T W/ E ///""
H I S T 0 R Y

0 F d'

A MERICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MA]JESTV' FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

C O R K:
PRINTED BY THOMAS WIITE, OPPOSITE 'IHE

EXCHANGE,

oMIOOOOOtó lt0000000Q000
M,DCC,LXXVII!.

# PREFACE.

P RE FA CE.

IN fulfilling the engagement which I had
come under to the Public with refpea to the
History of America, it was my intention not
to have published any part of it until the
whole was completed. The present state of
the Britifi Colonies has induced me to alter
that resolution. While they are engaged in
civil war with Great Britain, inquiries and fpe-
culations concerning their ancient forms of po-
licy and laws, which exilt no longer, cnnnot
be interesting. The attention and expectation
of mankind are now turned towards their future
condition. In whatever manner this unhappy
contest may terminate, a new order of things
must arise in North America, and its affairs
will aflume another aspet. I wait, with the
solicitude of a good citizen, until the ferment
Iubfide, and regular government be re-eflab-
liflied, and then I flall return to this part of
my work, in which I had made tome progress.
t'liat, together with the history of Portugueie

.America,

America, and of the settlements made by
the several nations, of Europe in the Weft India
islands, will complete my plan.

THE two volumes which I now publiflI, con-

tain an account of the discovery of the New
World, and of the progress of the Spanish
arms and colonies there. This is not only the
moit .splendid portion of the American story,
but ib much detached, that it forms a perfet
whole by itself, remarkable for the unity of the
'ubjeEt. As the principles and maxims of the
Spaniards in planting colonies, which have
been adopted in some meafire by every nation
in Europe, are unfolded in this part of my
work; it will serve as a proper introdution to
the hifory of their. establishment in America,
and convey such information concerning this
important article of policy, as may be deemed
no less interesting than curious.

IN describing the atchievements and inftitu-

tions of the Spaniards in the New World,
I have departed in many instances .from the
accounts of preceding historians, and have
often rciwiltd f.ait which ifein to have been
u!nklnown to tcim. It is a duty I owe the
Public, to mention the sources from which I
have derived ifuch intelligence, as julifies me
cither in placing tranl'tslions in a new light,
or ill forming any new O()inlio with re1fpc& to
rleir cauls Iand cfic&-s. This duty I perform
with great'r fatis(';ion, as it will afiord an op-
portunillty of cxpI-cfing my gratitLde to those
I)llcnfil.'ors, wvho have honoured ml e witIh their
cotlnt(nalncC aI d ai ,
i i 'r 1cli'archlics,

As

As it was from Spain that I had to ex-

ped the most important information, with re-
gard to this part of my work, I confidered it
as a very fortunate circumitance for me, when
Lord Grantham, to whom I had the honour of
being personally known, and with whose libe-
rality of sentiment, and disposition to oblige,
I was well acquainted, was appointed ambaffa-
dor to the court of Madrid. Upon applying
to him, I met with lbuch a reception as satisfied
me, that his endeavours would be employed
in the most proper manner, in order to obtain
the gratification of my wifles; and I am per-
fe&ly sensible, that what progress I have made
in my inquiries among the Spaniards, ought
to be ascribed chiefly to their knowing how
much his Lordfliip interested himself in their
success.

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord Gran-

tham, than his attention in engaging Mr.
Waddilove, the chaplain of his embafry, to
take the condu&E of my affairs in Spain, the
obligations I lie under would be very great.
During five years, that gentleman has carried
on researches for my behoof, with Iuch aa-ivi-
ty, perseverance, and knowledge of the sub-
jedC, to which his attention was turned, as have
filled me witll no less aftonilhment than satis-
faio6ni. I-e proc'i-cdl for mc tie greater part
of the Spanifll books, which I have coniltedl;
alnd as many of them were printed early in the
fixtccnth century, and are become extremely
rare, the collec'in(g of thelt was llch an occu-
patioll, as, alone, lrquired much time and al:
filuity.' To his fri'iedly attention I am in-
dlbtcd for copies of' ivcral valuable nanu-

'cripts,

scripts, containing fa&ts and details which I
might have searched for in vain, in works that
have been made public. Encouraged by the
inviting good-will with which Mr. Waddilove
conferred his favours, I tranfmritted to him a set
of queries, with refpe't both to the customs and
policy of the native Americans, and the na-
ture of several institutions in the Spanish fettle-
ments, framed in such a manner, that a Spa-
niard might answer them, without disclosing
any thing that was improper to be communi-
cated to a foreigner. He translated these into
Spanish, and obtained from various persons
who had resided in most of the Spanish colonies,
such replies as have afforded me much inftruc-
tion.

NOTWITHSTANDING these peculiar advanta-

ges with which my inquiries were carried on in
Spain, it is with regret I am obliged to add,
that the fucccfs with which they have been at-
tended, mull be ascribed to the beneficence of
individuals, not to any communication by pub-
lic authority. By a singular arrangement of
Philip II. thie records of the Spanish monarchy,
are deposited in the ARCHIvo ofSimancas, near
Valladoiid, at the diflance of a hundred and
.twenty miles fiom the feat of government, and
the fupireme courts ofjultice. The papers re"
lative to America, and chiefly to that early pe-
riod of its history, toward;s which my attention
was dircaed, are Io nulmerous, that they alone,
according to one account, fill the largelt apart-
ment in the Archivo; and according to ano-
ther, they compotei eight hundre d and seventy-
three large bundles. Conltio.s of'ponfl(fing,
in tolc degree, the indullly which belongs to

an

an historian, the profpet& of such a treasure ex-
cited my molt ardent curiosity. But the prof-
pea of it, only, is all that I have enjoyed.
Spain, with an excess of caution, has uniform-
ly thrown a veil over her transactions in Ame-
rica. From strangers they are concealed with
peculiar solicitude. Even to her own fubjeRs
the Archivo of Simancas is not opened with-
out a particularorder from the crown; and as-
ter obtaining that, papers cannot be copied,
without paying fees of office so exorbitant, that
the expence exceeds what it would be proper
to bestow, when the gratification of literary cu-
riofity is the only object. It is to be hoped,
that the Spaniards will at last discover this sys-
tem of concealment to be no less impolitic
than illiberal. From what I have experienced
in the course of my inquiries, I am satisfied,
that upon a more minute scrutiny into their
early operations in the New World, however
reprehensible the aftions of individuals may
appear, the condut of the nation will be pla-
ced in a more favourable light.

IN other parts of Europe very different fen-

timents prevail. Having searched, without
success, in Spain, for a letter of Cortes to
Charles V. written soon after he landed in the
Mexican empire, which has not hitherto been
published, it occurred to me, that as the em-
peror was setting out for Germany, at the time
when the messengers from Cortes arrived in Eu-
rope, the letter with which they were intrusted
might poflibly be preserved in the Imperial Li-
brary of Vienna. I communicated this idea to Sir
Robe rtMutrray Kcith,withl whom I have long had

the.

the honour to live in friendship, and I had
loon the pleasure to learn, that, upon his ap-
plication, her Imperial Majesty had been gra-
cioufly pleased to issue an order, that not only
a copy of that letter (if it were found), but of
any other papers in the library, which could
throw light upon the History of America,
should be transmitted to me. The letter from
Cortes is not in the Imperial Library, but an
authentic copy attested by a notary, of that
written by the magistrates of the colony plant-
ed by him at Vera Cruz, which I have men-
tioned, Vol. ii. p. 32, having been found; it
was transcribed and sent to me. This, no less
curious, and as little known as the letter which
was the object of my inquiries, did not come
to my hand till that part of the history tor
which it relates was printed; but I have given
some account of what is most worthy of notice
in it, at the end of Notes and Illustrations,
vol. ii. Together with it, I received a copy
of a letterfrom Cortes, containing a long ac-
count of his expedition to Honduras, with
respect to which, I did not think it necessary
to enter into anyparticular detail; and likewise
those curious Mexican paintings, which I have
described, vol. ii. p. 284, &c.

MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were carried

on with equal facility and success. In examin.
ing into the nearest communication between
our continent and that of America, it became
of confequecnce to obtain authentic informa-
tion concerning the discoveries of the Ruffians,
in their navigation from Kamchatka towards
the coast of America. Accurate relations of

their

their first voyage, in 1741, have been pub-
lifhed by Muller and Gnelin. Sever al itreCigl
authors have entertained an opinion, tiat ti.e
court of Rufiia ftudioufy conceals the progrets
which has been made by more recent nlvi'.a-
tors, and fuFrers the Public to be amnule witrh
false accounts of their route. Such conducQ
appeared to me unsuitable to thole liberal fen-
timents, and that patronage of L:ience, for
which the present sovereign of Ru!lia is emli-
nent; nor could I discern any political rcafon,
that miroht render it improper to appily fr in-
formation concerning the late attemlpts of the
Ruftians to open a communication betwcen AXia
and America. My ingenious countryinan, Doc-
tor Rogerfon, firlftphyfician to the ! mpreiS, pre-
fentled my requefi to her Imperial MP'ajely, who
not only disclaimed any idea of concealnent,
but instantly ordered the journal of Captain
Krenitzin, who conduEted the only voyage of
discovery made by public authority it o cc tiie
year I741, to be tramlnated, and his origiiln
chart to be copied. tor my ul-'. By conlucling
them, I have been enabled to give a noi'e

i a.-

cui;te view of the progrcfl andl- .Kc(C't of thle
R] uilian dilfCov rics, ttil li iiiS I.', rCFo bc

U ;
coiimmunicated to the Public.

FiROM) other quarters I hv1e received infor-

1mation of gr'ct utility and ilportance. 1M.
Chevalli erde ile Pl.irto, tile miilliit'r fiom iPoru-
gal to the' coiurt of Great B'ria:lin, wvio com-
mandeld for fevtral )years at l4ttgroibO, ;a i;:-
tleilent of the lPortugucl fe in the interior pa lt
of Brasil, where the Indians are numllro'lo s,
and their original mnnernc little altered ly

b intercourlk

intercourse with Europeans, was pleased to
fend me very full answers to some queries con-.
cerning the character and institutions of the
natives of America, which his polite recep-
tion of an application made to him in my
name, encouiaged me to propose. These fa-
titied me, that he had contemplated with dif-
cerning attention the curious objects which. his
situation presented to his view, and I have.of-
ten followed him as one of my best inftruted&
guides.

M. SUARD, to whose elegant translation of

the History of the Reign of Charles V. I owe
the favourable reception of that work on the
continent, procured me answers to the fame
queries from M. de Bouganville, who had op-
portunities of observing the Indians both of
North and South America, and from M. Godin
le Jcune, who resided fifteen years among the
Indians in Quito, and twenty years in Cayenne.
The latter are more valuable from having been
examnined by M. de la Condamine, who, a few
weeks before his death, made some short addi-
tionl to them, which may be confidered as the
;lalt effort of that attention to science which
occupied a long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one

region iniAicrica. Governor Hutchinson took
the trou ble ol recolmmendingl the confiderati-
on of my queries to Mr. THawley and Mr.
Braincrd, two proteflant missionarics, employ-
ed among the Indians of the Five Nations,
who favoured me withl aniwers, which discover
a cofitl l'll: i.ioc iknwl lgle of the people whose

cufoll'is

cuftooms they defctibe. From William Smith,
Efq; the ingenious hiitorian of New York, I
received some useful information. When I en-
ter upon the History of our Colonies in North
America, I shall have occasion to acknow-
ledge how much I have been indebted to
many 'other gentlemen of that country.

FROM the valuable ColleCion of Voyages

made by Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with
whose attention to the History of Navigation
and Discovery the Public is well acquainted,
I have received some very rare books, particu-
larly two large volumes of Memorials, partly
manuscript, and partly in print, which were
presented to the court of Spain during the
reigns of Philip III. and Philip IV. From
these I have learned many curious particulars
with refpe& to the interior state of the Spanish
colonies, and the various schemes formed for
their improvement. As this Collec-ion of
Memorials former!, belonged to the Colbert
Library, I have quoted them by that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have

consultcd with that attention, which the re-
fpeet due fiom an Author to the Public requi-
red; and by minute references to them, 1 have
endceavoriiedl to ;iuthcnticate whatever I relate.
The lnriger I fellet on the nature of historical
composition, the more I am convinced that
this fcrulpuIlous accuracy is neccffary. The
hill-orian who records the events of his own
time, is credited in proportion to the opinion
which the Public entertains with rehtect to his
means of infornation and his veracity. 11He

b 2 wvho

vwlo delineates the tranfacilons of a remote pe-
riod, has no title to claim assent, unless he
produces evidence in proof of his assertions.
Witholut this, h'e may write an amusing tale,
but cannot be laid to have composed an au-
theniiic hiltory. In those sentiments I have
beei confirmed by the opinion of an author *,
wxl,;co his indu-ry, erudition, and discern-
ment, have deservedly placed in a high rank
,lamong the noft eminent historians of the age.
IEmlboldened by a hint from him, I have pub-
lilhed a catalogue of the Spanish books which
I ha:ve conillred. This practice ws frequent
in the ialt century, and confidered as an evi-
dencre of .laudable industry in an author; in the
pie lciit, it may, perhaps, be deemed the effea of
oi'll ration; but as many of there books are
uli,,owiln in Great Britain, I could not other-
v-: lhave referled to them as authorities,
without encllumbering the page with an infer-
tion (' thir ful ttle s. To any person who
imay cl lle to follow me in this path of inqui-
1r, the caLtalogue mulni be very useful.

MI'/- reatders will obtlarve, that in mention-

ing UilnS (of money, I have uniformly follow-
ed the ';pan'nf method of computing by
.[%,s. Ii Amerinca, the peli> frerte, or duro, is
the onl v oiin known, and that is always meant
when any linn iniported fiom America is men-
tioned. 'The peif fuerte, as well as other
coins, hlIs va;ie(l in its numerary value, but I
have beeln alvifi,., without attending to such
minute variaitions, to confider it as equal to
four llillings and fix pence of our money. It

is
' Mr. Gibbon.

is to be remembered, however, that in the
sixteenth century, the effetive value of a pe-
so, i. e. the quantity of labour which it repre-
sented, or of goods which it would purchase,
was five or fix times as much as at present.'

C N-

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.
VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOOK I.
pROGRESS of navigation among the ancients

-View of their discoveries as preparatory to
thoje of the moderns-InperfeSion of ancient
navigation and geography-Doirine of the
Zones-Farther discoveries checked by the irrup-
tion of barbarous nations-Geographical know-
ledge fill prefervedin the east, and among the A-
rabians-Revival of commerce and navigation
in Europe-favoured by the Crofades-extended
by travellers into the eaft-promoted by the in-
vention of the mariner's compafs-Firft regular
plan of dicoveryformed by Portugal-State of
that kingdonm-Schemes of Prince [Lenry-Early
attempts feeble-Progrefs along the western coafl
of Africa-I[opes of dfcovering a new route to
the Eafl Indies-Attempts to accompliJh this-
'roJpeS7s offuccefs.

B O O K II.

Birth and education of Columbus--acquires naval

Jf2ill in the jervice of lPortugal--conceives
hopes of reachlig tLhe Eal Indies by holding

a w'fterly

a wefjerly courfe-his fjflem founded on the
ideas of the ancients, and knowledge of their
navigation-and on the discoveries of the Portu-
gueJe.-His negociations with different courts.-
Obfiacles which he had to Jfurmount ien Spain-
Voyage of difcovery-diciculties-fuccefs-re-
turn to Spai;n-AJftonijhment of mankind on this
discovery of a new world-Papal grant of it-
Second voyage-Colony fettle:---Farther disco-
ve;-ries-lfantr wil the Indieans-1'irf tax i;m-
poJea on them-Third voyage-He di'fovers the
co;tinent-,'tate of the S5pen/ifih colony-Errors
in the fiftl Jss;. ,

of colonizing-Voyage of the

Portuguese to the EanJt ndies ly the Cape of
Good .-bope-Effi'7 s of this-Dlj ovcries made
by private a'lventurers i;n t,5e lVew li7orld-
Nlame of ASierica given to it-Machinations
againfiJ Colurnbu/is-D>;f graced and sent in chains
tb L'urope-'ourth voyage of Columbus-His
difrcoverics-difafiers-death.

B OO K III.
State of the colony in wipanioa-/i:¥w war with

the Indianls-Cruelty of t/he ,Spaniards-Tatal
regulations concerningl t/he condltion of the In-
dians-lDiminution of th/:t Ileopl. -Di)cove-
ries and Jettlcmnnt.s-/' ir-/t coloniy planted on
the con/t.1nt

. t-Cc;n uqsi I ' Cu. a-/, .)i/fcov cJy

of lorida-of the Sc:'. ,,ca-Great e,.'pec-
tations ra'ijtd b/,y i/.is-(.,/i':s o/f (dijjpoiit-

eit .with ir'/pac t /

/ /, ' / ;' /0;w lii,'e--Col,-

troverJfy coic,'rningi' t',z' t;'at.ient f the:' .Id,'i..
ans-Coltraly ,i' ifionls-Z::/ *' /Ce ecc.lfit'a-
tics, particularly oJL as C.yjas-Singular i'oo-
cezdings of X;'nes.,,-N'',.r imlported into ,1-
ncaiiL-Las Ca.as's ir, ., a I.'e w coloIn--

c',i;iltl'J

permitted to attempt it-unfuccefsful-Difcove-
ries towards the WeftJ-ucatan-Campeachy
-New Spain--Preparations for in.vading it.

B O O K IV.
Yiew of America when firfi discovered, and of the

manners andpolicy of its moji uncivilizedinhabi-
tants--?aft extent of America-Grandeur of
the objels it presents to view-Its mountain--
rivers-lakes-Its form favourable to com-
merce-T'emzperature--predominence of cold-
Causes of this-uncultivated-unwholfome-
-its animals-foil--Inquiry how America was
peopled-various theories-what appears moJi
probable-Condition and charaCter of the Ame-
ricans-All, the Mexicans and Peruvians except-
ed, in the fJate offavages-Inquiry confined to
the uncivilized tribes-Difculty of obtaining in-
formation--various causes of this--Method obfer-
ved in the inquiry--L. The bodily confJitution of the
Americans coJflidered-11. The qualities of their
minds.-III. Their domestic ftate.--I. Their
political /ate and in/,itutions-V. Their Jyftem
of war and public feclrity-VI. The arts with
which they were acquainted-VIJ. Their reli-
gious ideas and infiitutions.-VI1I Such fingu-
lar and detached cufloms as are not reducible to
any of the former heads.---IX. General revicw
and efiimate of their virtues and defet7s.

c VOLUME

VOLUME THE SECOND.

B 0 0 K V.
IliJlo, of the con'quej of New Spain by Cortes.

BOOK VI.
History of the conqueif .of Peru, by Pizarro-and

of the di,3efions and civil wars of the Spani-
ards in that country-Origin-progrefs-and
efecis of tbhee.

BOOK YH.
· iezv of inflitutions and manners of .Mlexicans

and Peruvians-Civilized fates in coparifon
of other Amlericans-Recent origin of the
1Mexicansr.-Flas which prove their progress
in civ'lization--fV'iew of their policy in it's
various brancbes---of their arts---Fans which
indicate a small progress in civilization-
Wf-hat opinion Jould be formed on compa-
ring tbofe co,,t-adictory faTs-Genizs of their
religion- Peru viin imona4rclhy nore .ancient--ts
po/iy son. fN:d on r:liogio-Singular efe'ts of
this-peu uirdir fjlate oJ'prope rty 0aimong the Peru-
via.ts--Their public works and arts-roadsZ--
brig,'e.--/.': i'd:ing.-unswarlikie Jpiril-l/iew of
ot/.'tr donuJi.'; ns cf Yptin if. /iwerica-Cinaloa
a1)./ o0,':.r,'1---C-'sct//an end HI7ondu-
ras.- :,'li/il 'tc;,,^an- -.l in,..doom of I'ierra f irme
-New King'do;m of Granada.

BOOK

B O O K VIII.
J"iew ofthe interior government, commerce, &c. of

the Spanish colonies-Depopulation of America
firJ effe7 of their fettlements-not the confe-
quence of anyJ/fteem of policy-- or to be imputed
to religion-nsiumber of Indians fJill remaining-
Fundanmentl maxims on which the Spamnih fs-
ter of cclonization is founded-Condition of dzf-
frrent orders of men in their colonies-Chapeto-
n es- Creoles-\legroes-Indians-- Ecclesiastical
state and policy-Charfler of secular and regu-
lar clergy-Szmallprogrefs of Chrijfianity among
the natives-Mhines chief object of their atten-
tion-Mode of working theje-their produce--
Effects of encouraging this spec/es of induflry-
Other cormmodities of Spanijh America-EirF
effec7s of this new commerce on Spain--Why the
Span#is colonies have not been as beneficial to the
parent ft ate as those of other nations-Errors in
her J3ft4em of reuilatz)in this commerce-confined
to one port-carried on by annual fleets-Con-
traband trade-Decline of Spain both in popula-
tion and wealth-Rem;edies propofed-/View of

the wf. reWl g,

7 iions of the Bourbon Princes -

Zew ; ai.Imore liberaljsy/em introduced--Beneficial
efili's of this-- Probable coynfquences- -irTade be-
tcveLen AL.'vxico and thle Philippines----Revenue of
^r'ainfroum AInm lericl -

c hnice lt arfcs ---to what
it amoiltT Es.

T HE

# SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.

SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.

A. John Baldwin, Efq.

Walter Baldwin, Efq.
FRANCISARMSTEAD, Mr. Thomas Burne,

Efq. Mr. Richard Byrne,

Robt. St. L-eger Atkins, Efq. Patrick Blair, Efq. M. D.
Rev. Robt.Auflen, D. D. Mr. Abraham Biggs,
Mr. Joseph Aufen, Mr. Jacob Biggs,
Mr. George Aickii, Mr. Thomas Biggs,
Mr. David Aikenhead, James Bonwell, Efq.
Rev. Mason Alcock, HI-enry Beecher, Efq. 2 sets.
Capt. William Ancram, 34th Benjamin Bousfield, Efq.

Regt. John Bell, Efq.

Mr. Martin Anfter, John Bernard, Efq.
Mr. George Allman, Mr. Phineas Bagnell,
Samuel Aldwell, Efq. M. D. Mr. Matthew Bagnell,

Mr. Francis Bufteed,

B. IlMr. John Balts,

John Bennett, Efq. Capt. James Black,
Martin Byam, Efq. of the If- Rev. Henry Baggs.

land of Antigua, Thos. Ben. Barter, Efq;

Licut. Col. John Browne,
Rev. Je mmatt Browne, C.
Rev. Joshua Browne, D. . Right Rev. Isaac, Lord Bifllop
Rev. Adderly Browne, of Cork and Ross,
John Bagwell, Efqt. Be/grov', Sir James Cotter, Part.
John Bagwell, E1cq. /llmtre, Rev. George Chinnc ry,
C;pt. Blany Brahbzon, L. L. D. De:a of Cork.
Hon. and Rev. John 1utler, Broderick Clilnncrv, Efq.

D. D. Rogerfon Cotter, I q.
4r. James Butler, Jo1hn Carleton, Jfiq.
I'homas BtiLl.t, Ekq. William Cuthbert, FTr fq.
Paull Builfobn, Efq. Mr. Geco. Augu fllis Chandlee,
Mr. Peccr :tlakr, Jfoli Caipel, :lfq.
Rev. James lil;and, I. L. . I. :Ltrick Conicrf:'rd, Eliq.
Rev. James Bl and, M]iri/rn,',:, Mr. John Comclrford,

John

John Callanan, Efq. M. D. Mr. Isaac Daly,
Rev. Laurence Callanan, Mr. Timothy Daly,
Mr. Dominick Callanan, Rev. Robt. Dring,
Rev. Maurice Connor, Barry Denny, Efq;
Francis Campbell, Efq. Mr. Joseph Dibbs.
Mr. Thomas Clugfton,
Mr. Michael Casey,
John Coppinger, Efq. M. D. E.
Mr. Thos. Henry Coppinger,
Mr. James Coppinger, Wm. Evans, Efq;
William Coppinger,jun. Efq. Mr. James Emerson.
Mr. Patrick Creagh, jun.
Rev. Chambre Corker,
William Crofts, Efq. F.
Daniel Cronin, Efq.
Rev. Thomas Crawford, Savage French, Efq;
William Crooke, Efq, Richd. Temple French, Efq;
Win. Carey, Efq. Kinfale, Matthew Deane Towgood
Jeffery Connell, jun. Efq. French, Efq;

M. D. Li/bon, Miss French,

Mr/. James Connell', Lilhon, Miss Sarah Falkiner,
Gustavus Adolphus Thomas Miss Clotilda Fitz-Gerald,

Frele Crofbie, Efq; Mr. John Fitz-Gerald,

Francis Chute, Efq; Abraham Foifer, Efq;
Mr. Leslie Craggs, Robt. Ferguson, Efq;
Mr. William Coghlan, John Fitton, Efq;
Rev. John Chetwood, Richd. Fitton, Efq;
Rev. Edward Cotterell, Mr. Rich. Fitton,
Mr. Samuel Cooper, Rev. Nixon Flack, L. L. D.
Mr. John Cotter, Mr. Lawrence Fowkel
Mr. John Collins, Mr. Hen. Fowke,
Mr. Bartholomew Crcagh, Rich. Foott, Efq;
Mr. John Corker. Mr. Thomas Foott.

Mr. Jas. French James,

D. G.

Robt. Dobson, Efq: Thos. Spires Gabbett, Efq;
Rev. Rich:l. Davics, I)Daniel Gibbs, Efq;
Rev. J;fmis Day, Robt. Gordon, Efq;
Rev. FEdw. Day, I. I.. T). Wm. Grant, Efq;
Robt. I),- La-Conl rt, E lil; Mr. Bartholcmew Guynan,
)Cennis
1 l):tly, Efqi; NM.. D Mr. John Guynan,

Mr.·

Mr. Francis Goold, Rev. William Jeffop,
Mr. James Gregg, Mr. Thomas Jones,
Mr. Thomas Gregg, Sampson Jervois, Efq;
Mr. William Gliffan, Mr. George Jack,
Hen. Geran, Efq; Edward Jameson, Efq;
Rev. Luke Godfrey,
John Godfrey, Efq; K
Wm. Godfrey, Efq;
Mr. Herbert Gillman, James Kearny, Efq;
Thos. Green, Efq; oughall. Richard Kellet, Efq;

Rev. Edward Kenny,
H. Timothy Kirby, Efq; M. D.

Mr. John Knight.

Hon. Mrs. Hodder,
Hon. Wm. Williams Hewitt, L
John Heig, Efq; M. D.
Robt. Hartnet, Efq; Rt. Hon. John Lord Lisle,
Mr. John Howell, John Longfield, Efq; M. D.
John Haly, Efq; M. D. Richard Longfield, Efq;
Mr. Nicholas Francis Haly, John Longfield, Efq; Longue-
William Hare, Efq; ville,
Mr. Attiwell Hayes, Rev. Alexander Lamilliere,
Mr. James Hayes, L. L. D.
John Hanning, Efq; Capt. Lambert, 3d. Regt.
Rev. James Harris, (or Buffs,)
Mr. Abel Harris, William Leader, Efq;
Mr. Richd. Harris, James Lombard, Efq;
Mr. John Harris, Mr. Patrick Lynch,
Robert Honner, Efq; Mr. Bryan Lynch, Li/bon,
Hugh Hutchinson, Efq; Mr. Thomas Lehy,
Mr. Joseph Hatton, Mr. John Litchfield,
Hen. Arthur Herbert, Efq. Rev. Robert Lymbery,
Rev. Mich. Harrington, Mr. Edward Lamprey,
Rev. Timothy Hart, Rev. Giles Lee,
Ensign Honeywood, 3d. Regt. Mr. Robert Lyon,

(or Buffs,) Mafler William Limrick.

Mr. Wm. Hickie,
Mr. Win. Howfe,
Mr. Moore Hardaway. M

I. Hon. and Rev. Robert Moore,

Richard Mufgrave, Efq; Sal-
Rov. Archdeacon Jephfon, tibridge,

HIug

Hugh Millerd, junr. Efq; John Herbert Orpen, Efq;
Isaac Mee, Efq; M. D. M. D.
Robert M'Carthy, Efq; Richard Orpen, Efq;
Tim. M'Carthy, Efq; M. D. Mr. William Olliff,
Rev. James Mockler, L. L. B. Mr. Bartho. O'Donnoghue,
Mr. James Molony, Jeffery O'Donnoghue, Efq;
David Mellefonti Efq; Rcv. Thomas O'Keeffe,
Henry Mannix, Efq; Dennis O'Keeffe, Efq;
Rev. John Meade, Mr. Charles O'Neil, LiJfon.
Abraham 'Morris, Efq;
Rev. Francis Moylan, D. D. P
James Mahon, Efq;
Donat M'Mahon, Efq; William Perry, Efq;
Richard Moore, Efq; Rev. Edward Pigott,
Capt. Moore, Marinaduke Peacock, Efq;
Samuel Mann, Efq; Rev. Charles Perceval,
Lieut. Charles M'Murdo, 3d. Henry Peard, Efq;

Regt. (or Buffs,) Rev. James Pratt,
Mr. William Morton, Sur- John Purcell, Efq;

geon to the 3d. Regt. (or Paul Pierfy, Efq;
Buffs,) Jeffery Pierfy, Efq;
Licut. James Mounfey, 36th. Mr. John Parks,

Regt. Cooper Penrose, Efq;

Mr/I. Ant. Mattavon, Lijbon, Rev. Samuel Perrott,
Mr. And. Morony, LifJon, Mr. Gafpard Pilliard, Lisbon,
Mr. Dennis M'Carthy. E;bcn Pike. Efq:

Mr. Hu-,gh Power,
N Mr, Edmlund Power,

Mr. JTames Power,

John Newenham, Efq; \ir. jol) b1art Price,
,(cor. Ncwenhain, juir. Efq; Mr. WVilliam Phair.
Mr. George Newfom, Jas. Thco. Paync, Efq; M. D.
Rev. 'Viilliam Nixol,
Patrick Nag]c, Eiq; R
Mr. John Newce.

Major WTm. Madox Richard-
O lon, 3d, Regt. (or Buffs,)

Rev. Edward Richardlbn,
Thomas Owgan, Efq; IMayor Robert Reeves, junr. Efq;

of' Cork, Mr. Joseph Reeves,

Rxcv. Archdeacon Oliver, Mr. William Radcliffe,
RMifs Lucy ()liver, Snnicll Rowland, Eflq;
Mr1. Jolln O'Domelll, Wil. Rowland, Efq; M. D.

Rev.

Rev. William Robinson, T
Capt. Ross, of the Marines,
Mr. Gibbs Ross, William Tonfon, Efq;
Mr. Thomas Rochfort, Walter Travers, Efq;
John Roberts, Efq; Rev. Michael Tifdal,
Edward Regan, Efq; John Townsend, Efq;
Mr. David Roche, Rich. Townsend, Efq; M. D.
Mr. John Randall. Capt. Thomas Townsend,

Rev. Edw. Synge Townsend,
S . Major Thompson,

Mr. Peter Trant,
Hon. and Rev. Rich. South- Mr. Abbot Trayer,

well. Mr. Nicholas Therry.

Edmund Supple, Efq;
Charles Skottowe, Efq;
Sampson Stawell, Efq; Robert Uniacke, Efq;
William Stawell, Efq; Rev. Richard Vincent, Clon-
George Stawell, Efq; mel.
Mr. Bryan Sheehy,
Mr. Robert Stevely, junr. W.
James Skerrett, Efq; William Wrixon Efq; High-
Mr. Robert Shelton, Sheriff of the Co. of Corke,
Robert Sealy, Efq; Rev. Archdeacon Weld,
Rev. James Stopford, D. D. Lieut. Thos. Wrixon, 50th
Rev. Joseph Stopford, Regt.
John Swete, Efq; Miiborne Weft Efq;
William Snowe, Efq; William Willcocks Efq;
John Spread, Efq; Mr. Patrick Waters,
Greatrakes Smyth, Efq; Mr. Fr. Archer White A.B.
Mr. John Smith, Mr. Benjamin Wood,
J. Williams Stonehoufe, Efqi Mr. Joseph Wheeler, junr.
Rev. Edmund Synan, Mr. Wm. Wade,
Rev. Thomas Shinnick, Mr. John Woodward,
Capt. Francis Sullivan, Mr. Michael Woulfe.
Mr. John Sullivan, y.
Miss Spratt,
Mr. John Silke, John Young, Efq;
Mr. Benjamin Swaync. Mr. George Young,

Mr. John Younger.

Just published by the PRINTER hereof,
Handsomely printed in CROWN OCTAVO, on DUTCH THICIC

POST-PAPER, Price, fewed 2s. zd. bound zs. 8d.h.

P 0 E M S

B Y T H E

REVD. JAMES DE LA COUR.

Now in the PRESS and speedily will be published,

The WORKS of Miss HANNAH MORE.
Consisting of ESSAYS on VARIOUS SUBJECTS

PRINCIPALLY DESIGNED

FOR YOUN G LADIE S.
ODE to DRAGON, Mr. GARRICK'S Houfe-Dog at Hampton.

Sir EILDRED of the BOWER, and the BLEEDING ROCK:

,Legendary Tales.

The SEA RC H after I-I A P I N E , s : A Pastoral Drama.
T1J' IN1 LI:XJII.E CAI'TrIE, and PERC : Tragedies.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK I.

T H E
THE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
A M E RI CA.

B O O K I.

T1 H E progress of men in discovering and B OO K
peopling the various parts of the earth, has been I
extremely flow. Several ages elapsed before they T-

-) The earth

removed far from those mild and fertile regions fowly pco-
where they were originally placed by their Creator. pled.
The occasion of their firit general dispersion is
known; but we are unacquainted with the course
of their migrations, or the time when they took pof-
fcffion of the different countries which they now
inhabit. Neither history nor tradition furnish such
information concerning those remote events, as en-
ables us to trace, with any certainty, the operati-
ons of the human race in the infancy of society.
WE may conclude, however, that all the early Firl m;gra-

tions by

migrations of mankind were made by land. The l;,ld.
ocean, which every where surrounds the habitable
earth, as well as the various arms of the sea which
separate one region from another, though de-

VOL. I. B ftincd

B OO K fLined to facilitate the communication between

dillant countries, seem, at first, to be formed to
check the progress of man, and to mark the bounds
of that portion of the globe to which nature had
confined him. It was long, we may believe,
before men attempted to pass this formidable
barrier, and became so skilful and adventurous as
to commit themselves to the mercy of the winds
and waves, or to quit their native shore in
quest of remote and unknown regions.

F;R t NAVIGATION and ship-building are arts so nice
tempts to- and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
wards navi- as well as experience of many fucceflive ages to

bring them to any degree of perfelcion. From the
raft or canoe, which first served to carry a savage
over the river that obftruted him in the chace, to
the conftrudion of a velfel capable of conveying a
numerous crew with safety to a distant coast, the
progress in improvement is immense. Many es-
forts would be made, many experiments would be
tried, and much labour and invention would be em-
ployed, before men could: accomplish this arduous
and important undertaking. The rude and imper-
feEt state in which navigation is still found among
all nations which are not considerably civilized,
corresponds with this account of its progress, and
demonstrates that, in early times, the art was not
so far improved as to enable men to undertake dif-
tant voyages, or to attempt remote discoveries.

As loon, however, as the art of navigation be-

i'tkodu nwon
of cocmc cartle known, a new species of correspondence a-

mong Imen took place. It is fiom this era, that we
must date the commencement of such an intercourse
between nations as defervcs the appellation of com-
merce. Men are, indeed, far advanced ia improve-

meit

ment before commerce becomes an object of great B 0 0 rK

I.

importance to them. They must even have made
some considerable progress towards civilization,
before they acquire the idea of property, and afcer-
tain it so perfectly, as to be acquainted with the
most fiimple of all contracts, that of exchanging by
barter one rude commodity for another. But as
soon as this important right is eftablilhed, and
every individual feels that he has an exclusive title
to possess or to alienate whatever he has acquired by
his own labour and dexterity, the wants and inge-
nuity of his nature suggest to him a new method of
increasing his acquisitions and enjoyments, by dif-
posing of what is superfluous in his own flores, in
order to procure what is necessary or desirable in
those of other men. -Thus a commercial intercourse
begins, and is carried on among the members of
the fame community. By degrees, they discover
that neighbouring tribes possess what they want,
and enjoy comforts of which they wish to partake.
In the fame mode, and upon the fame principles,
that dmieftic traffic is carried on within the focie-
ty, an external commerce is eftablithed with other
tribes or nations. Theirmutual interest and mu-
tual wants render this intercourse dcfirable, and
imperceptibly introduce the maxims and laws which
facilitate its progress and render it secure. But no
very extensive commerce can take place between
contiguous provinces, whose foil and climate being
nearly the fame, yield similar produclions. Re-
mote countries cannot convey their commodities by
land, to those places, where on account of their
rarity they are desired, and become valuable. It is
to navigation that men are indebted for the power
of transporting the superfluous ifock of one part of
the earth, to ftipply the wants of another. The
luxuries and blessings of a particular climate are

B 2 no.

B 0 0 K no longer confined to itself alone, but the enjoy-

ment of them is communicated to the most distant
regions.

In proportion as the knowledge of the advan-

tages derived from navigation and commerce con-
tinued to spread, the intercourse among nations
extended. The ambition of conquest, or the ne-
ceffity of procuring a new settlement, were no
longer the sole motives of visiting distant lands.
The desire of gain became a new incentive to acti-
vity, routed adventurers and sent them forth upon
long voyages in search of countries, whose pro-
duts or wants might increase that circulation,
which nourishes and gives vigour to commerce.
Trade proved a great source of discovery, it open-
ed unknown seas, it penetrated into new regions,
and contributed more than any other cause, to
bring men acquainted with the situation, the na-
ture, and commodities of the different parts of the
globe. But even after a regular commerce was es-
tablifhed in the world, after nations were confider-
ably civilized, and the sciences and arts were cul-
tivated with ardour and success, navigation conti-
nued to be so imperfect, that it can hardly be said
to have advanced beyond the infancy of its improve-
ment in the ancient world.

impelrfiai- AMONG all the nations of antiquity the fl-ructure
ol ot na;Ii- of their vefiels was extremely rude, and their me-
.lniong the thod of working them no less defective. They
anicints. were unacquainted with tome of the great princi-

ples and operations in navigation, which are now
confidered as thefirft elements on which that fcicncc
is founded. Though that property of the magnet,
by which it attracts iron, was well known to the
ancients, its most important and amazing virtue of

pointing

pointing to the poles had entirely escaped their ob- B O 0 K
servation. Destitute of this faithful guide, which
now conducts the pilot with so much certainty in
the unbounded ocean, during the darkness of night,
and when the heavens are covered with clouds,
the ancients had no other method of regulating their
course than by observing the fun and stars. Their
navigation was of consequence uncertain and timid.
They durst seldom quit fight of land, but crept
along the coast, exposed to all the dangers, and
retarded by all the obftruEions, unavoidable in
holding such an aukward course. An incredible
length of time was requisite for performing voyages,
which are now finished in a short space.' Even in
the mildest climates, and in seas the least tempeftu-
ous, it was only during the fuminer months that
the ancients ventured out of their harbours. The
remainder of the year was loft in inactivity. It
would have been deemed most inconsiderate rashness
to have braved the fury of the winds and waves
during the winter .

WHILE both the science and practice of naviga-

tion continued to be so defe&ive, it was an under-
taking of no fiall difficulty and danger to visit any
remote region of the earth. Under every difadvan-
tage, however, the aEtive spirit of commerce ex-
erted itself. The Egyptians, soon after the cflab- N:vigatio;)
lifhment of their monarchy, are said to have open- C1
ed a trade between the Arabian Gulph or Red Sea, tl:'le;p. -
and the western coast of the great Indian continent. tiUlS".
The commodities which they imported from the
cast, were carried by land friom the Arabian Gulph
to the banks of the Nilc, and conveyed down that
river to the Mediterranean. But if the Egyptians
il early times applied thclnfelves to conmmerce,

B 3 their
c Vcgctius de lc inllit. lib. iv.

k

B 0 0 K their attention to it was of ihort duration. The

fertile foil and mild climate of Egypt produced the
necessaries and comforts of life with fiuch profusion,
as rendered its inhabitants so independent of other
countries, that it became an established maxim a-
mong that people, whose ideas and infitutions
differed in almost every point from those of other
nations, to renounce all intercourse with foreigners.
In consequence of this, they never went out of
their own country ; they held all sea-faring persons
in detcftation, as impious and profane ; and forti-
fying their own harbours, they denied strangers ad-
mittance into them *; and it was in the decline of
their power, that they again opened their ports,
and resumed any communication with foreigners.
OfthePhe- THE character and situation of the Phenicians

ncans were as favourable to the spirit of commerce and

discovery as those of the Egyptians were adverse to
it. They had no diftinguiihing peculiarity in their
manners and inflitutions; they were not addiced
to any singular and unsocial form of fuperflition ;
thty could mingle with other nations without fcru-
pie or relucdance. The territory which they pof-
si: eed was neither large nor fertile, Commerce was
the only source from which they could derive opu-
lence or power. Accordingly, the trade carried on
by the Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was more ex-
tensive and cntcrprizing thtin that of any state in
the ancient world. Thel genius ofthe Phenicians,
as well as thz object of their policy and the spirit
of their laws, were entirely commercial. They
were a Ipeople of merchants who aimed at the em-
pire of thie f':', and aic tii;.lly pofllctl it. Their
fililps not only frlequented all the ports in the Mcdi-

terranean,

Diol. Ski i. I'Al,. i. p. 7S. F17. Weirllingi. Anill. 1756.

StL.dio, lib. ;:vi. ?). 114. .. Ad .
A tll. 1707.

terranean, but they were the firit who ventured be- B 0 0 K
yond the ancient boundaries of navigation, and pas- I
sing the Streights of Gades, visited the western
coasts of Spain and Africa. In many of the places
to which they retorted, they planted colonies, and
communicated to the rude inhabitants some know-
ledge of their arts and improvements. While
they extended their discoveries towards the north
and the weft, they did not neglec to penetrate into
the more opulent and fertile regions of the south
and east. Having rendered themselves masters of fe-
veral commodious harbours towards the bottom of
the Arabian Gulph, they, after the example of the
Egyptians, established a regular intercourse with
Arabia and the continent of India on the one hand,
and with the eastern coast of Africa on the other.
From these countries they imported many valuable
commodities, unknown to the reft of the world,
and, during a long period, engrossed that lucra-
tive branch of commerce without a rival *.

THE vas wealth which the Phenicians acquired OftheJe,,;

by monopolizingthe trade carried on in the Red Sea,
incited their neighbours the Jews, under the prof-
perous reigns of David and Solomon, to aim at being
admitted to some flare of it. This they obtained,
partly by the conquest of Idumea, which stretches
along the Red Sea, and partly by their alliance with
Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon fitted out flects,
which, under the direction ofPhenician pilots, fail-
ed from the Red Sea to Tarfhifll and Ophir, which
it is probable were ports in India and Africa that
their conductors were accustomed to fiequent, ;n(d
returned with fuich valuable cargoes as fiiddcnly

B 4 diffukCd
See NOTE I. at the End of ite Volume&

B I0 K diffused wealth and splendour through the kingdom

of Israel *. But the singular institutions of the
Jews, the observance of which was enjoined by
their divine legislator, with an intention of preferv-
ing them a separate people, uninfected by idolatry,
formed a national character incapable of that open
and liberal intercourse with firangers which com-
merce requires. Accordingly, this unsocial genius
of the people, together with the disasters which be-
fel the kingdom of Israel, prevented the commer-
cial spirit which their monarchs laboured to intro-
duce, and to cherifhl, from spreading among them.
The Jews cannot be numbered among the nations
which contributed to improve navigation, or to
extend discovery.

BUT though the inftruaions and example of the

Of the Car-
thagini.as. Phenicians were unable to mould the manners and

temper of the Jews, in opposition to the tendency
of their laws, they transmitted the commercial fpi-
rit with facility, and in full vigour, to their own
descendants the Carthaginians. The common-
wealth of Carthage applied to trade and to naval
affairs, with no less ardour, ingenuity and success,
than its parent slate. Carthage early rivalled, and
soon furpafied Tyre, in opulence and power, but
seems not to have aimed at obtaining any ihare in
the commerce with India. The Phenicians haden-
grofled this, and had fucha command of the Red Sea
as fccurcd to them the cxclufive oflleffion of that
lucrative branch of trade. The conmnercial altivi-
ty of the Carthaginians was exerted in another
direction. lWithout contending for the trade of
the cast with their mother country, they extended

their

MlNrioir:c filu lcp y, dl'Ophi pr

p 3M. D'Anvillt Melr. dc 1' Aca-

i. .l
. slllE{; . . F ....
..c . .I . *'_

their navigation chiefly towards the wetl and north. B 0 0
Following the course which the Phenicians had
opened, they passed the Streights of Gades, and
pushing their discoveries far beyond theirs, not
only visited all the coasts of Spain, but those of
Gaul, and penetrated at last into Britain. At the
fame time that they acquired knowledge of new
countries in this part of the globe, they gradually
carried their researches towards the south. They
made considerable progress, by land, into the inte-
rior provinces of Africa, traded with some of them,
and fubjeded others to their empire. They failed
along the western coast of that great continent, al-
most to the tropic of Cancer, and planted several
colonies, in order to civilize the natives, and ac-
custom them to commerce. They discovered the
Fortunate Islands, now known by the name of the
Canaries, the utmost boundary of ancient naviga-
tion in the western ocean.*

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending their trade
from one country to another. Commerce was
followed by its ufial effets among both these peo-
ple. It awakened curiosity, enlarged the ideas and
desires of men, and incited them to bold enterprises.
Voyages were undertaken, the sole object of which
was to discover new countries, and explore un-
known Ieas. Such, during the prosperous age of
the Carthaginian republic, were the famous navi-
gations of Hanno and Himilco. Both their fleets
were equipped by authority of the ienatc, and at
public expencc. Hanno was dire-ccd to fleer to-
wards the south, along the coatl of Africa, and

felIms
P11 liii N t. HTif. Ill. vi. c. 37. elit. in uifum Delph. 4to, i685.

;B o0 K seems to have advanced much nearer the equinoc-

tial line than any former navigator t. Himilco
had it in charge to proceed towards the north, and
to examine the western coast of the European con-
tinent O. Of the fame nature was the extraordina-
ry navigation of the Phenicians round Africa. A
Phenician fleet, we are told, fitted out by Necho
king of Egypt, took its departure about fix hun-
dred and four years before the Christian .era, from
a port in the Red Sea, doubled the southern pro-
montory of Africa, and, after a voyage of three
years, returned by the Streights of Gades, to the
mouth of the Nile *. Eudoxus of Cyzicus is said
to have held the fame course, and to have accom-
plifhed the fame arduous undertaking 1j.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may jutly be reckoned the
greatest effort of navigation in the ancient world;
and if we attend to the imperfec sl-ate of the art at
that time, it is difficult to determine, whether we
should most admire the courage and sagacity with
which the design was formed, or the conduct and
good fortune with which it was executed. But un-
fortunately, all the original and authentic accounts
of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages, whe-
ther undertaken by public authority, or in profecu-
tion of their private trade, have pcrifhed. The in-
formation which we rcceive concerning them from
the Greek and Roman authors, is not only ob-
fcure and inaccurate, but, if we except a ihort nar-
rative of Hanno's expedition, is of suspicious au-

thority.

-Plinii Nat. Hist. lili. v. c. i. Hannonis Periphlus p. Gcoglraph

minores, edit. Hudfoni, vol .
i . . .

t. Plinii Nat. HilR. lil. ii. c. 67. Fcltus Avi,:nls apud lBochart
ceogr. facr. ib. i. c. 6o.p. 65z. Oper. vol. iii. L. Bat. I70o.
* Herodlot. lib. iv. c. 47.
|) Pliii Nat. ,ift. lib. ;i.c. ó.

thority*. Whatever acquaintance with the remote B o o K
regions of the earth the Phenicians or Carthagini-
ans may have acquired, was concealed from the
reft of mankind with a mercantile jealousy. Eve-
ry thing relative to the course of their navigation
was not only a mystery of trade, but a secret of
Rate. Extraordinary fats are recorded concerning
their solicitude to prevent other nations from pe-
netrating into what they wished should remain un-
divulged T. Many of their discoveries seem, accord-
ingly, to have been scarcely known beyond the
precindts of their own Rates. The navigation
round Africa, in particular, is recorded by the
Greek and Roman writers, rather as a strange
amusing tale, which they either did not comprehend,
or did not believe, than as a real tranfadion,
which enlarged their knowledge and influenced
their opinion §. As neither the progress of the
Phenician and Carthaginian discoveries, nor the
extent of their navigation, were communicated to
the reft of mankind, all memorials of their extraor-
dinary skill in naval affairs seem, in a great mea-
sure, to have perished, when the maritime power of
the former was annihilated by Alexander's con-
quest of Tyre, and the empire of the latter was
overturned by the Roman arms.

LEAVING, then, the obscure and pompous ac- of the

counts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages GrCeeks.
to the curiosity and conjectures of antiquaries, hifto-
ry must reft fatisfid with relating the progress of na-
vigation anl difcovcry among the Greeks and Ro-
mans, which, though less splendid, is better as-
ccrtained. It is evident that the Phenicians, who
initruEte(l the Greeks in other ufcful fcienccs and

arts,

' Sec NOTE II.

t Str:l. G i . iii.

i 6.

p. 6 . lib. xviii. p. 1154.
) Sec NOTE 111.

B 0 o K arts, did not communicate to them that extensive

«__ knowledge of navigation which they themselves

possessed; nor did the Romans imbibe that com-
mercial spirit and ardour for difcoverywhich diftin-
guifhed the Carthaginians. Though Greece be
almost encompassed by the sea, which formed many
spacious bays and commodious harbours, though
it be surrounded by a vast number of fertile islands,
yet, notwithstanding such a favourable situation,
which seemed to invite that ingenious people to ap-
ply themselves to navigation, it was long before
this art attained any degree of perfection among
them. Their early voyages, the object of which
was piracy rather than commerce, were so incon-
fiderable, that the expedition of the Argonauts from
the coat of Thessaly to the Euxine sea, appeared
such an amazing effort of skill and courage, as en-
titled the conductors of it to be ranked among the
demigods, and exalted the vessel in which they fail-
ed to a place among the heavenly conitellations.
Even at a later period, when the Greeks engaged
in their famous enterprize against Troy, their
knowledge in naval affirs fcems not to have been
much improved. According to the account of
Homer, the only poet to whom history ventures to
appeal, and vwho, by his scrupulous accuracy in
describing the mianners and a:rts of early ages, me-
rits this dilifttlion, the science of navigation,
at that time, li;: d halr.lly ;Iadvanced beyond its rudef-
slate. The (lrc;cls in the heroic age were unac-
quainted with the uife of iron, the most ferviccable
of all the ita;ils, without which no considerable
progress was (ever niade in the mechanical arts.
Their vcfles; \( Cre of inconsiderable burthen, and
moltly withoi

, t decks. 'I'hfc had only one mIafl,

whicl they) (c''tted or took down at pleasure.
They were ({';n('crs to the ufi of anchors. All

their

their operations in failing were clumsy and un- B OOK
Ikilful. They turned their observation towards
stars, which were improper for regulating their
course, and their mode of observing them was in-
accurate and fallacious. When they had finished
a voyage they drew their paltry barks ashore, as fa-
vages do their canoes, and they remained on dry
land until the season of returning to sea approach-
ed. It is not then in the early or heroic ages of
Greece, that we can expect to observe the science
of navigation, and the spirit of discovery making
any considerable progress. During that period of
disorder and ignorance, a thousand causes concur-
red in restraining curiosity and enterprize within
very narrow bounds.

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a
tfate of greater civilization and refinement. Go-
vernment, in its most liberal and perfect form,
began to be established in the communities of
Greece; equal laws and regular police were gra-
dually introduced; the sciences and arts that are
useful or ornamental in life were carried to a high
pitch of improvement, and several of the Grecian
commonwealths applied to commerce with such
ardour and fuicceis, that they were confidered, in
the ancient world, as maritime powers of the first
rank. Even then, however, the naval victories of
the Greeks must be ascribed rather to the native'
Ip)irit of the people, and to that courage which the
enjoyment of liberty inspires, than to any extraor-
dinary progress in the science of navigation. In the
lPerfian war, those exploits which the eloquence of
t!lc Greek hiflorians have rendered so famous, were
p)lrformed by fleets, composcd chiefly of veficls that
were open, and without decks *; the crews of

which
( Thtlcyyd. lib. i. c. 14

B O K which ruflied forward with impetuous valour, but

little art, to board those of the enemy. In the war
of Peloponnefus, their fiips seem still to have beenl
of inconsiderable burthen and of small force. The
extent of their trade was in proportion to this low
condition of their marine. The maritime flates of
Greece hardly carried on any commerce beyond the
limits of the Mediterranean sea. Their chief in-
tercourfe was with the colonies of their country-
men, planted in the lefler Asia, in Italy and Sicily.
They sometimes visited the ports of Egypt, of
Gaul, and of Thrace, or passing through the Hel-
lefpont, they traded with the countries situated a-
round the Euxine sea. Amazing instances occur
of their ignorance, even of those countries, which
lay within the narrow precints to which their na-
vigation was confined. When the Greeks had as-
fembled their combined fleet against Xerxes at Egi-
na, they thought it unadvifable to fail to Samos,
because they believed the distance between that
island and Egina to be as great as the distance be-
tween Egina and the Pillars of Hercules t. They
were either utterly unacquainted with all the parts
of the globe beyond the Mediterranean sea, or what
knowledge they had of them was founded on con-
jeture, or derived from the informations of a few
perobns, whom curiosity and the love of science had
prompted to travel by land into the Upper Asia, or
by sea into Egypt, the ancient feats of wisdom and
arts. After all that the Greeks learned fiom them,
they appear to have been ignorant of the most im-
portant fadts, on which an accurate and fcicntifi¢
knowledge of the globe is founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great into the
cast, considerably enlarged the sphere of navigation

. and
*' llerodot. lib. viii, c. ic Z

and of geographical knowledge among the Greeks. RI OK
That extroardinary man, notwithstanding the
violent pallions which incited him, at some times,
to the wildefi ations, and the most extravagant
enterprises, possessed talents which fitted hint not
only to conquer, but to govern the world. He
was capable of framing those bold and original
schemes of policy, which give a new form to hu-
man affairs. The revolution in commerce, brought
about by the force of his genius, is. hardly inferior
to that revolution in empire, occasioned by the fuc-
cess of his arms. It is probable, that the opposition
and efforts of the republic of Tyre, which checked
him so long in the career of his victories, gave
Alexander an opportunity of observing the vast re-
sources of a maritime power, and conveyed to him
some idea of the immense wealth which the Ty-
rians derived from their commerce, especially that
with the East Indies. As soon as he had accom-
plifhed the deftruclion of that slate, and reduced'
Egypt to fubjeAion, he formed the plan cf render-
ing the empire which he proposed to eft.tb!ifh, the
centre of commerce as well as the feat of domini-
on. With this view he founded a great city, which
he honoured with his own name, near one of the
mouths of the river Nile, that by the Mediterra-
nean Lea, and the neighbourhood of the Arabian
Gulf, it might command the trade both of the eafl
and wcf.* This situation was chofcn with such
discernment; that Alexandria toon became the chief
commercial city in the world. Not only during
the fubfiftenlcc of the Grecian empire in Egypt and
in the cast, but aniidft all the fucceflive revoluti-
ons in thole countries, fiomn the time of the Ptolo-
inics to the (lifcovcry of the navigation by the Cape

of
.* Stsailb Ccogr. lib. xvi;'.P 1143.1149.

B 0o K of Good Hope, commerce, particularly that of the

East Indies, continued to flow in the channel
which the sagacity and foresight of Alexander had
marked out for it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having open-

ed to the Greeks a communication with India by
sea; he aspired to the sovereignty of those regions
which furnished the reft of mankind with so many
precious commodities, and conducted his army thi-
ther by land. Enterprising, however, as he was, he
may be said rather to have discovered, than to have
conquered that country. He did not, in his pro-
grefs towards the east, advance beyond the banks
of the rivers that fall into the Indus, which is now
the western boundary of the vast continent of India.
Arnidff the wild exploits which distinguish this
part of his history, he pursued measures that mark
the superiority of his genius, as well as the extent
of his views. He had penetrated as far into India
as to confirm his opinion of its commercial impor-
tance, and to perceive that immense wealth might
be derived from intercourse with a country, where
the arts of elegance having been more early culti-
vated, were arrived at greater perfeftion than in
any other part of the earth*. Full of this idea, he
resolved to examine the course of navigation from
the mouth of the Indus to the bottom of the Persian
Gulph ; and if it should be found practicable, to
cftablifh a regular communication between them.
In order to effct this, he proposed to remove the
cataradls, with which, the jealousy of the Persians,
(and their aversion to correlpoldence with foreign-
ers, had obfltructed the entrance into the Euphra-
tes §; to carry the commodities of the eaftr up that

river

" Strab. Ccogr. 'ih. xv. p. 0o36. Q;Curtius, lib. xviii. c. 9I
(3 Stral. Gcogr. lib. xvi. p. 1075.

river, and the Tigris, which unites with it, into t do `

K

the interior parts'of his Asiatic dominions ; while, I. -
by the way of the Arabian Gulf, and the river
Nile, they might be conveyed to Alexandria, and
distributed to the rsft of the world.' Nearchus, an
officer of eminent abilities, was entruffed with the
command of the fleet fitted out for this expedition.
He performed this voyage, which was deemed an
enterprise so arduous and important, that Alexan-
der reckoned it one of the most extraordinary
events which distinguished his reign. Inconfider-
able as it may now appear, -itwas, at that time,
an undertaking of no 'little merit and difficulty.
In the prosecution of it, striking inflances occur
of the finall progress which the Greeks had made
in naval knowledge *. Having never failed be-
yond the bounds of the Mediterranean, where the
ebb and flow of the fea.are hardlyperceptible, when
they first observed this phaenomenon at the mouth
of the Indus, it appeared to them a prodigy, by
which the gods testified the displeasure of Heaven
against their enterprize t. During their whole
course, they teem never to have loft fight of land,
but followed the bearings of the coast so servilely,
that they could not much avail themselves of those
periodical winds, which facilitate navigation in
the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they spent no less
than ten months § in performing this voyage,
which, from the mouth of the Indus to that of the
Pcrfian gulf, does not exceed twenty degrees. It is
probable that alidft the violent convulsions, and
fiequent revolutions in the east, occasioned by the
contests among the successors of Alexander, the °
navigation to India, by the course which Near-
ch us had opened, was di fcontinued. The Indian trade
carried on at Alexandria, not only fiibfifled, but was
so much improved under the Grecian monarchs of
VOL. I. C Egypt,
' Sc, N OT E IV.
t Sau N 0 T E V. i Plin. I-ft. Nat. lib. vi. c, 3z.

B ,0 K Egypt,: that it proved agreat source of the wealth

. . which diftinguilhed that kingdom.

THE progress which the Romans made in navi-

Of the Ro- gati6n and'difcbvery, was still more inconsiderable
mans. than that of the Greeks. The genius of the Ro-

main pople, their military education,. nd the fpi-
¥it' 'of their laws, concurred'in estranging them
frbiim comiiercie and naval affairs. It was the ne-
ceffity of opdpoiftlg a formidable rival, not the desire
of extendirng trade, which irft' prompted them to
aim. at maritimne power. Though they soon per-
ceived that, in order to acquire the u'niverial do-
minion after which they aspired, it was necessary
to render themselves masters of the Tea, the'y ill
confide'ied the naval service' as a subordinate 'fa-
tion, aid' reserved for 'it fudh citizens as were n'ot
of a rank to be admitted into 'the legions*. In the
history of the Roman reputlic, 'hardly one event
occurs, that' marks attention to' navigation any far-
ther than as' it was inftrumenital towards conqu e'.
When the Roman valour and'difcipline had 'sub"-
dued all the maritime states kinown' in the ancienit
world; when Carthage, Greece, and Egypt, had
submitted to their power, the Romans did not im-
bibe the commercial spirit of th'e conquered nati-
ons. Among that people 6f soldiers, to have ap-
plied to trade would have been deemed a degradati-
on of a Roman citizen. ' They abandoned the me-
chanical arts, commerce, and navigation, to'flaves,
to freedmen, to provincials, and to citizens of tie
lowest class. Even after the filuverfion of liberty,
when the severity and haughtiness of ancient man-
ners began to abate, commerce did not rife into
high estimation anmong the Romans. The trade of
Grccce, Egypt, and the other conquered countries,
continued to be carried on in their ancient chan-
nels, after they were reduced into the form of Ro-

mait
* Polyb. lib. v.

man provinces. As Rome was the capital of the B O O K
world, and the feat of government, all 'the wealth -h
and valuable producions of the provinces: flved
naturally thither. The Romans, satisfi'ed with this,
seem to have suffered commerce to remain almoit
entirely in the hands of the natives of the refpedive
countries. The extent, however, of the Roman
power, which reached over almnot the whole
known world, the vigilant infpedion of the Ro-
man magiitrates, and the spirit of the Roman go-
vernment, no less intelligent than active, gave
such additional security to 'commerce, as animated
it with new vigour. The union among nations
was never so entire, nor the intercourse so perfet,
as within the bounds of this vast empire. Com-
merce, under their dominion, was not obstructed
by the jealousy of rival fiates, interrupted by fre-
'quent hostilities, 'or'limited, by partial reftritions.
One Superintending power moved and regulated
the induifry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits of
their joint efforts.

NAVIGATION felt, this influence, and, im-

proved under it. As soon as the Romans acquired
a taste for the luxuries of the eail, the trade with
India through Egypt was pushed with new vigour,
and carried' on to greater extent. By frequenting
the Indian continent, navigators became acquain-
ted with the periodical course of the winds, which
in the ocean that separates Africa fiom India, blow
with little variation during one half of the year
from the eafi, and during the other half fix with
equal ftcadinefs in the welt. Encouraged by ob-
serving this, they abandoned their ancient flow and
dangerous course along the coaRf, and as Coon as
the weflern monsoon set in, took their departure
from Ocelis, at the mouth of the Arabian gulf,
and stretchcd boldly across tile ocean *. The uni-

C 2 form
li. IHllt. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

B 0 0 K Iithridates and Tigranes, they seem to have fur-

_,, veyed the countries contiguous to the Euxine and

Caspian seas, more accurately than they had been
formerly, and to have carried on a more extensive
trade than that of the Greeks with the opulent
and commercial nations, then feated around the
Euxine sea.

Imperfc&i- FROM this fuccina survey of discovery and na-
phi°cgno- vigation, which I have traced from the earliest
ledge among dawn of historical knowledge to the full establish-
thancicnts. ment of the Roman dominion, their progress ap-

pears to be wonderfully flow. It seems neither
adequate to what we might have expeced from
the activity and enterprise of the human mind,
nor to what might have been performed by the
power of the great empires that fucceflively go-
verned the world. If we rejea accounts that are
fabulous and obscure; if we adhere steadily to the
light and information of authentic history, with-
out substituting in its place the conjeEtures of
fancy, or the dreams of etymologists, we must
conclude, that the knowledge which the ancients
had acquired of the habitable globe was extreme-
ly confined. In Europe, the extensive provinces
in the eaflern part of Germany were hardly known
to them. They were almost totally unacquainted
with the vast countries which are now subje&l to
the kings of Denmark, Sweden, Prussia, Poland,
and the Ruffian empire. The more barren re-
gions, that firetch within the artSic circle, were
quite unexplored. In Africa, their researches did
not extend far beyond the provinces which
border on the nMediterranean, and those situated on
the western bfore of the Arabian gulf. In Asia,
they were unacquainted, as I formerly observed,
with all the fertile and opulent countries beyond
the Ganges, which furnish the most valuable com-
moditics that, in modern times, have been the

great

great 'objeE of the European commerce with B: K
India; nor do they. seem to have ever penetrated -.
into those immense, regions occupied by the wan-
dering tribes, which they called by the general
name of Sarmatians or Scythians, and now pof-
sessed .by Tartars of various denominations, and
by the Asiatic fubjedis of Russia.

-, .

... ,A remarka-

BUT there is one opinion, that universally pre- bl proof of

vailed among the.ancients, which conveys a more this.
friking idea.of the small progress they had made in
the knowledge of the habitable globe, than can be
derived from any detail of their discoveries. They
supposed the earth to be divided into five regions,
which they distinguished by the name of zones.
Two of these, which were nearefi the poles, they
termed frigid zones, and believed that the extreme
cold which reigned perpetually there, rendered
them uninhabitable. Another, feated under the
line, and extending on either fide towards the tro-
pics, they called the torrid zone, and imagined it
to be so burnt up with unremitting heat, as to be
equally destitute of inhabitants. On the two other
zones, which occupied the remainder of the earth,
they bestowed the appellation of temperate, and
taught that these, being the only regions in which
life could subsist, were allotted to man for his habi-
tation. This wild opinion was not a conceit of
the uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fiction of the
poets, but a system adopted by the most enlighten-
ed philosophers, the noft accurate hifforians and
geographers in Greece and Rome. According to
this theory, a vast portion of the habitable earth
was pronounced to be unfit for fufitaining the hu-
man fplecies. T'hofc fertile and populous regions
within the torrid zone, which are now known not
only to yield their own inhabitants the necefiaries
and comforts of life, with most luxuriant profiu-
lion), but to con)lnuiicate their fupcrfluous ftorcs

to

B O O K to the reft of, the world, were suppose d to be the

mansion of perpetual fterilityl' and' desolation. ;As
all the parts of the globe, which. the ancients had
discovered, lay within the .northern. temperate
zone, their opinion that the other temperate zone
was filled with inhabitants, was founded on rea-
soning and conje6cure, not on discovery. They
even believed that, by the intolerable heat of the
torrid zone, such an' insuperable barrier was placed
between the two temperate regions of the earth, as
would prevent for ever any intercourse between
their respective inhabitants. Thus' 'this extrava-
gant theory not only proves that the ancients
were unacquainted with the true Rtate of the globe,
but it tended to render their ignorance of it per-
petual, by representing all attempts towards open-
ing a communication with the remote regions of
the earth, as utterly impracticable*.

BUT, however imperfect or inaccurate the geo-

graphical knowledge which the Greeks and Ro-
mans had acquired may appear, in refpeat of the
present improved itate of that science, their progress
in discovery will seem considerable, and the extent
to which they carried navigation and commerce
- must be reckoned great, when compared with the
ignorance of early times. As long as the Roman
empire retained such vigour as to prelerve its au-
thority over the conquered nations, and to keep
them united, it was an object of public police, as
well as of private curiosity, toexamine and def-
cribe the countries which composed this great body.
Even when the other fcicnccs began to decline,
geography, enriched with new obfcrvations, and
receiving some acceflion from the experience of
every age, and the reports of every traveller, bon-
tinued to improve. It attained to the highctf'paint
of perfection and accuracy to which it ever arrived

See.~ N

O T E VIII.i
4s Set. N 0 1' E Vil.

in the ancient world, by the induRtry and genius of- B 0 K
Ptolemy the philosopher. He flourished in the fe-
cond century of the Christian aera, and published Improve-
a description of the terrestrial globe, more ample mCnt iny
andexat than that of any of his predecessors. by Ptolemy.

BUT, soon after, violent convulsions began to The invafi-
shake the Roman state; the fatal ambition or ca- on of the

Roman em-

price of Conflantine, by changing the feat of go- pire by bar-
vernment, divided and weakened its force; the barous na-
barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as tior0e
its infiruments to overturn the mighty fabric of
theRoman power, began to assemble and to muster
their armies on its frontier; the empire tottered to
its fall. During this decline and old age of the
Roman state, it was impossible that the sciences
lhould go on improving. The efforts of genius
were, at that period, as languid and feeble as those
of government. From the time of Ptolemy, no
considerable addition seems to have been made to
geographical knowledge, nor did any important
revolution happen in trade, excepting that Con-
ftantinople, by its advantageous situation, and the
encouragement of the eastern emperors, became a
commercial city of the first note.

At length, the clouds which had been so long Effects of
gathering round the Roman empire, burst into a their con

quecls on

fiorm. The barbarous nations rulhed in with ir- commercial
resistible impetuosity, and, in the general wreck, iltercourfc,
occasioned by the inundation which overwhelmed
Europe, the arts, sciences, inventions and disco-
veries of the Romans, periflied and disappeared .
All the various tribes, which conquered and fcttled
in the different provinces of the Roman empire,
were uncivilized, irrangers to letters, defcitute of
arts, unacquainted with regular government, sub-
ordination, or laws. The manners and inflituti-
VOL. I. D onls

* H-Is. of Chazlke V. vo i. p. S8. 7,.

BO OK ons of some of them were so rude and barbarous,

as to be hardly compatible with a slate of social
union. Europe, when occupied by such inhabi-
tants, may be said to have returned to a second in-
fancy, and hld to begin anew its career in improve-
ment, fcicnce, and civility. The first effet pof the
settlement of those barbarous invaders was to dif-
solve the union by which the Roman power had
cemented mankind together. They parcelled out
Europe into many small and independent flates,
differing from each other in language and customs.
No intercourse fubfifed between the members of
those divided and hostile communities. Accustom-
ed to a simple mode of life, and averse to industry,
thev had few wants to supply, and no superfluities
to dispose of. The names of STRANGERand of ENE-
MY became once more words of the fame import.
Customs every-where prevailed, and even laws
were established, which rendered it disagreeable
and dangerous to visit any foreign country t. Ci-
ties, in which alone an extensive commerce can be
carried on, were few, inconsiderable, and destitute
of those immunities which produce security or ex-
cite enterprise. The fcienccs, on which geogra-
phy and navigation are founded, were not cultiva-
ted. The accounts of ancient improvemrnnts and
difcovcrics, contained in the Greek and Roman au-
thors, wcre ncglcted or mifuni erfilod. The
knowltdgc of remote regions was lofl, their fituati-
on, their commlodities, and almost their names,
were unknown.
Com:nlnci- ON' CI ciLrcum{l;anIce pIreventCd commlercial inter-

,le,-,: lill COt'II r- with d(ill;ilt n;l.ionll from cct;ia ig altogether.

lli.'rvtI in Conl';!n 1rinlopi)l, though oftenl threatelned by the
emiiTrn fierce inval
e rs, whlo lfread dellolation over the

rcf' f }. uro'pc, was to fortunlate as to clcape their

dclltructlive
h lial. oft Charic:. V. vol. i. p. 77. 327

deflruiive rage. In that city, the knowledge of B O O K
ancient arts and discoveries was preserved ; a taste
for splendour and elegance subsisted ; the produai-
ons and luxuries-of foreign countries were in re-
queff; and commerce continued to flourifhl there,
when it was extint in every other part of Europe.
The citizens of Constantinople did not confine
their trade to the islands of the Archipelago, or to
the adjacent coasts of Asia; they took a wider
range, and following the course which the an-
cients had marked out, imported the commodities
of the East Indies from Alexandria. When Egypt
was torn from the Roman empire by the Arabians,
the industry of the Greeks discovered a new chan-
nel, by which the productions of India might be
conveyed to Constantinople. They were carried
up the Indus, as far as that great river is navigable;
thence they were transported by land to the banks
of the river Oxus, and proceeded down its stream
to the Caspian sea. There they entered the Volga,
and failing up it, were carried by land to the Ta-
nais, which conducted them into the Euxine sea,
where vefels from Conflantinople waited their ar-
rival *. This extraordinary and tedious mode of
conveyance merits attention, not only as a proof
of the violent passion which the inhabitants of Con-
itantinople had conceived for the luxuries of the
east, and as a specimen of the ardour and ingenui-
ty with which they carried on commerce, but be-
cause it dcmonfirates, that, during the ignorance
which reigned in the reft of Europe, an extensive
knowledge of remote countries was frill preserved
in the capital of the Greek empire.

A'r the fame time, a gleam of light and know-

ledge broke in upon the eafl. The Arabians, hav- and amon
ilg contracted folne relish for the fcienccs of the the Ara-

D :2 people i *
* Ramnulio, vol. i. p. 372. F.

B O O K people whose empire they had contributed to over-

turn, tranfla ted the books of several of the Greek
philosophers into their own language. One of
the first was that valuable work of Ptolemy, which
I have already mentioned. The fiudy of geogra-
phy became, of consequence, an early object of
attention to the Arabians. But that acute and in-
genious people cultivated chiefly the speculative
and scientific parts of geography. In order to as-
certain the figure and dimensions of the terrestrial
globe, they applied the principles of geometry,
they had recourse to astronomical obfervations,.they
employed experiments and operations, which Eu-
rope, in more enlightened times, has been proud to
adopt and to imitate. At that period, however,
the fame of the improvements made by the Ara-
bians did not reach Europe. The knowledge of
their difcovcries was reserved for ages capable of
comprehending and of perfecting them.

Revival of BY degrees, the calamities and desolation brought
commerc upon the western provinces of the Roman empire
tion in Eu- by its barbarous conquerors, were forgotten, and
rope. in some measure repaired. The rude tribes which

fettled there, acquiring insensibly rome idea of re-
gular government, and some relish for the functions
and comforts of civil life, Europe began to awake
from its torpid and unative state. The first fymp-
toms of revival were discerned in Italy. The nor-
thern tribes which took poffeilion of this country,
made progrcfs in improvement with greater rapidity
than the people fettled in other parts of Europe.
Various caufcs, which it is not the objeat of this
work to enumerate or explain, concurred in reftor-
ing liberty and independence to the cities of Italyt.
The acquisition of these routed industry, and gave
motion and vigour to all the active powers of the

human
.1- Iil. of Charlcs V. vol."i. p. 33.

human mind. Foreign commerce revived, naviga- B 0O K
tion was attended to and improved. Conftanti-
nople became the chief mart to which the Italians
resorted. There they not only met with a favour-
able reception, but obtained such mercantile pri-
vileges as enabled them to carry on trade with
great advantage. They were supplied both with
the precious commodities of the east, and with
many curious manufactures, the producr of the
ancient arts and ingenuity that Rill subsisted among
the Greeks. As the labour and expence of con-
veying the productions of India to Constantinople
bythat longand indiret course which I have defcrib-
ed, rendered them extremely rare, and of an exorbi-
tant price, the industry of the Italians discovered
other methods of procuring them in greater abund-
ance, and at an easier rate. They sometimes pur-
chased them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other-ports
on the coaf of Syria, to which they were brought
by a route not unknown to the ancients. They
were conveyed from India by Lea, up the Persian
Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates and Tigris, as
far as Bagdat, were carried by-land across the Defart
to Palmyra, and from thence to the towns on the
Mediterranean. But from the length of the jour-
ney, and the dangers to which the caravans were
exposed, this proved always a tedious, and often a
precarious mode of conveyance. At length, the
Soldans of Egypt, having renewed the commerce
with India in its ancient channel, by the Arabi-
an Gulf, the Italian merchants, notwithtland-
ing the violent antipathy to each other with which
Chriflians and the followers of Mahomet were
then posses'e(d, repaired to Alexandria, and en-
during, from the love of gain, the insolence and x-
atlions of the Mahometans, eftablifled a lucrative
trade in that port. From that period, the commer-
cial lifilit of Italy became active and enterprising.
Vcnicc, Gcnoa, Pilt, rose fiom inconsiderable

towlns

B 0 0 K towns, so be populous and wealthy cities. Their

I._ naval power increased; their vefiels frequented

all the ports in the Mediterranean; they ventured
sometimes beyond the Streights ; visited the mari-
time towns of Spain, France, the Low Countries,
and England ; and, by distributing their commo-
dities over Europe, began to communicate to its
various nations some knowledge of the valuable pro-
ducions of the east, as well as some ideas of manu-
f.alures and arts, with which they had hi-
therto been unacquainted.

Their pro- WHILE the cities of Italy were thus advancing
grefs favour- i
ed bv the in their career of improvement, an event happened,
Cruiades. the most extraordinary perhaps in the history of

mankind, which infread of retarding the commer-
cial progress of the Italians, rendered it more rapid,
The martial spirit of the Europeans, heightened
and inflamed by religious zeal, prompted them to
deliver the Holy Land from the dominion of infidels.
Vast armies, composed of all the nations of Europe,
marched towards Afla, upon this wild enterprise.
The Genoese, the Pifans, and Venetiansfurnifhed
the transports which carried them thither. They
supplied them with provisions and military flores.
Beside the immense fums which they received on
this account, they obtained commercial privileges
and cftabliihments, of great consequence in the set-
tlemcnts which the Cruiladrs made in Paleffine,
and in other provinces of Asia. From those four-
ces, prodigious wealth flowed into the cities which
I have mentioned. A proportional ilcreafe of
power accompanied this, and by the end of the ho-
ly war, Venice, in particular, became a great ma-
ritime flat, poflefling an extenfivc commerce, and
ample territories *. Italy was not the only coun-
try in which the Crusades contributed to revive and
(iilhfe filch a spirit as prepared Europe for future

difcovcries.
nafl; tice 'IHlilnoire du Commerce de cVenife, p. lii.

discoveries. By their expeditions into Asia, the o- B °° K
ther European nations became well acquainted with .
remote regions, which formerly they knew only by
name, or by the reports of ignorant and credulous
Pilgrims. They had an opportunity of observing
the manners, the arts, and the accommodations of
people more polished than themselves. This inter-
course between the eafi and weft subsisted almost two
centuries. The adventurers, who returned from
Asia, communicated to their countrymen the ideas
which they had acquired, and the habits of life
they had contracted by vifitingmore refined nations.
The Europeans began to be sensible of wants with
which they were formerly unacquainted ; new de-
fires were excited; and such a taste for the com-
inodities and arts of other countries gradually
spread among them, that they not only encouraged
the resort of foreigners to their harbours, but began
to perceive the advantage and necessity of applying
to commerce themselves *.

THIS communication, which was opened be- by te di
twcen Europe and the western provinces of Asia, coveries of
encouraged several persons to advance far beyond t avedllers by
the countries in which the Crusaders carried on
their operations, and to travel by land into the more
remote and opulent regions of the east. The wild
1'ilaticifm, which ccems at that period to have
mingled in all the schemes of individuals, no less
thail in all the counsels of nations, firfi incited
men to enter upon thofc long and dangerous pere-
grinations. They were afterwards undertaken fiom
profplcits of commlercial advantage, or fiom mo-
tives of mere curiosity. Benjamin, a Jew of Tu-
'(ll, in the kingdom of Navarre, ponflflbd with a
filprftitious veneration for the law of Motes, and

solicitous
H-1ill. ofClirle V. vol. i. p. 15. &c.

B 0 0 K solicitous to visit his countrymen in the east, whom

he hoped to find in such a state of power and opu-
lence, as might redound to the honour of his set,
set out from Spain in the year II60, and travelling
by land to Constantinople, proceeded through the
countries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian
seas, as far as Chinese Tartary. From thence he
took his route towards the south, and after tra-
versing various provinces of the farther India, he
embarked on the Indian ocean, visited several of
its islands, and returned at the end of thirteen
years, by the way of Egypt, to Europe,
with much information concerning a large diftrid
of the globe, altogether unknown at that time to
the weitern world *. The. zeal of the head of the
Christian church co-operated with the superstition
of Benjamin the Jew, in discovering the interior
and remote provinces of Asia. All Christendom
having been alarmed with accounts of the rapid
progress of the Tartar arms under Zengis Khan,
Innocent IV. who entertained most exalted ideas
concerning the plenitude of his power, and the
4 submission due to his injuncions, sent father John

de Piano Carpini, at the head of a milion of
Franciscan monks, and father Afcolino, at the
head of another of Dominicans, to exhort Kayuk
Khan, the grandson of Zengis, who was then at
the head of the Tartar empire, to embrace the
Christian faith, and to desist from desolating the
earth by his arms. The haughty defccndant of the
grcateft conqueror Asia had ever beheld, aftonithed
at this strange mandate from an Italian Priest,
whose name and power were alike unknown to him,
received it with the contempt which it merited,
though he difmnified the mendicants who delivered
it with impunity. But as they had penetrated
into the country by different routes, and followed

for
* Bcrgcron Rccucl deo VoyageC, ac . to . 1. .

for some time the Tartar camps, which were al- B 0 0 K
ways in motion, they had an opportunity of visit- I.
ing a great part of Asia. Carpini, who proceeded
by the way of Poland and Russia, travelled through
its northern provinces as far as the extremities of
Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to have landed some-
where in Syria, advanced through its southern pro-
vinces, into the interior parts of Persia -.

NOT long after, St. Louis of France contributed I23*

farther towards extending the knowledge which the
Europeans had begun to acquire of those distant
regions. Some designing impostor, who took ad-
vantage of the slender acquaintance of the Chris-
tians with the state and characer of the Asiatic
nations, having informed him that a powerful
Khan of the Tartars had embraced the Chriflian
faith, the monarch listened to the tale with pious
credulity, and instantly resolved to fend ambafa-
dors to this illustrious convert, with a view of in-
citing him to attack their common enemy the Sa-
racens on one quarter, while he fell upon them on
the other. As monks were the only persons in
that age who possessed such a degree of knowledge
as qualified them for a service of this kind, he em-
ployed in it father Andrew, a Jacobine, who was
followed by father William de Rubruquis, a Fran-
cifcan. With respect to the progress of the for-
mer, there is no memorial extant. The journal
of the latter has been published. He was admitted
into the prcfence of Mangu, the third Khan in
fucceflion fiom Zengis, and made a circuit
through the interior parts of Asia, more extensive
than that of any European who had hitherto ex-
plored them :1:.

To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent

forth to visit Asia, fuccecdcd others who ventured
VOL. I. E into

t i H.ilcd yt. i. z1. Bergelon, tomn. i.
H.akl. i. 7 1. Rucucil de Voyages piar Beigeron, tom. i.

B O O K into remote countries, from the profpea of com-

_ mercial advantage, or from motives of mere curio-

fity. The first and most eminent of these was
Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Hav-
3269. ing engaged early in trade, according to the cuf-.

tom of his country, his aspiring mind wished for a
sphere of acaivity more extensive than was afforded
to it by the eftablified traffic carried on in those
ports of Europe and Asia, which the Venetians
frequented. This prompted him to travel into un-
known countries, in expetation of opening with
them a commercial intercourse, more tuited to the
sanguine ideas and hopes of a young adventurer.
As his father had already carried some European
commodities to the court of the great Khan of the
Tartars, and had disposed of them to advantage,
he resorted thither. Under the protetion of Kub-
lay Khan, the mofl powerful of all the successors of
Zengis, he continued his mercantile peregrinations
in Asia upwards of twenty-fix years ; and during
that time advanced towards the eaRt, far beyond
the utmost boundaries to which any European tra-
veller had ever proceeded. Instead of following
the course of Carpini and Rubruquis, along the
vaif unpeopled plains of Tartary, he passed through
the chief trading cities in the more cultivated parts
of Alia, and penetrated to Cambalu, or Peking,
the capital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or
China, f{ilbjct at that time to the fuccetlors of
Zcngiis. 1ie made more than one voyage on the
Indian oct.n, he traded in many of the islands,
from wlii ic E 1urope h;ad lo: g IeccivC ed fiiceries and
other commodities, which it held in high efimanti-
on, ihougli ulnacquainlted with the particutla
countries to which it was indebted for thole preci-
ous productiois ; 1and he obtained inlformaitio n
co(lccrI'in g vcral countritie, wlhich he (lid not
visit in lpclioln, palticLuirly the illand Zipabiri

probabl

probably the fame now known by the name of Ja- B o o K
pan t. On his return, he aftonilhed his contem-
poraries with his descriptions of vas, regions,
whose names had never been heard of in Europe,
and with such pompous accounts of their fertility,
their populousness, their opulence, the variety of
their manufactures, and the extent of their trade,
as rose far above the conception of an uninform-
ed age.

ABOUT half a century after Marco Polo, Sir

John Mandeville, an Englishman, encouraged by I32z.
his example, visited most of the countries in the east
which he had described, and like him, published
an account of them on his return t. The narrati-
ons of those early travellers abound with many wild
incoherent tales, concerning giants, enchanters,
and monsters. But they were not, from that cir-
cumftance, less acceptable to an ignorant age, which
delighted in what was marvellous. The wonders
which they told, morfly on hearsay, filled the mul-
titude with admiration. The sacs which they re-
lated from their own observation, attraCted the at-
tention of the more discerning. The former, which
may be confidered as the popular traditions and fa-
bles of the countries through which they had paifed,
were gradually disregarded as Europe advanced in
knowledge. The latter, however incredible some
of them may have appeared in their own time, have
been confirmed by the observations of modern tra-
vellers. By means of both, however, the curiosity
of mankind was excited with rcfpect to the remote
parts of the earth, their ideas were enlarged, and
they were not only insensibly difpolcd to attempt
new discoverics, but received such information as
direlrted them to that particular courlf in which
they were afterwards carried on.

E 2 W-II.L

t Vi;ggli dli Mar1:o Polrlo. It.lim s, ii. 7.. B rl'clrol, toll ii.
"Voy.ql;c, alal Tlavcels, by Sir John Mandtcvillr.

B O O K WHILE this spirit was gradually forming in Eu-

L__) rope, a fortunate discovery was made, which con-

and by the tributed more than all the efforts and ingenuity of
inkention of
the mainers preceding ages, to improve and toextend navigation.
hoinptfs the manet, by

whi.
conpfis. FThat wonderful property of the magnet, by which

it communicates such virtue to a slender rod of iron
or needle, as to point towards the poles of the earth,
was observed. The use which might be made of
this in direcing navigation was immediately per-
ceived, and that most valuable, but now familiar
instrument, the MARINERS COMPASS, was formed.
When, by means of it, navigators found that at all
seasons, and in every place,'they could discover the
north and south with so much ease and accuracy,
it became no longer neceflary to depend merely on
the light of the stars and the observation of the sea
coast. They gradually abandoned their ancient ti-
mid and lingering course along the shore, ventured
boldly into the ocean, and relying on this new
guide, could steer in the darkest n'ght, and under
the most cloudy sky, with a security and precision
hitherto unknown. The compass may be said to
have opened to man the dominion of the sea, and
to have put him in full poffeflion of the earth, by
enabling him to visit every part of it. Flavio Gioia
a citizeni of Amalfi, a town of considerable trade in
the kingdom of Naples, was the author of this
ireat discovery, about the year one thousand three
hundred and two. It hath been often the fate of
those illuffrious benefators of mankind, who have
enriched fcicncc and improved the arts by their in-
ventions, to derive more reputation than benefit
from the happy efforts of their genius. ]But the lot
of (Gioia has been ifill more cruel; through the
inattention or ignorance of contemporary historians,
he has been defrauded even of the faine to which

he had such a just title. We receive from them no B o o K
information with refped to his profession, his cha-
rafter, the precise time when he made this import-
ant discovery, and the accidents or inquiries which
led to it: the knowledge of this event, though
productive of greater effecs than any recorded in the
annals of the human race, is tranfinittedto uswith-
out any of those circumstances, which can gratify
the curiosity that it naturally awakens.*. Though
the use of the compass might enable the Italians
to perform the short voyages towhich they wereac-
customed, with greater security and expedition, its
influence was not so sudden or extensive, as
immediately to render navigation adventurous, and
to excite a spirit of discovery. Many causes com-
bined in preventing this beneficial invention from
producing its full effed instantaneously. Men re-
linquifh ancient habits slowly, and with relucance.
They are averse to new experiments, and venture
upon them with timidity. The commercial jea-
lousy of the Italians, it is probable, laboured to
conceal the happy discovery of their countryman
from othernations. The art of seering by the com-
pass, with such skill and accuracyas to infpireafull
confidence in its direction, was acquired gradually.
Sailors, long accufromed not to quit fight of land,
durfl not launch out at once, and commit them-
selves to unknown Ieas. Accordingly, near half a
century elapscd, from the time of Gioia's discovery,
before navigators ventured into any seas which they
had not been accuflomcd to frequent.

T-IE firfl appearance of a bolder fplirit may be Some ,p-

dated fiom the voyages of the Spaniards to the Ca- l';".:"" cos
nary or Fortunate Illands. By what accident they it in lnavi

were gation.

' Collinna c '&Trmbellus dI Acua niutice inventore. Inftit. Ac:,
A,,,,n. to')ni. ii. pa.rt iii. p. 37z

B 0 0 K were led to the discovery of those small isles, which

lie near five hundred miles from the Spanish coast,
and above a hundred and fifty miles from the coast
of Africa, contemporary writers have not explained.
But about the middle of the fourteenth century, the
people of all the different kingdoms into which
Spain was then divided, were accustomed to make,
piratical excursions thither, in order to plunder the
inhabitants, or to carry them off as slaves. Cle-
ment VI. in virtus of the right claimed by the holy
fee to dispose of all countries polfeffed by infidels,
ereaed those isles into a kingdom, in the year one
thousand three hundred and forty-four, and confer-
red it on Lewis de la Cerda, descended from the
royal family of Castile. But that unfortunate
prince, deflitute of power to assert his nominal
title, having never visited the Canaries, John de
Bethencourt, a Norman baron, obtained a grant of
them fiom IIcnry III. of Castile ". Bethencourt,
with the valour and good fortune which-diftinguifh-
cd the adventurers of his country, attempted and
cffetcd the conquest, and the poffeflion of the Ca-
naries remained for some time in his family, as a
sics held of the crown of Caflile. Previous to this
expedition of Bethencourt, his countrymen are said
to have visited the coaflt of Afiica, and to have pro-
ceeded far to the south of the Canary islands. But
a363 their voyages thither seem not to have been under-

taklen in confetluence of any public or regular plan
for extending navigation and attempting new dif
coveries. They were either excursions fuggcfitd
by that roving piratical ip)irit, which defcendedl to
the Normn:is from their anccftors, or ihe coilmmer-
cial enterpnriies of private niiichiants, which attr;t-
cd so little notice, that hardly any memorial 0f
them is to be found in contemporary authors. hi

* V;ir.l y C'!:nijo Notic, Ie la lliRtor. de Canari:l, 1. z6S, &c
G(l; Hifl. c. .x

a general survey of the progress of discovery, it is B OO .K
ufficient to have mentioned this event; and leav- ..

1 ing it among those of dubious exiPtence, or of finall
i mportance, we may conclude, that though much
additional information concerning the remote re-
ions of the East 'had been, received by travellers
who visited them by land, navigation, at the begin-
ning of the fifteenth century, had not advanced be-
vond the slate to which it had attained before the
dlownfal of the Roman empire.

AT length the period arrived, when Providence First regnar

AT,~~~~

!~~, .- .

,t . 'plan of dif-

decreed that men were to pass the limits, within covei-.
which they had been so long confined, and open to
t;cinfelves a more ample field wherein to display
tlieir talents, their enterprise, and courage. The
first considerable efforts towards this-were not made
by any of the more powerful Ptates of Europe, or
by those who had applied to navigation with the
(greatest afliduity and success. The glory of lead-
ing the way in this new career was reserved for
Portugal, one of the fialleft and most inconfidera-
b!c of the European kingdoms. As the attempts of
the Portuguese to acquire the knowledge of those the tlortl
pl;rts of the globe with which mankind were then gucic.
un:acliuainted, not only improved and extended the
;irt of naviga:tion, but roused such a spirit of curio-
{it- :Ind enterprise, as led to the difeovery of the
NcwWorld of which I propose to write the hiitory,
it is (icceli.ry to take a view of thi rife, the progress,
iaJd fcc(cfs of their various naval operations. It
w:s in this Ichool that the dilcovercr of America
was t;rainid ; and unlif's we trace the ftcps by
which his infirudiors and guides advanced, it will

1c inlpojlible to comprehend the circunmfances
lwhich fiig:fied the idea, or facilitated the cxecuti-
o1 ,)f liis ,rcr;it Idcigs.

VARIOLUS

B O O K VARIOUS circumstances prompted the Portu-

1 I guefe to exert their aacivity in this new direction,

Circumftan- and enabled them to accomplish undertakings ap-
ces which parently superior to the natural force of their mo-

etts. narchy. The kings of Portugal, having driven

the Moors out of their dominions, had acquired
power, as well as glory, by the success of their
arms against the infidels. By their vi&cories over
them, they had extended the royal authority be-
yond the narrow limits within which it was origi-
nally circumscribed in Portugal, as well as in
other feudal kingdoms. They had the command
of the national force, could rouse it to ac with
united vigour, and, after the expulsion of the
Moors, could employ it without dread of interrup-
tion from any domeflic enemy. By the perpetual
hostilities carried on for several centuries against
the Mahometans, the martial and i adventurous
spirit that distinguished all the European nations
during the middle ages, was improved and height-
ened among the Portuguese. A fierce civil war,
towards the close of the fourteenth century, occa-
sioned by a disputed succession, augmented the mi-
litary ardour of the nation, and formed or called
forth men of such aftive and daring genius, as are
fit for bold undertakings. The situation of the
kingdom, bounded on every fide by the dominions
of 0 more powerful neighbour, did not afford free
scope to the aSlivity of the Portuguese by land, as
the flrcngth of their monarchy was no match for
that of Castile. But Portigal wa~ a maritime
ftatc, in which there were manll commodious lhar-
bours; the people had begun to make some pIo-
grefs in the knowledge ani pral;lice of navigation
and the sea was open to tllm, presenting the only
field of entcrprife in which Lhey could diftinguifl
thcmfclvcs.

SUCH

SUCH was the state of Portugal, and such the B o o K

dipofition of the people, when John I. surnamed
the Bastard, obtained secure possession of the crown Firit at-
by the peace concluded with Castile in the year tempt
one thousand four hundred and eleven. He was a
prince of great merit, who, by superior courage
and abilities, had opened his way to a throne which
of right did not belong to him. He instantly per-
ceived that it would be impoflible to preserve pub-
lic order, or domestic tranquility, without finding
rome employment for the restless spirit of his sub-
jeds. With this view, he assembled a numerous
fleet at Lisbon, composed of all the ihips that he
could fit out in his own kingdom, and of many
hired from foreigners. This great armament was
deflined to attack the Moors fettled on the coast of
Barbary. While it was equipping, a few vessels 141Z.
were appointed to fail along the western Chore
of Africa bounded by the Atlantic ocean, and to
discover the unknown countries situated there.
From this inconsiderable attempt, we may date the
commencement of that spirit of discovery which
opened the barriers that had so long shut out man-
kind from the knowledge of one half of the terres-
trial globe.

AT the time when John sent forth there ships on

this new voyage, the art of navigation was still very
imperfect. Though Africa lay To near to Portugal,
and the fertility of the countries already known on
that continent invited men to make farther disco-
vcries, the Portugucfe had never ventured to fail
beyond Cape NON. That promontory, as its name
imports, was hitherto confidered as a boundary
which could not be pased. But the nations of
Europe had now acquired as much knowledge, as
clnboldened them to disregard the prejudices and to
corret the errors of their ancestors. The long
reign of ignorance, the conlfant enemy of every
VOL. I. F curious

B ) O K curious inquiry, and of every new undertaking,

was approachingto its period. The light of science
began to dawn. The works of the ancient Greeks
and Romans began to be read with admiration and
profit. The sciences cultivated by the Arabians
were introduced into Europe by the Moors fettled
in Spain and Portugal, and by the Jews, who
were very numerous in both these kingdoms. Geo-
metry, astronomy, and geography, the sciences on
which the art of navigation is founded, became ob-
jecs of fludious attention. The memory of the
discoveries made by the ancients was revived, and
the progr-cfs of their navigation and commerce be-
gan to be traced. Some of the causes which, dur-
ing this century and the last. have obftruted the
cultivation of science in Portugal, did not exist, or
did not operate in the fame manner, in the fifteenth
century'"'; and the Portuguese, at that period,
seem to have kept peace with other nations on this
fide of the Alps in literary pursuits.
t:. fucccfs. As the genius of the age favoured the execution

of that new undcrta!ing,l to which the peculiar
state of thtrir country invited the Portuguese,' it
proved lfaclccfful. The velcls lfnt on the disco-
very do:,bl J tli:'t formidable Cape, which had ter-
i,,ina altcd th prorcfls of former navigators, and
proct.dc'. a hudl;(!lr and sixty miles beyond it, to
(Cap: I 1 j.or. As its ro Icy cli is, which fl-rctch-
tld i, colnhiti :.:11l wv!y inito the Atlantic, appeared
nllc (ic.;,tii'ul tli:n th;e pi:olniortory which they
h:d p lfi.l, tiie lor 'ii.ii efc: comlrnalndcrs durflt not
,iiLm pto i;' tli! ' )tull it, but -retturned to Liftbon,
mm r, f.'e h'!(d w ii h:vin1g2L ;Iadlinced to far, than

.tl]liiilll kl ;itL hi.i\ia,!

v [.tL 'd 11o farther.

Pi, ',- , :'c>;si;) A;{ tc: ;rhis vioy;lre was, it increaf-
,V ., : c,-! the paiii(llon fur tlifcvcery, lwhlichI began to arise

~ S.,: NOTI' IIX.

in Portugal. The extraordinary success of the BOOK
king's expedition againfi the Moors of Barbary,
added strength to the spirit of enterprise in the nati- gu e disco-
on, and pushed it on to new undertakings. In or- V"e]n"
der to render these successful, it was nccelfarv that ''
they should be conduaed by a person who poll
feiled abilities capable of discerning what was at-
tainable, who enjoyed leisure to form a reguiar fy-
tem for prosecuting dilcovery, and who was ili-
mated with ardour that would persevere in lpite of
obflacles and repulses. Happily for Portugai, ife
found all those qualities in Henry duke of Viilo,
the fourth son of king John by Philippa of Laicaf-
ter, sifter of Henry IV. king of England. That
prince, in his early youth, having accomrpani-
ed his father in his expedition to Barbary,
distinguished himself by many deeds of va-
lour. To the martial spirit, which was the cha-
ractcriftic of every manl of noble birth at that time,
he added all the accomplishments of a more en-
lightened and polished age. He cultivated the arts
and sciences, which were then unknown and def-
pifed by persons of his rank. He applicd with pc-
culiar fondness to the study of geography; and by
the instruCtion of able masters, as well as by the
accounts oftravellers, he early acquired filch know-
ledge of the habitable globe, as di covered the great
probability of finding new and opulent countries,
by lailing along the coast of Africa. Such an ob-
ject was formed to awaken the enthufiafin and ar-
dour of a youthful mind, and he engaged with the
utinoft zeal to patronize a design that might prove
as beneficial, as it appeared to be splendid and
lhonouritble. In order that he might purfiue this
great scheme without interruption, he retired fiom
coumrt immediately after his return firom Africa,.and
fixcld his residence at Sagres, near Cape St. Vin-
ctnt, where the prof)pet of the Atlantic ocean in-
vitcd his thoughts continlluly towards his favou-

F 2 rite

B I0 K rite project, and encouraged him to execute it. In

this retreat he was attended by some of the most
learned men in his country, who aided him in his
researches. He applied for information to the
Moors of Barbary, who were accurftomed to travel
by land into the interior provinces of Africa, in
quest of ivory, gold-duff, and other rich commodi-
ties. He consulted the Jews fettled in Portugal.
By promises, rewards, and marks of respect, he al-
lured into his service several persons, foreigners as
well as Portuguese, who were eminent for their
skill in navigation. In taking those preparatory
steps, the great abilities of the prince were second-
ed by his private virtues. His integrity, his affabi-
lity, his refpec for religion, his zeal forthe honour
of his country, engaged persons of all ranks to
applaud his design, and to favour the execution
of it. His schemes were allowed by his country-
men to proceed neither from ambition, nor the de-
fire of wealth, but to flow from the warm benevo-
lence of a heart eager to promote the happiness of
mankind, and which justly intitled him to assume
a motto for his device, thatdefcribed the quality by
which hewifhed to be distinguished, THE TALENTr

OF DOING GOOD.

Difcovcryof His first effort, as is usual at the commencement
Porto Santo of any new undertaking, was extremely inconfidera-

ble. He fitted out a single ship, and giving the com-
mand of it to John Gonzalez Zarco and Tristan
Vaz, two gentlemen of his household, who volun-
tarily offered to conduat the cnterprife, he infltruA-
ed them to use their utmost efforts to double Cape
Bojador, and thence to ftcer towards the south.
They, according to the mode of navigation which
flill prevailed, held their courfc along the /hore;
and by following that direction, they mult have en-
countcred almofl i n fuipclrale difficulties in attempt-
ing to pals Cape Bojador. But fortune came in aid

toa

to their want of ikill, and prevented the voyage B O C( K

I.

from being altogether fruitless. A sudden squall
of wind arose, drove them out to Tea, and when they
expeEted every moment to periih, landed them on
an unknown illand, which from their happy escape
they named PORTO SANTO. In the infancy of na-
vigation, the discovery of this finall island appeared
a matter of such moment, that they instantly re-
turned to Portugal with the good tidings, and were
received by Henrywith the applause and honour due
to fortunate adventurers. This faint dawn of fuc-
cess filled a mind ardent in the pursuit of a favourite
object with (uch sanguine hopes as were sufficient
encouragement to proceed. Next year, Henry sent 1419.
out three ihips under the fame commanders, to
whom he joined Bartholomew Pereftrello, in order
to take poffeflion of the island which they had dif-
covered. When they began to fettle inPorto Santo,
they observed towards the south a fixed spot in the
horizon, like a small black cloud. By degrees,
they were led to conjecture that it might be land, OfMadeira..
and steering towards it, they arrived at a confidera-
ble island, uninhabited, and covered with wood,
which on that account they called MADEIRA'*. As
it was Henry's chief object torender his discoveries
ufcful to his country, he immediately equipped a 1420.
fleet tocarry a colony of Portuguese to these islands.
By his provident care, they were furnished not only
with the feeds, plants, and domeffic animals com-
mon in Europe ; but as he foreflawthat the warmth
of the climate and fertility of the foil would prove
favourable to the rearing of other prod(uctions, he
procured flips of the vine fiom the island of Cyprus,
the rich wines of which were then ii great request,
and plants of the fiigar-cane fiom Sicily, into
which it had been lately introduced. Thcfe throve
so profpcroufly in this new country, that the bene-

fit

I-li fi.ic;ll Relation of the firfr Difcovcry of Madeira, translatcd
filnl thle I'iotuguefc of lran. Alcafaianlo, p. 15, &c.

BO 00 K fit of cultivating them was immediately perceived,

and the sugar and wine of Madeira quickly became
considerable articles in the commerce of Portugal +.

DcubleCape As soon as the advantages derived from this firit
-bojador.

aor. ttlement to the weft of the European continent

began to be felt, the spirit of discovery appeared
lels chimerical, and became more adventurous. By
their voyages to Madeira, the Portuguese were gra-
dually accuflomed to a bolder navigation, and in-
ftcad of crel pi1ng fervil ly along the coafi, ventured
into the open sea. In consequence of taking this
course, Giiianez, who commanded one of prince
Hcnry's fiips, doubled Cape Bojador,'the boundary
of the Portuguese navigation upwards of twenty
years and which had hitherto been deemed unpaffa-
4;3- ble. This successful voyage, which the ignorance

of the age placed on a level with the most famous
exploits recorded in hiflory, opened a new sphere to
navigation, as it discovered the vast continent of
Africa, ifill waffied by the Atlantic ocean, and
stretching towards the iouth. Part of this was soon

wihincthe explored; the Portuguese advanced within the tro-
ropics. pics, and in the space of a few years they discovered

the river Senegal, and all the coafi extending from
CapeBlanco to Cape de Vcrd.

Afloniffed lHITHrER'O the Portuguese had been guided in
at what they
difcvcrcd their difeovlrics, or encouraged to attempt them,

c. ~ hby
the t light and information which they received

front the works of the ancient mathemaiticians and
gcogralphers. But, when they began to enter the
torrid zone, the notion which prevailed almong the
ancients, tat the cxcelrive heat, which rcigned
perpctlli;lly there, was t1 fatal to life as to render
it uninhabitali, deterred them, for some time,
from .proceeding. '1'hcir own olhfcrvatiolls, wlhe
they firflt entered into this un kniown and1 formidable
region, tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity

conccrnilng

. Lil. Guicci.li,li:i D i,'itt. d Pa
lP e;i l.alli, p. 1S8 ,

. concerning the violent operation of the direc rays B o O lK
of the stun. As far as the river Senegal, the Por- i___.
taluefe had found the coast of Africa inhabited
by people nearly resembling the Moors of Barbary.

ilWhen they advanced to the south of that river,. the

human form seemed to put on a new appearance.
Thev beheld men with skins black as ebony, with
1hort curled hair, flat noses, thick lips, and all the
peculiar features which are now known to diRin-
uiih the race of ncgroes. This surprising altera-
,tion they naturally attributed to the influence of
hecat, and if they lhould advance nearer to the line,
they began to dread that its efrc:ses would be fiill
more fatal. Those dangers were exaggerated, and
n.'many other objc/tions againit attempting farther
dilcoveries were proposed by some of the grandees,
iwho, from ignorance, from envy, or from thatcold
timid prudence which rcjeets wh:ttever has the air.
, of novelty or enterprise, had hitherto condemned
:.Ji Prince Henry's schemes. They rcprefented, that
it wV; s !alogether chimerical to expeCdt any advantage
froin countries situated in that region which the
u iidon .ndl experience of antiquity had pronounced
to he ultdit for tile habitation of men i that their
f'rc.iilla r, satisfied with cuitivatiing' the territory
: v.ii}h Prrovidence had allotted theim, did not waIte
tl: tintrlinthl of the kingdo-m by fruitlels projccts,
i, i it; t. of new tettlcments ; that Portugal wlas al-

i.

rt' :.i cxhiailtcd by Lth e expencc of attempts to dif-
(1'i.:r lands which either did not exist, or which

;,* ).it-urc dtlined to I'milan unlnown ; and was drainl-

i,< ( of: n1, , who might have been employed in u1n-
'; rtalkis attended with more certalin liccefs, ;ind
1l0i<lI'.:livc of greater benelit. But neither their
|i;pp.l to the . litlhority of (the ancients, nor their
Ic i'.li((mai:s co)nccr.ming the intereftl of Portugal,
"a,.. :m' ini-cfllon II)onl tlie d(termined philolo-
ph11 Cii (1I of prince '1,'11nry. '['lie difoveries which

hI, l
2 lr ,i ni.ilade convinced him thaat the ;Illci-

(iilts

BOOK ents had little more than a conjectural knowledge

of the torrid zone. He was no less satisfied that
the political arguments of his opponents with ref-
peet to the interest of Portugal were malevolent and
ill-founded. In those sentiments he was ftrenu-
ouflly supported by his brother Pedro, who govern-
ed the kingdom as guardian of their nephew Al-
i433. phonfo V. who had succeeded to the throne during

his minority; and instead of slackening his efforts,
Henry continued to pursue his discoveries with frefi
ardour.

Papal grant BUT) in order to silence all the murmurs of op.
to Portugal pofitiro,-he endeavoured to obtain the fandion of
of what
countries it the highet authority in favour of his operations.
lhoulddifco- With this view, he applied to the Pope, and re-
ver. presented, in pompous terms, the pious and un-

wearied zeal, with which he had exerted himself
during twenty years, in discovering unknown coun-
tries, the wretched inhabitants of which were utter
strangers to true religion, wandering in heathen
darkness, or led aitray by the delusions of Mahomet.
He besought the holy father, to whom, as the vi-
car of Christ, all the kingdoms of the earth were
subjet, to confer on the crown of Portugal a right
to all the countries possessed by Infidels, which
should be difcovcred by the indulhiy of its fubjeEts,
and subdued by the force of its arms. He entreat-
ed him to enjoin all Christian powers, under the
highest penalties, not to molclt the Portuguese
while engaged in this laudable entcrprife, and
to prohibit them from fettlingo in any of the
countries which they flould dilcover. Hc promised
that, in all their expeditions, it should be the chief
object of the Portugucfe to fprcad the knowledge of
the Christian religion, to citaibiifl the auithority of
the holy fee, and to encrcafc the flock of the uni-
versal partor. As it was by improving with dex-

tcrit)

terity every favourable conjuncture for acquiring B O O I
new powers, that the court of Rome had gradually
extended its usurpations, Eugene IV. the pontiff
to whom this application was made, eagerly seized
the opportunity that now presented itself. He in-
ftantly perceived, that by complying with prince
Henry's request, he might exercise a prerogative no
less flattering in its own nature, than likely to prove
beneficial in its consequences. A Bull was accord-
ingly ifTued, in which, after applauding iu the
itrongeft terms the past efforts of the Portuguese,
and exhorting them to proceed in that laudable ca-
reer on which they had entered, he granted them
an exclusive right to all the countries which they
should discover, from Cape Non to the continent
of India.

EXTRAVAGAcT as this donation, comprehending
such a large portion of the habitable globe, would
now appear even in Catholic countries, no
person in the fifteenth century doubted that the
pope, in the plenitude of his apostolic power, had a
rightto confer it. Prince Henry was soon sensible
of the advantages which he derived from this tranf-
aation. His schemes were authorised and sanctified
by the bull approving of them. The spirit
of dilcovery was connected with zeal for reli-
gion, which, in that age, was a principle of such
activity and vigour, as to influence the conduct of
nations. All Christian princes were deterred from
intruding into those countries which the Por-
tuguefe had difcovcred, or from interrupting the
progress of their navigation and conquests *.

The fame of the Portuguese voyages Goon spread Fame anl
over Europe. Men, long accufltmled to circumi- "progls of

tihe I'og1ttu-

scribe the activity and knowledge of the human g.ucil di;co.
mind within the limits to which they had been hi- vcti.'
VOL. . G therto

' Sec NOTE X,

.B 0 K therto confined, were astonished to behold the
,_ ,, sphere of navigation so suddenly enlarged, and a

profpcd opened of visiting regions of the globe, the
exiftcnce of which was unknown in former times.
The learned and speculative reafbned and formed
theories concerning those unexpeted discoveries.
The vulgar enquired and wondered ; and entcrpri-
sing adventurers crouded from everypart of Europe,
soliciting prince Henry to employ them in this ho-
nourable service. Many Venetians and Genoese,
in particular, who were, at that time, superior to all
other nations in the science of naval affairsj entered
aboard the Portuguese ships, and acquired a more
perseEt and extensive knowledge of their profeflion
in that new school of navigation. In emulation of
there foreigners, the Portuguese exerted their own
talents. The nation seconded the designs of the
prince. Private merchants formed companies,
1446. with a view to search for unknown countries. The

Cape de Verd islands, which lie off the promontory
1449. of that name, were discovered, and fopn after, the

isles called the Azores, As the former of these are
above three hundred miles from the African coast,
and the latter nine hundred miles from any continent,
it is evident, by their venturing so boldly into the
open teas, that the Portuguese had, by this time,
imrroved greatly in the art of navigation.

benth of VWHILE the passion for engaging in new under-
Prinlce
HIete-v. takings was thus warm and activc, it received an

1463. unfortunate check by the death of prince Henry,

-whofl fupcrior knowledge had hitherto dlireced all the
operations of the dilsoveirers, ;and whofle 1atron:lge
had encouraged and proteted thcn. It is true, thlat
during his lilf, the Portuguese, in their utmost pro-
grefs towards the south, did not advance within 'ive
degrees of the cc1qino1i;,il line; and, after their
continued exertions for half a century, hardly if-
tccn hundred niles of the coast of Africa were dlif-

covered

covered. To an age acquainted with the efforts of B o o K
navigation in its itate of maturity and improvement, -,
those eflays of its early years must necessarily appear From 1u4z
feeble and unskilful. But, inconsiderable as they to 1463
may appear, they were sufficient to turn the curi-
ofity of the European nations into a new chan-
nel, to excite an enterprising spirit, and to point
the way to future discoveries.

ALPHONSO, who possessed the throne of Portu- The paflion
gal at the time of prince Henry's death, was so or.dilcivcy

languishes

much engaged in supporting his pretensions to the for ofme
crown.of Caflile, or in carrying on his expeditions time,
against the Moors in Barbary, that the force of his
kingdom being exerted in other operations, he
could not prosecute the discoveries in Africa with
ardour. He committed the conduCt of them to
Fernando Gomez, a merchant in Lisbon, to whom
he granted an exclusive right of commerce with all
the countries of which prince Henry had taken
poffeifion. Under the reitraint and oppression of
a monopoly, the spirit of discovery languished. It
'ceased to be a national obje&t, and became the con-
cern of a private man, more attentive to his own
gain, than to the glory of his country. Some pro-
grefs, however, was made. The Portuguese ven-
tured at length to cross the line, and, to their a- '47i.
ftonifhment, found that region of the torrid zone,
which was supposcd to be scorched with intolera-
ble heat, to be not only habitable, but populous
and fertile.

JOHN II. who succeeded his father Alphonfo, T4R'

Revives

poncfl'd talents capable both of forminill and exe- with :ddii-
cuting great designs. As part of his revenues, onal ado'r.
while prince, had arisen from duties on the trade
with the ncwly-dilcoveled countries, this naturally
turned his attention towards them, and hftisfied
hlim with rcfpeai to their utility and importance.
In prolortion as his knowledge of thcfe countries

G 2 cxtcndcd

B O O K extended, the poffeflion of them appeared to be of

greater consequence. WVhile the Portuguese pro-
ceeded along the coast of Afiica, from Cape Non
to the river of Senegal, they found all that exten-
five trat to be sandy, barren, and thinly inhabited
by a wretched people, profefling the Mahometan
religion, and fubjectto the vas empire of Morocco.
But to the south of that river, the power and reli-
goion of the Mahometans were unknown. The
country was divided into finall independent princi-
palities, the population was considerable, the foil
fertile e, and the Portuguese soon discovered that
it produced ivory, rich gums, gold, and other va-
luable commodities. By the acquisition of these,
commerce was enlarged, and became more adven-
turous. Men, animated and rendered active by the
certain profpEt of gain, pursued discovery with
greater eagerness, than when they were excited only
by curiosity and hope.
Its progress. THIS spirit derived no small reinforcement of

vigour from the countenance of such a monarch as
John. He declared himself the patron of every
attempt towards discovery, and. promoted it with
all the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry,
and with superior power. The efl'cs of this were
14.4 . immediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out,

which, after discovering the kingdoms of Benin
and Congo, advanced above fifteen hundred miles
beyond the line, and the Portuguese, for the sitss
time, beheld a new heaven, and observed the flars
of another hcenifilhcrc. John was not only folici-
tous to discover, but attentive to secure the poilefii-
on of those count:ics. I-le built forts on the coalt
of Guinea; lie sint out colonies to fettle there;
he cfl-ablifh(e a commercial intercourse witl
the more powerful kiligdloms ; lie endeavourcd

to

t N.aviigatio A liyli C:.(lam!nu(ti alpuld Noviim Orljcbn Grylnai, l ' 2.

,.. N.avigat. all l ;o il i San ''onrt: l:r uil pilotto loilttuit . R.l ;i u-

, i s.
i. 5.

to render such as were feeble or divided, tributary B 0o0 K
to the crown of Portugal. Some of the petty
princes voluntarily acknowledged themselves his
valfils. Others were compelled to do so by force
of arms. A regular and well digested system .was
formed with refpe& to this new object of policy,
and by firmly adhering to it, the Portuguese power
and commerce in Africa were eftablilhed-upon a
solid foundation.

Hopes of

BY their constant intercourse with the people of discovering

Africa, the Portuguese gradually acquired some a nhevrout
knowledge of those parts of that country which Illnies.
they had not visited. The information which
they received from the natives, added to what
they had observed in their own voyages, began to
open profpeAs more extensive, and to suggest the
idea of schemes more important, than those which
had hitherto allured and occupied them. They
had deteLted the error of the ancients concerning
the nature of the torrid zone. They found, as
they proceeded southwards, that the continent of
Africa, instead of extending in breadth, according
to the doctrine ofPtolemy :, at that time the oracle
and guide of the learned in the fludy of geography,
appeared sensibly to contract itself, and to bend to-
wards the east. This induced them to give credit
to the accounts of the ancient Phenician voyages
round Africa, which had long been deemed fabu-
lous, and led them to conceive hopes that by fol-
lowing the fame routtc they might arrive at the
East Indies, and engrols that commerce, which has
been the foIlrce of wealth and power to every na-
tioin pocfleci of it. T he comprhellefive genius of
prince Henry, as we may conjc-ctuire from the
woeds of the pope's bull, had early formed frome
idea of thlis navigation. All the Por-tuguese pilots

and
t Vide Nor. Orbis Tlabul. Gcorgraiph. Secund. I'tolcm. Ams . 1730.

B 0 0 K and mathematicians now concurred in representing

a_

^
_ it as practicable. The king entered with warmth

into their sentiments, and began to concert measures
for this arduous and important voyage.

Schemes for BEFORE his preparations for this expedition were
accomplish- finished, accounts were transmitted from Africa,
ing this

that various nations along the coast had mentioned
a mighty kingdom situated on their continent, at
a great distance towards the east, the king of which,
according to their description, professed the Chris-
tian religion. The Portuguese monarch immedi-
ately concluded, that this must be the emperor
of Abyssinia, to whom the Europeans, seduced by a
miifake of Rubruquis, Marco Polo, and other
travellers to the east, absurdly gave the name Pref-
ter or Presbyter John; and as he hoped to receive
information and assistance from a Christian prince,
in prosecuting a scheme that tended to propagate
their common faith, he resolved to open, if poflible,
some intercourse with his court. With this view,
he made choice of Pedro de Covillam and Alphonfo
de Payva, who were perfect masters of the Arabic
language, and sent them into the east, to search
for the residence of this unknown potentate, and
to make him proffers of friendship. They had it
in charge, likewise, to procure whatever intelli-
gence the nations which they visited could supply,
with ref, dt to the trade of India, and the course
of navigation to that continent :I.

WHILE John made this new attempt by land, to

Voyage of obtain some knowledge of the country, which he
Bartholo-
mew Diaz. wished so ardently to discoVer, he didl not ncglejc

the prosecution of this great design by fca. The
conduct of this voyage, the most arduous and im-
~4 6' portlan

r Faria y Sousa Port, Afi., vol. i. p. 26. Lafitau Decouv. dc
Port. i. 46.

portant which the Portuguese had ever projedced, B 0 o K

: was committed to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer _-__
. whose sagacity, experience, and fortitude rendered 1486.

him equal to the undertaking. He itretched boldly
towards the south, and proceeding beyond the ut-
most limits to which his countrymen had hitherto
advanced, discovered near a thousand miles of new
country. Neither the danger to which he was
exposed, by a succession of violent tempeits in
unknown seas, and by the frequent mutinies of his
crew, nor the calamities of famine which he susser-
ed from losing his store-ship, could deter him from
prosecuting his enterprise. In recompence of his
labours and perseverance, he at last descried that
lofty promontory which bounds Africa to the
south. But to descry it, was all that was in his
power. The violence of the winds, the ihattered
condition of his ihips, and the turbulent spirit of
his sailors, compelled him to return, after a voyage
of sixteen months, in which he discovered an
extent of country far greater than any preceding
navigator. Diaz had called the promontory which
terminated his voyage CABO TORMENTOSO, or
the foormy Cape; but the king, his mailer, as he
now entertained no doubt of having found the
long desired route to India, gave it a name more
inviting, and of better omen, THE CAPE OF
GOOD HOPE t.

'I'HOSE sanguine expeations of success were Morece'-

confirmncd by the intelligence which John received tain piof-
(<vcr land, in consequence of his cmbafy to Abyf- lac. of flr -
finia. Covillam and Payva, in obedience to their
nlafter's inllruclions, had repaired to Grand lCairo.
lrorm that city, they travelledl along with a cal.av'a
of Egyptia; merchants, and crofled over to Aden,
o0 the Red Sea. .There they fcparatcd ; Payva

failed
* IFarli y Soufl P'ort. Asia, vol. i. p. z6.

B O 0 K failed dire&lytowardsAbyffinia; Covillam ernbark-

1_' ed for the East Indies, and having viiited Calecut,

Goa, and othef cities on the Malabar coast, return-
ed to Sofala, on the east fide of Africa, and thence
to Grand Cairo, which Payva and he had fixed up-
on as their place of rendezvous. Unfortunately
the former was cruelly murdered in Abyssinia, but
Covillam found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews,
whom John, whose provident sagacity attended
to every circumfiance that could facilitate the exe-
cution of his schemes, had dispatched after them,
in order to receive a detail of their proceedings, and
to communicate to them new inftruetions. By one
of these Jews, Covillam transmitted to Portugal a
journal of his travels by sea and land, his remarks
upon the trade of India, together with exad maps
of the coasts on which he had touched; and from
what he himself had observed, as well as fiom the
information of skilful seamen in different countries,
he concluded, that by failing round Africa, a pas-
sage might be found to the East Indies *.

preparationn THE happy coincidence of Covillaln's opinion
for anotlhr and report, with the discoveries which Diaz had

lately made, left hardly any fladow of doubt with
refpea to the poflibility of failing fromn Europe to
India. But the vast length of the voyage, and the
furious florms which Diaz had encountered near
the Cape of Good I-lope, alarmed and intimidated
the Portuguese to such a degree, although by long
experience they were now become adventurous and
skilful mariners, that some time was requisite to
prepare their minds for this dangerous and cxtraor-
dinary voyage. 'The courage, however, and o;n-
tllority of the monarch, gradually difpcllcd the
vain fears of his fublrjc:;, or made it neccfli'ay to
conceal them. As John thought himulifl now UP-
on the eve ofaccomplifli ng that great dfgn, whlicl

Sari Y Sos

Port. Afl:, vol. i. 1. L iu I) ihad

· Faria y Solsa Port,. As't:i, vol. i. p .
2.7. Lafitau Dc,:ouv. i. 48'

' had been the principal objec of his reign, his ear- B o o K
neinefs in prosecuting it became so vehement, that ao
it occupied his thoughts by day, and bereaved him
of sleep through the night. While he was taking
every precaution that his wisdom and experience
could suggest, in order to ensure the success of the
expedition, which was to decide concerning the fate
of his favourite project, the fame of the vafl
difcovcries which the Portuguese had already made,
the reports concerning the extraordinary intelli- The atten-
gnce which they had received from the east, and tionofmrn-

kind fixed

the profpec of the voyage which they now medita- upon it.
ted, drew the attention of all the European nati-
ons, and held them in fufpence and expectation.
By some, the maritime skill and navigations of
the Po-tuguefe were compared with those of the
Phenicians and Carthaginians, and exalted above
them. Others formed conjectures concerning the
revolutions which the success of their schemes
might occasion in the course of trade, and the poli-
tical state of Europe. The Venetians began to
be disquieted with the apprehension of losing
their Indian commerce, the monopoly of which
was the chief source of their power as well as opu-
lence, and the Portuguese alreadyenjoyed in fancy,
the wealth of the east. But, during this, interval,
which gave such scope to the various workings of
culiofity, of hope and of fear, an account was
brought to Europe of an event no lcfs extraordina-
ry than unexpected, the discovery of a New Suddenly
World situated in the weft, and the eyes and ad- lnew otjc .
mniialtion of mankind turned immedliately towards
that great object.
VOL. I. Tr;

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK II.

.A 2"T HE

ISTORY

H E
- Hi I S T O R Y

O F
A i E RI C A.

B O O K II.

.'MONG the foreigners whom the fame of B o O K

the lifcoveries made by the Portuguese had allured I.
into their service, was Chriflopher Columbus, a Bith and e-
fubj':cl of the republic of Genoa. Neither the ducation of
time nor place of his birth are known with cer- Columbus
tainty'; but he was delcended of an honourable
famiily, though reduced to indigence by various
misfortunes. His ancestors having betaken them-
selves for fulbfifence to a seafaring life, Columbus
discovered, in his early youth, the peculiar cha-
raer alntl talents which mark out a man for that
profcfion. His parents, instead of thwarting this
original propensity of his mind, fcem to have en-
couraged and confirmed it, by the education which
th(y gave him. After acquiring tome knowledge
of the Latin tongue, the only language in which
:' Icilnc was taught at that time, he was iintrtdled
in geometry, cosmography, aflronomy, and the

H 2 art
' See NOTE XI.

B 0 0 K art of drawing. To these he applied with such ar-

_v^_ dour and predilection, on account of their connec-

tion with navigation, his favourite objec, that
he advanced with rapid proficiency in the study of
1461. them. Thus qualified, he went to sea at the age

of fourteen, and began his career on that element
which conduAed him to so much glory. His early
voyages were to those ports in the Mediterranean
which his countrymen the Genoese frequented.
q This being a sphere too narrow for his acive mind,

he made an excursion to the northern seas, and vi-
fited the coast of Iceland, to which the Englifl
and other nations had begun to resort on account
of its fishery. As navigation, in every direcion,
was now become enterprising, he proceeded beyond
that island, the Thule of the ancients, and advan-
ced several degrees within the polar circle. Having
satisfied his curiosity by a voyage which tended
more' to enlarge his knowledge of naval affairs,
than to improve his fortune, he entered into the
service of a famous fea-captain, of his own name
and family. This man commanded a small fqua-
dron, fitted out at his own expence, and by
cruising sometimes against the Mahometans, some-
times againit the Venetians, the rivals of his coun-
try in trade, had acquired both wealth and reputa-
tion. With him Columbus continued for several
years, no lcfs distinguished for his courage, than
for his experience as a sailor. At length, in an
obstinate engagement, off the coast of Portugal,
with tome Venetian caravels, returning richly ladcn
from the Low Countries, the veflcl on board
which he servcd took fire, together with one of the
enemy's flips, to which it was fast grappled. In
this dreadful extremity his intrepidity and' pecfcncc
of mind (lid not forflke him. tHe threw hilfeilf
into the sea, laid hold of a floating oar, and(
by the support of it, and his dexterity in fwvim-

iTniag3

ming, he reached the shore, though above two B 0 0 K
leagues distant, aid. saved a life reserved for great _
undertakings *...

As soon as he recovered ftrenigth for the jour- He enters
ney, he repaired' to Lisbon, where many of his intothePor-

tuguefc ser-

countrymen were fettled. They soon conceived vice.
such a favourable opinion of his merit, as well
as talents, that, they warmly solicited himl to re-
main in that kingdom, where his naval skill and ex-
perience could not fail of rendering him confpicu-
ous. To every adventurer, animated either with
curiosity to visit new countries, or with ambition
to diiHinguifh himself, the Portuguefc service was
at that time extremely inviting. Columbus liftcn-
ed with a favourable ear to the advice of his fiicnds,
and having gained the eteein of a Portuguese lady,
whom he married, fixed his refidencc in Lisbon.
This alliance, initead of detaching him from a sea-
faring life, contributed to enlarge the sphere of his
naval knowledge, and to excite a desire of extend-
ing it still farther. His wife was a daughter of
Bartholomew, Percftrello, one of the captains cm-
ploycd by prince Henry in his early navigations,
and who, under his protection, had discover .d and
planted the islands of Porto Santo and lMadeira.
Columbus got poifflion of the journals and charts
of this experienced navigator, and fromn them lie
learni- the colurfe which the Porttleduc ie had held
in making thLir difcovcrics, as well ai., . - various
circuinifanccs which guided or encourant: thcm
in their attemplts. The fludy of these gratilicd anl
inflamcd his favourite pallion ; and whiile I,' con-
tenlplated the maps, and read the dcfi.l iptions of
the new coluntries which Pcreflrcllo h.l(l Sien , his
imlpatience to visit tthem bcame i-rrcli n

iboI. I n or-

lder to indulge it, he made a voyage, to Madeira,
and continued during fevcral years to trade: 'with

tha
.u .Life of Collumlbus, c. v.

B 00 IK that island, with the Canaries, the Azores, the

Ij ifettlements in Guinea, and all the other places

which the Portuguese had discovered on the con.
tinent of Africa *.

Th·er -a L BY the experience which Columbus acquired,
oi-'cnei .li:- during such a variety of voyages to aimofi every

c "
lr- part of the globe with which, at that time, any

intrrcourfe was carried on by sea, he was now be-
come cnc of the most skilful navigators in Europe.
But, not satisfied with that praise, his am-
bition aimed at something more. The successful
progress of the Portuguese navigators had awakened
a spirit of curiosity and emulation, which set every
man of lcience upon examining all the circumftan-
ces that led to thedifcoveries which they had made,
or that afforded a profpcd of succeeding in any
new and bolder undertaking. The mind of Colum-
bus, naturally inquisitive, capable of deep refleci-
on, and turned to speculations of this kind, was so
often employed in revolving the principles upon
wh.ich the Portuguese had founded their schemes
of discovery, and the mode in which they had car-
ried them on, that he gradually began to form an
idea of improving upon their plan, and of accom-
plifbing discoveries which hitherto they had at-
tempted in vain.

-rIe f;,rm To find out a pafnage by Lea to the Eafi Indies,
the idleiofa was the great olject in view at that period. From
ntw,, lC, the time that the Portuguefecdoubled Cape de Vcrd,

this was tlie point at which they aimed in all their
navigntions, and, in comparion with it, all their
difcoveIies in Africa appeared inconsiderable. The
fertility and riches of India had been known
for many aes ; its spices and other valuable
commodities were in high request throughout
Europe, and the vaif wealth of the Venctians,

a.rising
" Life of Colutmbus, c. iv. v.

arising from their having engrofied this trade, had B 0 IC
raised the envy of all nations. But how intent
soever the Portuguese were upon discovering a new
route to those desirable regions, they searched for
it only by steering towards the south, in hopes of
arriving at India, by turning to the eaf, after
they had failed round the farther extremnity of
Africa. This course, however, was fRill unknown,
.and, even if discovered, was of such immense
length, that a voyage from Europe to India muti
have appeared an undertaking extremely ardu-
ous, and of very uncertain issue. More than
half a century had been employed in advancing
from Cape Non to the equator ; a much longer
space of time might elapse before the more exten-
five navigation from that to India could be accom-
plifhed. These rcfleeions upon the uncertainty,
the danger and tediousness of the course which the
Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led Columbus
toconfider whether a snorter and more direct palfage
ito the EaRs Indies might not be found out. And, as-
ter revolving long and ferioully every circumatance
suggested by his superior knowledge in the theory
as well as practice of navigation, after comparing
attentively the obfi rvations of Inodirn pilots with
the hints and conjctures of ancicnt authors, he
at last concluded, that by failing directly towards
the weft, across the Atlantic ocean, new countries,
which probably formed a part of the vait continent
of India, mufl infallibly be difcoverd.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, and 'riTe irilnd-
1deived fiomn diffierent sources, induced him to adopt peSCll is
this opinion, feiemingly as chimerical as it was new tlhe(ov wad
and extraordinary. The fiherical figure of the earth foudCt.
was known, and its magnitude accl-rtained with

nome dcgree of accuracy. From this it was cvident,
that the continents of Europe, Afi;, ;and Africa,

formed

B1 0 K that illand, with the Canaries, the Azores, the
._._, ifettlcments in Guinea, and all the other places

which the Portuguese had discovered on the con-
tinent of Africa *.

The re.-s 3BY the experience which Columbus acquired,
o i-'~rLi- during such a variety of voyages to almost every
cir ulip- part of the globe with which, at that time, any

rntercourfe was carried on by sea, he was now be-
comc cnc of the most skilful navigators in Europe.
But, not satisficd with that praise, his am-
bition aimed at something more. The successful
prorefs of the Portuguese navigators had awakened
a spirit of curiosity and emulation, which set every
man of science upon examning all the circumfian-
ces that led to thedifcoveries which they had made,
or that afforded a profpcd of succeeding in any
new and bolder undertaking. The mind of Colum-
bus, naturally inquisitive, capable of deep refleai-
on, and turned to speculations of this kind, was so
often employed in revolving the principles upon
which the Portuguese had founded their schemes
of discovery, and the mode in which they had car-
ried them on, that he gradually began to form an
idea of improving upon their plan, and of accom-
plifhini discoveries which hitherto they had at-
tempted in vain.

Yrc rrms To find out a pafage by sea to the East Indies,
thel idr tnfa was the great object in view at that period. From
to lILc the time that the Portuguese doubled Cape de Vcrd,

this was thle point at which they aimed in all their
nalvigations, and, in compal)ioon with it, all their
difcovcries in Africa appeared inconsiderable. The
fcrLility and riches of India had been known
for many ages ; its fpiccs and other valuable
cotnmodities were in high requetf throughout
]Europe, and the vast wealth of the Venetials,

arifmiog
* Life of Columlbu; , c. iv. v.

arising from their having engrossed this trade, had B OO IK
raised the envy of all nations. But how intent
soever the Portuguese were upon discovering a new
route to those desirable regions, they searched for
it only by lleering towards the south, in hopes of
arriving at India, by turning to the east, after
they had failed round the farther extrenity of
Africa. This course, however, was still unknown,
and, even if discovered, was of such immense
length, that a voyage from Europe to India muth
have appeared an undertaking extremely ardu-
ous, and of very uncertain issue. More than
half a century had been employed in advancing
from Cape Non to the equator; a much longer
space of time might elapse before the more exten-
five navigation from that to India could be accom-
plilfed. These reflecions upon the uncertainty,
the danger and tediousness of the course which the
Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led Columbus
toconfider whether a snorter and more direct pafaoge
to the East Indies mightnot be found out. And, as-
ter revolving long and ferioully every circumtlance
suggested by his superior knowledge in the theory
as well as practice of navigation, after comparing
attentively the observations of modern pilots with
the hints and conjcEtures of ancient authors, he
att last concluded, that by f liling directly towards
the wcft, across the Atlantic ocean, new countries,
which probably formed a part of the valt continent
of India, mufl infallibly be discovered.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of vaiious kinds, and The princi-
erivced from diflferent sources, induced him to adopt pi iso
this opinion, iccmingly as chimerical as it was new tllhoiv wva
ald rxtaordinary. The sp)herical figure of the earth founel.
W"as known, and its magnitude afcerlaiind with
fmle degree of accuracy. From this it was evident,
that the continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa,

formed

BO K formed but a small portion of the terraqueous
c-L_ globe. It was suitable to our ideas concerning the

wisdom and beneficence of the author of Nature,
to believe that the vast space, still unexplored, waS
not covered entirely by a waste unprofitable ocean,
but occupied by countries fit for the habitation of
man. It appeared likewise extremely probable,
that the continent, on this fide of the globe, was
balanced by a proportional quantity of land in
the other hemisphere. These conclusions concern-
ing the existence of another continent, drawn from
the figure and ftruaure of the globe, were confirm-
ed by the observations and conjectures of modern
navigators. A Portuguese pilot, having stretched
farther to the weft than was usual at that time,
took up a piece of timber artificially carved, float-
ing upon the sea; and as it was driven towards
himn by a westerly wind, he concluded that it came
from some unknown land, situated in that quarter.
Columbus's brother-in-law had found, to the weft
of the Madeira isles, a piece of timber faflioned in
the fame manner, and brought by the fame wind;
and had seen likewise canes of an enormous size
floating upon the waves, which rcfcmbled those
defribcd'"by Ptolemy as irroduLdtions peculiar to the
East Indies *. Af;:cr a courife of weferly winds,
trees, torn up by the roots, wer:c often driven uponI
the coalts of tlle Azores, and at one time the dcad
bodies of two men, with singular f;atturcs, which
rcfemilced ncither the inlhabitants of E;urope nor of
Africa, were call- afliore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arising froIl

theoretical principles and prac.tical oblcrvaLions,
ledl Columbil; to cxpct thel difcovcry of new coun-
tries in the Wecftern Occ;in, other rea.sons ilindced
him to believe that thcli mult be connedlcd

with
* Lib., i. C. 17.

with the continent of India. Though the ancients B o o K
had hardly ever penetrated into India farther than I
the banks of the Ganges, yet some Greek authors
had ventured to describe the provinces beyond that
river. And, as men are prone, and at liberty, to
magnify what is remote and unknown, they repre-
sented them as regions of an immense extent. Cte-
fias affirmed that India was as large as all the reft of
Asia. Oneficritus, whom Pliny the naturalist fol-
lows *, contended that it was equal to a third part
of the habitable earth. Nearchus asserted, that it
would take four months to march from one extremi-
ty of it to the other, in a straight line:. The jour-
nal of Marco Polo, who travelled into Asia in the
thirteenth century, and who had proceeded towards
the east far beyond the limits to which any Europe-
an had ever advanced, seemed to confirm these ex-
.ggerated accounts of the ancients. By his magni-
ficent descriptions of the kingdoms of CATHAY and
CIPANGO, and of many other countries, the names
of which were unknown in Europe, India appeared
to be a region of vast extent. From these accounts,
which however defentive, were the most accurate
that the people of Europe had at that period receiv-
ed, with refpecl to the remote partsof the eafl, Co-
lumbus drew ajuft conclusion. He contended, that
in proportion as the continent of India ltretchcd
out towards the cars, it muff, in consequence of
the spherical figure of the earth, approach nearer
to the islands which had lately been discovered to
the weft of Africa ; that the distance from the one
to the other was probably not very considerable ;
and that the Inolt direct, as well as flortefl
course, to the remote regions of the eafl, was to
he found by failing due wefi§.

VOL. I. I This

* Nai. Hfi(l. li. v;. c. 17. t Strab. Grogr. lib. xv, p. 1ol .
Sec NO'TE XII.

B O O K This notion concerning the vicinity of India to the

western parts of our continent, was countenanced
by some eminent writers among the ancients, the
fandion of whose authority was necefiary, in that
age, to procure a favourable reception to any tenet.
Aristotle thought it probable that the Columns of
Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not far re-
moved from the East Indies, and that there might
be a communication by sea between them *. Se-
neca, in terms still more explicit, affirms, that,
with a fair wind, one might fail from Spain to In-
dia in a few days 1-. The famous Atlantic island
described by Plato, which many supposed to be a
real country, beyond which a vast unknown conti-
nent was situated, is represented by him as lying at
no great dilrance from Spain. After weighing all
these particulars, Columbus, in whose characer
the modefry and diffidence of true genius was united
with the ardent enthu'iafin of a projector, did not
reft with such absolute aflurance either upon his
own arguments, or upon the authority of the anci-
ents, as not to consult such of his contemnporaries as
were capable of comprehending the nature of the
evidence which he produced in support of his opi-
nion. As early as the year one thousand four hun-
dred and feventy-four, he communicated his ideas
concerning the probability ofdifcoverinig newcoun-
tries, by failing westwards, to Paul, a physician of $
Florence, eminent for his knowledge of cofilogra-
phy, and who, on account both of the learning and
candour which he difcovcrs in his reply, appears to
have been well eniltled to tie confidence which Co-
luimbus placed in himi. He warmly approved ol hii
plan, iiug,,efled icvc ral salts in confirmation
of it, 1and cncotur.igcd him to pcirfevee il
an utidcirt:tlaici ii I laudable, and which iont}

redound
*Arillot. del ( loi lili. ii. c. x. edit. Dl u Val, Par. 1629, vol i. i. 4, 7

) Seiicc. (.cll. Nal.ui lib. i. in )nocnm.

redound so much to the honour of his country, B 0 0 K

Ii.
and the benefit of Europe . L,

To a mind less capable of forming and of exe- His fchcm-
cuting great designs than that of Columbus, all forarry

.b

. - * 1 * it into exe-

these reafinings, and obiervations, and authorities, cution.
would have served only as the foundation of some
plausible and fruitless theory, which might have
furnifihed matter for ingenious discourse, or fanci-
ful conjeture. But with his sanguine and enter-
prifing temper, fpecuiation led directly to acion.
Fully satisfied himself with refpec to the truth of
his fyfrtm, he was impatient to bring it to the tcft
of experiment, and to set out upon a voyage ofdif-
covery. The firt. ftep towards this was to secure
the patronage of some of the considerable powers
in Europe, capable of undertaking such an enter-
prise. As long absence had not extinguished the
affection which he bore to his native country, he
wilhed that it fbould reap the fruits of his labours
and invention. With this view, he laid his scheme
before the senate of Genoa, and making his coun- He applis
try the first tender of his farvice, offered to fail un- to tie Cc.
der the banners of the republic, in quest of the new
regions which he expe&led to difcovcr. But Co-
lumbus had residcd for to many years in foreign
parts, that his countrymen were unacquainted with
his abilities and character ; and, though a mari-
time people, they were so little accuftomncd to dif-
t;lt voyages, that they could form nojuft idea of
the principles on which he founded his hopes of
filccefs. They inconsiderately rejccted his pro-
polil, as the dream of a chimerical projcdtor, and
lofl for ever the opportunity of refloring their com-
monwealth to its ancicnt; fpllcndour :1.

I 2 HAVING

I.ifc orCol'mlbls, c. viii.
t H-eccrae HiLt. (de las Indias Occid. Dec. 1. lib. i. c. 7.

B o0 K HAVING performed what was due to his country,

Columbus was so little discouraged by the repulse

to the king which he had received, that,inftcad of relinquishing
fio ltu.dl; his ulIndertaking, he pursucd it with fresh ardour.

Ile made his next overture to John II. king of Por-
tugal, in whole dominions he had been long eftab-
liihcd, and whom he confidered, on that account, as
having the second claim to his service. Here every
circunimfance seemed to promise him a more favour-
able reception. He applied to a monarch of an en-
tcrprifing genius, no incompetent judge in rnaval
alairs, and proud of patronising every attempt to
discover new countries. His fubjeds were the
most experienced na igators in Europe, and the
least apt to be intimidated either by the novelty or
boldness of any maritime expedition. In Portu-
gal, Columbus's skill in his profefiion, as well as
his persona! good qualities, were thoroughly
known; and as the former rendered it probable
that his scheme was not altogether chimerical, the
latter exempted him fiom the suspicion of any fini-
fter intention in propoling it. Accordingly, the
king listened to him in the mofi gracious manner,
and referred rhe consideration of his plan to Diego
Ortiz, bishop of Ccuta, and two Jewish physicians,
eminent cosmographers, whom he was accustomed
to consult in matters of this kind. As in Genol,
ignr)i-;acc had oppoled and difl;ppointed Colum-
bus ; in Lisbon, he had to combat with prejudice,
'i enlemy no less formidable. The persons, ac-
cording t, wh;ol dccifion his scheme was to be a-
lopted dor ircjectcd, lhad been the chief direaor s of
the Plortlugue I;avitionls, anld had advilctl t
f;:arch for a paflage to India, by fieering a courdl
directly opposite to that which Columbus recom-
mended as fihorter and more certain. 'Ihcy
culdl not, therefore, approve of his propo
f;il, vithout fuilbmitting to the double m"rl-
tification of condemning their own thcory,

and

and of acknowledging his superior sagacity. After n o K
teasing him with captious questions, and fiarting 1
innumerable objections, with a view of betraying bywhomhe
him into such a particular explanation of his sys- is deceived.
ter, as might draw from him a full discovery of
its nature, they deferred pafling a final judgment
with refpet to it. In the mean time, they con-
spired to rob hin of the honour and advantages
which he expected from the success of his scheme,
zdvifing the king to difpatcb a vessel, secretly, in
order to attempt the proposed discovery, by follow-
ing exactly the course which Columbus seemed to
point out. John, forgetting on this occasion the
sentiments becoming a monarch, meanly adopted
this perfidious counsel. But the pilot, chosen to
execute Columbus's plan, had neither the genius, nor
the fortitude of its author. Contrary winds arose,
no fight of approaching land appeared, his courage
failed, and he returned to Lisbon, execrating the
project as equally extravagant and dangerous .

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranfaai- He leaves

on, Columbus felt the indignation, natural to an aude,;
ingenuous mind, and in the warmth of his resent- to the court
mcnt determined to break off all intercourse with a Of S"ain'
nation capable of such flagrant treachery. He
inrlanntly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spain
towards the le cloof the year one thoufiand four
hundred and eighty-four. As he was now at liber-
ty to court the protection of any patron, whom lie
could engage to approve of his plan, and to carry
it into execution, he resolved to propose it in per-
lon, to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that time
governed the united kingdoms of Caftilc and Ara-
tgonl. But, as he had already experienced the lun-

Sends his
certainl ifiue of applications to kings and iniif- hmler,,eiit

ters, Englan'd.
,ife of Columbus, c. xi. Herrcra, dccad. i. lib. i. c. 7.

B 0 0 K ters, he took the precaution of fending into Eng-

land his brother Bartholomew, to whom he had
fully communicated his ideas, in order that he
might negociate, at the fame time, with Henry
VII. who was reputed one of the most sagacious as
well as opulent princes in Europe.

Obflacles. to
his flucccs IT was not without reason that Columbus enter-
in Sp'ln tained doubts and fears with refpeE to the recepti-

on .of his proposals in the Spanish court. Spain
was, at that juncure, engaged in a dangerous war
with Granada, the last of the Mooriih kingdoms.
The wary and suspicious temper of Ferdinand was
not formed to relish bold and uncommon designs.
Isabella, though more generous and enterprising,
was under the influence of her husband in all her
aaions. The Spaniards had hitherto made noes-
forts to extend navigation beyond its ancient
limits, and had beheld the amazing progress of
discovery among their neighbours the Portuguese,
without one attempt to imitate or to rival them.
The war with the Infidels afforded an ample field
to the national acivity and love of glory. Under
circumtiances so unfavourable, it was impossible for
Columbus to make rapid progress with a nation,
naturally flow and dilatory in forming all its refo-
lutions. His charadcr, however, was admirably
adapted to that of the people, whose confidence and
protctionl he solicited. He was grave, though
courteous in his deportment ; circumfpre in his
words and adions; irreproachable in his morals;
and exemplary in his attention to all the duties and
ilfuniions of religion. By qualities so rcfpdablc,
he not only gained many private friends, but ac-
quired fuich general cflcem, that, notwith flandilg
the plainness of his appearance, suitable to the me-
diocrity of his fortune, he was not confidered as a
mere adventurer, to whom indigence had ,suggestld

a vifi-

a visionary projeC, but was received as a person to B o o K
whose propositions serious attention was due.

FERDINAND and Isabella, though fully occupied His scheme
by their operations against the Moors, paid so much examined by

snnkilful

regard to Columbus, as to remit the consideration judil
of his plan to the queen's confessor, Ferdinand de
Talavera. He consulted such of his countrymen,
as were supposed best qualified to decide with re-
fpet to a subjed of this kind. But true science
had, hitherto, made so little progress in Spain, that
those pretended philosophers, feleted to judge in a
mfiatter of such moment, did not comprehend the
first principles, upon which Columbus founded his
conjeCtures and hopes. Some of them, from mif-
taken notions concerning the dimensions of the
globe, contended that a voyage to those remote
parts of the east, which Columbus expected to dif-
cover, could not be performed in less than three
years. Others concluded, that either he would find
the ocean to be of infinite extent, according to the
opinion of some ancient philosophers; or, if he
should pcrfift in fleering towards the wetl beyond a
certain point, that the convex figure of the globe
would prevent his return, and that he must inevita-
bly perish, in the vain attempt, to open a commu-
nication between the two opposite hemispheres,
which nature had for ever disjoined. Even with-
out deigning to enter into any particular difcuflion,
some rejected the scheme in general, upon the cre-
dit of a maxim, under which the ignorant and un-
enterprifilg fhelterthemfelvcs in every age, ' That
it is lpefillnptluols in any perfbon, to suppose that he
alone porflcles cknowledge fupclior to all the rcft of
mankindl united." They maintained, that if there
were really any Lfch countries as Columbus pre-
trctded, they could not have remailned (l
l ong con--

cealed,

B 0 0 K cealed, nor would the wisdom and sagacity of for-

mer ages have left the glory of this invention to an
obscure Genoese pilot.

nwo make IT required all Columbus's patience and address

vourable re- to negociate with men capable of advancing such
Port con-
erning flt.range propositions. He had to contend not only

with the obstinacy of ignorance, but with what is
still more intractable, the pride of false knowledge.
After innumerable conferences, and wafting five
years in fruitless endeavours to inform and to satis-
fy them, Talavera, at last, made such an unfa-
vourable report to Ferdinand and Isabella, as in-
duced them to acquaint Columbus, that until the
war with the Moors should be brought to a period,
it was impo.Tible for them to engage in any new and
expensive enterprise.

WHATEVER care was taken to soften the harsh-

ness of this declaration, Columbus confidered it as
a final rejecion of his proposals. But happily for
mankind, that superiority of genius, which is capa-
ble of forming great and uncommon designs, is
ufilally accompanied with an ardent enthufiafin,
which can neither be cooled by delays nor damped
by difappointmcnt. Columbus was of this fan-
guine temper. Though he felt deeply the cruel
blow given to his hopes, and retired immediately
from a court, where he had been amuse'd lb long
with vain expectations, his confidence in the jufR-
ness of his own fyftcm did not diminish, and his
impatience to dcmonftrate the truth of it by an
actual experiment became greater than ever. Hav-
ing courted the protleetion of fovclricn {italcs : ith-
out lucccs, he appllied, next, to pcrolns of inflriol
rank, and addreflncd fui.cceflively the dukes of Iiedli-
na Sidonia, and Medina Celi, who, though s ib-
jecds, were poflinfd of power and opuleiinc

iiu iC

more than equal to the enterprise which he pro- B O K
jetcd. His negociations with them proved as
fruitless, as those in which he had been hitherto
engaged; for these noblemen were either as little
convinced by Columbus's arguments as their fu-
periors, or they were afraid of alarming the jea-
louly, and offending the pride of Ferdinand, by
countenancing a scheme, which he had rejected .

AMID the painful sensations occasioned by such Negocia-ior
a ficceffion of difapointments, Columbus had ofhiS bro-

ther in Eng-

to fullain the additional distress, of having received land.
no accounts of his brother, whom he had sent
to the court of England. In his voyage to that
country, Bartholomew had been so unfortunate
as to fall into the hands of pirates, who hav-
ing stripped him of every thing, detained him
a prisoner for several years. At length, he
made his escape, and arrived in London, but in
such extreme indigence, that he was obliged to
employ himself during a considerable time, in
drawing and felling maps, in order to pick up
as much money as would purchase a decent
dress, in which he might venture to appear at
court. He then laid before the king the pro-
polals, with which he had been entrusted by
his brother, and, notwithstanding Henry's ex-
cefiivc caution and parsimony, which rendered
himn averse to new and expensive undertakings,
he received Columbus's overtures, with more
approbation, than any monarch to whom they
hlad hitherto been prfelnted.

Columlua

MIIEANWHIILE, Columbus being unacquainted has lome
with his brother's fate, and havingl now no p^ri,,detsotf

1encourage-
Plrofpiec of encouragenment in Spain, rcfolved mlent i

to Spail.
V LoL. I. K

1 Life ofColmn) c. 13. Hcrrusadc. I. lib. i. (. 7.

B °OIT K to visit the court of England in person, in hopes

of meeting with a more favourable reception
there. He had already made preparations for
this p4rpofe, and taken measures for the disposal
of his children during his absence, when Juan
Perez, the Prior of the monatery of Rabida, near
Palos, in which they had been educated, earnefily
solicited him to defer his journey for . flort time.
Perez was a man of considerable learning, and of
some credit with queen Isabella, to whom he
was known pcrfonally. He was warmly attached
to Columbus, with whose abilities as well as in-
tegrity he had many opportunities of being ac-
quainted, Prompted by curiosity or by friend-
ship he entered upon an accurate examination
of his fyftemi in conjunction with a physician
fettled in the neigbourhood, who was a confi-
derable proficient in mathematical knowledge,
This investigation satisfied them so thoroughly,
with refpeA to the solidity of the principles oil
which Columbus founded his opinion, and the
probability of success in executing the plan which
he proposed, that Perez, in order to preventhis
country from being deprived of the glory and
benefit, which muf acc rue to the patrons of such
a grand enterprise, ventured to write to Isabella,
conjilring her to confider the matter anew, with
the attention which it merited.

MOVED by the representations of a person

whom she rtcfedcd, Ifiabella desired Perez to re-
pair immediately to the village of Santa F?, in
which, on account of the siege of Granada, the
court resided at that time, that ile might confer
with him upon this important subje&t. The sirs es-
fed of their interview was a gracious invitation of
Columbus back to court, accompanied with the
91 present of a fiall fuin to equip him for the journey.

As there was now a certain proflpcEt, tt the

war

war with the Moors would speedily be brought to B O O K
an happy iflue by the reduction of Granada, which .
would leave the nation at liberty to engage in new
undertakings; this, as well as the mark of royal fa-
vour, with which Columbus had been lately ho-
noured, encouraged his friends to appear with
greater confidence than formerly in support of his
scheme. The chief of these, Alonfo de Quintanilla,
comptroller of the finances in Castile, and Luis
de Santangel, receiver of the ecclesiastical revenues
in Aragon, whose meritorious zeal in promoting
this great design, entitles their names to an honour-
able place in history, introduced Columbus to ma-
ny persons of high rank, and interested them
warmly in his behalf.

BUT it was not an easy matter to inspire Ferdi- Is ag;n atid

nand with favourable sentiments. His cold dif- ap
trustful prudence fill regarded Columbus's projec
as extravagant and chimerical, and in order to ren-
der the efforts of his partizans ineffectual, he had
the address to employ in this new negociation with
him, some of the persons who had formerly pro-
nounced his scheme to be impracticable. To their
astonishment, Columbus appeared before them
with the fame confident hopes of success as for-
merly, and insisted upon the fame high recompence.
He proposed that a small fleet should be fitted out,
under his command, to attempt the difcovcry, and
demanded to be appointed perpetual and hereditary
admiral and viceroy of all the seas and lands which
he should discover, and to have te t tenth of the
profits arising from them, fettled irrevocably upon
himself and his descendants. At the anme time, he
offered to advance the eight part of the fmun neccf-
fary for accomplifling his design, on condi-
tion that he flould be entitled to a propor-
tional lhare of benefit from the advcn-
ture. If the enterprize ftluld totally mifnc' r-

K a 2y

B OIO K ry, he made no stipulation for any reward or emo-

lument whatever. Instead of viewing this conduct
as the clearest evidence of his full persuasion with
refpet to the truth of his own system, or beinr
struck with that magnanimity, which, after so ma-
ny delays and repulses, would stoop to nothing in-
ferior to its original claims, the persons with whom
Columbus treated, began meanly to calculate the
expence of the expedition, and the value of the re-
ward which he demanded. The expence, mode-
rate as it was, they represented to be too great for
Spain, in the present exhausted frate of its finances.
They contended, that the honours and emoluments
claimed by Columbus, were exorbitant, even if he
should perform the utmnol of what he had promif-
ed; and if all his sanguine hopes should prove illu-
five, such vast concessions to an adventurer would
be deemed not only inconsiderate, but ridiculous.
In this imposing garb of caution and prudence,
their opinion appeared so plausible, and was so
warmly supported by Ferdinand, that Isabella de-
clined giving any countenance to Columbus, and
abruptly broke off the negociation with him which
Ihe lad begun.

TH-I was more mortifying to Columbus than

all the difappointlnents which he had hitherto met
with. The invitation to court from Isabella, like
an unexpc&ed ray of light, had opened such prolf
ped.s of success, as encouragcd him to hope that
his labours were at an end ; but now darkness and
uncertainty returned, and his mind, firm as it was,
could hardly fuptport the fllock of such an unforc-
fecn reverlf. He withdrew in deep anguifll fom
court, with an intention of pi1-rotccuting his voyage
to England, as his last rcfboLrce.

AnOUT

ABOUT that time Granada furnendered, and Ser- B 0 0 K

dinand and Isabella, in triumphal pomp, took pof-
fecfion of a city, the reduelion of which extirpated Provcs at
a foreign power from the heart of their dominions, fillcce
and rendered them maflers of all the provinces, cx- r492.
tending from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the January 2-
frontiers of Portugal. As the ifow of spirits which
accompanies success elevates the mind, and renders
itenterprfing, Quintanilla and Santangcl, the vi-
gilant and dis'cerning patrons of Columbus, took
advantagc of this favourable finration, in order to
make one effort more in behalr of their friend.
They addreficd themselves to Isabella, and, after
expressing some surprise, that file, who haed always
been the munificent patroness of generous undertak-
ings, should hesitate so long to countenance the
most splendid scheme that had ever been proposed
to any monarch, they represented to her, that Co-
lumbus was a man of a found underflanding and
virtuous character, well qualified, by his experi-
ence in navigation, as well as his knowledge of
geometry, to form just ideas with respect to the
IhtudLure of the globe and the situation of its vari-
ous regions ; that, by offering to risk his own life
and fortune in the execution of his scheme, he
gave the most satisfying evidence both of his inte-
grity and hope of success ; that the fiun requisite
for equippinlg fich an armament as he demanded
was inconsiderable, and the adlvantages which
might accrue fiom his undertaking were imincnfe ;
that he ldemanded no rccompcl)ncc for his invention
anii labour, but what was to arise from the coun-
tries which he should dilcover; that, as it was
worthy of her macgnanimity to make this noble at-
tcmpt to extend the ifphcre of human knowledge,
and to open an inltcr-ouric with regions hitherto
llunkllowIn, tb it would aRf'ord. tlhe higihcfl: ftisftatlion
to her piety and ,zeal, after rc-cftablifhilng the

Chriftiaxi

B 0 0 l Chriflian faith in those provinces of Spain from
a_, which it had been long banished, to discover a new
149-. world, to which she might communicate the light

and bleflings of divine truth ; that if now she did
not decide inflantly, the opportunity would be loft
irretrievably; that Columbus was on his way to
foreign countries, where some prince, more fortun-
ate or adventurous, would close with his proposals,
and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal timidity
which had excluded her from the glory and advan-
tages that she had once in her power to have en-
joyed.

THESE forcible arguments, urged by persons of

such authority, and at the juncture so well chosen,
produced the desired effect. They dispelled all
Isabella's doubts and fears ; The ordered Columbus
to be inifantly recalled, declared her resolution of
employing him on his own terms, and regretting
the low state of her finances, generously offered to
pledge her own jewels, in order to raise as much
money as would be needed in making preparations
for. the voyage. Santangel, in a transport of grati-
tude, kifled the queen's hand, and in order to save
her from having recourse to such a mortifying ex-
pedient for procuring money, engaged to advance
immediately the fum that was requisite :. -
COLUMBUS had proceeded tome leagues on lis

h condi- journey, when the mcffenger from Ifhbella over-
tions of his took him. Upon receiving an account of the tn-
agreement cxpeacd revolution in his favour, he returned di-
wit Spain. retly to Santa Fe, though some remainder of diffi-

dence still mingled itself with his joy. But the
cordial reception which he met with from Isabella,
together with the near profpc& of setting out upon
that voyage which had so long been the objjct
of his thoughts and wishes, tbon effaced the

rmemcmbrancel
t Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 8.

remembrance of all that he had suffered in Spain, B °1 1K.
during eight tedious years of solicitation and sus-
pence. The negociation now went forward with 1493.
facility and dispatch, and a treaty or capitulation
with Columbus was signed on the seventeenth of
April, one thousand four hundred aud ninety-two.
The chief articles of it were, i. Ferdinand and If-
abella, as sovereigns of the ocean, constituted Co-
lumbus their high admiral in all the seas, islands,
and continents which should be discovered by his
industry; and flipulated, that he and his heirs for
ever should enjoy this office, with the fame powers
and prerogatives which belonged to the high admi-
ral of Castile, within the limits of his jurisdiction.
2. They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all
the islands and continents which he should disco-
ver; but if, for the better administration of affairs,
it should hereafter be necessary to eftablifll a fepa-
rate governor in any of those countries, they au-
thorifed Columbus to name three persons, of whom
they would chufe one for that office; and the dig-
Pity of viceroy, with all its immunities, was like-
wife to be hereditary in the family of Columbus.
3. They granted to Columbus and his heirs for e-
ver the tenth of the free profits accruing from the
produltions and commerce of the countries which
he flould discover. 4. They declared, that if any
controvcrfy or law-suit fllall arise with refpecE to
any mercantile transaction in the countries which
should be difcovcred, it should be determined by,
the role atthority of Columbus, or of judges to be
appointed by him. 5. They permitted Columbus
to advance one-eighth part of what ihoild
be expended in preparing for the expedition,
and in carrying on commerce with the countries
which he flould discover, and intitled him, in re-
turn, to an eighth part of the profit '*.

Ti-iouG I-
. ife of Colmlnbs, c. is. Hcrrera, dec. i lib. ic. 9g

Bo o I THOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears con-

i joined with that of Ifabela in this tranifaion, his
9~-z2. d;flruP of Colu;nbWus was flill so violent, that he

refufid to take any par in the entcrprife, as king of
Arag-on. As the whole expcnce of the expedition
was to be defrayed by the crown or'Cafriie, Isabella
rcfererd for her fubje&cs of that kingdom an exclu-
five right to all the benefits which might redound
from its fucccfs.

The prep.a- As soon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, by
_hisvo ae, her attention and aAivity in forwarding the prepa-

rations for the voyage, endeavoured to make some
reparation to Columbus for the time which he had
loft in fruitless solicitation. By the twelfth of
May, all that depended upon her was adjufled;
and Columbus waited on the king and queen, in
order to receive their final inftrul:ions. Every
thing refpecaing the destination and condu& of the
voyage, they committed implicitly to the disposal
of his prudence. But, that they might avoid giv-
ing any just cause of offence to the king of Portu-
gal, they firicly enjoined him not to approach near
to the Portuguese fettleinents on the coast of Gui-
nea, nor in any of the othercountries to which they
claimed right as discoverers. Isabella had ordered
the ships, of which Columbus was to take the
command, to be fitted out in the port of Palos,;
finall inaritimne town in the province of Andalusia.
As the prior Juan Perez, to whom Columbus had
a;ready been flo much indebted, rcfided in tlhe
neighbourhood of this place, he, by the influence
of that good ccclefiaftic, as well as by his own coin
ncdtion with the inhabitants, not only raised
amrong them what he wanted of the rum that 1 wa;
bound hy treaty to advance, but cngaged several of
themn to accompany him in the voyage. The chie
of these aflbciatcs were thrcce brothers of the nami1

of

ofPinzon, of considerable wealth, and of great ex- B C 0 K

Ii.

perience in naval affairs, who were willing to ha- . -
zard their lives and fortunes in the enterprise. 1g92.

BUT, after all the endeavours and efforts of Ila-

bella and Columbus, the armament was not fuita-
ble cither to the dignity of the nation by which it
was equipped, or to the importance of the ftrvice
for which it was destined. It confiifed of three
vessels only. The largest, a ship of no confidera-
ble burden, was commanded by Columbus, as ad-
miral, who gave it the name of SANTA MARIA,
out of respect for the Blessed Virgin, whom he ho-
noured with singular devotion. Of the second,
called the PINTA, Martin Pinzon was captain,and
his brother Francis pilot. The third, named the
NIGNA, was under the command of Vincent
Yanez Pinzon. These two were light vessels,
' hardly superior in burden or force to large boats.
, This squadron, if it merits that name, was vic-

tualed for twelve months, and had on board ninety
men, mostly sailors, together with a few advcn-
hturers who followed the fortune of Columbus, and
some gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom ihe ap-
pointed to accompany him. Though the expcnce
of the undertaking was one of the circumitances
that chiefly alarmed the court of Spain, and rctar-
ded so long the negotiation with Colunmbus, the
I fu employed in fitting out this squadron did not
exceed four thousand pounds.

As the art of shipbuilding in the fifteenth cent
tury was extremely rude, and tile bulk anid con
flruion of vcelels were accouinnmdaf.td to the
fllort and easy voyages along. the co,.l which thy
were accufl'omed to perflorm, it is a proof of the cou-
rage as well as cntclrrifinlg ge: i uS of Col Lumbus, th.it

VOL. L he

B O O K he ventured, with a fleet so unfit for a distant na.

I- .vigation, to explore unknown seas, where he had
1492. no chart to guide him, no knowledge of the tides

and currents, and no experience of the dangers to
which he might be exposed. His eagerness to ac-
complifl the great design which had so long en.
grofied his thoughts, made him overlook or difre.
gard every circumstance that would have intimi.
dated a mind less adventurous. He pushed forward
the preparations with such ardour, and was second.
ed so effectually by the persons to whom Isabella
committed the superintendence of this business,
that every thing was soon in readiness for the
voyage. But as Columbus was deeply impressed
with sentiments of religion, he would not set out
upon an expedition so arduous, and of which one
great object was to extend the knowledge of the
ChriCfian faith, without imploring publicly the
guidance and protection of Heaven. With this
view, he, together with all the persons under his
command, marched in solemn proceflion to the
monafRery of Rabida. After confessing their fins,
and obtaining absolution from them, they received
the holy sacrament from the hands of the prior,
who joined his prayers to theirs for the success of
an enterprise which he had so zealously patronized.

;Si (kepir- NEXT morning, being Friday the third day of
Spain) Augutll, in the year one thousand four hundred

and nincty-two, Columbus fit fail, a little before
sun-rise, in plrfence of a vats crowd of spectators,
who sent 1up their filpplications to Heaven for the
profi)pro us illuc of the voyage, which they wishld,
rather l than CxpI)Cted. Columbus fleered directly for
Auluft 13. tlhe Canarsy iflanld, and arrived there without ;ny

occurrecnce that would have deserved notice on ;iny
other ocac;fio. ] Lt, in a voyage offuch cxpe(iatiol
;uld importancc, every circumfilaice was the objlcL

of

of attention. The rudder of the Pinta broke loose, B 0 0 K
the day after they left the harbour, and that acci-
dent alarmed the crew, no less superstitious than 492
unskilful, as a certain omen of the unfortunate def-
tiny of the expedition. Even in the short run to
the Canaries, the ihips were found to be so crazy
and ill appointed, as to be very improper for a na-
vigation which was expeded to be both long and
dangerous. Columbus refitted them, however, to
the befl of his power, and having supplicd himiclf
with fresh provisions, he. took his departure fiomn
Gomera, one of the most westerly of the Canary
Islands, on the sixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of discovery may properly be, The courCf
said to begin ; for Columbus holding his course which he
due welR, left immediately the usual trac of navi- held.
gagation, and stretched into unfrequented and un-
|;known seas. The first day, as it was very calm,
' he made but little way; but on the second, he loft
fight of the Canaries; and many of the sailors,
j dcjeaed already and dismayed, when they con-
!:tcmplated the boldness of the undertaking, began
| to beat their breasts, and to shied tears, as if they
were never more to behold land. Columbus com-
forted them with assurances of success, and the
profpea of vast wealth, in those opulent regions
whither he was conduCting them. T'his early dif-
covery of the spirit of his followers taught Colum-
bus, that he mufl- prepare to struggle, not only with
the unavoidable difficulties which might be cxpct-

firom the nature of his undertaking, but with
ch as wre ikely to arie from the ignorance and
,iidty of the people under his command ; and lhe
lccived that the art of governing the minds of
"en would be no lels requisite for accompliflling
hlifcoveries which he had in view, than naval

and an cntcrprifing courage. Happily for

I 2 himnfcll

B 0 1 K himfeif, and for the country by which he was
<i> emnplcyed, he joined to the ardent temper and in-

Iq(, ventive genius of a projector, virtues of another

species, which are rarely united with them. He
pofl'ficed a thorough knowledge of mankind, an in-
finuating address, a patient perseverance in execut-
ing any plan, the perfeCt government of his own
paflions, and the talent of acquiring the directionof
those of other men. All there qualities, which
formed him for c(cn-mrand, were accompanied with
that fupcrior knowledge of his profelfion, which be-
gets confidence in times of difficulty and danger.
To unskilful Spanish tailors, accuffomed only to

Vigiilance
anl attcnti- coasting voyages in the Mediterranean, the mari-
onofColum- time science of Columbus, the fruit of thirty years

experience, improved by an acquaintance with all
the inventions of the Portuguese, appeared immense,
As soon as they put to sea, he regulated every thing
by his sole authority ; he superintended the execu-
tion of every order; and allowing himself only a
few hours for sleep, he was at all other times upon
desk. As his course lay through seas which had
not formerly been visited, the founding-line, or in-
ftruments for obfcrvation, were continually in his
hands. After the example of the Portuguese disco-
vcrers, he attended to the motion of tides and cur-
rents, watched the flight of birds, the appearance of
fihes, of sea-weeds, and of every thing that float-
ed on the waves, and entered every occurence, with
a minute exactness, in the journal which he kept.
As the length of the voyage could not fail of
alarming sailors habituated only to flort cxcurfions,
Columbus cndeavoured to conceal fiom them the
real progress which they made. With this view,
though they run eighteen leagues on the second
day after they left Gomera, he gave out that they
had advanced only fifteen, and he uniformly cm'
ployed the fame artifice of reckoning short durilig

the

the whole voyage. By the fourteenth of Septem- B 0 0 K
ber, the fleet was above two hundred leagues to the __
weft of the Canary isles, at a greater distance from 1492.
land than any Spaniard had been before that time. Apprehen-
There they were struck with an appearance no less larms of his
astonishing than it was new. They observed, that crew.
the magnetic needle, in their compafles, did not.
point exactly to the polar flar, but varied a degree
towards the weft ; and as they proceeded, this vari-
ation encreafed. This appearance, which is now
familiar, though it flill remains one of the myfte-
rics of nature, into the cause of which the sagacity
of man hath not been able to penetrate, filled the
companions of Columbus with terror. They were
now in a boundless unknown ocean, far from the
usual course of navigation ; nature itself seemed to
be altered, and the only guide which they had left
was about to fail them. Columbus, with no less
quickness than ingenuity, invented a reason for this
appearance, which though it did not satisfy himself,
seemed so plausible to them, as dispelled their fears,
or silenced their murmurs.

HE still continued to fleer due weft, nearly in the
fame latitude with the Canary Islands. In this
course he came within the sphere of the trade wind,
which blows invariably from east to weft, between
the tropics and a few degrees beyond them. He ad-
vanced before this steady gale with such uniform ra-
pidity, that it was seldom necessary to shift a fail.
When about four hundred leagues to the weft of the
Canaries, he found the sea so covered with weeds,
that it had a resemblance toa meadow of vast extent;
and in some places they were so thick, as to retard
the motion of the veftels. This firange appearance
occasioncd new alarm and disquiet. The sailors
imagined that they were now arrived at the
utmost boundary of the navigable ocean; that

thole

B o o K these floating weeds would obftrua their farther

_I progress, and concealed dangerous rocks, or some
g492 large tra& of land, which had funk, they knew

not how, in that place. Columbus endeavoured
to persuade them, that the appearance which had
alarmed, ought rather to have encouraged them,
and was to be confidered as a sign of approach-
ing land. At the fame time, abrifk gale arose
and carried them forward. Several birds were
seen hovering about the ship *, and direding their
flight towards the weft. The desponding crew re-
fumed some degree of spirit, and began to enter-
tain fresh hopes.

UPON the firfl of O&ober they were, according

to the admiral's reckoning, seven hundred and seven-
ty leagues to the weft of the Canaries, but left his
men should be intimidated by the prodigious length
of the navigation, he gave out that they had pro-
ceeded only five hundred and eighty four-leagues;
and, fortunately for Columbus, neither his own pi-
lot, nor those of the other ships, had skill sufficient
to corret this error, and discover the deceit. They
had now been above three weeks at sea; they had
proceeded far beyond what former navigators had
attempted or deemed poflible ; all their prognostics
of discovery, drawn from the flight of birds and other
circumstances, had proved fallacious; the appear-
ances of land, with which their own credulity or
the artifice of their commander had fiom time to
time flattered and amused them, had been altogether
illufivc, and their profpcet of success seemed now
to be as diflant as ever. Thcfe reflections occured
often to men, who had no other objct& or oc-
cupation, than to reason and difcourlf concerning
the intention and circumianccs of their expedition.

They
X See NOTE XIIL

They made impression, at firif, upon the ignorant B 0 0 K
ind timid, and extending, by degrees, to such as <
were better informed or more resolute, the contagi-,14
on spread at length from ship to ihip. From secret
whispers and murnurings, they proceeded to open
cabals and public complaints. They taxed their
sovereign with inconsiderate credulity, in paying
such regard to the vain promises and rash conjec-
tures of an indigent foreigner, as to hazard the
lives of so many of her own fubjedts, in prosecuting
a chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they had
fully performed their duty, by venturing so far in
aIn unknown and hopeless course, and could incur
no blame for refusing, at last, to follow a desperate
adventurer to certain deftrudion. They contended,
that it was necessary to think of returning to Spain,
while their crazy vessels were still in a condition to
keep the sea, but expressed their fears that the at-
tempt would prove vain, as the wind, which had
hitherto been so favourable to their course, muff
render it impossible to fail in the opposite direction.
All agreed that Columbus lhould be compelled by
force to adopt a measure on which their common
filfety depended. Some of the more audacious pro-
posed, as the mort expeditious and certain method
for getting rid at once of his remonstrances, to
throw him into the fca, being persuaded that, upon
their return to Spain, the death of an unsuccessful
Projector would excite little concern, and be in-
quircd into with no curiosity.

COLUMIUS was fully sensible of his perilous situ-
1ionz. He had observed, with great concern, the Of colr'i4
frtal operation of ignorance and of fiar in prodticinl bus in fozth-
(lifarlicdt ion among his crew, and saw that it was ig tI1
n')w ready to burfl out into open nutilny. HL
r'taiiled, however, perftet prel(lce of mind. He
;lfrcted to tccn ignorant of their mnachinaltions.
N3otvithf!l.arlingl tih agitation and IbuIicitudll of hIis

, oWI

B o o K own mind, he appeared with a chearful counten-

ance, like a man satisfied with the progress which
1492. he had made, and confident of success. Sometimes

he employed all the arts'of insinuation to soothe his
men. Sometimes he endeavoured to work upon
their ambition or avarice, by magnificent defcripti-
ons of the fame and wealth which they were about
to acquire. On other occasions, he assumed a tone
of authority, and threatened them with vengeance
from their sovereign, if, by their dafiardly behavi-
our, they should defeat this noble effort to promote
the glory of God, and to exalt the Spaniih name
above that of every other nation. Even with fedi-
tious sailors, the words of a man whom they had
been accustomed to reverence, were weighty and
persuasive. They not only restrained them from
those violent excesses, which they meditated, but
prevailed with them to accompany their admiral
for some time longer.

Their fears As they proceeded, the indications of approach-
return. ing land seemed to be more certain, and excited

hope in proportion. The birds began to appear in
flocks, making towards the south-west. Colum-
bus, in imitation of the Portuguese navigators,
who had been guided, in several of their discoveries,
by the motion of birds, altered his course from due
weft towards that quarter whither they pointed their
flight. But, after holding on for several days in
this new direction, without any better tuccefs than
formerly, having tlecn no objet, during thirty days,
but the sea and the sky, their hopes tubfided safer
than they had risen ; their fears revived with addi-
tional force; inmpaticnce, ragc, and despair, ap-
peared in every countenance. All fenfl of fubordi-

Dnger ofa nation was loft: the officcrs, who hadl hitherto
mutiny. concurred with Columbus in opinion, and fuip-

ported

ported his authority, now took part with the men; B O O K
they aflembled tumultuously on the deck, expoftu-
lated with their commander, mingled threats with
their expostulations, and required him instantly to
tack about and return to Europe. Columbus per-
ceived that it would be of no avail to have recourse
to any of his former arts, which having been tried
so often, had loft their effects; and that it was im-
possible to rekindle any zeal for the success of the
enterprise among men, in whose breatis fear had
extinguished every generous fcntiment. He saw D s

Diftrcfs of

that it was no less vain to think of employing ei- Columbus,
ther gentle or fevtre measures, to quell a mutiny to
general and so violent. It was necessary, on all
there accounts, to soothe passions which he could
no longer command, and to give way to a torrent
too impetuous to be checked. He promised solemn-
ly to his men that he would comply with their re-
quefl, provided they would accompany him, and
obey his commands for three days longer, antI if,
during that time, land w.ere not discovered, he
would then abandon the enterprise, and direct his
course towards Spain t.

ENRAGED as the sailors were, and impatient to Enc uraging

turn their faces again towards their native country, ;ipc,. ice
this proposition did not appear to them unreafona- offuccefl
ble. Nor did Columbus hazard much in confin-
ing himself to a term so ihort. The prcfages of
dilcovering land were now so numncilou'; and pro-
mifing, that he deemed them infallible. For fuome
d lays the founding line reached the bottom, and the
fioil which it bronght up indicatcL land to be at no
great distance. The flocks of birds inlrcatled, and
were composed not only of fca fowl, but of such

land
VOL. I. M

Oviedo, ifll. ap. Ranmu. vol. iii. p. . E.

B OOK land birds as could not be supposed to fly far from

the fllore. The crew of the Pinta observed a cane
floating, which seemed to have been newly cut,
and likewise a piece of timber artificially carved.
The sailors aboard the Nigna took up the branch
of a tree with red berries, perfedtly fresh. The
clouds around the setting fun aflulned a new ap-
pearance; the air was more mild and warm, and,
during ni;(ht, the wind became unequal and varia-
ble. From all these symptoms, Columbus was so
confident of being near land, that on the evening
of the eleventh of October, after public prayers for
success, he ordered the fails to be furled, and the
flips to lie by, keeping ftridt watch, left they
ihould be driven ashore in the night. During this
interval of fufpence and expectation, no man hfut
his eves, all kept upon deck, gazing intently to-
wards that quarter where they expected to discover
the land, which had been so long the object of their
witiles.

APOUT two hours before midnight, Columbus,
ed. d Prtanding on the forccaftle, obfrved a ligrht at a dif-

tancc, and privately pointed it out to Pedro Gut-
ticrcz, a page of the queen's wardrobe. Gut-
tierez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comp-
troller of the fleet, all three fltw it in motion, as if
it were carried from place to place. A little after
lmildnilght, the joyful found of LAND, LAND, WIS
heard from the Pinta, which kept always a-head of
the other i nips. But, havingt been o ocftlel (deceived
by fallacious appearances, they were now become
flowv of belief, and waited, in all the anl uifl of uln-
ccrtainty alnd impatience, for the return of day. As
fooln as morni ng (awned, their (oubts and farsSwerec

2id iay, ifll they hbheld an iflanl about two lea:.ues to
Ot. 12. tihe north, whofc flat and vcrd(lt fieldls,well tored

with wood, and watered with mainy rivulets, pre-

fillntcd

sented to them the aspect of a delightful country. B 0O K
The crew of the Pinta infrantly began the TE ._,
DEuM, as a hymn of thanksgiving to God, and
were joined by those of the other ships, with tears
of joy and transports of congratulation. This of-
fice of gratitude to Heaven was followed by an a&t
ofjuflice to their commander. They threw them-
selves at the feet of Columbus, with feelings of self
condemnation mingled with reverence. They im-
plored him to pardon their ignorance, incredulity,
and insolence, which had created him so much un-
neceflary disquiet, and had so often obftru'led the
prosecution of his well concerted plan; and paiT-
ing, in the warmth of their admiration, from one
extreme to another, they now pronounced the man,
whom they had so lately reviled and threatened, to
be a person inspired by Heaven with sagacity and
fortitude more than human, in order to accomplish
a design, so far beyond the ideas and conception of
all former ages.

As soon as the fun arose, all the boats were Filrtinter-

manned and armed. They rowed towards the if- vthewnais
land with their colours displayed, warlike music,
and other martial pomp ; and as they approached
the coali, they saw it covered with a multitude of
people, whom the novelty of the fpestacle had
drawn together, and whose attitudes and getlures
cxprelsed wonder and aftoniihment at the strange
objects which presented themfclves to thcir view.
Columbus was the firfl European who let foot in
the New World which he had dicovcred. He land-
ed in a rich drels, and with a naked iword in his
hand. His nien followed, and kneelingdown, they
all kicfed the ground which they had so long deftred
to fee. They next erciecd a crucifix, and prori{lmting
themlclves before it, returned thanks to God for
condulting their voyage to fitch an happy ifflue.

M z Thcy

B O O K They then took solemn possession of the country for

the crown of Castile and Leon, with all the forma-
lities which the Portuguese were accustomed to obh
serve in acts of this kind, in their new difcove.
rics -.

Their mit- THE Spaniards, while thus employed, were fur-
ttmelt.lli rounded by many of the natives, who gazed, in si-

lent admniration, upon aAions which they could
not comprehend, and of which they did not fore-
fee tile consequences. The drels of the Spaniards,
the whiteness of their skins, their beards, their
arms, appeared strange and surprising. The vast
machines in which they had traversed the ocean,
that seemed to move upon the waters with wings,
and uttered a dreadful found resembling thunder,
accompanied with lightning and smoke, struck them
with such terror, that they began to refpec their
new gues-s as a superior order of beings, and con-.
cluded that they were children of the Sun, who
had descended to visit the earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at the

scene now before them. Every herb, and shrub,
and tree, was different from those which flourished
in Europc. The foil seemed to be rich, but bor
few marks of cultivation. The climate, even to
Spaniards, felt warm, though extremely delightful.
'Ihe inhabitants appeared in the simple innocence
of nature, entirely naked. Their black hair, long
and unlcurlled, floated upon their flioulders, or was
bound in trfcils around their heads. They had no
beards, and every part of their bodics was perfcctly
finooth. Their complexion was of a dusky copper
colour, their features singular, rather than difagrec-
able, their afpc t gentle and timid. Though not

tall,
I.,ift of Colnmbus, c. z7, 23. Hcnrrr i, deC. i. lib, i. c. X3.

tall, they were well shaped, and active. Their B o o K
faces, and other parts of their body, were fantafti-
cally painted with glaring colours. They were shy
at first through fear, but soon became familiar with
the Spaniards, and with transports of joy received
fiom them hawks-bells, glass beads, and other bau-
bles, in return for which they gave such provisions
as they had, and some cotton yarn, the only com-
modity of value that they could produce. Towards
evening, Columbus returned to his ships, accom-
panied by many of the islanders in their boats,
which they called CANOES, and though rudely
formed out of the trunk of a single tree, they rawed
them with surprising dexterity. Thus, in the fi.rst
interview between the inhabitants of the.old and
new worlds, every thing was conducted amicably,
and to their mutual farisfadcion. The former, en-
lightened and ambitious, formed already vast ideas
with refpec' to the advantages which they might
derive from those regions that began to open to
their view. The latter, simple and undifcerning,
had no foresight of the calamities and desolation
which were now approaching their coulntry.
COLUMBUS, who now assumed the title and au-

Columbus

thority of admiral and viceroy, called the island afumesthe
which he had discovered SAN SALVADOR. It is titleofad-

miral and

better known by the name of GUANAHANI, which viceroy.
the natives gave to it, and is one of that large cluf-
ter of islands called the Lucaya or Bahama ifics,
It is situated above three thousand miles to the
weft of Gomera, fiom which the squadron took its
departure, and only four degrees to the south of it;
f0 little had Columbus deviated from the westerly
courfc, which he had chosen as the most proper.

COLUMBUS employed the next day in visiting Pr.eedsto
tile coasts of the island ; and from the universal w.,ltlsthi.
Pvlery of the inhabitants, he perceived that this fotltl

was

B o o K was not the rich country for which he fought.

,__
_ ,But, conformably to his theory concerning the dif-

covery of those regions of Asia which stretched to-
wards the eall, he concluded that San Salvador
was one of the isles which geographers described as
situated in the vast ocean adjacent to India*. Hav-
ing observed that moit of the people whbm he had
seen wore finall plates of gold, byway of ornament,
in their nostrils, he eagerly inquired where they
got that precious metal. They pointed towards
the south, and made him compr hend by signs, that
(old abounded in countries situated in that quarter.
Thither he immediately determined to direct his
course, in full confidence of finding there those o-
pulent regions which had been the object of his
voyage, and would be a recompence for all his toils
and dangers. He took along with him seven of the
natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring the
Spanish language, they might serve as guides and
interpreters; and those innocent people confidered
it as a mark of diftinlion when they were feleSed
to accompany him.

HEI fiw fcvcral islands, and touched at threeof the
Clb3't 5 largcit, on which he bl.flowed the names of St,

Mary of the Conception, Fernadina,, and Isabella,
But as their ioil, productions, and inhabitants, near-
ly refcmbled those of San Salvador, he made no
stay in any of them. He inquired every where for
gold, and received uniformly for anfwcr, that it
was brought from the south. He followed that
course, and soon discovercd a country of val cx-
tent, not pcrfi tly level, like thole which he had al-
ready viiited, but foi diverlified with rising grounds,
hill-:, rivers, woods, and plains, that he was uncrcctill
whthelr it mlight prove an i lland, orpart:of the con-

tinclt.
* I't. Mart. epifl. 135.

tinent. The natives of San Salvador, whom he B O X
had on board, called it CUBA; Columbus gave it
the name of Juanna. He entered the mouth of a
laicre river with his squadron, and all the inhabi-
tants fled to the mountains as he approached the
shore. But as he resolved to careen his ships in that
place, he sent some Spaniards, together with one of
the people of San Salvador, to view the interior parts
of the country. They, having advanced above ixty
miles from the shore, reported, upon their return,
that the foil was richer and more cultivated than
any they had hitherto discovered ; that betide many
scattered cottages, they had found one village, con-
taining above a thousand inhabitants ; that the peo-
ple, though naked, seemed to be more intelligent
. than those of San Salvador, but had treated them

with the fame refpeEtful attention, kilinng their feet,
and honouring them as sacred beings allied toHea-
1 ven; that they had given them to eat a certain root,

the taste of which resembled roastcd chefiuts, and
1 likewise a singular fpecics of corn called MAIZE,

w hich, either when roasted whole or ground into
meal, was abundantly palatable ; that there seemed
to be no four-footed animals in the country, but a
fiecies of dogs, which could not bark, and a crea-
tiue rerfembling a rabbit, but of a much smaller
size; that they had observed some ornaments of
gold among the people, but of no great value e.

1 'IrSR mrnefingers had. prevailed. with tome of
( tli n:tives to accompany themi, who inlormed Co- is on'-
luiiiibs, that the gold of which they lmade their ,'.nld io it.
"(rl.iiliicnts was found in CUBANACUM. By) this
word they meant the middle or inla(nd part of Cu-
hi; hb!t Col iibu

i s, hci ng ignor;nt of their language,
as well as unaccufitomcd to their pronunciation, and

his
i Cir o l"Ctulitin s, c. 4.---zS. Ilrreri, dec. 1. lib. i. C. ...

B 0 O K his thoughts running continuallyupon his own

By_} theory concerning the discovery of the East Indies,

he was led, by the refemblanceof found, to suppose
that they spoke of the Great Khan, and imagined
that the opulent kingdom of CATHAY, described
by Marco Polo, was not very remote. This in-
duced him to employ some time in viewing the
country. He visited almofi every harbour, from
Porto del Principe, on the north coast of Cuba, to
the eastern extremity of the illand; but, though
delighted with the beauty of the scenes, which e-
very where presented themselves, and amazed at
the luxuriant fertility of the foil, both which, from
their novelty, made a more lively impreflion upon
his imagination *, he did not find gold in such
quantity as was fuficient to satisfy either the ava-
rice of his followers, or the expectations of the court
to which he was to return. The natives, as much
afconifhed at his eagerness in quest of gold, as the
Europeans were at their ignorance and simplicity,
pointed towards the east, where an island which
they called Hayti was situated, in which that me-
tal was more abundant than among them. Colum-
bus ordered his squadron to bend its course thither;
but Martin Alonfo Pinzon, impatient to be the sirs
who should take polleflion of the treasures which
this country was supposcd to contain, quitted his
companions, regardless o all the admiral's fignnals
to flacken fail, until they flould come up with
him.

Discovers COLUMIuIIS, retarded by contrary winds, did iot
the infl.nd reach Hayti till the sixth of December. He called
Ilifiniul. the portwhere he firfl:touched St. Nicholas, and thc

island itfclf Efpagnola, in holnour of thekingdom by
which he was employed; and it is the only count'y,
ofthofeh he had yet difcovcrcd, which has retained tile
name that lie gave it. As lie could neither 1lcet

* See N 0 TE XIV.

with the Pinta, nor have any intercourse with the B O0 K
inhabitants, who fled in great consternation towards
the woods, he soon quitted St. Nicholas, and fail- 1492.
ing along the northern coa{f of the island, he enter-
ed another harbour, which he called Conception.
Here he was more fortunate; his people overtook
a.woman who was flying from them, and after treat-
ing her with great kindness, dismissed her with a
present of such toys as they knew were most va-
lued in those countries. The description which
she gave to her countrymen of the humanity and
wonderful qualities of the ifrangers; their admi-
ration of the trinkets, which she shewed with
exultation; and their eagerness to participate of
the fame favours ; removed all their fears, and in-
duced many of them to repair to the harbour. The
itrange objc&ts which they beheld, and the baubles
which Columbus bestowed upon them, amply gra-
tified their curiosity and their wishes. They nearly
resembled the people of Guanahani and Cuba.
They were naked like them, ignorant, and simple;
and seemed to be equally unacquainted with all the
arts which appear most necessary in poliihed focie-
ties; but they were gentle, credulous, and timid,
to a degree which rendered it easy to acquire the
ascendant over them, especially as their excessive
admiration led them into the fame error with the
people of the other islands, in believing the Spa-
niards to be more than mortals, and dlccndtcld im-
mediately fiom Heaven. They pofleflic( gold in
greater abundance than their neighbours, which
they readily exchanged for bells, beads, or pins;
and, in this unequal traffic, both parties were high-
ly pleased, each confidering themselves as gainers
by the tran facLion. IHere Colilumbul s was visited by
a prince or CAZIXQUE of the country. I-e appeared
with all the pomp known among a fimnple people,
beingr carried in a fort of palanquin upon the
VOL. I. N floulclcrs

B o O K shoulders of four men, and attended by many of

his fubjets, who served him with great refpe,
1403. His deportment was grave and fRately, very reserved

towards his own people, but with Columbus
and the Spaniards extremely courteous. He gave
the admiral some thin plates of gold, and a girdle
of curious workmanship, receiving in return pre.
sents of small value, but highly acceptable to
him. $

COLUMBUS, still intent on discovering the mines

which yielded gold, continued to interrogate all the
natives with whom he had any intercourse concern-
ing their situation. They concurred in pointing
out a mountainous country, which they called
CIhAO, at fomre distance from the sea, and farther
towards the east. Struck with this found, which
appeared to him the fame with CIPANGO, the name
by which Marco Polo, and other travellers to the
eaff, distinguished the islands of Japan, he no longer
doubted with refpeA to the vicinity of the countries
which he had discovered to the remote parts of
Asia; and, in full expectation of reaching soon
those regions vhich had been the object of his
voyage, he di .led his course towards the east.
He put into a commodious harbour, which he call-
ed St. Thomas, and found that district to be under
the government of a powerful cazique, named
GUACANAt-lARI, who, as he afterwards learned,
was one of the five sovereigns among whom the
whole island was divided. He immediately sent
meffcngcrs to Columbus, who, in his name, deli-
vered to him the prefcnt of a mafkl curiously
faihioned, wxith the cars, nlofe, and mouth of beaten
gold, and invited him to the place of his residence,
near the harbour now called Cape Francois, some
leagues towards the eaflt. Columbus dispatchcd
ifomc of his officers to visit this prince, who, as he

behaved
l,i'c of Colunibus, c. 32. I-Icrrera, dec. 1, lib. i. c. 15, &c'

behaved with greater dignity, seemed to claim B OO K
i more attention. They returned, with such favour-

able accounts both of the country and of the peo- 149.
pie, as made Columbus impatient for that inter-
view with Guacanahari to which lie had been
* invited.

HE failed for this purpose from St. Thomas, on of
the twenty-fourth of December, with a fair wind, iipS icft.
and the sea perfectly calm; and as, amidst the
multiplicity of his occupations, he had not fliut
his eyes for two days, he retired at midnight, in
f'order to take some repose, having committed the
'helm to the pilot, with firid injunctions not to
quit it for a moment. The pilot, dreading no
!'danger, carelessly left the helm to an unexperien-
* ced cabin-boy, and thefhip, carried away by a cur-
:,rent, was dashed against a rock. The violence of
'the lhock awakened Columbus. He ran up to the
-''deck. There, all was confusion and despair. He
alone retained presence of mind. He ordered some
,of the sailors to take a boat, and carry out an
''anchor astern ; but, instead of obeying, they made
;of' towards the Nigna, which was about half a
i'caaguc diflant. He then commanded the masts to be
:,cut down, in order to lighten the ship ; but all his
endeavours were too late; the veflel opened near
' the keel, and filled so fast with water, that its, loss
iwvls inevitable. The finoothnefs of the sea, and
,lthe timely affiflance of boats fiom the Nigna, cn-
'lblcd the crew to save their lives. As boon as the
ildrntlcers heard of this disaster, they crowded to the
ftlore, with their prince Guacanahari at their head.
IRfead of taking advantage of the diftrels in which
tYey beheld the Spaniards, to attempt any thing to
their detriment, they lamented their misfortune
ilth tears of finccre condolance. Not. satisficd
With this unavailing expreflion of their tympathy,
:cy put to fca a valt number of canocs, and, under

N 2 the

B O O K the direrlion of the Spaniards, affiled in favino

whatever could be got out of the wreck ; and by
1492. the united labour of so many hands, almost every

thing of value was carried ashore. As fast as the
goods were landed, Guacanahari in person took
charge of them. By his orders, they were all de.
posited in one place, and armed centinels were
posted, who kept the multitude at a distance, in
order to prevent them not only from embezzling,
but from infpedting too curiously what belonged to
their guefis :. Next morning this prince visited
Columbus, who was now on board the Nigna, and
endeavoured to console him for his loss, by offering
all that he poffeiled to repair it §.

Dif;rcfs of THE condition of Columbus was such, thathe
Columbus flood in need of consolation. He had hitherto pro.

cured no intelligence of the Pinta, and no longer
'doubted but that his treacherous associate had set
fail for Europe, that he might have the meritof
carrying the first tidings of the extraordinary dif.
coveries which they had made, and might so far pre.
occupy the ear of their sovereign, as to rob him of
the glory and reward to which he whasjuftly intitled,
There remained but one veflel, and that the finalleld
and most crazy of the squadron, to traverse fuchl
vast ocean, and carry so many men back to Europe.
Each of those circumnflances was alarming, and fill-
ed the mind of Cohlmbus with the utmost filicitudc.
His (lifire of overtaking Pinzon, and of cftaciln
the unfavourablc imprcflions which his mifirclpccll
tations mirht make in Spain, made it nccclalryto

Rcfolves to returnl thlither writhout delay. The difficulty oft;k
P.ve 1 pa.it ing fcch a number of pcrfolns aboard the Nigna, C0o
,fhis; crew
iuthei llmid firmcnd him in an opinion, which the fertility oftli

country, and the gentle temper of the people, hadl1
ready induced him to form. Ie resolvcd to lcave a p'1'

·e Sec NOTE XV. § Hcrrcra, (ec. . lib. i.c. i8

of his crew in the island, that, by residing there, B o0 K
they might learn the language of the natives, study _ j
their disposition, examine the nature of the coun- 149z.
try, search for mines, prepare for the commodious
settlement of the colony, with which he proposed
to return, and thus secure and facilitate the acquifi-
tion of those advantages which he expected from
his discoveries. When he mentioned this to his
men, all approved of the design; and from impa-
tience under the fatigue of a long voyage, from the
levity natural to sailors, or from the hopes of a-
massing vast wealth in a country which afforded
such promising specimens of its riches, many of-
sered voluntarily to be among the number of those
who thould remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the exe- Obtains the
cution of this scheme, but to obtain the consent of he natitfs

the natives.

Guacanahari ; and his unfufpicious simplicity soon
presented to the. admiral a favourable. opportunity
of proposing it. Columbus having, in the beftman-
ner he could, by broken words and signs, expressed
some curiosity to know the cause which had moved
the islanders to fly with such precipitation upon the
approach of his Ihips, he informed him that the
country was much inferccd by the incursions of cer-
tain people, whom he called CARRIBEANS, who in-
habited fevcral islands to the south call. These he
dlefclibed as a fierce and warlike race of men, who
delighted in blood, and devoured the fleill of the pri-
foners who were so unhl;ppy as to fall into their
lihanls; and as upon the firfl appearance of the Spa-
niards, they were fiuppolfd to be Carriheans, whom
the nativcs, however lnumerous, ditirl not face in
lbttle, they had rccourte to their ufiftal method of
fccluing their aftcly, by flying into the thickest and
Inofl inlpelctrablc woods. Cuacanahl.ari, while
lpceaking of thole dreadful invaders, ditcovcrcd

fu cl

B OO K kind were to be deprived of every benefit that might

have been derived from the happy success of his
. fcheincs, and his own nrtme would defccnd to pofte-

ritv as that of a rash deluded adventurer, initead of
being tranfinitted with the honour due to the author
and condutor of the molt noble enterprise that.had
ever been undertaken. These refledions extin-
guised all fcnfe of his own personal danger. Less
affetled with the loss of life, than solicitous to pre-
serve the memory of what he had attempted and
atchieved, he retired to his cabbin, and wrote, up.
on parchment, a short account of the voyage
which he had made, of the course which he had
taken, of the situation and riches of the countries
which he had discovered, and of the colony that he
had left there. Having wrapt up this in an oiled
cloth, which he inclosed in a cake of wax, he put
it into a cafr carefully stopped up, and threw it into
the sea, in hopes that some fortunate accident
might preftrve a deposit of so much importance to
the world *.

'r:Tak fhtIc AT length Providence intcrpofed, to save a life
tc: in Clic reserved for other fervico's. The wind abated, the
Azorcd. fca became calm, ancd on hic evening of the fifteenth

they dicovercd land ; alnd though uncertain what
it was, the y mnde towards it. They soon knew it
to be St. Mlary, one of the Azores or wetern iflcs,
futlljct to the crown of Polrtugal. There, after a
violent colntcf with the governor, in which Colum-
bus difplty)led no lcfs fpiiit than prudence, he obtain-
cd a lfpply of fricfl provifrons, and( whatever clfe
lie needed. One circimfiance, however, greatly
difltuictcd l him. 'The P inta, of which he had
loft fight oiln he firfl daly of the hurricane,
did not appear ; he dreaded for foimle time tlhat
fhc had fltndered at Iea, and that all her crew had

peCrihedl:

* Life of (',hlinl':;, c. 37. I-lcn-irc , (Iec. l. ii. c. i, 1'
Sec N 0 '1' l XVI.

perifhedl: afterwards, his former suspicions recur- - BOK
red, and he became apprehensive that Pinzon had
borne away for Spain, that he might reach it
before him, and by giving the firit account of
his discoveries, might obtain lome ihare of his
fame.

IN order to prevent this, he left the Azores as Feb. 24.

soon as the weather would permit. At no great A.-,iesat
difMance from the coast of Spain, when alino.i at Lllbun
the end of his voyage, and beyond the re-ach of any
disaster, another itorin arose, little inferior to
the former iln v.,leice ; and after driiing before
it during two days and two nights, he was forced,
to take fielter in the river Tagus. Upon applica-
tion to the king of Portugal, he was allowed to Ma 4-
come up to Lisbon; and, notwithflanding the
envy which it was natural for the Portugucfe to
feel, when they beheld another nation entering
upon that province of discovery which they had
hitherto deemed peculiarly their own, and in its
first essay, not only rivalling but eclipsing their
faine, Columbus was received with all the narks
of difinlltion due to a man who had performed
things so extraordinary and unexpectcd. The
kinlt admitted him into his prefencc, treated him
with the highest refpcet, and lifiend to the ac-
coullt which he gave of his voyage with admira-
tion mingled with regret. While Columbus, on
his pitrt, enjoyed the fatisfadtion of describing the
impolrtlance of his dicoveries, and of being nowv
a le to prove the solidity of his fchemcns to tholc
, very pcrfons, who, wirh an ignorance dirfraceful
to thotl;lv'lves, and fatal to their country, had lately
'; rCj'Ced them as the projects of a.vifionary or de-
fig lning adventurer '*
.

O 2 COLUMnBUS
'i:if CofC lumilu, c. r,o, 4.. Ilcrrulr, dec. . i. . ii. c. i.

B 0 0 K COLUMBUS was so impatient to return to Spain,

I.- that he remained only five days in Lisbon. On

- the fifteenth of March he arrived in the port of

Ret'n to Palos, seven months and eleven days from the
Spain. time when he set out thence upon his voyage. As

soon as his fiip was discovered approaching the
port, all the inhabitants of Palos ran eagerly to the
shore, in order to welcome their relations and fel-
low-citizcns, and to hear tidings of their voyage.
When the prosperous iflue of it was known, when
they beheld the firange people, the unknown ani-
mals, and singular produaions brought from the
countries which had been discovered, the effusion
of joy was general and unbounded. The bells
were rung, the cannon fired ; Columbus was re-
ceived at landincg with royal honours, and all the
people, in solemn proccflion, accompanied him
and his crew to the church, where they returned
thanks to Heaven, which had so wonderfully con-
dudted and crowned with success, a voyage of great-
er length and of more importance, than had been
attempted in any former age. On the evening of
the fame day, he had the fatisfation of feeing the
Pinta, which the violence of the tempest had dri-
ven far to the north, enter the harbour.

Ti-iE. first care of Columbus was to inform the
tionl. killng and qluecn, who were then at Barcelona, of

his arrivl anld fucccfs. Ferdinand and Iihbella,
no less allonifnicd than delighted with this unex-
pctcd event, returned an an nwer in terms the 0oft
ref pctfull and flattering to Columbus, requecfing
him to repair imlmediately to court, that from lis
own mouth, they mi;ght receive a full detail of his
extraordinary felviccs and diicovcrics. IDuring his
jolrllcy to 1asrcelona, tlhe people crowded fiom ihe
adjacent coulltry, following him every where with
admIiration anld applaultC . His cntrance ilto the

SktY

city was conduced, by order of Ferdinand and Ifa- B O K
bella, with pomp suitable to the great event, which
added such distinguishing luflre to their reign. The 1493.
people whom he brought along with him from the
countries which he had discovered, marched firit,
and by their singular complexion, the wild peculia-
rity of their features, and uncouth finery, appeared
like men of another species. Next to them were
carried the ornaments of gold, faflioned by the
rude art of the natives, the grains of gold found in
the mountains, and dust of the fame metal gather-
ed in the rivers. After these appeared the various
commodities of the new discovered countries, toge-
ther with their curious produdtions. Columbus
himself closed the proceflion, and attralced the eyes
of all the fpetators, who gazed with admiration
on the extraordinary man, whose superior sagacity
and fortitude had conducted their countrymen,
by a route concealed from past ages, to the know-
ledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella
received him clad in their royal robes, and feated
upon a throne, under a magnificent canopy.
When he approached they stood up, and raising him
as he kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him
to take his feat upon a chair prepared for him, and
to give a circumfiantial account of his voyage.
He delivered it with a gravity and composure nolefs
suitable to the disposition of the Spanifi nation,than
to the dignity of the audience in which he spoke,
and with that modest simplicity which characdcrifes
men of superior minds; who, satisfied with having
performed great actions, court not vain applause
by an oftcntatious display of their exploits, When
lie had finished his narration, the king and queen,
knleeling down, offered up folelmn thanks to Al-
mighty God for the discovery of those new regions,
from which they cxpcted .so many advantages to

flow

B O O K flow in upon the kingdoms subjea to their govern-

I__ ment*. Every mark of honour that gratitude or
1493. admiration could suggest was conferred upon

Columbus. Letters patent were issued, confirm.
ing to him and to his heirs all the privileges con-
tained in the capitulation concluded at Santa Fe;
hi; family was ennobled; the king and queen, and,
after their example, the courtiers, treated him,
on every occasion, with all the ceremonious ref.
pet paid to persons of the highest rank. But
what pleated him most, as it gratified the enterpri-
sing a iivity of his mind, bent continually upon
great objects, was an order to equip, without
delay, an armament of such force, as might
enable him not only to take ?offeflion of the
countries which he had already discovered, but
to go in search of those more opulent regions,
which he still confidently expected to find .

Atn;i- h- WHILE preparations were making for this
ment if expedition, the fame of Columbus's successful
,nnicind at voyage spread over Europe, and excited general at-

ies. tention. The multitude, struck with amazement

when they heard that a new world had been found,
could hardly believe an event so much above
their conception. Men of fcicnce, capable of co0n-
prehending the nature, and of discerning the
efiects, of this great discovery, received the ac-
count of it with admiration and joy. They
spoke of it with rapture, and congratulated one
another upon their felicity, in having lived at
the period when, by this extraordinary cvclIt,
the boundaries of human knowledge wCle so
much extended, and fuich a new field of inquiry

;ind

* Sec NO T E XVII.
* Lif: of Columbus, c. 42, 43. f}[rrcra, tec. i. lil. i * ,3'

and observation opened, as would lead mankind to B 0 0 K
a perfec acquaintance with the ftrucure and pro-
duroions of the habitable globe *. Various opini- 1493.
ons and conjectures were formed concerning the
new-found countries, and what division of the
earth they belonged to. Columbus adhered tena-
cioufly to his original opinion, that they should
be reckoned a part of those vast regions in Asia,
comprchended under the general name of India.
This sentiment was confirmed by the observations
which he made concerning the productions of the
countries which he had discovered. Gold was
known to abound in India, and he had met with
such promising samples of it in the islands which
he visited, as led him to believe that rich mines of
it might be found. Cotton, another production of
the Eafft Indies, was common there. The pimen-
to of the islands he imagined to be a species of the
i Eat-Indian pepper. He miifook a root, somewhat
. rfcimbling rhubarb, for that valuable drug, which
was then fiuppofed to be a plant peculiar to the East-
Indies t. The birds which he had brought home
were adorned with the fame rich plumage that'dif-
tinguifhes those of India. The alligator of the one
country appeared to be the fame with the croco-
dile of the other. After weighing all these cir-
culiftainces, not only the Spaniards, but the other ed by the
nations of Europe, seem to have adopted the opini- nalme of the
:01 of Columbus. The countries wiich he had wcldi
'dtifcovercd were confidered as a part of India. In
'collfcqu(cnice of this notion, the name of Indies
is given to thel by Ferdinand and Ifabclla, in a
r.itilication of their former agreement, which was
grl'an(d to Columnbus upon his return 1:. Even as-
etr tihe error which gave rife to this opinion was

dctcc'cd,

*. .M:r. (lil. i .13, 13.4, i 35. Set NOTE XVIII.

l' Ill i , ilcr . I. lib. i. C. 20. oal ir.a l-il'. C. 17.
Li ol Coulilubua, c. 44.

B o o K deteAed, and the true position of the New world

was ascertained, the name has remained, and the
1493. appellation of WEST INDIES is given by all the

people of Europe to the country, and that of IN-
DIANS to its inhabitants.

Preparations THE name by which Columbus diftinguiihed
for a second the countries which he had discovered was so invit-
voyage. ing ; the specimens of their riches and fertility,

which he produced, were so considerable ; and the
reports of his companions, delivered frequently with
the exaggeration natural to travellers, so favoura-
ble ; that they excited a wonderful spirit of enter-
prise among the Spaniards. Though little accuf-
tomed to naval expeditions, they were impatient to
set out upon another voyage. Volunteers of every
rank solicited to be employed. Allured by the vas
profpecs which opened to their ambition and ava-
rice, neither the length nor danger of the navigati-
on intimidated them. Cautious as Ferdinand was,
and averse to every thing new or adventurous, he
seemed to have catched the fame spirit with his sub-
jeCs. Under its influence, preparations for a fe-
cond expedition were carried on with a rapidity
unusual among the Spaniards, and to an extent that
would be deemed not inconsiderable in the present
age. The fleet confifled of feventcen llips, tfme
of which were of good burden. It had on board
fifteen hundred perlfns, among whom were many of
noble families, who had fcrvcd in honourable
flations. The greater part of these being defiied
to remain in the country, they were ftirniflied with
every thing requifitc for conrqucft or fittlenlcit,
with all kinds of European donmllic ;nimanls, with
such fcds and plants as wrre mnoltl likely to thrive
in the climate of the Wc{

W t Inlics, with utcnlfils

and inftrumcnts of every fort, and with fuclh artifi-
ccrs as might be mofl uitcul in an infant co-
lonly t. B1 u,
t IHcrrura, dec. i lib. ii. c. 5. Life of Columlbus, c. 45'

BUT, formidable and well provided as this fleet B O0 K

was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not reft their title
to the poffeflion of the newly-difcovered countries 1493.
upon its operations alone. The example of the Therightof

Spain to the

Portuguese, as well as the fuperrtition of the age, Ncw World
made it necessary to obtain from the Roman pon- confirmed by

the Pope.

tiff a grant of those territories which they wished
to occupy. The Pope, as the vicar and reprefenta-
tive of Jesus Christ, was supposed to have a right
of dominion over all the kingdoms of the earth.
Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every crime
that disgraces humanity, filled the papal throne at
that time. As he was born Ferdinand's subjet,
and very solicitous to secure the protection of tha
monarch, in order to facilitate the execution of his
ambitious schemes in favour of his own family, he
instantly complied with his request. By an act of
liberality which cost him nothing, and that served
to establish the jurifdidion and pretensions of the
papapal fee, he bellowed on Ferdinand and Isabella
all the countries inhabited by Infidels, which they
had discovered, or should discover; and in virtue of
that power which he derived from Jesus Christ, he
vcftcd in the crown of Castile a right to vast regions,
to the pofeflion of which he himself was so far from
having any title, that he was unacquainted with their
situation, and even with their existence. As it was
lnecefflry to prevent this grant fiom interfering with
that formerly made to the crown of Portugal, he
appointed that a line, fuppored to be drawn from
pole to pole, a hundred l eagues to the wectward of
the Azores, lhould serve as the limit between them;
and, in the plenitude of his power, conferred all to
the cast of this imaginary line upon the Portuguese,
i anti all to the weft of it upon the Spaniards *.
Zeal for propagating the Christian faith was the
c(oifidlerationi employed by Ferdinand 'in so liciting
Vol. 1. P this
leicrcl;, (Ic. i. lib. ii. c. 4.. Torquemiada Mon. Ind. lib. xviii. C..3.

B 0 0 Kt this bull, and is mentioned by Alexander as his

chief motive for issuing it. In order to manifef
493. sone concern for this laudable object, several friars,

under rhe direction of Father Boyl, a Catalonian
nimonk of (rreat reputation, as apoftolical vicar, were
appointed to accompany Columbus, and to devot
themielves to the inftrucion of the natives. The
Indians whom Columbus had brought along with
him, having received some tincture of Christian
knowledge, were baptized with much solemnity,
the king himself, the prince his son, and the chief
pcrfons of his court, standing as their godfathers
Those first fruits of the New World have not been
followed by such an increase as pious men wifled,

Seconl VOY- FFRDINAND and Isabella having thus acquiredi
gL o;Co- _
luinii4. title, which was then deemed completely valid,to

extend their discoveries, and to establish their dori-
nion over such a vafl portion of the globe, nothing
now retarded the departure of the fleet. Columbu
was extremely impatient to rcvifit the colony which
he had left, and to pursue that career of glory upon
vwhich lie had entered. He set fail from the bay ofCa.
diz on the twenty-fifth of September, and touching
again at the island of Gomcrra, he fleered farther to.
wn rds; the south than in his former voyage. By holdl-
ing this cou rfi, he cenjoyed more feadily the bencfitof
the regular winds, which reign within the tropics,
and was carried towa(rds a larrge cluffcr of islands,
situated cclnfi(ldr;il to theea ca of those which hehlad
already di fcovcred. On the t wnty-fixth day after his
departutre from (Gomera, he made land :1:. It was one
Nov. z ofthe Carilbbe or Leeward islands, to which h1g ;ve

the namle of )Defeacdn, on accoluit of the impaticce
of his crew to dilcover Iumc part of the New worldl

After
t Oviel(o ap Ramnuf. iii. 85. 13

After this he visited successively Dominica, Mari- B 0 0 K
gailante, Guadalupe, Antigua, St. John de Porto _
Rico, and several other islands, scattered in his way 1493.
gas he advanced towards the northwest. All these
he found to be inhabited by that fierce race of peo-
'le wIhom Guacanahari had painted in such fright-
'fill colours. His descriptions appeared not to have
Ibeen exaggerated. The Spaniards, as often as they
,landed, met with such a reception as convinced
thein of their nartial and daring spirit ; and they
discovered in their habitations the relics of those
jhorrid feasts which tley had made upon the bodies
3of their enemies taken in war.

: BUT as Columbus was eager t5 know the state Arie aet

^rof the colony which he had planted, and to supply i^!''"'
it tw ith those neceilaries of which he supposed it to
b:e in want, he made no stay in any ps those iallds,

p;and proceeded direftly to Hispaniola *. When he

.iarrived off Navidad, the station in which he had
?ileft the thirty-eight men under the command of
iArada, he was aflonifhed that none of them ap-
:1peared, and exe every moment to fee. then
'Irnnin-g with transports of joy to welcome their
countryleen. Full of solicitude about their safe-
'tv, and foreboding in his mind what had befallcn
?themi, he rowed inffantly to land. All the natives
i..irn whom he might have reccived information had
,fled. But the fort which he had built was entirely
lcndmolifed, alnd the tattered galrmentts, the brokell
;arims and utentils icattered about it, left no room to
.(loubt colncerningl the lunhappy flite of thle arrin : .

" P 2 XWhile

' 1 M.lty'r, dec.p 15. rt. H- rrcra) : (Ic. 1.

Tl i. ii. c. '7. Li-.
,*f olumllb,,) c. 46, &c. t -Hifi. de Curi dc los Piticioi. MS.

B o o K While the Spaniards were lhedding tears over those

'1 fad memorials of their fellow-citizens, a brother of
149J" the cazique Guacanahari arrived. From him Co-

Thef:ite of lIumbus received a particular detail of what had
tic nmne happened after his departure from the island. The
whlom he
leA there. familiar intercourse of the Indians with the Spa-

niards tended gradually to diminifll the fuperititi-
ous vencration with which their first appearance
h;d inspired that simple people. By their own in-
discretion and ill condud, the Spaniards speedily
effaced those favourable impressions, and soon con-
vinced the natives, that they had all the wants, and
weaknefles, and pallions of men. As soon as the
powerful restraints which the presence and autho-
rity of Columbus imposed was withdrawn, thegar-
rifon threw off all regard for the officer whom he
had invested with command. Regardless of the
prudent infl-ructions which he had given them, e-
very man became independent, and gratified his de-
fires without controul. The gold, the women, the
provisions of the natives, were all the prey of those
licentious oppressors. They roamed in small par-
ties over the island, extending their rapacity and
insolence to every corner of it. Gentle and timid
as the people were, thcfe unprovoked injuries at
lcngth cxhauited their patience, and rouzed their
coulagc. The cazique of Cibao, whose territores
the S paninrds chiefly inflfted on account of he gold
which tlhy contained, surprised and cut off Icvenlal
of them, while they fnragglcd in as perfclcq feclrity
as if their coul(ILt had been altogetlicr inoiftciive.
Hei then LafIciilled his fl!ubjc -s, land fiilrroudigl
the fort, f.t it on fire. Some of the Spaniards
wvc're killcd inl lit'fiidii it, the reft perifled in at-
lteil) iing to kll:l: their clcape lby crolling an a11n j
of thel iba. ( Iuan aliih i, whom all their cxali-
tns 1had lcUt t;!i'inattcld iloi tlhe Spaniards took

alll'S I

arms in their behalf, and in endeavouring to pro- B O O K
tcC them, had received a wound, by which he.was
still confined. -. 1493.

THOUGH this account was far from removing His pru-

the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained dt con-
- with refpeE to the fidelity of Guacanahari, Co-
lumrbus perceived so clearly that this was not a
proper juncture for inquiring into his conduct
with scrupulous accuracy, that he rejected the
advice of several of his officers, who urged
him to seize the person of that prince, and to
revenge the death of their countrymen by at-
tacking his fubjeats. He represented to them the
necessity of fecurihg the friendship of some po-
tentate of the country, in order to facilitate the
f ettlement which they intended, and the danger of
driving the natives to unite in some desperate at-
tempt againit them, by such an ill-timed and un-
availing exercise of rigour. niltcad of wafting
his time in punishing past wrongs, he took precau-
tions for preventing any future injury. With this
view, he made choice of a situation more healthy
and commodious than that of Navidad. He tra-
ced out the plan of a town in a large plain near a
spacious bay, and obliging every pcrfon to put his
hand to a work on which their common fafty dc-
pended, the houci:s and ramparts were s60on b far
advanlced by their united labour, as to afl:ord them
ileltcr and Icurity. IThis rising city, the first that
thc EurIopeans founded in the New World, he na-
red Ifthbala, in hlonour of his patroness the queen
of Caflilc §.

Ir carryinog on thiS ncecnetlly work, Colu- DotelC
)1S had.l n1ot only to fuflaii all the hardlhips, of ifol-
and to cl1couller all tie difficulties, to which lowers.

infant
* i, Martyr, I c'iled. l). 22. &c, l- lrtra;, (IcC. i. lii. ii. c. 7.

9 ' Io C,,O(l,,,|,is, c. 40q, 50. § Liei of Columbus, c,
5', 1crcrICic. Ic. i. lb. ii. c. 1O

B 0 0 K infant colonies are exposed when they fettle in an

uncultivated country, but he had to contend with
1453. what was more insuperable, the laziness, the impa.

tience, and mutinous disposition of his followers,
By the enervating influence of a hot climate, the
natural inactivity of the Spaniards seemed to
increase. Many of them were gentlemen, un-
accuflomed to the fatigue of bodily labour, and
all had engaged in the enterprise. with the fan-
guine hopes excited by the splendid and exag-
gerated dcfcriptions of those who returned with
Columbus from his first voyage, or by his own mif-
taken idea that the country which he had disco-
vered was either the Cipango of Marco Polo, or
the Ophir *, from which Solomon imported those
precious commodities which suddenly diffused
such extraordinary riches through his kingdom.
But when, instead of that golden harvest which
they had expected to reap without toil or pains,
the Spaniards saw that their profped of wealth was
remote as well as uncertain, and that it could not
be attained but by the flow and persevering efforts
of indufiry, the disappointment of those chimerical
hopes occasioned such dejection of mind as border-
ed on dcfpair, and led to general discontent. In
vain did Columbus endeavour to revive their fpi-
rits by pointing out the fertility of the foil, and
exhibiting the fpeciniens of gold daily brought in
froml dificrent parts of the island. They had not
patience to wait for the gradual returns which the
forlmer might yield, and tlle latter they dcfpilcd
as scanty and iniconfidcrablc. 'I'he spirit of difut-
Icc ion spread, and a confiiracy was formed, which
might have been fatal to Coliumbus and theco-
lohy. I-Happily he difcovcred it, and Ifizing tlie
ringleaders, puniflhcd some of t;lem, s 'nt others
prilbones into Spain, whitlher lie dipflatched

twel v
J'. Martyr. dec. p. 9.

t twelve of the ships which had served as transports, B 0 K
.with an earnest request for a reinforcement of men
- and a large supply of provisions .

MIEANWHILE, in order to banifli that idleness 1494.

:' which, by allowing his people leisure to brood over intotheitate
" their diappointmcnt, nourilied the spirit of dif- ofthecoun-

: content, he planned several expeditions into the in-- t:y.
:: tcrior part of the country. He sent a detachment,

iunder the command of Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant

: and cntelprifing officer, to visit the difrrif of Cibao,
'i which was Caid to yield the greatest quantity of

gold, and followed him in person with the main bo- Ma'ch I, .
( v of his troops. In this expedition, he displayed
' ail the pomp of military magnificence that he could

exhibit, in order to flirike the imagination of the na-
tics. He marched with colours flying, with mar-
tial music, and with a finall body of cavalry that
.arafddl fometilnes in the front and fomctimes in
i the rear. As those were the firl- horses that ap-
p earcd in the New World, they were objects of
i terror no less than admiration to the Indians, who
hvili(g 1no tame animals themfclves, were unac-
q tinited with that vast acccilion of power, which
mian liath acquired by flubjefting them to his domi-
inion. They imagined them to berational creatures,
that f)rmed but one animal with their riders.
' I lc! \were afionifhed at their speed, and confidered
tlcir ilpctuofity and strength as irrcfiftible. But
while Coltlmbus endeavoured to inspire the na-
tives with a dread of his power, he did not neglert
the arts of gaining their love and confidence. He
;Itllilrcd fcrulpullolfly to the principles of integrity
i:1l j iulice in all his tr:anal: ionslswith them, and
trcaltcdl themn, on every occafioln not only Withl hu-

manity,
reicira, (Idec. 1. lib. ii. C. io0 tT.

B 0 0 K manity, but with indulgence. The dif-rict ofCi.

_is, bao anfiered the description given of it by the na-
1494. tives. It was mountainous and uncultivated, but

in every river and brook gold was gathered either
in dust or in grains, some of which were of confi-
derable size. The Indians had never opened any
mines in fcarch of gold. To penetrate into the
bowels of the earth, and to refine the rude ore, were
operations too complicated for their talents and in.
duffry, and they had no such high value for gold as
to put their ingenuity and invention upon the
firetch in order to obtain it T. The small quanti-
ty of that precious metal which they poflnfed, was
either picked up in the beds of the .rivcrs, or waih-
ed from the mountains by the heavy rains which
fall within the tropics. But, from those indicati-
ons, the Spaniards could no longer doubt that the
country contained rich trcafures in its bowels, of
which theyhoped soon to be masters t. In order to
secure the command of this valuable province, Co-
lumbus erected a finall fort, to which he gave the
name of St. Thomas, by way of ridicule upon some
of his incredulous followers, who would not be-
lieve that the country produced gold, until they
saw it with theirown eyes, and touched it with their
hands :.

'The difirefs THE account of those promising appearances of

tand ,l' tec- wealth in the country of Ciao came very fcafolla-

Gcla of the

-t t d I

colony in- bly to comfort the (ldcpoding colony, which
ciC.it. was aifcEtcdl with dillrcflcs of various kinds.

The flock of provisions which had been brought
fiom Eu rope was nofilly contfiltled ; what re-
mained was t much corrupted by the heat and
inoifture of tile climatc, as to be almoflt ulft

fur

* Ovicdtl, lib. ii. p. go. A. - P. M.utyr, dcc. p. p3.-
. clerrcr., (idc. i. lib. ii. c. -,. Lite ol'Collunbus, c. 5,2.

for use; the natives cultivated so finall a portion of B O O K
ground, and with so littlefkill, that it hardly yield- I
ed what was fuflicient for their own fubfiftance; 1494.
the Spaniards at Isabella had hitherto neither time
nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap any confi-
derable fruits of their own induRtry. On all these
accounts, they became afraid of perishing with
hunger, and were reduced to live already at short
allowance. At the fame time, the diseases predo-
minant in the torrid zone, and which rage chiefly
in those uncultivated countries, where the hand of
indufiry has not opened the woods, drained the
marshes, and confined the rivers within a certain
channel, began to spread among them. Alarmed
at their violence and unusual symptoms, they ex-
claimed againRf Columbus and his companions in
the former voyage, who, by their splendid but de-
ceitful descriptions of Hispaniola, had allured them
to quit their native country for a barbarous uncul-
tivated land, where they muff either be cut off by
famine, or die of unknown distempers. Several of
the officers and persons of note, instead of check-
ing, joined in those seditious complaints. Father
Boyl, the apoftolical vicar. was one of the most tur-
bulent and outrageous. It required all the autho-
rity and address of Columbus to re-establish fubor-
dination and tranquility in the colony. Threats
and promises were alternately employed for this
pupofc ; but nothing contributed more to tooth
the malcontents than the profped of finding, in the
mines of Cibao, such a rich flore of treasure as
would be a recompence for all their fufilcrings, and
cflace the memory of former difappointmcents.

WHE N, by his unwearied endeavours, con- Columhlus
cord and order were so far rcftored, that lhe 'it...Ui1s

new cl1iscQ-

couldl venture to leave the island, Columbus re- vcrics.
solvcd to pursue his discoverics, that he mighlt be
VOL. I. Q able

B O 0 K able to ascertain whether those new countries with

which he had opened a communication, were con.
1494. nected with any region of the earth already known,

or whether they were to be confidered as a separate
portion of the globe, hitherto unvisited. He ap.
pointed his brother Don Diego, with the afilitance
of a council of officers, to govern the island in his
absence; and gave the command of a body of fol1
diers to Don Pedro Margarita, with which he was
to visit the different parts of the island, and endea.
vour to eltablifh the authority of the Spaniards a-
mong the inhabitants. Having left them very par-
ticular inftruAions with refpe& to their condut,
he weighed anchor on the twenty-fourth of April,
with one ship and two frnall barks under his com-
mand. During a tedious voyageof full five months,
he had a trial of almost all the numerous hardihips
to which persons of his profession areexpofed, with-
out making any discovery of importance, except the
island of Jamaica. As he ranged along the fou-
thern coast of Cuba *, he was entangled in a la-
byrinth formed by an incredible number of fiall
islands, to which he gave the name of the Queen's
Garden. In this unknown course, among rocks
and shelves, he was retarded by contrary winds, as-
laulted with furious storms, and alarmed with the
terrible thunder and lightning which is often al-
most incefcant between the tropics. At length his
provisions fell short; his crew, exhausted with fa-
tigue as well as hunger, murmured and threatened,
and were ready to proceed to the most desperate ex-
tremities againfl him. Befctwith danger in fiich va-
rious forms, he was obliged to keep continual
watch, to ohfcrve every occurrence with his own
eyes, to illue every order, and to superintend the ex-
ccution of it. On no occasion, was the extent of
his still and experience as a navigator so much

tried.
Sec N 0 T IE XIX.

'i tried. To these the squadron owed its safety. But B O0 K
i this unremitted fatigue of body and intenf applica-

tion of mind, overpowering his confcitution, 1494.
i; though naturally vigorous and robust, brought on a

f feverish disorder, which terminated in a lethargy,
1 that deprived him of sense and memory, and had al-

1i mo11 proved fatal to his life .

BUT, on his return to Hispaniola, the sudden Sept 27
emotion of joy which be felt upon meeting with his On his re.
: brother Bartholemew at Isabella, occasioned such a his inother
flow of spirits as contributed greatly to his recovery. Barthole-
It was now thirteen years since the two brothers, mew at
whom similarity of talents united in close friend-
fi:hip, had separated from each other, and during
? that long period there had been no intercourse be-
t tween them. Bartholemew, after finishing his ne-
gociation in the court of England, had set out for
I Spain by the way of France. At Paris he received

an account of the extraordinary discoveries which
his brother had made in his firif voyage, and that
he was then preparing to embark on a second expe-
dlition. Though this naturally induced him to
pulrfie his journey with the utimof dispatch, Co-
i lumbus had failed for Hispaniola before he reached
!" Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella received him with
Ithe refpecCt due to the brother of a man whose merit
andd fcrvices rendered him so conspicuous ; and as
they knew what consolation his pretence would
afiord to Columbus, they persuaded him to take the
icimmllmnd of three flips, which they had appointed
jto carry provisions to the colony at Isabella §.

Q 2 -I'E
I.ifc ofColutibus,c. 54, &c. Hcrrcra, dec. I. lib. ii. c. x , 14.

yr,M.;rtyl.drc. p. 34, &c.

e
Ilrlria;. dec, 1. lib. ii. C. I6.

B 0 O K HE could not have arrived at any juncure when

Columbus flood more in need of a friend capable

1494. of assisting him with his counsels, or of dividing

The Indians
the lndns with him the cares and burden of government. For
agiinit the although the provisions now brought from Europe,
Spaniards. afforded a temporary relief to the Spaniards from

the calamities of famine, the supply was notin
such quantity as to support them long, and the
ifiand did not hitherto yield what was sufficient for
their fuflenance. They were threatened with ano-
ther danger, still more formidable than the return
of scarcity, and which demanded more immediate
attention. No sooner did Columbus leave the
island on his voyage of discovery, than the soldiers
under Margarita, as if they had been set free from
discipline and subordination, scorned all refiraint,
Inftcad of conforming to the prudent inftruEtions
of Columbus, they dispersed in straggling parties
over the island, lived at discretion upon the natives,
wafted their provisions, seized their women, and
treated that inoffensive race of men with all the in-
folence of military opprcflion t.

As long as the Indians had any profpec that

their sufferings might come to a period by the vo.
luntary departure of the invaders, they submitted in
silence, and dissembled their sorrow; but they not
lprceived that the yoke would be as permanent as
it was intolerable. The Spaniards had built
town, and lurrounded it with ramparts. They had
creet.'d forts in difierent places. They had
inclosed and iown fevcral fields. It was apparet
that they came not to visit the country, but to sett
in it. 'l'hotu(h the number of thofc firangers Wa
not confiderablc, the slate of cultivation amol

tii
] P. Martyr, dec. p. 47.

this rude people was so imperfect, and in such exad B o o K
proportion to their own consumption, that it was
with difficulty they could afford fubfiftance to their i94.
new guests. Their own mode of life was so indo-
lent and inacR-ive, the warmth of the climate Io en-
ervating, the constitution of their bodies naturally
so feeble, and so unaccustomed to the laborious
exertions of industry, that they were satisfied with
a proportion of food amazingly fiall. A handful
of maize, or a little of the insipid bread made of
the caffada-root, was sufficient to support men,
whose strength and spirits were not exhausted by
any vigorous efforts either of body or mind. The
Spaniards, though the moif abstemious of all the
European nations, appeared to them exceflively vo-
racious. One Spaniard consumed as much as feve-
ral Indians. This keenness of appetite surprised
them so much, and seemed to them to be so infatia-
ble, that they supposed the Spaniards had left their
own country, because it did not produce as much
as was requisite to gratify their immoderate desire of
food, and had come among them in quest of nourish-
mcnt :l. Self-prefervation prompted them to wish
for the departure of guests who wafted so fast their
slender stock of provisions. The injuries which
they sufFered, added to their impatience for this
event. They had long expected that the Spaniards
would retire of their own accord. They now per-
ceived that, in order to avert the defirucdion with
which they were threatened, either by the {low con-
firmption of famine, or by the violence of their
oppreflors, it was neceflhry to aflume courage, to
attack thofi formidable invaders with united force,
and drive them fiom the fcttlements of which they
had violently taken polfecfion.

SUCH
e IIericra, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 1,.

X o o K SUCH were the sentiments which universally

prevailed among the Indians, when Columbus re-

1494. turned to Isabella. Inflamed by the unprovoked
War with outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree of rage of

which their gentle natures, formed to susser and
submit, seemed hardly susceptible, they waited only
for a signal from their leaders to fall upon the colo-
ny. Some of the caziques had already surprised
and cut off several of the stragglers. The dread of
this impending danger united the Spaniards, and
re-established the authority of Columbus, as they
saw no profpedt of safety but in committing them-
selves to his prudent guidance. It was now necef-
fary to have recourse to arms, the employing of
which against the Indians, Columbus had hitherto
avoided with the greatest solicitude. Unequal as
the conflict may seem, between the naked inhabi-
tants of the New World, armed with clubs, sticks
hardened in the fire, wooden swords, and arrows
pointed with bones or flints; and troops accustom-
ed to the discipline, and provided with the inftru-
ments of deftruftion known in the European art of
war, the situation of the Spaniards was far from
being exempt from danger. The vast superiority'
of the natives in number, compensated many defets.
An handful of men was about to encounter a whole
nation. One adverse event, or even any unfore-
seen delay in determining the fate of the war, might
prove fatal to the Spaniards. Conscious that fuc-
cess depended on the vigour and rapidity of his
operations, Columbus instantly aftnm bled his forces.
They were reduced to a very finall number. Dif-
cafes, cngendered by the warmth and humidity of
the country, had raged among them with much
violence; experience had not yet taught them the
art either of curing there, or the precautions reqii-
fitc for guarding againit them ; two-thirds of the
original adventurers were dead, and many of those

who

who survived were incapable of service ~. The B 0 0 K

i,: body which took the field consisted only of two
: hundred foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs; 3495.

and how strange soever it may seem, to mention Malh 34
the last as composing part of a military force, they
were not perhaps the least formidable and deftruc-
tive of the whole, when employed againfc naked
and timid Indians. All the caziques of the island,
:: Guacanahari excepted, who retained an inviolable

attachment to the Spaniards, were in arms to op-

; pose Columbus, with forces amounting, if we may
. believe the Spanish historians, to a hundred thou-
: sand men. Instead of attempting to draw the Spa-

,niards into the fastnesses of the woods and moun-
; tains, they were so imprudent as to take their ftati-

on in the Vega Real, the most open plain in the
country. Columbus did not allow them time
to perceive their error, or to alter their position.
i He attacked them during the night, when undif-
l: ciplined troops are least capable of atfing with
i; union and concert, and obtained an easy and blood-
I less victory. The conflernation with which the
i Indians were filled by the'noife and havoc made by

the fire-arms, by the impetuous force of the caval-
: ry, and the fierce onset of the dogs was so great

that they threw down their weapons, and fled with-
out attempting resistance. Many were slain ; more
were taken prisoners, and reduced to servitude §;
and so thoroughly were the reft intimidated, that
from that moment they abandoned themselves to
deli)air, relinquifling all thoughts of contending
with aggreflbrs whom they deemed invincible.

COI.UMnUS employed several months in march- A taw im.

ing through the island, and in fubjeaing it to the Cfed "ui0'
Spi;1lifi government, withoutmeeting any oplofiti-
li. He imposcd a tribute upon all the inhabitants

above.
1 Life of Coluinbus, c. 61. Sec. NOTE XX.

B 0 0 K above the age of fourteen. Each person who lived

in those diftrias where gold was found, was oblig-
1495 ed to pay quarterly as much gold' dufl as filled a

hawk's bell ; from those in other parts of the coun-
try, twenty-five pounds of cotton were demanded.
This was the first regular taxation of the Indians,
and served as a precedent for exaCtions still more
intolerable. Such an heavy iipofition was ex-
tremely contrary to those maxims which Columbus
had hitherto inculcated with refpeA to the mode
of treating them. But intrigues were carrying on
in the court of Spain at this junCture, in order to
undermine his power and discredit his operations,
which constrained him to depart from his own fyl-
ter of adminiitration. Several unfavourable ac-
counts of his conduct, as well as of the countries
discovered by him, had been transmitted to Spain,
Margarita and Father Boyl were now at court; and
in order tojuftify their own conduct, or to gratify
their resentment, watched with malevolent attention
for every opportunity offpreading insinuations to his
detriment. Many of the courtiers viewed his growing
reputation and power with envious eyes. Fonseca,
the archdeacon of Seville, who was intrusted with
the chief direction of Indian affairs, had conceived
such an unfavourable opinion of Columbus, for
some reason which the contemporary writers have
not mentioned, that he liitencd with partiality to
every inveCtive against him. It was not easy for aI
unfricndcd firanger, unpractifrd in courtly arts, to
counteract the machinations of to many ene'
mics. Columbus saw that there was but 0one
method of supporting his own credit, and Of
filcncing all his advcrfarics. He- mut produce
fllch a quantity of gold, as would not only juttiif

wllt

what he had reported with refped to the richness B o0 K
1 of the country, but encourage Ferdinand and Ifa-

bella to persevere in prosecuting his plans. The 1495.
necessity of obtaining it, forced him not only to
mnpofe this heavy tax upon the Indians, but to ex-
at payment of it with extreme rigour ; and may
be pleaded in excuse for his deviating on this occa-
sion from the mi.dnefs and humanity with which
he uniformly treated that unhappy people *

THE labour, attention, and foresight which the FataLeffcets
Indians were obliged to employ in procuring the tme-
tribute demanded of them, appeared the most into-
lerable of all evils, to men accustomed to pass their
days in a careless, improvident indolence. They
were incapable of such a regularand persevering ex-
ertion of industry, and felt it such a grievous re-
ftraint upon their liberty, that they had-recourfe to
an expedient for obtaining deliverance from this
yoke, which demonstrates the excess of their impa-
tience and despair. They formed a fchemc of itarv-
ing those oppressors whom they durst not attempt
to expel ; and from the opinion which they enter-
tained with refpeat to the voracious appetite of the
Spaniards, they concluded the execution of it to be
very praticable. With this view, they fufpenided
all the operations of agriculture; they sowed no
maize, they pulled up the roots of the manioc
which were planted, and rcti ing to the nof' inac--
ccllible parts of the imountains, left the uncultiva-.
ted plains to their enemies. This dcfpcrate rcto]u-
tion produced tome part of tle cflccq-s which they
cxpciStei. The Spani.-ds were reduced to e ttn 'r
wan"t ; butt they received filch l:i oiiabl)le fil, i[l is of
pr)wifionls from Europe, and son0 111(1o lmany rcfourIes
ill their own inll!.euCIiity and iildlry, tlhat IlChy hllf-
sered no great loss of men. The mwretched Indian:
VoL. 1. R VwereV

' Htrircrc et c,

l ,
;c b. ii.c. 17.

D 0 0 K were the vidtims of their own ill-concerted policy.

A vatt multitude liut up among barren mountains,
j495. without any food but the spontaneous productions

of the earth, soon feltthe utmost distresses of famine,
This brought on contagious diseases ; and, in the
course of a few months, more than a third part of
the inhabitants of the island perifled, after expe-
riencing misery in all its various forms .

Intrigues BUT while Columbus was thus successfully es
againfl Co- tablifling the foundations of the Spanish grandeur
the cortof in the New WVorld, his enemies laboured with un-
Snain. wearied assiduity to deprive him of the glory and re-

wards to which his services and sufferings intitled
him. The hardfnips unavoidable in a new fettle.
ment, the calamities occasioned by an unhealthy cli-
mate, the disasters attending a voyage in unknown
seas, were all represented as the fruits of his restless
and inconsiderate ambition. His prudent attention
to preserve discipline and subordination was deno-
minated excess of rigour ; the punishments which
he inflicted upon the mutinous and disorderly were
imputed to cruelty. 'rhefe accusations gained fich
credit in a jeilous court, that a commiflioner was
appointed to repair to Hispaniola, and to infpedt in-
to the conduiic of Columbus. By the recommenda-
tion of his enemies, Aguado, a groom of the bed-
chamber, was the perlon to whom this important
truit was committed. But in this choice they fcem
to have been more influcnced by the obsequious at-
tachinmnt of the mlan lo their intcrefl., than by his
capacity for the station. Puf'cid up with such fdl-
den elevation, Agu:ado displayed, in the cxcrcifeol
this office, all the irivolous fcll-iilportancfc

and

t fiecriler, dec l.

l xi. ic. C. I.ife of Cohiimbus, c.66. Oie

do, l, iii. ii . (3. D. BenLon Ilifi.N(,vl Oibi;, il.i. . 9.
lB.ULyr, dec. 1. 48.

and acted with all the disgusting insolence, which B 0 0 K
,are natural to little minds, when raised to unex- i.
.peded dignity, or employed in fundcions to which 495.
:; they are not equal. By listening with eagerness to

every accusation against Columbus, and encourag-
: ing not only the malcontent Spaniards, but even
' the Indians, to produce their grievances, real or

imaginary, he fomented the spirit of diflention in
the island, without establishing any regulation of
public utility, or that tended to redress the many
wrongs, with the odium of which he wished to load
the admiral's administration. As Columbus felt
sensibly how humiliating his situation must be, if
hefliould remain in the country while such a par-
t: tial inrped-or observed his motions, and controuled

his jurifdidcion, he took the resolution of returning
: to Spain, in order to lay a full account of all his

tranfadtions, particularly with respect to the points
in dispute between him and his adversaries, before
Ferdinand and Isabella, from whose justice and dif-
cernment he expected an equal and a favourable
decision. He committed the administration of as- 1496.
fairs, during his absence, to Don Bartholoniew, his
brother, with the title of Adelantado, or Lieute-
nant-Governor. By a choice less fortunate, and
, which proved the source of many calamities to the
colony, he appointed Francis Roldan chief justice,
' wilh very cxtenfive powers -.

IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a course Returns to

dl(iflrent fromn that whlich he had taken in his for- sp'ain
mJ ir voynge. H-e fleered almofl due east fiom HIif-
lani ,iol;, il the parallel of twenty-two degrees of la-
titudel( ; as experience had not yet dilcovered the
more certain and expeditious method of firctching
to ihc lnorth, in older to fall in with the fouth-wcft
winds. By this ill-advifed choice, which, in the

infhncy

R 2
* llcrrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 18. Lib. ii. c. v .

B OOK infancy of navigation between the New and Old
__- Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the admiral as a
1496, defect in naval ikill, he was exposed to infinite fa-

tigue and danger, in a pepetual struggle with the
trade-winds, which blow without variation from
the cast between the tropics. Notwithstanding the
almoot infupcrable difficulties of such a navigation,
he periifted in his course with his usual patience
and firmness, but mrade so little way, that he was
three months without secing land. At length, his
provisions began to fail, the crew was reduced to
the scanty allowance of fix ounces of bread a-day
for each person. The admiral fared no better than
the meanest sailor. But, even in this extreme dif-
trefs, he retained the humanity which diflinguifhes
his charater, and refused to comply with the earn-
eft solicitations of his crew, some of whom propos-
ed to feed upon the Indian prisoners whom they
were carrying over, and others insisted to throw
them over-board, in order toleffen the consumption
of their small stock. He represented, that they
were human beings, reduced by a common calami-
ty to the fame condition with themselves, and in-
titled to share an equal fate. His authority and re-
inonfirance dissipated those wild ideas suggested by
despair. Nor had they time to recur, as he came
soon within fight of the coast of Spain, and all their
fears and sufferings ended -,

Hiis recepti- COLUMPUS appeared at court with the modcef
on tblerc. but determined confidence of a man conscious not

only of integrity, but of having performed great fcr.
vices. Ferdinand and Ifabclla, ashamed of their own
facility in lending too favourable an car to fiivolous
or ill-founded acculations, received him with

filch
* HIIeCr.ci, dec. i. lib. iii. c. i. Life of Columbus, c. 6,4.

such distinguished marks of refpet, as covered his B O O K
enemies with shame. Their censures and calum-
nies were no more heard of at that juncture. The 1496.
gold, the pearls, the cotton, and other commodi-
ties of value which Columbus produced, seemed
fully to refute what the malcontents had propaga-
ted with refpe't to the poverty of the country. By
reducing the Indians to obedience, and imposing a
regular tax upon them, he had secured to Spain
a large acceflion of new fubjeas, and the eftabliih-
ment of a revenue that promised to be considerable.
By the mines which he had found.out and exami-
ned, a source of wealth still more copious was
opened. Great and unexpe&ed as those advantages
were, Columbus represented them. only as preludes
to future acquisitions, and as the earnest of more
important discoveries, which he still meditated,
and to which those he had already made would
conduct him with ease and certainty*.

THE attentive consideration of all those cir-

A plan for-

cumifances made such impression, not only upon med for the
Isabella, who was flattered with the idea.of being molereegular

iesabli/h-

the patroness of all Columbus's enterprises, but men of a
even upon Ferdinand, who having originally cx- co:cny.
preflnd his disapprobation of his Ichcmes, was fill
more apt to doubt of their success, that they refol-
ved to ftipply the colony in His-paniola with every
thing that could render it a permanent eftablifll-
ment, and to furnish Columbuls with such a fleet,
that he might proceed to trarch for thole new
countrics, of whose cxiftence he seemed to be
confident. The measures most proper for accom-
plifling both there dcfigns were concerted with
Columbus. Ditfcovery had been the folc objec of
the firlf voyage to the New World ; and' though,
ill the lccond, fettlemcnt had been propoled,

the
I'io o(f Columbus, c. 65. . lrcra, dec. . .ib, iii. c. lh

B30 0 K the precautions taken for that purpose had eitler

been insufficient, or were rendered ineffetaual by
1496. the mutinous spirit of the Spaniards, and the un-

foreseen calamities arising from various causes,.
Now a plan was to be formed of a regular colony,
that might serve as a model in all future eflablifh-
ments. Every particular was con:fidered with atten-
tion, and arranged with a fcrupuloQs accuracy.
The precise number of adventurers who should
be permitted to embark was fixed. They were to
be of different ranks and professions ; and the pro-
portion of each was eflablifhed, according to their
usefulness and wants of the colony. A suitable
number of women was to be chosen to accompany
these new settlers. As it was the first obje& to raise
provisions in a country where the scarcity of food
had been the occasion of so much didlrefs, a confi-
derable body of husbandmen was to be carried over.
As the Spaniards had then no conception of deri-
ving any benefit from those productions of the
New World which have fincc yielded such large
returns of wealth to Europe, but had formed mag-
nificent ideas, and entertained sanguine hopes with
refpe&c to the riches contained in the mines which
had been discovered, a band of workmen skilled in
the various arts employed in digging and refining
the precious metals, was provided. All these emi-
grants were to receive pay and fubfiftence'for some
years at the public expcnce -*
A defet in TI-HUS far the regulations were prudent and well

it. adapted to the end in view. But as it was forcfecn

that fewwollld engage voluntarily to fettle in a coul-
try, whose noxious climate had been fatal to so many
of their countrymcn, Columbus proposcd to transport
to Ilifpaniola such malcfactors as had been con-

vi6ictl
* In-ieriri, dec» r. lib. iii. c, 2.-

vi&ted of crimes, which, though capital, were of a B 0 K
less atrocious nature; and that for the future a cer- .
tain proportion of the offenders usually sent to the 1496.
i; allies, should be condemned to labour in the mines

w:hich were to be opened. This advice, given
v' without due refledion, was as inconsiderately adopt-
ed. The prisons of Spain were drained, in order to
collea members for the intended colony; and the
judges were infiruded to recruit it by their future
: fenences. It is not, however, with such materials,

that the foundations of a society, destined to be
permanent, should belaid. Industry, sobriety, pa.
tience, and mutual confidence are indispensably
rcquifite in an infant settlement, where purity of
morals mufft contribute more towards efablilhing
ordef than the operation or authority of laws. But
when such a mixture of what is corrupt is admitted
into the original constitution of the political body,
the vices of those unsound and incurable members
will probably insed the whole, and mudft certainly
he produtive of violent and unhappy effects. This
the Spaniards fatally experienced ; and the other
: European nations having successively imitated their
i: prafice in this particular, pernicious consequences
have followed in their settlements, which can be
' imiputed to no other cause .

iTHOUGH Columbus obtained, with great facili-
ty alnd dispatch, the royal approbation of every Executed'
miceatlure and regulation that he propoedl, his en-
itk;lvours to carry them into execution were so long
let;rtlced, as muff have tired out the patience of any
mallll, less acculf(omed to encounter difficulties and
t1I fIurmollnt themi. Thole delays were occasioncd
Partly by that tedious for!ality and spirit of pro-
ciftiiltio;n, with which the Spaniards condull

bufficfrs ;

Hctrrcr., dec. i. lib, ii. c. C. T.ouron Hilf. GCccr. de I'Amcri-
i", . p. 51.

0 K business ; and partly by the exhausted frate of the

treasury, which was drained by the expence of
1496. celebrating the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's

only son with Margaret of Austria, and that of
Joanna, their second daughter, with Philip arch-
duke of Aufiria t; but must be chiefly imputed to
the malicious arts of Columbus's enemies. Afto-
nifhcd at the reception which he met with upon
his return, and overawed by his presence, they
gave way, for some time, to a tide of favour too
strong for them to oppose. Their enmity, how-
ever, was too inveterate to remain long inacive,
They resumed their operations, and by the assisi-
ance of Fonseca, the minister for Indian affairs,
who was now promoted to the bishopric of Badajos,
they threw in so many obifacles to protratd the
preparations for Columbus's expedition, that a year
elapsed before he t could procure two flips to car-
ry over a part of the supplies destined for the colo-
ny, and almost two years were spent before the
finall squadron was equipped of which he himfclf
was to take the command §.

THIS squadron consistcd of fix ships only, of no

Third voy- great burden, and but indifferently provided for a
a;'e of Co- long or dangerous navigation. The voyage which

he now meditated was in a course different friom
any he had undertaken. As he was fully perfuad-
ed that the fertile regions of India lny to the south-
weft of those countries which he had discovered(
he proposed, as the loflt certain method of findin:
out theec, to stand diretlly south from the Canary
or Cape de Vcrd illands, until he caimc under the
equinoCti;;l line, and then to flretch to the wefl be-
fore the favour;)ble wind for fucli a course, which
May 0o. blows invariably between the tropics. With tlhiS

idra

I P. Martyr, epift. 16S. 1 LifcofCollnius,.c
. iclrrcla, dec. i. lili. iii. c. 9.

i idea he set fail, and touched first at the Canary, B 0 K

and then at the Cape de Verd islands. From the
former he dispatched three of his ships with a sup- 149s.
ply of provisions for the colony in Hispaniola: J"uy 4
with the other three, he continued his voyage to-
wards the south. No remarkable occurrence hap-
pened until they arrived within five degrees of the
line. There they were becalmed, and at the fame
time the heat waxed so excessive, that many of their J"lY 19-
wine casks burfi, the liquor in others toured, and
their provisions corrupted T. The Spaniards, who
had never ventured so far to the south, were afraid
that the ships would take fire, and began to appre-
hend the reality of what the ancients had taught
concerning the dertrucdive qualities of that torrid
region of the globe. They were relieved, in some
measure, from their fears by a seasonable fall of
rain. This, however, though so heavy and unin-
termitting that the men could hardly keep the deck,
did not greatly mitigate the intenseness of the heat.
The admiral, who with his usual vigilance had
directed every operation in person, from the begin-
inng of the voyage, was so much exhaufled by
fatigue and want of sleep, that it brought on a
violent fit of the gout, accompanied with a fever.
All these circumfiances constrained him to yield to
the importunities of his crew, and to alt'.r his
course to the north wefl, in order to reach fomne of
the Carribec islands, where he might refit, and be
fluppllid with provisions.

ON the first of Augufl-, the man flationed in the

rounld top surprised them with the joyful cry of 1, Co,' i-
LAND. They flood towards it, andi dil'covcrcd a ncnit of
colfietlcrable island, whlilch tile admir.i cill.l Alliri;l.
lriinidad, a niame it flill retains. It liKs on lic
\1OL. I. , S CO;it

P P. Maityr, Ilcc, p. 70.

B O O K coast of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco,

I_ _ This, though a river only of the third or fourth
1498. magnitude in the New World, far surpasses any of

the Itreams that water our hemisphere. It rolls
towards the ocean fich a vati body of water, and
rufles into it with such impetuous force, that
when it meets the tide, which on that coast rites
to an uncommon height, their collision occafionsa
swell and agitation of the waves no less surprising
than formidable. In this conflilt, the irresistible
torrent of the river so far prevails, that it freihens
the ocean many leagues with its flood $. Colum-
bus, before he could perceive the danger, was en-
tangled among those adverse currents and tempers
tuous waves, and it was with the utmost difficulty
that he escaped through a narrow firait, which ap-
peared so tremendous, that he called it La Boca del
Drago. As soon as the conftcrnation which this
occasioned permitted him to refle& upon the nature
of an appearance so extraordinary, he discerned in
it a fourceof comfort and hope. He justly conclud-
ed, that such a vast body of water as th;s river con-
tained, could not be supplied by any island, but
must flow through a country of immense extent,
and of consequence, that he was now arrived at
that continent which it had long been the objec of
his wishes to discover. Full of this idea, he tood to
the weft along the coast of those provinces which are
now known by the names of Paria and Cumana. He
landed in fivcral places, and had some intercourse
with the people, who resembled thofc of Hispaniola
in their appearance alnd manner of life. They wore,
as ornaments, finall plates of gold, and pearls of
considerable valtu, which they willingly exchanged
for European toys. They seemcd to poflefs a better

undcrftandiini
I Gumi ilIa Hifl. di I'Oicnoqutc, ton i. i, . 14,.

understanding, and greater courage, than the inha- B 00 K
bitants of the islands. The country produced four- t-.
lo footed animals of several kinds, as well as agreatva- 1498.

riety of fowls and fruits *. The admiral was fomuch
delighted with its beauty and fertility, that with
the warm enthufiafin of a discoverer, he imagined
it to be the paradise described in Scripture, which
the Almighty chose for the rcfidence of man, while
he retained innocence that rendered him worthy of
such a habitation t. Thus Columbus had the glo-
ry not only of discovering to mankind the existence
of New World, but made considerable progress
t t(wards a perfel- knowledge of it ; and was the
firit mn ln who conduded the Spaniards to that vast
continjnt which has been the chief feat of their
cip,:rc, and the source of their treasures in this
ou:'::'or of the globe. The ihattered condition of
;i; fh;p', Icarcity ofprovifions, his own infirmities,
.tocIher with the impatience of his crew, prevent-
ed him from pursuing his discoveries any farther,
an(l made it ncceflary to bear away for Hispaniola.
In his way thither he discovered the islands of Cu-
bg;ua and Margarita,.which afterwards became re-
r mukable for their pearl-fifhery. When he arrived Aug. 30.
at Hipaniola, he was wafted to an extreme degree
with fatigue and'licknefs; but found the affairs of
the colony in such a situation, as afforded him no
Iprofped- of enjoying that rcpofe of which he isood
f o much in need.

MANY revolutions had happened in that country St.ite of
during his ahlfcnce. His brother, the Adclantado, Hi'i'aniola

on his arri-

n colnfcqucnce of an advice which the admiral gave v'll tlwre
bcl(rc his departure, had removed the colony fiom
liliMlla to a more commodious flation, on the op-
Iotitc fide of the island, and laid the foundation of

S 2 St.

iHer-cia, dec. i. li. iii. c. 9. Io. I . Lifc oCColtiinlh,, c. 66

*3
" [, llcircran dec. i. lib. iii. c. z1. Gomara, c. 84.
SIc NOTI£ XXI.

B O O K St. Domingo *, which was long the mofi confider-

able European town in the New World, and the
49S. scat of the supreme courts in the Spanifli dominions

there. As loon as the Spaniards were established
in this new settlement, the adelantado, that they
minht neither languilh in inac5ivity, nor have leisure
to form n-w cabals, marched into those parts of the
ifiland which his brother had not yet visited or re-
duced to obedience. As the people were unable to
reriff, they fubnitted every where to the tribute
which he imposed. But they soon found the bur-
den to be £o intolerable, that, overawed as they
were by the superior power of their oppressors. they
took arms against them. Those infurreEtions,
however, were not formidable. A conflit with
timid and naked Indians was neither dangerous nor
of doubtful ifile.

M!lutinyof B1UT while the adelantado was employed againlt
Rold.an. them in the iield, a mutiny, of an aspet far more

alarming, broke out among the Spaniards. The
ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom Colum-
bus had placed in a station which required him to
be the guardian of order and tranquility in the co-
lony. A turbulent and inconsiderate ambition pre-
cinitated him into this desperate measure, so unbe-
coming his rank. The arguments which he em-
ployed to seduce his countrymen were frivolous and
ill-founded. iHe accuscd Columbus and histwo
brothers of arrogance and fevcrity; he pretended
that they aimed at cflabliiin an independent do-
ininion in the country ; he taxed themlwith an in-
tention of cutting off part of the Spanliards by hun-
ger aned fatigue, that they might more cafily reduce
the remainder to fubjctlion l he -cprefcnted it as

unwortlly
'I. (Il\arlyr, tlcc. p. 56.

unworthy of Castilians, to remain the tame and B O O K
passive slaves of three Genoese adventurers. As
men have always a propensity to impute the hard- 1498.
/hips of which they feel the preiTure, to the mif-
conduc of their rulers; as every nation views with
a jealous eye the power and exaltation of foreigners,
Roldan's insinuations made a deep imprcffion on his
countrymen. His character and rank added weight
to them. A considerable number of the Spaniards
made choice of him as their leader, and taking arms
against the adelantado and his brother, seized the
king's magazine of provisions, and endeavoured to
surprise the fort at St. Domingo. This was pre-
served by the vigilance and courage of Don Diego.
Columbus. The mutineers were obliged to retire
to the province of Xaragua, where they continued
not only to disclaim the adelantado's authority
themfclves, but excited the Indians to throw off the
yoke '.

SUCH was the diftratcd state of the colony when
Columbus landed at St. Domingo. He was aston-
ifhed to find that the three flips which he had dif-
patched from the Canaries were not yet arrived. By
the unfiilfulnefs of the pilots, and the violence of
currents, they had been carried an hundred and
sixty miles to the weft of St. Domingo, and forced
to take flelter in a harbour of the province of Xa-
ragua, where Roldan and his seditious followers
were cantoned. Roldan carefully concealed from
the commanders his inlfurreiion against the adclan-
tado, and employing his utmost' addrc's togain their
confidence, persuaded them to set on flore a conli-
(clrable part of the new settlers whom they
lIrought over, that they might proceed by land
lo St. Domingo. It required but few argu-

mellts

' tHcrrc i, (tr .

e. lil. iii. c. 5 -S. Life of Columbus, c. 74--77,
ch, a, .i c. 2 3. P. M;atyi, p. 78.

B O 0 K ments to prevail with those men to espouse his

cause. They were the refule of the jails of Spain,
149s. to whom idleness, licentiousness, and deeds of vio-

lence were familiar ; and they returned eagerly to
a course of life nearly resembling that to which
they had been accustomed. The commanders of
the Ihips perceiving, when it was too late, their
imprudence in disembarking so many of their men,
food away for St. Domingo, and got safe into the
port a few days after the admiral ; but their flock
of provisions was so wafted during a voyage of such
long continuance, that they brought little relief to
the colony a.

Comlofed BY this jun&ion with a band of such bold and
by t'e pu- desperate associates, Roldan became extremely for.
dent con-
dua of Co- midable, and no less extravagant in his demands,
lunibus. Columbus, though filled with resentment at his in-

gratitude, and highly exasperated by the insolence
of his followers, made no haste to take the field.
He trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flames
of a civil war, in which, whatever party prevailed,
the power and strength of both must be so much
wafted, as might encourage the common enemy to
unite and complete their deftlru'ion. At the fame
time, he obfcrved, that the prejudices and pafions
which incited the rebels to take arms, had so far in-
sected those who still adhered to him, that many of
them were adverse, and all cold to the fervicc.
From such fentillents, with rcfpcd to the public
intcrefc, as well as from this view of his own fitua-
tion, he chofr to ncgociate rather than to fight. By
a seasonable proclamation, offering free pardon to
such as should merit it by returning to their
duty, he made imprcflion upon some of the mal-

coltntts.
I-Icrrcr e, l . lib. ii. c. z. 1 ife of Cblumbui, c. 8 7879

malcontents. By engaging to grant such as should B o o K
desire it the liberty of returning to Spain, he allu- n'
red all those unfortunate adventurers, who, from 148.9
sickness and disappointment, were disgusted with
the country. By promising to re-eitablifh Rol-
dan in his former office, he soothed his pride; and
by complying with most of his demands in behalf
of his followers, he satisfied their avarice. Thus,
gradually and without bloodshed, but after many
tedious negociations, he dissolved this dangerous
combination which threatened the colony with
ruin; and restored the appearance of order, regu-
lar government, and tranquility .

IN consequence of this agreement with the mu- Anew mode

tineers, lands were allotted them in different of fettle-
parts of the island, and the Indians fettled in each mnt eta-

blillbed

diftric were appointed to cultivate a certain por-
tion of ground for the use of those new marfers.
The performance of this work was fubitituted in 1499.
place of the tribute formerly imposed : and how ne-
ccfltary soever such a regulation might be in afickly
and feeble colony, it introduced among the Spaniards
the REPARTIMIENTOS, or difiributions of Indians
tf:tblifllcd by them in all their fettlemnents, which
brought numberless calamities upon that unhappy
people, and fubjieded them to the most: grievous
oppreflion ::. This was not the only bad effet of
tlec infiliredion in Hilplaniola ; it prevented Co-
lumbus from proficiiting his dilfcoveries on the
coiltinent, as f'llf-prfcrvation obliged him to Ikep
"ner Ihis pcrlio l his brother the adcllantldo, and the
ftilors whom he intended to have employed in that
frvice. As fbon as his ast;irs would permith, he
tlit forle of Ilis fllips to Spaiii with a journal of the

voyage

lHerrcle, dcc. x. il. iii . i. I, 4.. I.ifc of Columibu c. So, &c.
I Itlc'r.j, sl:c. I. lilb. iii. c. 14, &;(c.

B O 0 K voyage which he had made, a description of the

new countries which he had discovered, a chart
1499- . of the coast along which he had failed, and fpeci.

mens of the gold, the pearls, and other curious or
valuable producions which he had acquired by
trafficking with the natives. At the fame time he
tranfinitted an account of the infurredion in His-
paniola; he accused the mutineers not only of
having thrown the colony into such violent con-
vulfions as threatened its diflolution, but of having
obftruted every attempt towards discovery and im-
provement, by their unprovoked rebellion against
their superiors, and proposed several regulations
for the better government of the island, as well
as the cxtintion of that mutinous spirit, which,
though suppressed at present, might soon burst out
with additional rage. Roldan and hisaffociatesdid
notneglet to convey to Spain, by the fame ihips,
an apology for their own condut, together with
their recriminations upon the admiral and his bro-
thers. Unfortunately for the honour of Spain,
and the happiness of Columbus, the latter gained
most credit in the court of Ferdinand and Ilabella,
and produced unexpeEted cffess 4.

hlle vonvae Bu'r, previous to thecr, events had happcned
ofV.ifcdlc which merit attention, both on account of their
Gama otthe own importance, and their conncaion with the
ty tl c c history of the New World.. VJhile Columbus wa;
oICoil elnl-acd in his fucceflive voyages to tile wcti, the

- ilirit of difcovcry did not languiih in Plortugal,
the kingdomi where it firfl acqutired vigour, and
lbccame cilterplriling. Self-conldclination and rc-
grlt were not lhe only fcltinclts to which tle fuc-
Cess of CtulliLlus, and rcflc1tion upon their owi

ilmlpru(dlcl
Ilcrea, (Ic. 1. lll. ill. C. 14. Belnzo . Hi- t, Nov. Orl). lib. 1.i

dence in rejecing his proposals, gave rife among B o O K
the Portugucfe. They excited a generous emula-
tion to surpass his performances, and an ardent de- 1499.
fire to make some reparation to their country for
their own error. With this view, Emmanuel, who
inherited the enterprising genius of his predecel'ors,
perfiRfed in their grand scheme of opening a passage
to the East Indies by the-Cape of Good Hope;
and soon after his acceffiQn to the throne, equipped
a squadron for that important voyage. He gave
the command of it to Vasco de Gama, a man of
noble birth, possessed of virtue, prudence, and
courage, equal to the flation. The squadron, like
all those fitted out for discovery in the infancy of
navigation, was extremely feeble, consisting only
of three veflls, of neither burden nor force ade-
quate to the service. As the Europeans were at
that time altogether unacquainted with the course
of the trade winds and periodical monsoons, which
render navigation in the Atlantic ocean, as well
as in the sea that separates Africa from India, at
some seasons easy, and at others not only dan-
gerous, but almost impracticable, the time chosen
for Gama's departure was the most improper du-
ring the whole year. He set fail from Libon on
the ninth of July, and flanding towards the south, 1 9
had to struggle for four months with contrary
winds, before lie could reach the Cape of Good
Hope. Here their violence began to abate; and

Nov,. zo.

during an interval of calm weather, (ama doubled
that formidable promontory, which hliad io long
been the boundary of navidgation, and dirctcd
his courle towards the no th-callt, along the African
coatr. He touched at fevcrlil ports ; ndl after va-
rious ;lvrntlltris, which the Io) uftllul:C/ hiloriallS
relate with high butr jtul- enccomiumilis upoln his c),n-
dudc and intrlepidcity, he c:lnle to anchor before the
city of Meilnda. TI hroughout all the vast coun-
tries which extend along the coalt of Africi,
V(O. I. T fri'o

B o O K from the river Senegal to the confines of Zangue,

bar, the Portuguese had found a race of men
1499. rude and uncultivated, strangers to letters, to

arts and commerce, and differing from the inha.
bitants of Europe no less in their features and com.
plexion, than in their manners and institutions.
As they advanced from this, they observed, to
their inexpressible joy, that the human form gra.
dually altered and improved, the Asiatic features
began to predominate, marks of civilization ap.
peared, letters were known, the Mahometan reli.
gion was eftablifled, and a commerce, far from be.
ing inconsiderable, was carried on. At that time
several veftels from India were in the port of Me-
linda. Gama now pursued his voyage with almost
absolute certainty of success, and, under the con.
duct of a Mahometan pilot, arrived at Calecut,up.
on the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-fecond of
May one thousand four hundred and ninety-eight,
What he beheld of the wealth, the populousness,
the cultivation, the industry and arts of this highly
civilized country, far surpassed any idea that he had
formed, from the imperfect accounts which the Eu-
ropeans had hitherto received of it. But as he
pofeffeed neither sufficient force to attempt a fettle-
ment, nor proper commodities with which hecould
carry on commerce of any consequence, he haften-
ed back to Portugal,with an account of his success
in performing a voyage the longest, as well as molt
difficult, that had ever been made since the sirs in-
vcntion of navigation. He landed at Lisbon oni
the fourteenth of September one thousand four
hundred and ninety-nine, two years, two months,
and five days, from the time he left that port 1'.

T FHu , dur ing the course of the fifteenth century,
kankind made greater progrcfs in exploring the ftslt

I Rlilnikfo, vol. I.. II), D.

of the habitable globe, than in all the ages which had B o0 K
elapsed previous to that period. The fpiritofdifco- _
very, feeble at first and cautious, moved within ave- 1499.
ry narrow sphere, and made its efforts with hefita-
tion and timidity. Encouraged by success, it became
adventurous, and boldly extended its operations. In
the course of its progression, it continued to acquire
vigour, and advanced at length with a rapidity and
force which burt through all the limits within
which ignorance and fear had hitherto circumfcrib-
ed the adivity of the human race. Almost fifty
years were employed by the Portuguese in creeping
along the coast of Africa from Cape Non to Cape
de Verd, the latter of which lies only twelve de-
grees to the south of the former. In less than thir-
ty years, they ventured beyond the equinoEtial line
into another hemisphere, and penetrated to the fou-
them extremity of Africa, at the distance of forty-
nine degrees from Cape de Verd. During the last
seven years, a New World was discovered in the
weft, not inferior in extent to all the parts of the
earth with which mankind were at that time ac-
quainted. In the east, unknown seas and countries
were found out, and a communication, long defir-
ed,but hitherto concealed, was opened between Eu-
rope and the opulent regions of India. In compa-
rifon with events so wonderful and unexpected,
all that had hitherto been deemed great or splendid,
faded away and difappcared. Vait objecs now
presented thcmfelves. The human mind, rouzed
and interflted by the profpcd, engaged with ardour
in purlilit of them, and exerted its ative powers
in a new direetion.

THIS spirit of cntcrprifc, though but newly Difcoveriea
awakened in Spain, began soon to operate ex- a""'ied o" in

Spain by pii-

tenfively. All the attempts towards discovery vate advell-
acde in that kingdom, had hitherto been carried turcrs

T2 on

B O O K on by Columbus alone, and at the expenceofthe

,1 ifovcrcign. But now private adventurers, allured
49s-' by the magnificent descriptions he gave of the re-

(icns lwhich he had visited, as well as by the fpeci-
iens of their wealth which he produced, offered to
fit out squadrons at their own risk, and to goin
quest of new countries. The Spanifi court, whose
scanty revenues were exhausted by the charge ofits
expeditions to the New World, which, tiluugh they
opened vast profpe&s of future beneit, yieldeda
very sparing return of present profit, was extremely
willing to devolve the burden of discovery upon its
fubjecs. It seized with joy an opportunity of ren-
dering the avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of pro-
jeaors, inirurmental in promoting designs of cer-
tain advantage to the public, though of doubtful

te success with refpet to themselves. One of thefirft
ji[tofthcfe. propositions of this kind was made by Alonfo de

Ojeda, a gallant and active officer, who had accom-
panied Columbus in his second voyage. His rank
and charaJcer procured him such credit with the
merchants of Seville, that they undertook to equip
four ships, provided he could obtain the royal licence,
authoriling; the voyage. The powerful patronage
of the biflhop of l3adajos caily securcd success in a
finit so agreeable to the court. WXithout consulting
Coluniablis, or rearding the rights and jurifdiaionl
which lie had acquired by the capitulation in one
thoufl.nd four Ihundred and ninety-two, Ojeda was
permitted to eIt out for the New World. In or-
der to d(ircd-t his cotirle, the hifllop communlicated
to him tihe adnir;ll's journal of his last voyage,
and his charts of the countries which he had dlif
,iy covered ()j' d: flrtilck out into n1o new path of na-

vigation, but adihring fcrvilcly to the route which
Colunibus h:',d tkcen, arrived on the coast of Paria.
IIe traded wilh tlhe natives, and fianding to thle
weft, plrocc(led as far as Cape de Vcla, all"

ralnged

ranged along a coofiderable extent of the coast be- B 0 0 K
yond that on which Columbus had touched. Hav- 1
ing thus ascertained the opinion of Columbus, that 1499.
this country was a part of the continent, Ojeda
returned by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some
reputation as a discoverer, but with little benefit to
those who had raised the funds for the expedi-
tion. t

AMERIGO VESPUCCI, a Florentine gentleman, Is accompa-

nied by

accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what tfa- Amerigo
tion he served, is uncertain ; but as he was an ex- Vespucci.
perienced sailor, and eminently skilful in all the
fcienccs subservient to navigation, he seems to have
acquired such authority among his companions,
that they willingly allowed him to have a chief
fharc in direating their operations during the voy-
age. Soon after his return, he transmitted an ac-
count of his adventures and discoveries to one of
his countrymen ;- and labouring with the vanity of
a traveller to magnify his own exploits, he had the
addrcfs and confidence to frame his narrative, so as
to make it appear that he had the glor of having first
discovered the continent in the New World. Ame-
rigo's account was drawn up not only with art, but
with some elegance. It contained an amusing his-
tory of his voyagc, and judicious observations upon
the natural produclions, the inhabitants, and the
customs of the countrieswhich he had visited. As it
was the firfi dfcreiption of any part of the New
World that was publificd, a performance so well
calculated to gratify the paflion of mankind for
wl;at is new and marvellous, circulated rapidly,
inil was read with admiration. The country of
which Anmrigo was fluppl)fd to be the discoverer,
camne gradually to be called by his name. The From whom

the name of

caprice of mankind, often as unaccountable as lutn-
jult, has erplrpcttlted this error. By the univerfll given to the

consent NCw World.

. II 'crrC; , (1 li. llb .

i . .
I. 2 3.

B 0 0 K content of nations, AMERICA is the name bes.

towed on this new quarter of the globe. The bold
a499. pretensions of a fortunate impostor have robbed the

discoverer of the New World of a diftindion which
belonged to him. The name of Amerigo has sup.
planted that of Columbus ; and mankind may re.
gret an at of injustice, which, having received the
sanction of time, it is now too late to redress t.

DURING the fame year, another voyage of disco.

AlonfoNi very was undertaken. Columbus not only intro-
-o. duced the spirit of naval enterprise into Spain, but

all the first adventurers who distinguished themselves
in this new career, were formed by his inftrud-ions,
and acquired in his voyages the skill and informati-
on which qualified them to imitate his example.
Alonfo Nigno, who had served under the admiral
in his last expedition, fitted out, in conjun ion
with Christopher Guerra, a merchant of Seville, a
tingle flip, and failed to the coast of Paria. This
voyage seems to have been condu&ed with greater
attention to private emolument, than to any general
or national object. Nigno and Guerra made no
discoveries of any importance; but they brought
home such a return of gold and pearls, as inflamed
their countrymen with the desire of engaging in
similar adventures ::.

SOON after, Vincent Yancz Pinzon, one of the

i5eo. admiral's companions in his firlt voyage, failed from

Jaf"vi3.nY Palos with four flips. He stood boldly towards
Of Vincent
Yanez Pin- the south, and was the firfl Spaniard who ventured
*zo\J to cross the equinodial line; but he seems to

have landed on no part of the coafl beyond the
mouth of the Maragnon, or river of the Amazons.

All
t Sec NOTE XXII.

P'. Martyr, dec. p. 87. Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 5.

All these navigators adapted the erroneous theory B o K
of Columbus, and believed that the countries
which they had discovered were part of the vast 1oo.
contineilnt of India i.

DURING this first year of the sixteenth century, The Port.-
that fertile diflrid of America, on the confines of gufe disco-

ver BrasL

which Pinzon had ifopt short, was more fully dif-
covered. The successful voyage of Gama to the
East Indies, having encouraged the king of Portu-
gal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not only to
carry on trade, but to attempt conquest, he gave
the command of it to Pedro Alvarez Cabral. In
order to avoid the coast of Africa, where he was
certain of meeting with variable breezes, or fre-
quent calms, to retard his voyage, Cabral stood
,ut to fca, and kept so far to the weft, that, to his
surprise, he found himself upon the shore of an
unknown country, in the tenth degree beyond the
line. He imagined, at first, that it was some island
in the Atlantic ocean hitherto unobserved; but,
proceeding along its coast for several days, he was
led gradually to believe, that a country so exten-
five formed a part of some great continent. This
j:tter opinion was well founded. The country
with wiich he fell in belongs to that province in
South America now known by the name of Brasil.
Hie landed ; and having formed a very high idea of
the fertility of the foil, and agreeableneis of the
clilate, lie took polleflionl of it for the crown of
Portlugl, and dispatchcd a fl(ip to Lisbon with an
nccoiullt of this event, which appeared to be no less
imlortant than it was unexpected ::. Collumbus's
dilcovlry of the New World was the cfi-ort of an
a*iCive genius, ienlightened by fcicncc, guided by cx-
peiicnce, and adting uponl a regular plan, exccuted

with

'I lirrrt., 'dec. I. lilb. iv. c . i P. Martyr, dec. p. 95.
\ liracri.t, dc. 1 . lib. iv. c. 7.

B O O K with no less courage than perseverance. But from

I__ .this adventure of the Portuguese, it appears that
c150. chance might have accomplished that great design,

which it is now the pride of human reason to have
formed and perfected. If the sagacity of Colum-
bus had not conducted mankind to America, Ca-
bral, by a fortunate accident, might have led them,
a few years later, to the knowle(!ge of that exten.
five continent *.

Machinati- WHILE the Spaniards and the Portuguese, by
nlubaitus those successive voyages, were daily acquiring more

enlarged ideas of the extent and opulence of that
quarter of the globe which Columbus had made
known to them, he hilnfelf, far from enjoying the
tranquility and honours with which his services
should have been recompenfed, was firuggling with
every dirfrefs in which the envy and malevolence of
the people under his command, or the ingratitude
of the court which he servcd, could involve him,
Though the pacification with Roldan broke the
union and weakened the force of the mutineers, it
did not extirpate the feeds of discord out of the if-
land. Several of the malcontents continued in
arms, refuting to submit to the admiral. He and
his brothers were obliged to take the field alternate-
ly, in order to check their incursions, or to punish
their crimes. The perpetual occupation and dif
quiet which this created, prevented him from giv-
ing due attention to the dangerous machinations of
his enemies in the court of Spain. A good num-
ber of those who were most diliatisfied with his ad-
minifrationi, hadl embraced the opportunity of re-
turning to Luropc with the flips which he dispatch-
cd from St. I)oiniIgo. '(e final d(ifapl)poilltrnent of
all their hopes inflamed the rane ofthclc unirfoltulte

adventurers

, l-lerr',cr I,
d c. , lib. nii. c. .

adventurers against Columbus to the utmost pitch. B 0 0 K
Their poverty and dirfrefs, by exciting compaftion, -..
rendered their accusations credible, and their co-

o5cr

plaints interesting. They teazed Ferdinand and If-
abella incessantly with memorials, containing the
detail of their own grievances, and the articles of
- their charge against Columbus. Whenever either

the king or queen appeared in public, they fur-
rounded them in a tumultuary manner, insisting
with importunate clamours for payment of the ar-
rears due to them, and demanding vengeance upon
the author of their sufferings, They insulted the
admiral's sons wherever they met them, reproach-
ing them as the offspring of the projetor, whose
fatal curiosity had discovered those pernicious re-
gions which drained Spain of its wealth, and would
prove the grave of its people. Those avowed en-
deavours of the malcontents from America to ruin
· Columbus, were seconded by the secret, but more

d. dangerous insinuations of that party among the
; courtiers. who had always thwarted his schemes,

and envied his success and credit *.

FERDINAND was disposed to liftcn, not only with Their in-
a willing, but with a partial ear, to these accufati- F(rdii
ons. Notwithstanding the flattering accounts which and Ifabhjl
Columbus had given of the riches of America, the
remittances from it had hitherto been so scanty,
that they fell far fiort of defraying the expence of
: the armaments fitted out. The glory of the disco-

very, together with the profpe& of remotc coirlmer-
cial advantages, was all that Spain had yet recceved
in returni for the efforts which flhe had mnad. But
tinme had already diminiflcd the firfl- cnf.itions of
joy which the discovery of a New World occ::fion-
il, and fame alone was not an olbjtc' to falisfy tlh
VOL. I. U cold

Life of Colun'.ios, c. 5.

B o o K cold intercfted mind of Ferdinand. The nature'of

. comnmerce was then so little understood, that,vwhere
50. immediate gain was not acquired, the hope of dif.

tant benefit, or of low and moderate returns, was
totally disregarded. Ferdinand confidered Spiin,
on this account, as a loser by the cnterprife of Co-
lumbus, and imputed it to his mifconduit and in-
capacity for government, that a country abounding
in gold had yielded nothing of value to its conqle.
rors. Even Isabella, who, from the favourable
opinion which fie entertained of Columbus, had
uniformly protcaced him, was shaken at length by
the number and boldneis of his accusers, and becgn
to fulfect that a cifaffeAion so general mufl have
been occasioned by real grievances, which called for
re.drel. The bishop of Badajos, with his ufuala.
nimofiry acainft Columbus, encouraged therelfu'
picions, and ccnfi:-med them.

Fatal cesSes As soon as the queen began to give way tothe
ro this. torrent of carlnrny, a refo!ltion fatal to Coilumbni

wa'; taken. Francis de Bovadilla, a knight ofCL
latrala, was appointed to repair to I-ifp:!ni(lawith
full powers to inquitre into the condu(i of Coluin
bus, and if he found the charge of mal-acdniflirati
on provced, to ftip(rfctdc him, and alufme the go'
vernmcnt of tle island. It was inipofbiblc.to efcapF
condcl(:in:aio;, when this prpclil-crous conin:iflioc
md:!de it the inlltereft of the judge to firld 1th p1erll
.whom lve was lent to tlry, guiilty. Though C0lunl.
bus liad now coinpolfd all the di fie ntions in tlle if
land ; tlhouih he1 liad brought l)oth Splaniards a
indians to fublmit peaceabl y to his go/vcelr1lelt;
theiio;li he hlad Il:de 1(uch efflCinual )provilfionll
vrorkiln: the mine', and cultivating the collntr
at4 woulll ih:ive eculred a conlli:rablell C r:ovclic to thi
kin.9 , :.'; well as :.;'r-c profits: to individuals, ]0"va'
dill;l, wvithlut di.i ning to attend to the nat'ure0

_j s(iltll

nerit of those services, discovered, from the mo- 'B CO K
nent that he landed in Hispaniola, a determined
turpofe of treating him as a criminal. He took s50oo.
ofreffion of the admiral's house in St. Domingo,
rom which he happened at that time to he absent,
nd seized his effeiós, as if he had been already con-
lided ; he rendered himself mailer of the fort and
js the king's fiores by violence ; he required al.
Ier'ons to acknowledge him as supreme governor i
e set at liberty the prisoners confined by the adm;i-
airal, and summoned him to appear before his trl-
lunal, in order to answer for his conduct; tranfinit-
ir to him, together with the summons, a copy of
e royal mandate, by which Columbus was en-
ined to yield implicit obedience to his commands.

I COLUMBUS, though deeply affected with the in- Columbus
gratitude and injustice of Ferdinand and Isabella, chains to
did not heftrate a moment about his own conduct. Spain.
e submitted to the will of his sovereigns with a
}etpedeful silence, and repaired direcly to the court
ifthat violent and partial judge whom they had au-
ihorifed to try him. Bovadilla, without admitting

m into his pretence, ordered him instantly to be
rrefted, to be loaded with chains, and hurried on
poard a ship. Even under this -huiimiliating reverse Otober.
f fortune, the firmncfs of mind which diftinguifhl-
is the charater of Columbus, did not forsake him.
0onfcious of his own integrity, and solacing him-
ls with reflecing upon the great things which he
d atchicvcd, he endured this insult offered to
is charadter, not only with compofiue, but
ith dignity. Nor had he the consolation of sym-
tlly to mitigate his sufferings. Bovadilla had
ready rendered himfclf so extremely popular, by
ranting various immunities to the colony, by
beral donations of Indians to all who applied.

1] 2 for-

B O O K for them, and by relaxing the reins of discipline and

II. government, that the Spaniards, who were mostly
"500. adventurers, whom their indigence or crimes had

impelled to abandon their native country, expressed
the most indecent fatisfation with the disgrace and
imprifonmentof Columbus. They flattered them-
selves, that now they should enjoy an uncontrouled
liberty, more suitable to their disposition and for-
mer habits of life. Among persons thus prepared
to censure the proceedings, and to asperse the cha-
rader of Columbus, Bovadilla colleted materials
for a charge against him. All accusations, the mol
improbable as well as inconliftent, were received,
No informer, however infamous, was rejected. The
result of this inquest, no less indecent than partial,
he transmitted to Spain. At the fame time, he or-
dered Columbus, with his two brothers, to be car-
ried thither in fetters ; and, adding cruelty to'infult,
he confined them in different fllips, and excluded
them from the comfort of that friendly intercourse
which might have toothed their common difrefs.
But while the Spaniards in Hispaniola viewed the
arbitrary and insolent proceedings of Bovadillawith
a general approbation, which reflecs difhonourup-
on their name and country, one man still retained
the memory of the great actions which Columbus
had performed, and was touched with the senti-
mcnts of veneration and pity due to his rank, his
age, and his merit. Alonfo de Vallejo, the captain
of the vclfcl on board which the admiral was con-
fined, as soon 'as he was clear of the island, al'
proached his priloner with great reipcd, a"d
offered to rclcafc him from the fetters with which
he was unjuilly loaded. " No," replied Coluinm
bus, with a generous indignation, "' I wcar thlle
jrolls in colllcq(ltlce of an order from my foveil.igls'
I''hey flall finld me as obedient to this ias tetlc"
other illnj ui iolls. lIy their command I h:'"v

- *' bbe

been confined, and their command alone ihall set B O O K
me at liberty t."

1500.
FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was ex- Nov. 23-

Set at liber-

tremely short. As soon as Ferdinand and Isabella ty, but de-
were informed that Columbus was brought home a prived of all
prisoner, and in chains, they perceived at once what authority.
universal astonishment this event muff occasion, and
what an impression to their disadvantage it must
make. All Europe, they foresaw, would be filled
with indignation at this ungenerous requital of a
man who had performed actions worthy of the high-
eft recompence, and would exclaim against the in-
justice of the nation, to which he had been such an
eminent benefactor, as well as against the ingrati-
tude of the princes whose reign he had rendered
illuitrious. Ashamed of their own conduct, and
eager not only to make some reparation for this in-
jury, but to efface the stain which it might fix up-
on their charaCter, they instantly issued orders to
set Columbus at liberty, invited him to court, and Dec. 17.
remitted money to enable him to appear there in
a manner suitable to his rank. When he entered
the royal presence, Columbus threw himself at the
feet of his sovereigns. He remained for some
time silent; the various passions which agitated his
mind suppressing his power of utterance, At length
he recovered himself, and vindicated his condu& in
a long discourse, producing the most satisfying
proofs of his own integrity as well as good intenti-
on, and'evidence, no less clear, of the malevolence
of his enemies, who, not satisfied with having
ruined his fortune, laboured to deprive him of what
alone ras now left, his honour and his fame. Fcr-
diiand received him with decent civility, and Ifa-
bela with tcndcrnefs and refpel. Thcy both ex-

prffced

'I Iils of Colnnlhl;, c. 36. I Irercen , dcc. i, . . iv. c. ..--II,
[;mrdn. i lld
i . 3i,3. Oviedal, lib. iii. c. 6.

B O K pressed their sorrow for what had happened, difa.

vowed their knowledge of it, and joined in pro-
i5o0. mifing him protecion and future favour. But'

though they instantly degraded Boyadilla, in order
to remove from themselves any suspicion ofhaving,
authorised his violent proceedings, they did not'
reitore to Columbus his jurifdiition and privileges
as viceroy of those countries which he had discover-
ed. Though. willing to appear the avengers of
Columbus's wrongs; that' illiberal jealousy which
prompted them to invest Bovadillf with such' au-
thority as put it in his power to treat the admiral
with indignity, flil fubfifled. They were afraid to
trust a man to whom they were so highly indebted,
and retaining him at court under various pretexts,.
they appointed Nicholas de Ovando, a knight of
the military order of Alcantara, governor. of His-
paniola i.

COLUMBUS was deeply affe&ed with this new in-

jury, which came from hands that seemed to be
employed in making reparation for his pall susser-
ings. The sensibility with whichl great minds feel
every thing that implies any suspicion of their inte-
grity, or that wears the aspect of an affront,. is ex-
quifite. Columbus had experienced both from the
Spaniards.; and their ungenerous condut exafpe-
rated him to such a degree, that he could no longer
conceal the sentiments which it excited. Wherever
he went, he carried'about with him, as a memorial
of their ingratitude, those fetters with which he had
been loaded. They were conitantly hung up in his
chamber, and he gave orders that when he died
they should be buried in his grave t.

MEANWHILE,

t Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. xo.---.. Life of Columbus, c. 97.
t Life of Columbus, c. 86. p. 577.

MEANWHILE,, the spirit of discovery,: notwitl- B .0 0 K

itanding the fevere'check which it received' by thie -
ungenerous treatment of the man. who first excited 1501.
it in Spain, continued a&cive and ,viorou. Rode- oefs of

-h ~.....Rodedifcovery.

rigo di Baftidas, a erfon ofdiffin&idon,. fitted but
two ships in co-partnery with .6hn- de Ia Cosa, January.
who having served under the adni:al-in- ttwo of his
voyages, was deemed the mo fktil1ful pilpt in Sp:i-n.
They steered direaly -towaras the continent, arriv-
ed on the coafeof:Paria, ..andproceeding to the
weft, discovered all the' coast of the. province now
known by the na.ne of Terra Firma, from Cpe de
Vela to the gulfof'Darien. Not: long after'Ojeda,
with his former associate, Amnerigo Vespucci, set
out upon a second voyage, and being unacquainted
with the destination of Batidas, held the fame
course, and touched at the fame places. The
voyage of Baftidas was profperousand lucrative,
that of Ojeda unfortunate. But both tended to in-
crease the ardour of discovery ; for in proportion
as the Spaniards acquired a more extensive know-
led;le of the American continent, their idea of its
opulence and fertility increased ,
.

BEFORE these adventurers returned from their Ovando ap-
voyages, a ,fleet was equipped, at the public.ex- pointed go-

vernor of

pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new go- Hifpanioa.
vernor, to Hispaniola. His presence there was ex-
tremely requisite, in order to flop the'inconfiderate
career of Bovadilla, whose imprudent adminifira-
tion threatened the settlement with ruin. Con-
fcious of the violence and iniquity of his proceed-
ings against Columbus, he continued to make it
his role objec to gain the favour and flipport of his.
countrynen, by accommodating himself to tleir

.pa fidns
He-rrcra, dec. x. lib. iv.c. Ii.

B o0 K paflions and prejudices. With this view, he eita-

bliihed regulations, in every point the reverse of
o150. those which Columbus deemed efTential to the pro.

fperity of the colony. Inflead of the severe difci-
pline, neceflary in order to habituate the dissolute
and corrupted members of which the society was
composed, to the restraints of law and fubordinati-
on, he suffered them to enjoy such uncontrouled
licence, as encouraged the wildest excesses. In-
flead of proteding the Indians, he gave a legal
fancrion to the oppression of that unhappy people,
He took the exact number of such as survived their
past calamities, divided them into diftinc classes,
distributed them in property among his adherents,
and reduced the whole island to a fiate of complete
servitude. As the avarice of the Spaniards was too
rapacious and impatient to try any method of ac-
quiring wealth but that of searching for gold' this
servitude became as grievous as it was unjust.
The Indians were driven in crowds to the moun-
tains, and compelled to work in the mines by maf-
ters, who imposed their talks without mercy ordif-
cretion. Labour, so disproportioned to their
strength and former habits of life, wafted that feeble
race of men, with such rapid conlumption, as nmut
have soon terminated in the utter extinction of the
ancient inhabitahts of the island :[.

TFIE necefity of applying a fpcedy remedy to

liNr',ta-.- those disorders, hastened Ovando's departure. He
bliild. lhad the command of the most refIpcablc armament

hitherto fitted out for the New World. It conifted
of thirty-two fllips, on board of which two thoulaill
five hundred persons emblarked, with an inltclltioll
of fttlilng ill the country. Upon th,:: arrival of thl
new goverlnor with this powerfuil reinllforcemenIct to

tlhe

ltlreCra, (Ice . i. ilv. Ci . ¢. i i, &c. (3vi.'!o Ilifl, . iii c- 6.
.' 97. )lI:nzoi. I lifl. lib. i. c. ,1. i. 51.

the colony, Bovadilla resigned his charge, and was B 0 0 K.
commanded to return infrantly to Spain, in order to
answer for his condud. Roldan, and the other J502.
ringleaders of the mutineers who had been most
active in opposing Columbus, were required to
leave the island at the fame time. A proclamation
was issued, declaring the natives to be free fubjets
of Spain, of whom no service was to be exated
contrary to their own inclination, and without pay-
ing them an adequate price for their labour. With
refpet to the Spaniards themselves, various regula-
tions were made, tending to suppress the licentious
spirit which had been so fatal to the colony, and to
establish that reverence for law and order on which
society is founded, and to which it is indebted for
its increase and stability. In order to limit the ex-
orbitant gain which private persons were supposed
to make by working the mines, an ordinance was
published, directing all the gold to be brought to a
public fmelting-houfe, and declaring one half of it
to be the property of the crown. §.

WHILE these tfeps were taking for securing the The d;fa
tranquility and welfare of the Colony which Co- greale h-

tu.ition of

lumbus had planted, he himself was engaged in the Columblls.
unpleasant employment of soliciting the favour of
an ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding all his
merit and services, he solicited in vain. He demand-
ed, in terms of the original capitulation in one
thousand four hundred and ninety-two, to be rein-
flated in his office of viceroy over the countries
which he had discovered. By a strange fatality, the
circumiflance which he urged in fipport of his
claim,il determined a jealous monarch to reje~t it.
1'he greatness of his dilcoveries, and the profl)edt
VOL. I. X of

§ t lorzano Politica Indiana. lib. I, c< it. IIcrrer;a, dIc. 1. lit. iv.
*t. i,,

B o o K of their increasing value, made Ferdinand confider

' the conceflions in the capitulation as extravagant
J102. and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting a sub.

jeCt with the exercise of a jurisdiction that now ap-
peared to be so extremely extensive, and might grow
to be no less formidable. He inspired Isabella with
the fame fuifpicions; and under' various pretexts,
equally frivolous and unjust, they eluded all Co-
lumbus's requisitions to perform that which a
solemn treaty bound them to accomplish. After
attending the court of Spain for near two years, as
an humble suitor, he found it impossible to remove
Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and per.
ceived, at length, that he laboured in vain, when he
urged a claim ofjuftice or merit with an interested
and unfeeling prince.

He forms BUT even this ungenerous return did not dif-
new fchcmes courage him from pursuing the great object which
otdiicovery. .fir called forth his inventive genius, and excited

him to attempt discovery. To open a new passage
to the Eaff Indies was his original and favourite
fchemc. This frill engrocfld his thoughts; and
either from his own observations in his voyage to
Paria, or from Come obscure hint of the natives, or
from the accounts given by Baftidas and de la Cosa,
of their expedition, he conceived an opinion that,
beyond the continent of America, there was a fce
which extended to the Eait Indies, and hoped to
find fonm fitait or narrow neck of land, by which a
communication might be opened with it and the
part of the ocean already known. By a very fortun-
ate conjci llre, he fuppotcd this firait or iflhinus
to be fituatt'd near the gulph of Darien. Full of
this idea, though he was now of an advanic0t
:ag,, wo rn out with fatigue, and broken with
iniirmiitiit, hle oflrcd, with the alacrity of a

youthful

youthful adventurer, to undertake a voyage which B o o'K
would ascertain this important point, and perfect I
the grand scheme which from the beginning he ,
proposed to accomplish. Several circumstances
concurred in disposing Ferdinand and Isabella to
lend a favourable ear to this proposal. They were
glad to have the pretext of any honourable employ-
ment for removing from court a man with whose
demands they deemed it impolitic to comply, and
whose services it was indecent to neglec&. Though
unwilling to reward Columbus, they were not in-
sensible of his merit, and from their experience of
his skill and conduct, had reason to give credit to
his conjectures, and to confide in his success. To
there considerations, a third must be added of still
more powerful influence. About this time the Por-
tuguefe fleet, under Cabral, arrived from the In-
dies; and, by the richness of its cargo, gave the
people of Europe a more perfect idea, than they
had hitherto been able to form, of the opulence and
fertility of the east. The Portuguese had been more
fortunate in their discoveries than the Spaniards.
They had opened a communication with countries
where industry, arts, and eldgance flourished; and
where commerce had been longer established, and
carried to greater extent than in any region of the
earth. Their firit voyages thither yielded imme-
diate, as well as vail returns of profit, in commo-
dities extremely precious and in great request. Lif-
bon became immediately the feat of commerce and
of wealth ;while Spain had only the expedation
of remote benefit, and of future gain, from the
wcflcrn world. Nothing, then, could be more
acceptable to the Spaniards than Columbus's offer
to condua them to the ear-, by a route which he
expedted to be shorter, as well as lets dangerous,
than that which the Portuguese had takan. Even

X Fcrdinandl

B 0 0 K Ferdinand, was routed by such a profpet, and

w armly approved of the undertaking.

1502.

His fourth BUT, interesting as the objet of this voyage was
voylge to the nation, Columbus could procure only four

finall barks, the largcft of which did not exceed
seventy tons in burden, for performing it. Accuf-
tomed to brave danger, and to engage in arduous
undertakings with inadequate force, he did not he-
fitate to accept the command of this pitiful fqua-
dron. His brother Bartholomew, and his second
son Ferdinand, the historian of his acions, accom-
panied him. He failed from Cadiz on the ninth
of May, and touched, as usual, at the Canary If-
lands; fiom thence he purposed to have Rfood di-
redly for the continent; but his largest vessel was
so clumsy and unfit for service, as conffrained him
to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of exchanging
her for some ship of the fleet that had carried over
Junc 29, Ovando. When he arrived off St. Domingo, he

found eighteen of these flips ready loaded, and on
the point of departing for Spain. Columbus im-
mediately acquainted the governor with the defli-
nation of his voyage, and the accident which had
obliged him to alter his route. He requefled per-
mifion to enter the harbour, not only that he
might negoeiate the exchange of his ship, but that
he might take flcltcr during a violent hurricane, of
which he discerned the approach from variousprog-
noftics, which his experience and sagacity had
taught him to obfervc. On that account, he ad-
vilcd him likewifl to put of for some days the de-
parture of the fleet bound for Spain. But Ovando
refuted his requef-, and dcfrpifcd his counflcl. Under
circumnftances in which humanity would have as-
fordld refuge to a flrangcr, Columbus was denied

admittance

admittance into a country of which he had disco- B o0 K
vered the existence, and acquired the possession.
His salutary warning, which might have been at- 5o.
tended to without any inconveniency, was regarded
as the dream of a visionary prophet, who arrogantly
pretended to predict an event beyond the reach of
human foresight. The fleet set fail for Spain. Next
night the hurricane came on with dreadful impetu-
ofity. Columbus, aware of the danger, took pre-
cautions against it,, and saved his little squadron.
The fleet destined for Spain met with the fate
which the raffnefs and obfiinacy of its commanders
merited. Of eighteen ships two or three only es-
caped. In this general wreck perished Bovadilla,
Roldan, and the greater part of those who had been
the most ative in persecuting Columbus, and op-
pressing the Indians. Together with themselves,
all the wealth which they had acquired by their in-
justice and cruelty was swallowed up. It exceeded
in value two hundred thousand PESO'S; an im-
mense fum at that period, and sufficient not only to
have screened them from any severe scrutiny into
their condudt, but to have secured them a gracious
reception in the Spanish court. Among the ihips
that escaped, one had on board all the effects of Co-
lumbus which had been recovered from the wreck
of his fortune. Historians, struck with the exact
discrimination of charatcrs, as well as the just dif-
tribution of rewards and punifllments, conspicuous
inl those events, universally attribute them to an
ilmmediate interposition of divine Providence, in or-
der to avenge the wrongs of an injured man, and to
punifl the opprcflbrs of an innocent people. Upon
the ignorant'anld fuplel'rftitious race of men, who
were witneffis of this occurrence, it made a differ-
cit imlprcflion. From an opinion, which vulgar ad-
mlir.tion is apt to entertain with rell)ect to persons
vlhlp have difinguillicd thcmhelvcs by their iagacity

and

B 0 0 K and inventions, they believed Columbus to be pof.

sessed of supernatural powers, and imagined that he
5son. had conjured up this dreadful storm by magical

art, and incantations, in order to be revenged
his enemies '.

JuIvy 4. COLUMBUS soon left Hispaniola, where he had

Searhes in
va· for a met with such an inhospitable reception, and Rood
pafTg- to towards the continent. After a tedious and dan.
the Indian

vyg
O~cUan lgerous voyage, he discovered Guanaia, an ifiand

not far distant from the coast of Honduras. There
he had an interview with some inhabitants of the
continent, who arrived in a large canoe. They
appeared to be a people more civilized, and who
had made greater progress in the knowledge of use.
ful arts, than any whom he had hitherto discovered,
In return to the inquiries which the Spaniards
made, with their usual eagerness, concerningthe
places where they got the gold which they wore by
way of ornament, they directed them to countries
situated to the weft, in which, according to their
description, gold was found in such profuiion, that
it was applied to the most common uses. Initead
of freering in quest of a country so inviting, which
would have conducted them along the coast of Yu-
catan to the rich empire of Mexico, Columbus was
so bent upon his favourite scheme of finding out
that strait which communicated with the Indian
ocean, that he bore away to the east towards the
gulf of Darien. In this navigation he discovered
all the coast of the continent, from Cape Gracias
a Dios, to a harbour which, on account of its
beauty and security, he called Porto B1llo.
He searched, in vain, for the imaginary trait,
through which he expccted to make his way
into an unknown sea ; and thougll he went ol1
shore several times, and advanced into the country,

lie

Ovicldo, ll). iii. c. 7, 9 -. Hcrreri, dec. i. lib. v. c- ', 3
Life of Columbu;, c. 88.

he did not penetrate so far as to cross the narrow B 0 0 K
isthmus which separates the gulf of Mexico from the -
great southern ocean. He was so much delighted, 50z
however, with the fertility of the country, and con-
ceived such an idea of its wealth, from the fpeci-
mens of gold produced by the natives, that he re-
solved to leave a small colony upon the river Belem,
in the province of Veragua, under the command of
his brother, and to return himself to Spain, in or- 150o.
der to procure what was requisite for rendering the
establishment permanent. But the ungovernable
spirit of the people under his command, deprived
Columbus of the glory of planting the first colony
on the continent of America. Their insolence and
rapaciousness provoked the natives to takearms,
and as they were a more hardy and warlike race of
men than the inhabitants of the islands, they cut off
part of the Spaniards, and obliged the r.ft to aban-
don a station which they were unable to maintain*.

THIS repulse, the first that the Spaniards metwith Shipwreck-
fromanyof the American nations, was not the only ed on th
misfortune that besel Columbus; it was followed maica.
by a succession of all the disasters to which navi-
gation is exposcd. Furious hurricanes, with vio-
lent storms of thunder and lightening, threatened
his leaky veisels with deiruction; while his difcon-
tented crew, exhausted with fatigue, and destitute
of provisions, was unwilling or unable to execute
his commands. One of his ships perished; hewas
obliged to abandon another, as unfit for c(e ;
and with the two which remained, he quit. :'

.

part ofthe continent which in his anguifli he na,. ':
tle Coafl of Vcxationt-, and bore away for Hiilfp-

niola.

I Flerrer, dec. I. lib. v. c. <, &c. Life of Celurmlnhu c. g9, Icc.
Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9. - 1,La colta tie los contrastec.

BO 0 K niola. New distresses awaited him in this voyage.

He ras driven back by a violent tempeit from the
3503. coast of Cuba, his ships fell foul of one another,

and were so much shattered by the shock, that with
June 24. the utmost difficulty they reached Jamaica, where

he was obliged to run them aground, to prevent
them from finking. The measure of his calamities
seemed now to be full. He was cast ashore upon
an island at a considerable distance from the only
settlement of the Spaniards in America. His ships
were ruined beyond the possibility of being repair-
ed. To convey an account of his situation to His.
paniola, appeared imprafticable; and without this
it was vain to expect relief. His genius, ser-
tile in resources, and most vigorous in those peril-
ous extremities when feeble minds abandon them-
selves to despair, discovered the only expedient
which afforded any profped of deliverance. He
had recourse to the hospitable kindness of the na-
tives, who confidering the Spaniards as beings of a
superior nature, were eager, on every occasion, to
minister to their wants. From them he obtained
two of their canoes, each formed out of the trunk
of a ingle tree, hollowed with fire, and so mif-
lhapen and aukward as hardly to merit the name of
boats. In thefic, which were fit only for creeping
along the coast, or crossing fiom one bay to another,
Mendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, a Genoese, two
gentlemen particularly attached to Columbus, gal-
lantly offered to set out for Hispaniola, upon a
voyage of above thirty leagues T. This they ac-
coliplifhcd in t(en days, after futrmounting incredi-
ble dangers, and enduring such fatigue, thatfevcral
of the Indians who accolmpanied them funk under
it, and died. 'Ihe attention paid to them by the
governor of I-ifpnlliola wuas neither such as their
courage merited, nor the diflrefs of the persons firo1
whom they came, required. Ovando, from a l;Iall

jcaloufy
* Gvici, lib. ii. c. 9.

jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of allowing him B 0 0 K
to set his foot in the island under his government.
This ungenerous paflion hardened his heart againit 1503.
every tender sentiment, which refleEtion upon the
services and misfortunes of that great man, or com-
paflion for his own fellow-citizens, involved in the
fame calamities, must have excited. Mendez and
Fiefchi spent eight months in soliciting relief for
their commander and associates, without any prof-
pea of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various paflions agitated His ditref5

the mind of Columnbus, and his companions in ad- nd susser,
verfity. At firit the expec:ation of speedy deliver-
ance, from the success of Mendez and Fiefchi's
voyage, cheered the spirits of the most desponding.
After some time the more timorous began to fufpedct
that they had miscarried in their daring attempt.
At length all concluded that they had perilsed. 7504,
The ray of hope which had broke in upon them,
made their condition appear now more difimal.
Dcfipair, heightened by disappointment, fettled in
every brcaft. Their last resource had failed, and
! nl)tning remained but to end theii miserable days

aamong naked savages, far from their country and
th ir friends. The seamen, in a transport of rage,
rof( in open mutiny, threatened the life of Colum-
bus, whom they reproached as the author of all
their calamitics, seized ten canoes, which he had
i purcliafeI from the Indians, and defpifiing his re-

moniftrances and entreaties, made ofi-'with thcln to
a dif rlnt part of the island. At the fatlme time, the
natives murmured at the long rcfidence of the Spa-
niards in their country. As their indufilry was not
rclatcr tlhan that of their neiThbous in lifplanilola,
1 i k themn, they found the bltrden of supporting so
Ilnany ihlancers to be ;llto-cther intolcrablo. lihecy
beg;n to bring in provisions with 1rluIancc, they
V OL. I, Y furniflcd

B 0 0 K furnished them with a sparing hand, and threatened

"_. to withdraw those supplies altogether. Such are-
504. folution'muft quickly have been fatal to the Spa-

niards. Their safety depended upon the good-will
of the Indians; and unless they could revive the
admiration and reverence with which that simple
people had at first beheld them, deftrudion was un-
avoidable. Though the licentious proceedings of
the mutineers had, in a great measure, effaced those
impressions which had been so favourable to the
Spaniards, the ingenuity of Columbus fuggefleda
happy artifice, that not only restored but heighten-
ed the high opinion which the Indians had origi-
nally entertained of them. By his skill in afirono-
my, he knew that there was shortly to be a total
eclipse of the moon. He assembled all the princi-
pal persons of the diftrid around him on the day be-
fore it happened, and, after reproaching them for
their fickleness in withdrawing their affection and
assistance from men whom they had lately revered,
he told them, that the Spaniards werefervants of the
Great Spirit who dwells in heaven, who made and
governs the world ; that he, offended at their re-
futing to support men who were the objects of his
peculiar favour, was preparing to punish this crime
with exemplary severity, and that very night the
moon should withhold her light, and appear of a
bloody hue, as a sign of the divine wrath, and an
cmblem of the vengeance ready to fall upon them.
To this marvellous prediction some of them lifken
ed with the carclefs indifference peculiar to the pco-
ple of America; others, with the credulous aftonifil-
mcnt natural to barbarians. But when the moon be-
gan gradually to be darkened, and at length appear-
ed of a red colour, all were ftruckwith terror. 1 hcy
run with confltrnation to their houses, and returning
instantly to Columbus loaded with provifipns, threw
them at his feet, conjuring him to intercede with the

Grcat

Great Spirit to avert the destruction with which B o0 K
they were threatened. Columbus, seeming to be
moved by their entreaties, promised to comply with -504.
their desire. The eclipse went off, the moon re-
covered its splendour, and from that day the
Spaniards were not only furnished profusely with
provisions, but the natives, with fupcrftitious at-
tention, avoided every thing that could give them
offence §.

DURING those tranfaEtions, the mutineers had A crude :l-
made repeated attempts to pass over to Hispaniola in dition to

them.

the canoes which they had seized. But, from their
own misconduCt, or the violence of the winds and
currents, their efforts were all unsuccessful. En-
raged at this disappointment, they marched towards
that part of the island where Columbus remained,
threatening him with new danger and insults.
While they were advancing, an event happened,
more cruel and afflidting than any calamity which
he dreaded from them. The governor of Hifpa-
niola, whose mind was still filled with some dark
flfpicions of Columbus, Tent a finall bark to Ja-
maica, not to deliver his distressed countrymen, but
to spy out their condition. Left the sympathy of
those whom he employed flould afford them relief,
contrary to his intention, he gave the command of
this vessel to Efcobar, an inveterate enemy of Co-
lumbus, who adhering to his instructions with ma.
lignant accuracy, cast anchor at fomc distance
from the island, approached the shore in a finall
hn)mit, observed the wretched plight of the Spaniards,
(dlilvered a letter of empty compliment to the ad-
miral, received his anfwcr, and departed. When
thie Spaniards first dcfcried the vcrefl fianding to-
wards the island, everv heart exulted, as if the long-

Y 2 expeLcted

§ l iir of Coluitnlius c. I03 c.

Il rra, dcc . lib. vL. c. 5, 6. Bel-

j
ZO, Hifr. ilil. i. C. 14.

B O O K expelted hour of their deliverance had at length

arrived; but when it disappeared so suddenly, they
1504. funk into the deepelt dejecion, and all their hopes

died away. Columbus alone, though he felt most
sensibly this wanton insult which Ovando added to
his past neglecc, retained such composure of mind,
as to be able to cheer his followers. He assured
them, that Mendez and Fiefchi had reached Iif-
paniola in safety ; that they would speedily procure
ships to carry them off; and as Efcobar'sveffel could
not. take them all on board, that he had refused togo
with her, because he was determined never to aban-
don the faithful companions of his dilfrefs, Soothed
with the expectation of speedy deliverance, and de-
lighted with his apparent generosity in attending
more to their'prefervation than to his own safety,
their spirits revived, and he regained their confi-
dence §.

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have

refited the mutineers, who were now at hand. All
his endeavours to reclaim those desperate men had
no effeEt but to increase their frenzy. Their de-
mands became every day more extravagant, and
their intentions more violent and bloody, The
common safety rendered it neceflary to oppose thell
with open force, Columbus, who had been long
aflicled with the gout, could not take the field.
His brother, the Adclantado, marched against them.
vMay o2. 'Ihey quickly met. The mutineers rcjected with

scorn terms of accommodation, which he once more
offlered them, and rushed on boldly to the attack,
They fell not upol an enemy unprepared to receive
them. In the first Ihock, several of their most daring
leaders were slain. 'IThe Adclantado, whofi frclngtil,
was equal to his courage, clolcd with tieir

captain,

$ Life (ofCultlitt.r,, c. 104.. II (i,
c eri, dec. x. lib. vi c. 17.

captain, wounded, disarmed, and took him prison- B 0 0 K
er *. At fight of this, the reft fled with a dastard- 1
ly fear, suitable to their former insolence. Soon 1504.
after, they submitted in a body to Columbus, and
bound themnfelves by the most solemn oaths to obey
all his commands. Hardly was tranquility re-
established, when the ihips appeared, whose arrival
Columbus had promised with great address, though
he could foresee it with little certainty. With
transports of joy, the Spaniards quitted an island in
which the unfeeling jealousy of Ovando had susser-
ed them to languish above a year, exposed to misery
in all its various forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the gover- Aug. 13.
nor, with the mean artifice of a vulgar mind, that Hni deliver-
labours to atone for insolence by servility, fawned rival at His-
on the man whom he envied, and had attempted to pani0a.
ruin. He received Columbus with the most studied
refpedt, lodged him in his own house, and difRin-
guifhed him with every mark of honour. But,
amidst those over-adted demonstrations of regard,
he could not conceal the hatred and malignity la-
tent in his heart. He set at liberty the captain of
the mutinleers, whom Columbus had brought over,
in chains, to be tried for his crimes, and threatened
such as had adhered'to the admiral with proceeding
to a judicial inquiry into their conduct. Colum-
bus submitted in silence to what he could not re-
dress ; but discovered an extreme impatience to
quit a country under the jurifdiacion of a man who
had treated him, on every occasion, with inhuma-
nity and injustice. His preparations were soon
finiflhcd, and he fct tail for Spain with two flips.
Dilafi-ers similar to those which had accompanied Spt. .
him through life continued to purfuc him to the

end
Lic ol Columll,, , 107. l'errcrai ( 1c.. li. vi.. c. I ,

B O O K end of his career. One of his vessels being disabled,

was toon forced back to St. Doniingo; the other,
504 shattered by violent storms, failed seven hundred

leagues with jury-maits, and reached with difficul-

Decemb ty the port of St. Lucar §.

December.

Death of THERE he received the account of an event the
Ifabelia.
Nov. 9. most fatal that could have befallen him, and which

completed his misfortunes. This was the death of
his patroness quv.en Isabella, in whose justice, hu-
manity, and favour, he confided as his last resource.
None nowv remaiined to redress his wrongs, or to
reward him for his services and fuffcrings, but Ser-
dinand, who had so long opposed and so often in-
jured him. To solicit a prince thus prejudiced
againif him. was an occupation no less irksome
than hopeless. In this, however, was Columbus
doomed to employ the close of his days. As soon
as his health was in some degree re-eflablifhed, he
repaired to court; and though he was received
there with civility barely decent, he plie&' Ferdi-
nand with petition after petition, demanding the
punifinment of his oppressors, and the restitution of
all the privileges b,:itwcd upon him by the capitu-
l.tion of one thousand four hundred and ninely-
two. Ferdiinand iamliued him with fiir words and
unmeaning prornifcs. I n tead of granting his claimn,
he proposeld expedients in order to elude them, and
spun out the as-'ir with fulch apparent art, as plain-
ly difcovcled his intention that it should never he
terminatcd. Tlhe declining health of Colulnmus
flattered Ferdinand with the hopes of being soon
d ',tcrcd from an importunate fuitcr, and cn-
coiurlg,('d liiil to pc'ti\'v re in this illiberal pl'n.
Nor was hIc deceived in his cxpe:itions. I)if

nguflc

S I ; '(rCiFlul s, c. 1o .
H cI'cra dc. . lib. vl. c. I?.

gusted with the ingratitude of a monarch whom he B II K
had served with such fidelity and success, exhausted I
vwiih the fatigues and hardships which he had en- 1504.
dured, and broken with the infirmities which these

Death of

brought tipon him, Columbus ended his life at Coluhnbus.
Valladolid on the twentieth of May one thousand
five hundred and fix, in the fifty-ninth year of his
age. Hc died with a composure of mind suitable
to the magnanimity which difRinguifhed his charac-
ter, and with sentiments of piety becoming that
supreme reifped for religion, which he manifested
in every occurrence of his life 1i.
j] Life of Columbus, c. ioS. Herrera, dec. i.lib. vi.c. 13, 14, 15.

THE

THE
I S T R Y

O F

A M E R I C A.

W HILE Columbus was employed in his last ill.
voyage, several events worthy of notice happened in '-

1504·

Hispaniola. The colony there, the parent and State of the
nurse of all the subsequent establishments of Spain colony in
in the New World, gradually acquired the form of Hpni
a regular and prosperous society. The humane so-
licitude of Isabella to prote& the Indians from op-
preflion, and particularly the proclamation, by
which the Spaniards were prohibited to compel
them to work, retarded, it is true, for some time,
the progress of improvement. The natives, who
confidered exemption from toil as supreme felicity,
scorned every allurement and reward by which they
were invited to labour. The Spaniards had not a
sufficient number of hands either to work the mines
0 to cultivate the foil. Several of the firfl- colo-
ilts, who had been accuffomed to the fcrvice of
tle Indians, quitted the island, when deprived of
those infirunents without which they knew not
how to carry on any operation. Many of those
VOL. I. Z who

B O O K who came over with Ovando, were seized with the

III. M_>, ditfempers peculiar to the climate, and in a ihort
1504. fpacc above a thousand of them died. At the fame

time, the demand of one half of the product of the
mines as the royal fliare, was found to be an ex.
action so exorbitant, that no adventurers would en.
gage to work them upon such terms. In order to
save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured to
relax the rigour of the royal edicts. He made a
s50. !Inew distribution of the Indians among the Spani-

ards, compelling them to labour, for a stated time,
in digging the mines, or in cultivating the ground;
but, in order to fkreen himself from the imputation
of having fubjeaed them again to servitude, heen-
joined their maiters to pay them a certain fum, as
the price of their work. He reduced the royal
share of the gold found in the mines from the half
to the third part, and fooi after lowered it to a fifth,
at which it.long remained. Notwithitanding Ifa-
bella's tender concern for the good treatment of the
Indians, and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve the
royal revenue, Ovando persuaded the court to ap-
prove of both thcfe regulations *.

War with BUT the Indians, after enjoying respite from
t'h Ilndians. oppreflion, though during a short interval, now

felt the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that they
made several attempts to vindicate their own liber-
ty. This the Spaniards confidercd as rebellion, and
took arms in order to reduce them to fuljectiol.
When war is carried on between nations whofcftlte
of improvement is in any degree similar, the means
of defence bear tfome proportion to those employed
in the attack ; and in this equal contcft such cf-
forts nmult be made, fuich talents are displayed,

anc
" Il lc.i, ilcc. i. li[>. v. c. 3.

and such passions roused, as exhibit mankind to B O K
view in a situation no less firiking than interefiig. J'.
It is one of the noblest funcions of history, to oh- o
fcrve and to delineate men at ajuncture when their
minds are most violently agitated, and all their
powers and passions are called forth. Hence the
operations of war, and the struggles between con-
tending flates, have been deemed by historians, an-
cient as well as modern, a capital and important
article in the annals of human ations. But in a
contefl between naked savages, and one of the
most warlike of the European nations, where
science, courage, and discipline on one fide, were
opposed by timidity, ignorance, and disorder on the
other, a particular detail of events would be as un-
pleasant as uninftruEive. If the simplicity and
innocence of the Indians had inspired the Spani-
ards with humanity, had softened the pride of fu-
periority into compaflion, and had induced them to
improve the inhabitants of the New World, intfead
of opprefling them, some sudden atds of violence,
like the too rigorous chastisements of impatient in-
itrutors, might have been related without horror.
But, unfortunately, this consciousness of fuperio-
rity operated in a different manner. The Spaniards
were advanced so far beyond the natives of A-
merica in improvement of every kind, that they
viewed them with contempt. They conceived the
Americans to be beings of an inferior nature, who
were not intitled to the rights and privileges of men.
In peace, they filbjeted them to servitude. In war,
tlcey paid no regard to thofi laws, which, by a ta-
cit convention between contending nations, regu-
late hostility, and set fomc bounds to its rage.
TIhey confidered them not as men fighting in de-,
fence of their liberty, but as slaves, who had re-
volted against their nafters. Their caziques, when
taken, were condemned, like the leaders of ban-
dliti, to the most cruel and ignominious punif-

Z 2 mcnts ;

B 0 0 K ments; and all their subjects, without regarding

the difinEtion of ranks established among them,
1505. were reduced to the fame fiate of abjec slavery,

With such a spirit and sentiments were hofti.
lities carried on againif the cazique of Higuey,
a province at the eastern extremity of the island,
This war was occasioned by the perfidy of the Spa.
niards, in violating a treaty which they had made
with the natives, and it was terminated by hanging
up the cazique, who defended his people with bra-
very so far superior to that of his countrymen, as
intitled him to a better fate *.

and treache- THE conduct of Ovando, in another part of the
rous conduc island, was still more treacherous and cruel. The
f Ovando. province anciently named Xaragua, which ex-

tends from the fertile plain where Leogane is now
situated, to the western extremity of the island,
was subject to a female cazique, named Ana-
coana, highly refpeced by the natives. She,
from that partial fondness with which the women
of America were attached to the Europeans, (the
cause of which shall be afterwards explained)
had always cokurted the friendship of the Spa-
niards, and loaded them with good offices. But
some of the adherents of Roldan having fettled in
her country, were so Imuch cxafperated at her en-
deavourino to reltrain their exceffls, that they ac-
cufed her of having formed a plan to throw off the
yolcc, and to exterminlate the Spaniards. Ovando,
though lh klnew well how little credit was duc to
such profligatc men,C marched, without further in-
quiry, towards Xaragua, with three hundred foot
and fevcnty liorfcmcn. To prevent the In-
dians fromn taking alarn at this hostile appear-
;IMce, he gave out that his sole intention was to

vilit
H -cirrcr a. dec. 1. lib. vi. c. 9, o10

visit Anacoana, to whom his countrymen had been B 0 o K
so much indebted, in the most respectful manner,
and to regulate with her the mode of levying the 1505.
tribute payable to the king of Spain. Anacoana,
in order to receive this illustrious guest with due
honour, assembled the principal men in her domi-
nions, to the number of three hundred, and
advancing at the head of there, accompanied by a
vast croud of persons of inferior rank, she welcom-
ed Ovando with songs and dances, according to
the mode of the country, and conduced him to the
place of her residence. There he was feasted, for
.some days, with all the kindness of simple hofpita-
lity, and amused with the games and fpedtacles u-
fual among the Americans upon occasions of mirth
and festivity. But, amidst the security which this
inspired, Ovando was meditating the deftrudtion
of his unfufpicious entertainer and her subjects;
and the mean perfidy with which he executed this
scheme, equalled his barbarity in forming it. Un-
der colour of exhibiting to the Indians the parade
of an European tournament, he advanced with his
troops, in battle array, towards the house in which
Anacoana and the chiefs who attended her were as-
fembled. The infantry took poflcffion of all the
avenues which led to the village. The horsemen
cncompafled the house. These movements were
the objec of admiration without any mixture of
f;ear, until, upon a signal which had been concert-
ed, the Spaniards fuddcnly drew their swords, and
rufled( upon the Indians, dcfcncelefs, and aftonifl-
cd at an a(l of treachlery which exceeded the con-
ception of uncdefigning men. In a moment Anaco-
a;la swas 'ccurcd. All her attendants were seizcd and
bound. Fire was set to the house ; and, withoutex-
a.ililnation or conviclion, all theif unhappy perlons,
the noill illustrious in their own country, wcrccon-
fumcd in the flaumcs. Anacoana was rcferved for a

more

B O O K more ignominious fate. She was carried in chains to

Saint Domingo, and, after the formality of a trial
s50o. before Spanifl judges, she was condemned upon

the evidence of those very men who had betrayed
her, to be publickly hanged *.

Rediaifon OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious
ofthein- treatment of their princes and nobles, who were
dies, and its
effcas. objects of their highest reverence, the people in all

the provinces of Flifpaniola submitted, without far-
ther reiiaance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon the
death of fabella, all the regulations tending to mi-
tigate the riogour of their servitude were forgotten,
The small gratuity paid to them as the priceof
their labour was withdrawn ; and at the fame time
the taks imnpofed upon them were increased. 0-
35c6. vando, without any reifraint, distributed Indians

among his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to
whom the queen had left by will one half of the
revenue arising from the settlements in the New
Worid, conferred grants of a limilar nature upon
his courtiers, as the least expensive mode of reward-
ing their services. They farmed out the Indians,
of whom they were rendered proprietors, to their
countrymen fettled in Hispaniola ; and that wretch-
ed people, being compelled to labour in order to
satisfy the rapacity of both, the exactions of their
oppreflbrs no longer knew any bounds. But, barba-
rousas their policy was, and fatal to the inhabitants
of Hispaniola, it produced, for some time, very con-
fiderablc effects. By calling forth the force of a
whole nation, and exerting it in one direction, the
working of the mines was carried on with amazing
rapidity and fiucccfs. During several years, the gold
brought into the royal finclting-houtfs in Hispaniola

amounted

* Oviedo, lib. iii. c. t2. TIcrrern, de. i. llb. vi. c. 4. Ovi

edo, lib. iii. c. 12. l.clacionll ( IC i d Clit'uyc. id lui In llas, par ' BJJI
de la Calai, p. S.

amounted annually to four hundred and sixty thou- B O K
sand pesos, above a hundred thousand pounds sier-
ling; which, if we attend 'to the great change in o6
the value of money fince'the beginning of the fix-
teenth century to the present times, niuft appear an
immense fum. Vast fortunes were created, of a
sudden, by some. Others diflipated in ostentatious
profusion, what they acquired with facility. Daz-
zled by both, new adventurers crouded to America,
with the most eager impatience, to fliare in those
treasures which had enriched their countrymen;
and, notwithstanding the mortality occasioned by
tlle unhealthiness of the climate, the colony con-
tinued to increase §.

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wisdom progrfof

and justice, not inferior to the rigoui with which the cola)y.
he treated the Indians. He established equal laws,
and, by executing them with impartiality, accuf-
tomed the people of the colony to reverence them.
He founded several new towns in different parts of
the island, and allured inhabitants to them, by the
concession of various immunities. He endeavoured
to turn the attention of the Spaniards .to some
branch of industry more useful than that offearch-
ing for gold in the mines. Some flips of the fu-
gar-cane having been brought from the Canary if-
lands by way of experiment, they were found to
thrive with such increase in the rich foil and warm
climate to which they were transplanted ; that the
cultivation of them boon became an objea of COIi-
inerce. Extensive plantations were begun; fu gnr-
works, which the Spaniards called [IGENIo'S,
f'lom the various machinery employed in them,
were ereced, and in a few years the maniufaicure of
this commoldity was the great occupation of the

inhabit;ants
§ I-crrera, dec. I. lib. vi c. 13, ac..

B O O K inhabitants of Hispaniola, and the most confidera

I. bble source of their wealth §.

156. THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to promote

Political re- the welfare of the colony, were powerfully second.
gulaionsof ed by Ferdinand. The large remittances which

he received from the New World, opened his eyes,
at length, with refpet to the importance of those
discoveries, which he had hitherto asseted to un-
15c7, der-value. Fortune, and his own address, having

now extricated him out of those difficulties inwhich
he had been involved by the death of his queen,
and by his disputes with his fon-in-law about the
government of her dominions f, he had full leisure
to turn his attention to the affairs of America. To
his provident sagacity, Spain is indebted for many
of those regulations which gradually formed that
system of profound, but jealous policy, by which
lhe governs her dominions in the New World.
He erected a court, distinguished by the title of the
CASA DE CONTRATACION, or Board of Trade,
composed of persons eminent for rank and abilities,
to whom he committed the administration of Ame-
rican affairs. This board assembled regularly in
Seville, and was invested with a diffinc and ex-
tensive jurisdiction. He gave a regular form to ec-
clefiaflical government in America, by nominating
archbishops, bihops, deans, together with cler-
gymen of subordinate ranks, to take charge of
the Spaniards established thcre, as well as of
the natives, who ihould embrace the Chriflian
faith. But, notwithflanding the obfcquious de-
votion of the Spanish court to the Papal Sec,
such was Ferdinand's solicitude to prevent any
foreign power from claiming juriifdiction, or
acquiring influence, in his new dolinlions, that he

rcfcrvc(l

§ Oviedn, li. iv. c. i. . t li1. or tlli Rciln of Challec V.
vol. ii. p. 6, &;.

reserved to the crown of Spain the sole right of pa- B O O IK
tronage to'the benefices in America, and flipulated ,
that no papal bull or mandate should be promul- . 506.
gated there, until it was previously examined and
approved of by his council. With the fame spirit
ofjealoufy, he prohibited any goods to be exported
to America, or any pcrfon to fettle there, without a
special licence from that council t.

BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the po- Thenumbd-

of the In-

lice and welfare of the colony, a calamity impend- dians dimi-
ed which threatened its dissolution. The original niiaes sis+.
inhabitants, on whose labour the Spaniards in 1His-
paniola depended for their prosperity, and even
their existence, wafted so fast, that the extinction
of the whole race seemed to be inevitable. When
Columbus discovered Hispaniola, the number of its
inhabitants was computed to be at least a million ..
They were now reduced to sixty thousand in the
space of fifteen years. This consumption of the
human species, no less amazing than rapid, was the
effet of several concurring causes. The natives of
the American islands were of a more feeble confci-
tution than the inhabitants of the other henmiphere.
They could neither perform the fame work, nor
endure the fame fatigue with men whose organs
were of a more vigorous conformation. The inac-
tive indolence in which they delighted to pass their
days, as it was the cffcct of their debility, contri-
buted likewifc to increase it, and rendered them,
from habit as well as conflitution, incapable of
hard labour. The food on which they fubfiltcd,
afiordcd little nouriflinent, and they were acculf
tomcd to take it in filall quanti:ies, not fuflicient
*to invigorate a languid frame, and render it equal to
VOL. I. A a the
'I Hrercri,ldec. i. lib. vi. . 19, zo. Ibid. dec. 1. lib. x. c, 12.

B o 0 K the efforts of industry. The Spaniards, without

1 attending to these peculiarities in the constitution
1506 of the Americans, imposed tasks upon them so dif.

proportioned to their strength, that many funk un-
der the fatigue, and ended their wretched days.
Others, prompted by impatience and despair, cut
short their own lives with a violent hand. Fa-
mine, brought on by compelling such numbers to
abandon the culture of their lands, in order to la-
bour in the mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases
of various kinds, some occasioned by the hardships
to which they were exposed, and others by their
intercourse with the Europeans, compleated the
desolation of the island. Being thus deprived of
the infiruments which they were accustomed to em-
ploy, the Spaniards found it impossible to extend
their improvements, or even to carry on the works
1SOS. which they had already begun. In order to pro-

vide an immediate remedy for an evil so alarming,
Ovando proposed to transport the inhabitants of
the Lucavo islands to Hispaniola, under pretence
that they might be civilized with more facility,
and inltru'ted to greater advantage in the Christian
religion, if they were united to the Spanish colony,
and under the immediate inspection of the miffiona-
rics scttled there. Ferdinand, deceived by this
artifice, or willing to connive at an aat of violence
which policy rcprcfcntcd as iieceflary, gave his as-
sint to the pl)opofal. Several veflsls were fitted out
for the Lucayos, the commanders of which inform-
ed the natives, with whofc language they were now
well acquainted, that they came from a delicious
counttry, in which their departed anccfrtos residcd,
by whom the(y were felt to invite fthe to rcfort
thither, to parlake of the bliss which they enjoyed.
That

l filii ;p people lift-ined with wonder and cre-
dtulit y; and, fond of vifiti ngr their relations anid
fric(nds inl tlat happy region, followed the Spaniairds

with

with eagerness. By this artifice, above forty B 0I K
thousand were decoyed into Hispaniola, to Ihare in _-- _
the sufferings which were the lot of the inhabitants 5j8.
of that island, and to mingle their groans and tears
with those of that wretched race of men t.

THE Spaniards had, for rome time, carried on New disco-

veries and

their operations in the mines of Hiiipaniola with settlements.
such ardour as well as success, that they seemed to
have engrossed their whole'attention. The spirit
of discovery languished ; and, since the last voyage
of Columbus, no enterprise of any moment had
been undertaken. But as the decrease of the In-
dians rendered it impossible to acquire wealth in
that island with the fame rapidity as former-
ly, this urged them to search for new coun-
tries, where their avarice might be gratified with
more facility. Juan Ponce de Leon, who com-
manded under Ovando in the eastern diffrit of
Hispaniola, passed over to the island of St. John
de Porto Rico, which Columbus had discovered in
his second voyage, and penetrated into the interior
part of the country. As he found the foil to be
fertile, and expected, from some fymptomls, as well
as from the information of the inhabitants, to dif-
cover mines of gold in the mountains, Ovando per-
mitted him to attempt making a fcttlemcent in the
island. This was easily efFeced by an officer emi-
ncnt for conduc no less than for courage. In a
few years Porto Rico was fubjctcd to the Spaniih
government, the natives were reduced to servitude ;
and, being treated with the famei inconlidcrate ri-
gour as their neighbours in Hispaniola, the race of
original inhabitants, worn out with fatigue and
sufferings, was soon exterminated ::.

A a 2 ABOUT

I;' Ierrera, dec. I. lil,. vii. c. 3. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. Gonnara Hist.

C* C4.1-

|I lerrel,~ dec. I. lil. vii. c. I.---4. Gomara I-ift c. 44. Rclelion.
e c
B. dc laa Cl.fas p. 10.

B 0 0 1K ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in
_n1~ Cconjuncion with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of
iscS. Columbus's original companions, made a voyage to

the continent. Thley held the fame course which
Columbus had taken, as far as to the island of
G uanaios ; but, ftaniing from thence to the weft,
they di (covered a new and extensive province, after.
wards known by the name of Yucatan, and proceed-
ed a confidcrable way along the coafi of that coun-
try t. Though nothing nmemorable occurred in
this voyage, it deserves notice, because it led to
discoveries of greater importance. For the fame
reason, the voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo must be
mentioned. By the command of Ovando, he fail-
ed round Cuba, and first discovered, with certainty,
that this country, which Columbus once supposed
to be a part of the continent, was a large island 7.

D.egp Co- THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the lafi oc-
lpointid ap- currences under the administration of Ovando.
vt.norof Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Don

H.noa. Diego had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand

to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, to(,ether with all the other im-
imunities anid profits which descended to him by in-
heritance, in conlciqu:i'ce of the original capitula-
tion with hi,; f:'ther. But if there dignities and re-
vcnuie: app;'::.rcd o! considerable to lierdinand, that,
at the ex-.'nct of b einCg deemled unjufr as well as
ungrateful , he had wrcitd them from Columbus, it
is lot ftillriiin that hle fliould be unwilling to con-
fir thci on his tin. Accordingly, I)on Dicgo
wafted Lwo yc'ars ill incclt:ll bit fri itlefs iimportu-
nity. Weary of this, hel cndeavourcd at length to
obtalin by a ic(,;i fenitence, wll:t he could not pro-
cuire from the favour of an int:rcfsed moinarchi

crr l cc. .ib.vi.c. 7. bil. ib.vii. c.
, !k'Icrrer;i (ec. I. lib. vi. c. 17. ~ Ibid. llb. vii. c. l.

He commenced a suit against Ferdinand before the B o o K
council that managed Indian affairs, and that court,
with integrity which refleAs honour upon its pro- 1508.
ceedings, decided against the king, and sustained
Don Diego's claim of the vice-royalty, and all the
other privileges stipulated in the capitulation.
Even after this decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to
put a subjet in poffeflion of such extensive rights,
might have thrown in new obstacles, if Don
Diego had not taken a fRep which interested very
powerful persons in the success of his claims. The
sentence of the council of the Indies gave him a
title to a rank so elevated, and a fortune so opulent,
that he found no difficulty in concluding a marriage
with Donna Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand de
Toledo, great commendator of Leon, and brother
of the duke of Alva, a grandee of the first rank,
and nearly related to the king. The duke and his
family cfpoufed so warmly the cause of their new
ally, that Ferdinand could not resist their folicita-
tions. He recalled Ovando, and appointed Don
Diego his fucceifor, though, even in conferring 1509-
this favour, he could not conceal his jealousy;
for he allowed him to affulme only the title of go-.
vernor, not that of viceroy, which had been ad-
judged to belong to him t.

H. soon repaired to Hispaniola, attended by his He repairs

brother, his uncles, his wife, whom the courtesy to 1hifa
of the Spaniards honoured with the title of vice-
queen, and a numerous retinue of persons of both
sexes, born of good families. He lived with a
fpl)lndoulr and m1agnifilence hiitherto unkniownI in
in the New World ; and the family of Colun-bus
''tncmd nowm to nljoy the honours and rewards due
t( his inve(ntive gcnius, of which he himielfhad
beell clruelly defrauded. 'The colony itself acquired
new lulfre by the iacceflion of so many inhabitants,

of
t'I Ilirc r., dec. 1. lib vii. c, 4, &c.

B o o K of a different rank and character from most of thoft

.." who had hitherto migrated to America, and many
x^o~9. of the most illustrious families in the Spanish set-

tlements are descended from the persons who at
that time accompanied Don Diego Columbus t.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives from

this change of governors. Don Diego was not on-
ly authorised by a royal ediC to continue the
REPARTIMIENTOS, or distribution of Indians, but
the particular number which he might grant to
every person, according to his rank in the colony,
was specified. He availed himself of that permif-
sion ; and soon after he landed at St. Domingo, he
divided such Indians as were still unappropriated,
among his relations and attendants t.

THE next care of the new governor was to com-
of Cubgua. ply with an infruction which he received from the

king, about fettling a colony in Cubagua, a finall
island which Columbus had difcovcred in his third
voyage. Though this barren spot hardly yielded
subsistence to its wretched inhabitants, such quan-
tities of those oyflers which produce pearls were
found on its coait, that it did not long escape the
inquisitive avarice of the Spaniards, and became a
place of considerable retort. Large fortunes were
acquired by the fishery of pearls, which was carried
on with cxtraordinary ardour. The. Indians, es-
pccially those from the Lucayo islands, were com-
pellcd to dive for them ; and this dangerous and
unhealthy employment was an additional calamity,
which contributed not a little to the extinicion of
that devoted race '.

'~ Ovicdo, llb. lii. c. . i Recrcril.aion d' I.cycs, il.vi.t';

8. 1 . r. l rlCr.i, dec. . lil.. vii. c. le. Ilc.-ici.i, d . t' :
vii j.C. 9 O Gom1ar4 li11. c. 70).

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pin- B o o K

III.

zon set out, in conjundtion, upon a frcond voyage.
They stood directly south, towards the cquinoctial 1509.
line, which Pinzon had formerly crossed, and ad- Ncw v
vanced as far as the fortieth degree of southern la- aes'
titudc. They were aftonihed.to find that the con-
tinent of America firetched, on their right hand,
through all this vast extent of ocean. They land-
ed in different places, to take pofiieilon in name of
their sovereign ; but though the country appeared
to be extremely fertile and inviting, their force
wa- so fiall, having been fitted out rather for dif-
covery than making settlements, that they left no
colon) behind them. Their voyage served, how-
ever, to give the Spaniards more exalted and ade-
quate ideas with refped to the dimensions of this
new quarter of the globe *.

'rHOUGH it was above ten years since Columbus A fettle-
had discovered the main land of America, the Spa- menton the

continent

niards had hitherto made no settlement in any part attempted.
cfit. What had been so long negletcd was now
fcrioufly attempted, and with coniidcrable vigour,
thougl; the plan for this purpole was neither form-

by the crown, nor ececuted at the expcnce of the

nation, bh1 carried on by the enterprising spirit of
private adventurers. This fchcme took its rife from
Alonio de Ojeda, who had already made two
vr()'ags. at a dilcoverer, by which he acquired con-
f.tlci;b]c rreputation, but no vwealth. But his cha-
r;:til(r for intrepidity and conducd cafily procured
hil alfl)(ci;tes, who advanced the money requisite to
ticiray the clharges of the expedition. About the
fCile tilne, Diego de Nicuefla, who had acquired a
large fortunle in Iifi,;aniola, formled ta imilar dctign.
lerdinand ncolrag.'d both ; and tlhculh hle refuf-
tl to advance the finallef fum, was c:t-rcincly li-

beral
' Jlerera, dc. . V. lib. vii. C. 9.

B o0 K beral of titles and patents. He erected two govern.

ments on the continent, one extending from Cape
x509. de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the other from

that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The former was
given to Ojeda, the latter to Nicueffa. Ojeda fitted
out a ship and two brigantines, with three hundred
men ; Nicueffa, fix veifels, with seven hundred and
eighty men. They failed about the fame time from
St. Domingo for their refpetive governments. In
order to give their title to those countries some ap-
pearance of validity, several of the most eminent
divines and lawyers in Spain were employed to
prescribe the mode in which they should take pof-
session of them -. There is not in the history of
mankind any thing more singular or extravagant
than the form which they devised for this purpose
They inftru(ced thofc invaders, as soon as they
landed on the continent, to declare to the natives
the principal articles of the Chriflian faith ; to ac-
quaint thein, in particular, with the fupremejurif-
didion of the Pope over all the kingdoms of the
-earth; to inform them of the grant which this holy
pontiff had made of their country to the king of
Spain; to require them to embrace the dofrines
of that religion which they made known to them;
and to submit to the sovereign whose authority
they proclaimed. If they reful'd to comply with
this requisition, the terms of which must have bcen
utterly incomprehcnfible to an uninftrueted Indian,
then Ojeda and Nicucfla were authorised to attack
them with sword and fire ; to reduce them, their
wives and children, to a ftatc of lfrvitude ; and to
compel them by force to recognize the juri'dic-
tion of the church, and the authority of the mo0-
oarch, to which they wouldl not voluntarily fuibjca
themiclvcs :t. A

t HIrrcrltdec. i. lib. ; 1.
. Szc J 'I'TE XXIl.

As the inhabitants of the continent could not at B O O K

once yield assent to doErines too refined for their 'I
uncultivated understandings, and explained to them 1509.
by interpreters imperfectly acquainted with their Thedifaf-

ters attend-

language; as they did not conceive how a foreign ,rig it.
priest, of whom they had never heard, could have
any right to dispose of their country, or how an un-
known prince should claimjurifdiAion over them as
his subjects; they fiercely opposed the new inva-
ders of their territories. Ojeda and Nicueffa en-
deavoured to effed by force what they could not
accomplish by persuasion. The contemporary
writers enter into a very minute detail in relating
their tranfadtions ; but as they made no discovery
of importance, nor established any permanent set-
tlement, their adventures are not intitled to any
considerable place in the general hiftor) of a period,
where romantic valour, firuggling with incredible
hardships, diftinguih every effort of the Spanish
arms. They found the natives in those countries
of which they went to assume the government, to
be of a charader very different from that of their
countrymen in the islands. They were fierce and
warlike. Their arrows were dipped in a poison so
noxious, that every wound was followed with ccr-
tain death. In one encounter they cut off above fe-
veCty of Ojeda's followers, and the Spaniards, for
the first time, were taught to dread the inhabitants
of the New World. Nicuefii1 was oppolfed by pco-
ple cqually resolute in defence of their pofFeilions.
Nothing could soften their ferocity. Though the
Spaniards employed every art to liothec them, ai.d
to gain their confidence, they reflfced to hold any
iltclcourfe, or to exchange any friendly office,
with men whose residence among theml they con-
filcred as fatal to their liberty and indepelcncc.

his implacable enmity of the natives though it Ii5;
iCendLcd ;it xtr(cnely difficult as well as dangercous

Vo 1. - Bb) to

B 0 0 K to cftablifh a settlement in their country, might

have been surmounted at length by the perfeve-
1510 rance of the Spaniards, by the superiority of their

arms, and their skill in the art of war. But every
difaifer which can be accumulated upon the unfor-
tunate, combined to complete their ruin. The loss
of their ships by various accidents upon an un-
known coast, the dileafes peculiar to a climate the
most noxious in all America, the want of provifi-
ons, unavoidable in a country imperfectly cultiva-
ted, dissention among themselves, and the incessant
hostilities of the natives, involved them in a fuccef-
sion of calamities, the bare recital of which frikes
one with horror. Though they received two con-
fiderable reinforcements from Hispaniola, the great-
er part of those who had engaged in this unhappy
expedition, perished, in less than a year, in the most
extreme misery. A few who survived, fettled as a
feeble colony at Santa Maria el Antigua, on the
gulf of Darien, under the command of Vasco Nug-
nez de Balboa, who, in the most desperate exigen-
cies, dilfplayed such courage and conduct, asfirfr
gained the confidence of his countrymen, and
marked him out as their leader in more splendid and

successful undertakings. Nor was he the only ad-

venturer in this expedition who will appear with
luir-c in more important scenes. Francis Pizarro
was one of Ojeda's companions, and in this school
ol advcrfity acquirdc( or improved the talents which
fitted liim lior the extraordinary at-ions which be
afteerwallrds prifobrm cd. Ferdinalnd Cortes, wliofe
name became fiil] more framous, had engaged early
ini this clntcrpric, which rotized all the acti'e
yotth ofr li fiiol to arms; but the good fortune
whichl accomp:nied himi in his filbfeqluent advell
tures, inltelrpofld to save hinm from the disasters to
which his comlpanions were exposcd. IHe was taken

ill

ill at St. Domingo before the departure of the fleet, B o o K
and detained there by that indisposition *.

ICIO.

NOTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate issue of Conqucft of
this expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred Cuba.
from engaging in new schemes of a similar nature.
When wealth is acquired gradually by the perse-
vering hand of industry, or accumulated by the
flow operations of regular commerce, the means
employed are so proportioned to the end attained,
that there is nothing to strike the imagination, and
little to urge on the active powers of the mind to
uncommon efforts. But when large fortunes were
created almost instantaneously when gold and
pearls were procured in exchange for baubles;
when the countries which produced these rich com-
modities, defended only by naked savages, might
be seized by the firit bold invader ; objedts so fin-
gular and alluring rouzed a wonderful spirit of en-
terprife among the Spaniards, who rushed with ar-
dour into this new path that was opened to wealth
and diftintion. WVhile this spirit continued warm
and vigorous, every attempt either towards difcove-
ry or conquest was applauded, and adventurers en-
gaged in it with emulation. The passion for new
undertakings, which charaterifes the age of disco-
very in the latter part of the fifteenth and be-
ginning of the sixteenth century, would alone have
been fufficicnt to prevent the Spaniards from stop-
ping short in their career. But circumstances pe-
culiar to Hispaniola at this juncture concurred with
it in extending their navigation and conqucfts. The
rigorous treatment of the inhabitants of that ifiand
having alnloft extirpated the race, many of the Spa-
nifh planters, as I have already obfcrvcd, find-

B b2 ing

* Hrlncira, dec. . lib. vii. c. 11, &c. Gomara His. c. 57, 58, 59.
lEcnzon. HilL lib. i. c. 19.--z3. P. Martyr, decad. 12z.

B O O K ,ing it im pofible to carry on their works with the

fame vigour and profit, were obliged to look out
1510. for fcttlements in some country whose people were

not yet wafted by opprcflion. Others, with the
inconsiderate levity natural to men upon whom
wealth pours in with a sudden flow, had squander-
ed, in thoughtless prodigality, what they acquired
with cafe, and were driven by necessity to embark
in the most desperate schemes, in order to retrieve
;5i*l their afftairs. From all these causes, when Don

Diego Columbus proposed to conquer the iflandof
Cuba, and to eftablifll a colony there, manyper-
sons of chief diltigciion in Hispaniola engaged with
alacrity in the neafure. He gave the command of
the troops destined for that service to Diego Valaf-
quez, one of his father's companions in his second
voyage, and who, having been long fettled in His-
paniola, had acquired an ample fortune, with such
reputation for probity and prudence, that he seem-
ed to be well qualified for conduaing an expedition
of importance. Three hundred men were deemed
sufficient for the conquest of an island above seven
hundred miles in length, and filled with inhabi-
tants. But they were of the fame unwarlike cha-
rader with the pcople of Hispaniola. They were
not only intimidated by the appearance of their
new cnemies, but unprepared to rcfilt them. For
though, from the time that the Spaniards took pof-
frcfion of the adjacent island, there was reason to
cxpect a dtflCCnt on llhir territories, none of the
fnmall communities into which Cuba was divided,
had either made any provifito for its own defence,
or had forimed any concert for their common lafety.
T'he' only obflruCtiion the Spanards met with was
fironn iIatticy), a ca.ique, who had fled from HI-ifia-
niol;, and t;kcn pofl'l ionI l of the caftern cxtrelmity
,of (Cih;. E-l: flood iupoll the defensive at their first
landllling, anld ietidavloulrc( to drive them Iack to

their

their ships. His feeble troops, however, were soon B O o K
broken and dispersed; and he himself being taken
prisoner, Velasquez, according to the barbarous j5ci.
maxim of the Spaniards, confidered him as a slave
who had taken arms against his master, and con-
demned him to the flames. When Hatuey was faf-
tened to the flake, a Franciscan friar labouring to
convert him, promised him immediate admittance
into the joys of heaven, if he would embrace the
Christian faith. " Are there any Spaniards," fays
he, after some pause, " in that region of bliss which
you describe ?" Yes," replied the monk, " but
only such as are worthy and good." " The best
of them," returned the indignant cazique, " have
neither worth nor goodness; I will not go to a place
where I may meet with one of thataccurfed race*."
This dreadful example of vengeance firuck the
people of Cuba with such terror, that they scarcely
gave any opposition to the progress of their inva-
ders; and Velasquez, without the loss of a man,
annexed this extensive and fertileifland to the Spa-
nifh monarchy :.

THE facility with which this important conquet Discovery of

was completed, served as an incitement to other un- Florida.
dertakings. Juan Ponce de Lcon, having acquired
both fame and wealth by the redution of Porto
Rico, was impatient to engage in some new enter-
prise. He fitted out three ships at his own expence,
ofr a voyage of discovery, and his reputation soon *512, .
drew together a rcfpedable body of followers. He
diretcld his course towards the Lucayo islands;
an(l after touching at several of them, as well as of
the Bahama ifics, he flood to the south wefl, and
i(icovered a country hitherto unknown to the Spa-

niards,

B. (IC de ln; CasT, , 1p 0. 40- lerracr, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 2, 3, &e
Oicldj, ib. xvii. c. 3 p.1. 179.

B O O K niards, which he called Florida, either because he

fell in with it on Palm Sunday, or on account of
151z. its gay and beautiful appearance. He attempted to

land in different places, but met with such vigorous
opposition fiom the natives, who were fierce and
warlike, as convinced hi!n.that an increase of force
was requisite to effee a settlement. Satisfied with
having opened a communication with a new coun.
try, of whose value and importance he conceived
very sanguine hopes, he returned to Porto Rico,
through the channel now known by the name of
the Gulf of Florida.

IT was not merely the passion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon to un-
dertake this voyage, he was influenced byoneof
those visionary ideas, which at that time often min-
gled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered it
more enterprising. A tradition prevailed among
the natives of Porto Rico, that in the isle of Bimi-
ni, one of the Lucayos, there was a fountainof
such wonderful virtue as to renew the youth, and
recal the vigour of every person who bathed in its
salutary waters. In hopes of finding this grand re-
florative, Ponce de Leon and his followers ranged
through the islands, searching, with fruitlcfs folici-
tude and labour, for the fountain, which was the
chief object of their expedition. That a talc so
fabulous flo;uld gain credit among simple un'il
ltruCtcd Indians is not surprising. That it fiould
make any imiprefion upon an enlightened people
appears, in the present age, altogether incredible.
'Ihe fact, however, is certai n; and the mnoft a-
thentic Sptiifil hi florians mention this extlav'ag;'nt
tally of their credulous countrymen. The Spa-
niards, at that period, were engaged in a career of
activity which gave a romlantic turn to their imagi-
nation, andl daily prcfilntcd to them firange iaid

inarvcllous

marvellous objec's. A New World was opened to B O K
their view. They visited islands and continents of
whose existence mankind in former ages had no 15.2.
conception. In those delightful countries nature
seemed to assume another form ; every tree and plant
and animal was different from those of the ancient
hemisphere. They seemed to be transported to en-
chanted ground; and, after the wonders which they
had seen, in the warmth and novelty of their admi-
ration, nothing appeared to them so extraordinary
as to be beyond belief. If the rapid succession of
new and striking scenes made such impression even
upon the found understanding of Columbus, that
he boasted of having found the feat of Paradise, it
vill not appear firange that Ponce de Leon should
dream of discovering the fountain of youth t.

SOON after the expedition to Florida, a discovery Prngr-fs of
of much greater importance was made in another Balboain

Darien.

part of America. Balboa having been raised to the
government of the finall colony at Santa Maria in
Darien, by the voluntary suffrage of his associates,
was so extremely desirous to obtain from the crown
a confirmation of their election, that he dispatched
one of his officers to Spain, in order to solicit a roy-
al cornmiflion, which might invest him with a legal
title to the supreme command. Conscious, howe-
ver, that he could not expeL success from the pa-
tronage of Ferdinand's ministers, with whom he
w;s unconnecEted, or from ncgociating in a court
to the arts of which he was a ft-rlnger, he endca-
vour(d It merit :the dignity to which he aflpird, and
ailmld at perforlinlg io(mei fi-nal service that would
fcuc re him the preference to every competitor. Full

of

t P. Mi'tvlr, 'Ic.l. pe . p. E. 'Enfi,o Chlrnnl. para la -1:1 if de a1

' i, p' .

(l

( 1, pal p).

. , . . vied, lib. V''i. c. . l r-e Crra,
", ' iil' iax, . l5, Hiti. de I.l Conii. d la Florida, par Carc de la

B O O K of this idea, he made frequent inroads into thq ad.

III.
I-Y_ jacent country, subdued several of the caziques,
iiz'. and colleced a considerable quantity of gold, which

abounded more in that part of the continent than
in the islands. In one of those excursions, the
Spaniards contended with such eagerness about the
division of some gold, that they were at the point of
proceeding to acts of violence against one another.
A young cazique, who was present, astonished at the
high value which they set upon a thing of which
he did not discern the use, tumbled the gold out of
the balance with indignation ; and, turning to the
Spaniards, " Why do you quarrel (fays he) about
such a trifle ? If you are so passionately fond of
gold, as to abandon your own country, and to dif-
turb the tranquility of distant nations for its fake,
I will conduct you to a region where the metal
which seems to be the chief obje& of your admira-
tion and desire, is so common that the meanest uten-
ils are formed of it." Transported with what they
heard, Balboa and his companions inquired eagerly
where this happy country lay, and how they might
arrive at it. He informed them that at the difrance
of fix funs, that is of fix days journey towards the
south, they should discover another ocean, near to
which this wealthy kingdom was situated; but if
they intended to attack that powerful ifate, they
muftf'affemble forces far superior in number and
strength to those with which they now appeared t.

Whschclie'a THIS was the first information which the Spa-
fuorns. niards received concerning the great fouthernocean,

or the opulent and extensive country known after-
wards by the name of Peru. Balboa had now be-
fore him objccs suited to his boundless ambition,

and

1· '

H rrcrn, dec. I. lib. i. c. 2. Gomar1a, c. 6o. P. Martyr,
Dccad. p. j49,

and the enterprising ardour of his genius. He im- B 0 0 K
mediately concluded the ocean which the Cazique ,i-
mentioned, to be that for which Columbus had I51z.
searched without success in this part of America,
in hopes of opening a more dire&c communication
with the East Indies; and he conjectured that the
rich territory which had been described to him, must
be part of that vast and opulent region of the earth.
Elated with the idea of performing what so great a
man had attempted in vain ; and eager to accom-
plifh a discovery which he knew would be no less
acceptable to the king than beneficial to his country,
he was impatient until he could set out upon this
enterprize, in comparison of which all his former
exploits appeared inconsiderable. But previous ar-
arrangement and preparation were requisite to en-
sure success. He began with courting and securing
the friendship of the neighbouring Caziques. He
sent some of his officers to Hispaniola with a large
quantity of gold, as a proof of his past success, and
an earnest of his future hopes. By a proper diftri-
bution of this, they fccured the favour of the go-
vernor, and allured volunteers into the service. A
confidcrable reinforcement from that island joined
him, and he thought himifclf in a condition to at-
tempt the difcovcry.

THE isthmus of Darien is not above sixty miles in Difficulty to

breadth, but this neck of land, which binds together .x.cutilgit.
the continents of North and South America, is
strengthened by a chain of lofty mountains stretch-
ing through its whole extent, which render it a
barrier of solidity fiuficicnt to resist the impulse of
two opposite oceans. The mountaini s arc covered
with forcats almost inacccflible. lThe valleys in that
moist climate, where it rains during two thirds of
tie year, are inarfly, and so frequently overflowed,
that the inlh;litants find it ncccfiu'y, in many

Vo-. I. C c places,

B 0 0 K places, to build their houses upon trees, in order

__ to be elevated at tome diflance from the damp foil
s1iz. and the odious reptiles ingendered in the putrid

waters t. Large rivers rush down with an impetuous
current from the high grounds. In a region thinly
inhabited by wandering savages, the hand of in.
dultry had done nothing to mitigate or correct those
natural disadvantages. To march across this un-
explored country, with no other guides but Indians,
whosie fidelity could be little trusted, was, on all
thcfe accounts, the boldest enterprise on which the
Spaniards had hitherto ventured in the New World,
Bur the intrepidity of Balboa was such as diftin-
guilhed him among his countrymen, at a period
when every adventurer was conspicuous for darin(
courage. Nor was bravery his only merit, hewas
prudent in conduct, generous, affable, and pofl'efed
of thofc popular talents which, in the most desperate
undertakings, inspire confidence and secure attach-
ment. Even after the junction of the volunteers
from Hispaniola, he was able to muster only an
hundred and ninety men for his expedition. But
they were hardy veterans, inured to the clirnatcof
America, and ready to follow him through every
danger. A thoulfind Indians attended them to
carry thcir provisions ; and to complete their war-
lilk array, they took with themn everal of tho0l
fierce (logs, which were no less formidable than
dcflrudtivc to their nlaked enemies.

Diic,1v3,rs xrT.eOA set outt upon this important expedition
tl,' South on the' fitflt of Scpt(cbher, about the time that the
S'ca. prio. licl r,iins be';ilan to abate. I-e proceded by

fi-a, ;anll wiloit :iny difficulty, to the territories of a
ca'.ique who'li ' e frimllfliip he had gained ; but l0
loomn:r did il'' b

. g;in tIo advanlce into the interior p1'ir
of the co ).iltry, thn lie was retarded by every)

,obfuacl,
'|' P'. M.'i 'r, (dccalI. p. 158.

obstacle, which he had reason to apprehend, from B O K

mI.

the nature of the territory, or the disposition of its
inhabitants. Someof the caziques, at his approach, 1513.
fled to the mountains with all their people, and
carried offer destroyed whatever could afford sub-
fiftence to his troops. Others colleced their sub-
jeds, in order to oppose his progress, and he quick-
ly perceived what an arduous undertaking it was, to
conduct such a body of men through hostile nations,
across swamps and rivers, and woods, which had
never been passed but by straggling Indians. But
by sharing in every hardship with the meanest fol-
dier, by appearing the forcmoft to meet every dan-
ger, by promising confidently to his troops the en-
joyment of honour and riches superior to the most
successful of their countrymen, he inspired them
with such enthusiastic resolution, that they follow-
ed him without murmuring. When they had pe-
netrated a good way into the mountains, a powerful
cazique appeared in a narrow pass, with a nuner-
ous body of his fubjeas to obftrut their progress.
But men who had surmounted so many obstacles,
dcfpifed the opposition of such feeble enemies.
They attacked them with impetuosity, and having
dispersed them with much ease and great slaughter,
continued their march. Though their guides had
represented the breadth of the isthmus to be only
a journey of fix days, they had already spent twen-
ty-five in forcing their way through the woods and
mountains. Malany of them were ready to fink un-
der such uninterrupted fatigue in that sultry cli-
In mte, several were fcized with the diseases peculiar
to the country, and all became impatient to reach
thei period of their labours and sufFerings. At
1. length the Indians assured them, that from the

C c 2 top

B 0 0 K top of the next mountain they ihould discover the

ocean which was the object of their wishes. When,
s13. with infinite toil, they had climbed up the greater

part of that fieep ascent, Balboa commanded his
men to halt, and advanced alone to the summit,
that he might be the firfi who should enjoy a
fpecacle which he had so long desired. As foonas
he beheld the South Sea firetching in endless pro,
fpe, below him, he fell on his knees, and lifting
up his hands to Heaven, returned thanks to God,
who had conduted him to a discovery so beneficial
to his country, and so honourable to himself. His
followers obfcrving his transports of joy, rushed
forward to join in his wonder, exultation and gra-
titude. They held on their course to the shore
with great alacrity, when Balboa advancing up to
the middle in the waves with his buckler and sword,
took possession of that ocean in the name of the
king his mafier, and vowed to defend it, with these
arms, against all his enemies 4.

THAT part of the great Pacific or Southern

ocean, which Balboa firit discovered, still retains
the name of the Gulf of St. Michael, which he
rave to it, and is situated to the cast of Panama,
From several of the pctty princes, who governed in
the dift-iris adjacent to that gulf, he extorted pro,
visions and gold by force of arms. Others sent
thel to him voluntarily. To these acceptable pre-
sents, tome of the caziqucs added a considerable
quantity of pearls ; and. he learned from them,
with much fatisfadion, that pearl oysters abounided
in the Lca which he had newly difcovcred,

TO GE( T''Ir ER.

. lfIerrIP , I1h. . . ib. x. (. Y, &c, Gomara, c. 6, &c. P. Mar
tyi- lcei.tl. .) &'.Cl

TOGETHER with the acquisition of this wealth, B o o K

which served to soothe and encourage his followers, ,
he received accounts which confirmed his sanguine 1513.
hopes of future and more extensive benefits from the He receives
expedition. All the people on the coast of the concering
South Sea concurred, in informing him that there amtre opu-
was a mighty and opulent kingdom situated at a etcr u
considerable distance towards the east, the inhabi-
tants of which had tame animals to carry their bur-
dens. In order to give him an idea of these, they
drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas or
Iheep, afterwards found in Peru, which the Peru-
vians had taught to perform such services as they
described. As the Llama, in its form, nearly re-
fembles a camel, a beast of burden deemed peculiar
toAfia, this circumfiance, in conjunction with the
discovery of the pearls, another noted production of
that country, tended to confirm the Spaniards in
their mistaken theory with respect to the vicinity
of the New World to the East Indies t.

BUT though the information which Balboa re- Obliged to

ccivcd from the people on the coast, as well as his return.
own conjetures and hopes, rendered him extreme-
ly impatient to visit this unknown country, his
prudence restrained him from attempting to invade
it with an handful of men, exhausted by fatigue,
and weakened by diseases §. He determined to lead
back his followers, at present, to their settlement
at Santa Maria in Darien, and to return next sea-
son with a force more adequate to such an arduous
cntcirprize. In order to acquire a more extensive
knowledge of the iflhmus, he marched back by a
different route, which he found to be no less dan-
gerous and difiicult than that which he had former-
ly taken. But to men elated with fucccfs, and ani-

mated
'I Hcrrcr:l, dcc. . llb. x. c. . - See NOTE XXIV,

B OOK mated with hope, nothing is unsurmountable. Bal.

III. _>_ boa returned to Santa Maria, from' which he had
'- - - been absent four months, with greater glory and

more treasure than the Spaniards had acquired in
any expedition in the New World. None of Bal.
boa's officers di'finguihled himself more in this ser-
vice than'Francifcd Pizarro, or affitPed with greater
courage and ardour in opening a communication
with those countries, in which he afterwards ated
such an illustrious part *.

BALBOA'S firR care was to fend informationto

appointed Spain of the' important discovery which 'he had
g vcrnou of made; and to demand a reinforcement of a thou-

sand men, in order to attempt the conquet of that
opulont country, concerning which he had received
such inviting intelligence. The first account of
the discovery of the New World hardly occasioned
greater joy than the unexpected tidings, that a pas-
sage was at last found to the great southern ocean.
The communication with the Eat Indies, by a
course to the weflward of the line of demarkation,
drawn by tbe Pope, seemed now to be certain.
The vast wealth which flowed into Portugal from
its settlements and conqucRs in that country, excit-
ed the envy and called forth the emulation of other
flates. Ferdinand hoped now to come in for a
fharc in this lucrative commerce, and in his eager-
nces to obtain it, was willing to make an effort
beyond' what Balboa required. But even in this
exertion, his jealous policy, as well as the fatal
antipathy of Fonseca, now biflhop of Burgos, to
every man of merit who diffinguiflied himself il
the New World, were conllficuous. Notwith-
flanding Balboa's recent fcrvices,' which marked
him out as the most proper pcrfon to finish that great

undertaking

* I-Ievelra, d(c. I. lib. x. c. 3---6. Gomara, c. 64. P. Martyr, dec'
p. 2,cj, &c.

undertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand was B 0 : K
so ungenerous as to overlook these, and to appoint -II
Pedrarias Davila governor of Darien. He gave

1514.

him the command of fifteen stout vessels, and
twelve hundred soldiers. These were fitted out at
the public expence, with a liberality which Ferdi-
nand had never displayed in any former armament
destincd for the New World; and such was the
ardour of the Spanifhi gentlemen to follow a leader
who was about to conduct them to a country,
where, as fame reported, they had only to throw
their nets into the sea and draw out gold -i, that
fifteen hundred embarked on board the fleet, and
if they had not been restrained, a much greater
number would have engaged in the service :.

PEDRARIAS reached the gulf of Darien without
any remarkable accident, and immediately ient
some of his principal officers ashore, to inform Bal-
boa of his arrival, with the king's commifflion, to
be governor of the colony. To their aftoniffiment,
they found Balboa, of whose great exploits they
had heard so much, and of whose opulence they
had formed such high ideas, clad in a canvas
jacket, with shoes made of pack-thread, employed,
together with fbme Indians, in thatching his own-
hut with reeds. Even in this simple garb, which
correifonded so ill with the expedtations and withes
of his new guests, Balboa reccived them with dig-
lity. The fame of his discoverics had drawn so
many adventurers fiom the islands, that he could
now nmuter four hundred and fifty men. At the
head of those da(ring veterans, he was more than a
'match for the forces which Pedrarias brought
with him. But though his troops murmured
; loudly at the ilnjuftice of the king in fipclr-

feding

;'' .. .

.lHTmr,

<c. I. ib. x. c. 14.. Ibli. dec. 1. lib. x. . 6, 7
';i . M.'ltyr, dc.. 1. 177. z56.

BOO K feding their commander, and complained that

, trangers would now reap the fruits of their toil and
A514. success, Balboa submitted with implicit obedience

to the will of his sovereign, and received Pedrarias
with all the deference due to his character t.

Dissention NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation of Balboa,
between to which Pedrarias owed the peaceable poifeffion of
Biaboa. his government, he appointed a judicial inquiry to

be made into his condut, while under'the com-
mand' of Nicueila and Encifo, and imposed a con-
fiderable fine upon him, on account of the irregu-
larities of which he had then been guilty. Balboa
felt sensibly the mortification of being fubjeded to
trial and to punishment in a place where he had so
lately occupied the first fRation. Pedrarias could
not conceal his jealousy of his superior merit;
so that the resentment of the one, and the envy of
the other, gave rife to dissentions extremely detri-
mental to the colony. It was threatened with a
calamity still more fatal. Pedrarias had landed in
Darien at a most unlucky time of the year, about

July. the middle of the rainy season, in that part of the
,/ ~ torrid zone where the clouds pour down such tor-

rents as are unknown in more temperate climates :.
The village of Santa Maria was feated in a rich
plain, environed with marfles and woods. The
constitution of Europeans was unable to with-
stand the pcfilentiall influence of such a situation,
in a climate naturally so noxious, and at a sea-
son so peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and de-
ftrudcive malady carried off many of the soldiers
who accompanied Pedrarias. An extreme scar-
city of provisions augmented this diftrcfs, as
it rendered it impofiible to find proper rcfrcfl-

1llCllt
' l-lerrera, dec. 1. lil, x. c. r ,, 14.

JRicih;ud IHll. N;iatuiclil dc I'Alir, :om. i. . z04.

inent for the tick, or the necessary sustenance for B 0 0 K
the healthy t. In the space of a month, above fix
hundred persons perished in the utmiofl misery. De- 1514.
jecion and despair spread through the colony. Ma-
ny principal persons solicited their difmiflion, and
were glad to relinquish all their hopes of wealth,
in order to escape from that pernicious region. Pe-
drarias endeavoured to divert those who remained
f;om brooding over their misfortunes, by finding
them employment. With this view, he sent several
detachments into the interior parts of the country,
to levy gold among the natives, and to search for
the mines in which it was produced. Those rapa-
cious adventurers, more attentive to present gain
than to the means of facilitating their future pro-
grefs, plundered without diftindion wherever they
marched. Regardless of the alliances which Balboa
had made with several of the caziques, they fripped
them of every thing valuable, and treated them, as
well as their fubjeEts, with the utmost insolence
and cruelty. By their tyranny and exadcions,
which Pedrarias, either from want of authority or
of inclination, did not refrain, all the country
from the gulf of Darien to the lake of Nicaragua
was desolated, and the Spaniards were inconfide-
rately deprived of the advantages which they might
have derived from the friendship of the natives, in
extending their conquests to the oruth Sea. Bal-
boa, who saw with concern, that such ill-judged
proceedings retarded the execution of his favourite
fchemc, sent violent rcmonftrances to Spain against
the imprudent government of Pedrarias, which had
ruined a happy and flourishing colony. Pedrarias,
on the other hand, acctfcd him of having deceived
the king, by magnifying his own exploits, as well
VOL. i. D d as

A I-errcra, dec. x. lib. x. c. 14. P. Martyr, dec. p. 27y .

B 0 0 K as by a falle representation of the opulence and

1i ' value of the country t.
vil'nA r-o- FERDINAND became sensible at length of his in.

"'' '- prudence in fuperfcdilg the most active and expe.
ia. rieci'd &oricer he had in the New World, and, by

way of c;.m enflition to Balboa, appointed him A.
DELANTADO, or Lieutenant-governor of the coun-
tries upon the South Sea, with very extensive pri.
vileges and authority. At the fame time he enjoin-
ed Pedrarias to support Balboa in all hisenterprifes,
and to consult with him concerning every measure
35,5. which he himself pursued. But to effect fucha

fuddcn transition from inveterate enmity to perfect
confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's power. Pedrarias
continued to treat his rival with negled ; and Bal-
boa's fortune being exhaustcd by the payinent of his
fine, and other exactions of Pcdrarias, he could not
make suitable preparations for taking poffefionof
his new government. At length, by the interpoli-
tion and exhortations of the bifhlop of Darien, they
were brought to a reconciliation ; and, in order to
cement this union more firmly, Pcdrarias agreed to
give his daughter in marriage to Balboa. Thr first
516-. effc& of their concord was, that Balboa was per-

mitted to make several finall incursions into the
country. T'Ihefi hc conducted with such prudence,
as added to the reputation which he had already
acquired. MIany adventurers retorted to hinl,; and,
with the counIlt:allnc and ifupport of Pedrarias, he
belgan to pripar; for hisexpedition to the South Sea.
In order to :ccoin(1pllli this, it was nccciry to
build vcl1'Is ca.;abll of ccl:vc)'ingl is troops to th0l
proviiics riiicll he piU-ltld to invade. Afttr

ftrlnlounting

*J II1-rrri i, ilrc .

1. l i. x. > . i (r(. rc. ?.. c. I, ,' ; Icit l , c, 616

ail. Y

;l i i, 1ii:
, j· I.) 11t.

surmounting many obstacles, and enduring a va- B o o K
riety of those hardlhips which were the portion of I
the conquerors of America, he at length finished X517,
four frnall brigantines. In these, with three hun-
dred chosen men (a force fupcrior to that with
which Pizarro afterwards undertook the fame expe-
dition), he was ready to fail towards Peru, when
he received an unexpected meflage from Pedrarias $.
As his reconciliation with Balboa had never been
cordial, the progress which he made revived his an-
cient erfmity, and added to its rancour. -He dread-
ed the prosperity and elevation of a man whom he
had injured so deeply. He fufpeced that fucccfs
wosld encourage him to aim at independence upon
his jurifdi&ion ; and so violently did the paflions
gs hatred, fear, and jealousy, operate upon his
mind, that, in order to gratify his vengeance, he
scrupled not to defeat an enterprise of the greatest
moment to his country. Under pretexts which
were false, but plausible, he desired Balboa to post-
pone his voyage for a short time, and to repair to
Acla, in order thathe mighthave an interview with
him. Balboa, with the unfufpicious confidence of
a man conscious of no crime, instantly obeyed the
summons ; hut as soon as he entered the place, he
was arrestcd by order of Pedrarias, whose impa-
tience to satiate his revenge did not ftffclr him to
.Iinguifll long in confinement. Judges were imme-
diatcly appointed to proceed to his trial. An accu-
fltion of disloyalty to the king, and of an intention
to revolt againtf the governor, was prefe-rred againif
him. Sentence of dcath was pronounced ; and
though the judges who palicd it, seconded by the
whole colony, interceded warmly for his pardon,

d Irdrarias continued inexorable ; and, to their aflo-
lifhlment and lorrow, the Spaniards beheld the pub-.
1t' execution of a man whom they universally deemn

D d 2 ct.

.' H rrera, tICec, z. lib. i. c. 3. Lib. ii. c. s. 13.7.'.
ll'

B O O K ed more capable than any who had borne command

Ill.

in America, of forming and accomplishing great
517. designs *. Upon his death, the expedition which

he had planned was relinquished. Pedrarias, not.
withstanding the violence and injustice of his pro.
ceedings, was not only screened from punishment
by the powerful patronage of the bishop of Burgos
and other courtiers, but continued in power. Soon
after, he obtained permifion to remove the colony
from its unhealthy flation at Santa Maria to Pana.
ma, on the opposite fide of the isthmus; and
though it did not gain much in point of healthful.
ness by the change, the commodious situation of
this new settlement contributed greatly to facilitate
the subsequent conquests of the Spaniards in th
vast countries situated upon the Southern Oceant.

1S15. DURING there tranfatAions in Darien, the hifRo
New disco- ry of which it was proper to carry on in an unin

terrupted tenour, several important events occurr
ed with refpe& to the discovery, the conquest, and
government of other provinces in the.New World
Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a communi
cation with the Molucca or Spice Islands byth
weft, that, in the year one thousand five hundre
and fiftecn, he fitted out two ships at hisownex
pence, in order to attempt such a voyage, and gav
the connmand of them to Juan Diaz de Solis, wh
was deemed the most skilful navigator in Spain.
flood along the coast of South America, andi (ith
firPt of January one thousand five hundred and fix
teen, entered a river, which he called Janciro
where an extensive commerce is now carried 0C
From thence he proceeded to a spacious buay, Wil
he ftlppofed to be the entrance into a strait tla
communicated with the Indian ocean ; blit "p0

advanCill

l Hcxrc;a, dec, c . lib. ii. c, al, z1. t Ibid. lib. iv.l'
!v

advancing farther, he found it to be the mouth of B 0o K
Rio de Plata, one of the vait rivers by which the W.
southern continent of America is watered. In en- 1517.
deavouring to make a defeent in this country, De
Solis and several of his crew were slain by the na-
tives, who, in fight of the ships, cut their bodies in
pieces, roasted and devoured them. Discouraged
with the loss of their commander, and terrified at
this ihocking speCtacle, the surviving Spaniards set
fail for Europe, without aiming at any farther dif-
covery *. Though this attempt proved abortive,
it was not without benefit. It turned the attention
of ingenious men to this course of navigation, and
prepared the way for a more fortunate voyage, in
which, a few years pofteriorto this period, the great
design that Ferdinand had in view was accomplished.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus adively em- Stateofths

ployed in extending their discoveries and fettle- colonyin
ments in America, they still confidered Hispaniola
as their principal colony, and the feat of govern-
ment. Don Diego Columbus wanted neither in-
clination nor abilities to have rendered the members
of this colony, who were most immediately under
his jurisdiction, prosperous and happy. But he was
circumscribed in all his operations by the suspicious
policy of Ferdinand, who on every occasion, and
under pretexts the most frivolous, retrenched his
privileges, and encouraged the treasurer, thejudges,
and other subordinate officers, to counterac his
meafurcs, and to difputte his authority. The most
valuable prerogative which the governor possessed,
was that of distributing Indians among the Spa-
niards fettled in the island. The rigorous servitude
of those unhappy men having been but little miti-
gated by all the regulations in their favour, the

power
< IHclrcra, dcc. . l'b. i. c. 7. P. Martyr, dccad. p. 317.

B O O K power of parcelling out such necessary infiruments

In" of labour at pleasure, secured to the governor great
si7i. influence in the:colony. In order to strip him of

this, Ferdinand created a new office, with the pow-
er ofdiftributing the Indians, and beflowed it up-
on Rodrigo Albuquerque, a relation of Zapata, his
confidential miniffer. Mortified with the injuflice,
as well as indignity, of this invasion upon his rights,
in a point so essential, Don Diego could no longer
remain in a place where his power and consequence
were ahlloft ?nnihilated. He repaired to Spain
with the vain, hopes of obtaining redress 1. Al-
buquerque entered upon his office with all the ra-
paci'y of an indigcnt adventurer, impatient to a-
mass wvltth. HI began with taking the exad
number of Iind;ans in the island, and found, that
from sixty thouland, who, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eight, survived after all their sus-
ferings, they were now reduced to fourteen thou-
sand. These he threw into separate divisions or
lots, and bestowed them upon such as were willing
to purchase them at the highest price. By this ar-
bitrary diitribution, several of the natives were re-
moved from their original habitations, many were
taken from their ancient maifers, and all of them
fubljcled to heavier burdcns, and to more intolera-
ble labour, in order to reimburse their new propric-
tors. Those additional calamities completed the
mifcry, and haflened on the extinction of this
wretched and innocent race of men 1-,

Contl-ovfsy 'lITHE violence of those proceedings, togetherwith
withleflcat the fatal confcquences which attended them, not
to the treat-
.eliiltof 'ith only excited complaints amoing fich as thought
luji.iis. thcmfclvcs agriicved, but touched the hearts of ;1ll

wha

t I-lcH rera, (ecl . . li'. ix. c. . lib, x. c. 12. -1 Ibid. deIc, 1. lib'
X. C. 12.

who retained any sentiments of humanity. From B. O K
the time that Ecclefiafics were sent into America. _
to infRruE and convert the natives, they perceived 1517
that the rigour with which the Spaniards treated
them, rendered their ministry altogether fruitless.
The mifionaries, in conformity to the mild spirit
of that religion which they were employed to p'ub-
lifh, early remonstrated againfc the maxims of their
countrymen with refpet to the Americans, and
condemned the REPARTIMIENTOS, or DISTRIBU-
'IONS, by which they were given up as slaves to
their conquerors, as no less contrary to natural
juflice and the precepts of Chrifianity, than to
found policy. The Dominicans, to whom the in-
{truftion of the Americans was originally commit-
ted, were most vehement in testifying againit the
REPARTIMIENTOS. In the year one thousand five
hundred and eleven, Montefino, one of their most
eminent preachers, inveighed against this practice
in the great church at St. Domingo, with all the
inipe:uofity of popular eloquence. Don Diego
Columbus, the principal officers of the colony, and
all the laymen who had been his hearers, complain-
cd of the monk to his superiors ; but they, inflead of
condcmning, applauded his doctrine, as equally pi-
ous and seasonable. The Franciscans, influenced
by the spirit of opposition and rivalihip which sub-
lifts between the two olders, discovered some incli-
nation to take part with the laity, and to espouse
the dfence of the REPARTIMIENTOS. But as they
could not with decency give their avowed approba-
tion to a system of oppression, so repugnant to the
i)irit of religion, they endeavoured to palliate what
tl'y could not justify, and alledged, in excuse for
the condult of their countrymen, that it was impof-
fible to carry on any improvemlent in the colony,
liill(f tlh S paniallrds pollled fiuch domlinion over

thlc

B O O K the natives, that they could compel them to la.

III.

bour *

Contrary THE Dominicans, regardless of such political
decifioni and interested considerations, would not relax in
concerning
this point. any degree the rigour of their sentiments, and even

refused to absolve, or admit to the sacraments, such
of their countrymen as held the natives in fervi-
tude $. Both parties-applied to the king for his de-
cifion in a matter of such importance. Ferdinand
empowered a committee of his privy-council, as-
sifted by some of the most eminent civilians and di-
vines in Spain, to hear the deputies sent from His-
paniola, in support of their refpetive opinions.
After a long difcuflion, the speculative point in
controversy was determined in favour of the Do-
minicans, the Indians were declared to be a free
people, intitled to all the natural rights of men;
but, notwithstanding this decision, the REPARTI-
MIENTOS were continued upon their ancient foot-
ing t. As this determination admitted the prin-
ciple upon which the Dominicans founded their
opinion, it was not calculated either to silence or
to convince them. At length, in order to quiet
the colony, which was alarmed by their remon-
firances and censures, Ferdinand issued a decree of
his privy-council, declaring, that after mature con-
fideration of the Apostolic Bull, and other titles
'613. by which the crown of Castile claimed a right toits

possessions in the New World, the servitude of the
Indians was warranted both by the laws of God and
of man ; that u nlcs they were ffbjeted to the domi-
nion of the Spaniards, and compelled to rcfide under
their infpelion, it would be impossible to reclaim

them

* Herrcra, drc. i. lib. viii. c. I. Oviedo, lib. iii .. p.

6. 97

I Oviedo, ibid. i Itericra, dc. .i. .li .

.
viii . l. ll. Ix. c. 5

them from idolatry, or to initrudt them in the prin- B o o K
ciples of the Christian faith ; that no farther fcru- ..
pie ought to be entertained concerning the lawful- 1517.
ness of the REPARTIMIENTOS, as the king and
council were willing to take the charge of that up-
on their own consciences; and that therefore the
Dominicans, and monks of other religious orders,
lhould abstain, for the future, from those invec-
tives, which, from an excess of charitable, but ill-
informed zeal, they had uttered againit that prac-
tice .

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree
might be fully understood, Ferdinand conferred new
grants of Indians upon several of his courtiers 11.
But, in order that he might not seem altogether in-
attentive to the rights of humanity, he publiflhed
an edict, in which he endeavoured to provide for the
mild treatment of the Indians under the yoke to
which he subjected them; he regulated the nature
of the work which they Ihould be required to per-
form, he prescribed the mode in which they should
be clothed and fed, and gave direcions with refpedc
to their inftrudion in the principles of Chris-
tianity §.

Effea o£

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their expe- thef.
rience of what was pafl, judged concerning the fu-
ture, soon perceived the inefficacy of those provifi-
ons, and foretold, that as long as it was the in-
terest of individuals to treat the Indians with ri-
gour, no public regulations could render their fervi-
tude mild or tolerable. They confidered it as vain
to wast-e their own time and strength in attempting
to communicate the sublime truths of rcligion to
men, whotc spirits were broken, and their facul-
VoL. . .E c ties

' H*Trcra, d(ec. i, lib. ix. c. 14. Sec N 0 T E XXV.
i Herrera, ibid.

B 0 0 K ties impaired by oppreflion. Some of them, in de.

,_ _, ifpair, requested the permission of their fuperiorsto
1517. remove to the continent, and to pursue the objec

of their miflion, among such of the natives as were
not hitherto corrupted by the example of the Spa.
niards, or alienated by their cruelty from the Chri-
ftian faith. Such as remained in Hispaniola con-
tinued to remonstrate, with decent firmness, against
the servitude of the Indians *

Birtholo- THE violent operations of Albuquerque, the
mew de !as
Caa.s ap- new diltributor of Indians, revived the zeal of the
peiar in te- Dominicans against the REPARTIMIENTOS, and
rence of the
Indians. called forth an advocate for that opprefled people,

who possessed all the courage, the talents, and ac-
tivity requisite in supporting such a desperate cause,
This was Bartholomew de las Casas, a native of
Seville, and one of the clergymen sent out with
Columbus in his second voyage to Hispaniola, in
order to fettle in that island. He early adopted the
opinion prevalent among ecclesiastics, with refped
to the unlawfulness of reducing the natives to ser-
vitude ; and th:lt he might demonfirate the sincerity
of his colnvicion, he relinquifled all the Indians
who had fallen to his own share in the divifionof
the inhabit:ults among their conquerors, declaring
that he hould ever bewail his own misfortune and
guilt, in having, excrciftd for a moment this impi-
uus dominioi over his fellow-creatures -l-. Fro
that time, lie was the avowed patron of the In-
dlians ; alnl by his bold interpositions in their be-
half, as well as by the IrlICet due to his abilities
and chalnicl-.er-, lie had often the merit of fCtting
ioiec boii ind to thle cxccflies of his countryll)il

He
*» llr,:' h: 1,h',. . lib ix. c. 1, l'onl i . I-nill. (e. li e IcI'AUtI

.1
l:'. . \.%i,|. } il. *

I' dilla H i(l. d il `

l l hlt i ,

(i lc 1 l It'ovlndci,lde
Sl[ JL.,')c M i cxLt p,. 303(, 3,''. 1-CrI Ill, dc1. i . lit. x c. 12.

He did not fail to remonfirate warmly against the B O
proceedings of Albuquerque, and, though he soon
found that attention to his own interest rendercd ir;.
him deaf to admonition, he did not abandon the
wretched people whose cause he had espouscd. He
instantly set out for Spain, with the nroft linguil:e
hopes of opening the eyes and softening the heart of
Ferdinand, by that striking picture of the oppref--
sion of his new fubjecs, which he would exhibit to
his view *.

HE easily obtained admittance tothe king, whom 1516.
he found in a declining state of health. \ith soui inthe
much freedom, and no less eloquence, he repre- cu-t of
sented to him all the fatal effects of the REPARTI- S!i
IIENTOS in the New World, boldly charging him
with the guilt of having authorised this impious
meafiire, which had brought misery and destruction
upon a numerous and innocent race of men, whom
Providence had placed under his protecion. Ser-
dinand, whose mind as well as body was much en-
feebled by his distemper, was greatly alarmed at
this charge of impiety, which at another juncture
he would have dcfpifed. He liftcned with deep
compunction to the discourse of Las Casas, and
proliifed to take into attentive consideration the
mcans of redrcfling the evil of which he complain-
ctl. But death prevcnted him from cxccuting his
rcfblution. Charles of Aufiria, to whom all his
clowns devolved, resided at that time in his pater-
1al dolllinions in the Low Countrics. Las Caflis,
with his ufuial ardour, prepared immediately to fct
"'lt for Slanders, in order to occuply the c.lr of the
y')llbii monarch, whcll cardinal Ximenes, who, as
r''o'nt, afliuedl the reins of govrlnment in Caflile,
C(mlllilended him to defifi fioml the journey, anld en-
t;1'tcd to hcar hlis complaintis iln i l foll.

E c2 IIE

Ir11 Itrl, t lcc. l. lib. x. c. I2. 1P c. i..

l . i.

c. 1 . Davil. Pa-
,! i llIl. p. 30.1..

B 0 0 K HE accordingly weighed the matter with atten.

IIl tion equal to its importance; and as his impetuous
ic5. mind delighted in schemes bold and uncommon, he

The regula- soon fixed upon a plan which aftoniihed the mini.
tions of car-
dinal Xi- fcrs, trained up under the formal and cautious ad-

nnes. mininiration of Ferdinand. Without regarding ei.

ther the rights of Don Diego Columbus, or the re-
gulations established by the late king, he resolved to
fend three persons to America as fuperintendentsof
all the colonies there, with authority, after examin.
ing all circumstances on the spot, to decide finally
with refpeEt to the point in question. It was a
matter of deliberation and delicacy to chute men
qualified for such an important station. As all the
laymen fettled in America, or who had been con-
fulted in the administration of that department, had
given their opinion that the Spaniards could not
keep poffefiFon of their new settlements, unless they
were allowed to retain their dominion over the In-
dians, he saw that he could not rely on their impar-
tiality, and determined to commit the trust to eccle-
fiatics. As the Dominicans and Franciscans had
already efpouled opposite fides in the controversy,
he, from the fame principle, excluded both these
fraternities from the commiflion. He confined his
choice to the monks of St. Jerome, a frnall, but re-
fpectablc order in Spain. With the assistance of
their general, and in concert with Las Casas, he
loon pitched upon three persons whom he dceeied
equal to the charge. To them he joined Zuazo, a
private lawycr of' dii-iiguificd probity, with 1nl-
bounded power to regulate all judicial procecdings
in the colonies. Las Casas was appointed to ac
company them with the title of Protector of the
Indians '.

To
I ler,'cr., (icc. 2. lib. ii. c. 3.

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might at B O O K

once overturn the fyflem of government established il
in the New World, in four persons, who, from 1517.
their humble condition in life, were little intitled The anner
to poliefs this high authority, appeared to Zapata, they were
and other ministers of the late king, a measure so executed.
wild and dangerous, that they refused to issue the
dispatches neceflary for carrying it into execution.
But Xinenes was not of a temper patiently to brook
opposition to any of his schemes. He sent for the
refractoryminifters, and addressed them in such a
tone, that in the utmost consternation they obeyed
his orders *. The superintendents, with their as-
fociate Zuazo, and Las Casas, failed for St. Do-
mingo. Upon their arrival, the first aEt of their
authority was to set at liberty all the Indians who
had been granted to the Spaniih courtiers, or to any
person not residing in America. This, together
with the information which had been received from
Spain concerning the objec of the commission,
spread a general alarm. The colonies concluded
that they were to be deprived at once of the hands
with which they carried on their labour, and that,
of consequence, ruin was unavoidable. But the
fathers of St. Jerome proceeded with such caution
and prudence, as soon dissipated all their fears.
They discovered, in every tPep of their condut, a
knowledge of the world, and of affairs, which is
seldom acquired in a cloiftcr ; and displayed a mo-
deration and gentleness still more rare among per-
sons trained up in the solitude and austerity of mo-
nastic life. Their ears were open to information
from every quarter, they compared the different ac-
counts which they received, and, after a mature
consideration of the whole, they were fully satisfied
that the irate of the colony rendered it impossible

to
Hc-rrora, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 6.

B 0 0 K to adopt the plan proposed by Las Casas, and re-

_s commended by the cardinal. They plainly per.
i517 ceived that the Spaniards fettled in America were

so few in number, that they could neither work the
mines which had been opened, nor cultivate the
country ; that they depended for both upon the la-
bour of the natives, and if deprived of it, they mufr
instantly relinquish their conquests, or give up all
the advantages which they derived from them; that
no allurement was so powerful as to surmount the
natural aversion of the Indians to any laborious es-
fort, and that nothing but the authority of a master
could compel them to work ; and if they were not
kept constantly under the eye and discipline of a
superior, so great was their natural listlessness and
indifference, that they would neither attend to re-
ligious instruCtion, nor observe thole rites of Chri-
flianity which they had been already taught. Upon
all those accounts, they found it neceflary to tole-
rate the REPARTIMIENTOS, and to susSer the In-
dians to remain under subjection to their Spanish
maiters. They used their utmost endeavours,
however, to prevent the fatal effets of this eftab-
lihinent, and to secure the Indians the consolation
of the belt treatment compatible with a state of fr-
vitude. For this purpose, they revived former re-
gulations, they prclcribed new ones, they neglected
no circumstance that tended to mitigate the rigour
of the yoke ; and by their authority, their example,
and their exhortations, they laboured to inspire
their countrymenc with fclntimcnts of equity 'an
gcntlenefs towards the unhappy people upon whofc
indtifry they depended. Zuazo, in his depart-
ment, fcconded the endeavoulrs of the fuperinten-
dents. He reformed the courts of juilicc, in lich al
manner as to render their decisions equitable as well
as expeditious, and intrloduced various regulations
which greatly improved the interior police of the

colony,

colony, The fatisfaaion with his conduci, and B O K
that of the superintendents, was now universal a-
mong the Spaniards fettled in the New World, and 1517
all admired the boldness of Ximenes, in having de-
parted from the ordinary path of business in forming
his plan, as well as his sagacity in pitching upon
persons, whose wisdom, moderation, and disinter-
edlcdnefs, rendered them worthy of this high trust*.

LAS CASAS alone was dissatisfied. The pruden- LasCafas

tial considerations which influenced the fuperin- dissatisfied
tcndents, made no impression upon him. He re- wth
garded their idea of accommodating their conduct
to the state of the colony, as the maxim of an un-
hallowed timid policy, which tolerated what was
uljuft, because it was beneficial. He contended,
that the Indians were by nature free, and, as their
protector, he required the superintendents not to
bereave them of the common privilegeof humanity.
They received his moit virulent remonstrances
without emotion, but adhered firmly to their own
fiflcm. The Spanish planters did not bear with
him lo paticntly, and were ready to tear him in
pieces for insisting in a requisition so odious to
them. Las Casas, in order to fcrecn hinlfelf from
their lia;e, found it neceifarv to take flelter in a
cnvcint ; and perceiving that all his efForts in Ame-
rica wer-e fruitlcfs, lie Toon set out for Europe, with
;I fixed relblution not to abandon the protection of
l pIople whom he deemed to be cruelly oppreffed-l-.

I1ADt) Xinicles retained that vigour of mind with isinicgocia-

whichl he ulfuially applied to business, Las Casas '
Iilll h;tve met withl no very gracious reception up- f(cn. of

0 Cliallch V.

1 Ilc'rrcra, d.c . i c.

.c. i. i . I . Rcnmeal. Iifi. Gei cr. lib. z. c.

1, '''e:> .
*| I rc .,LL , .. lib). ii i. 16.

B O O K on his return to Spain. But he found the cardi.

nal languishing under a mortal distemper, and pre-
1517. paring to resign his authority to the young king,

who was daily expeCed from the Low Countries.
Charles arrived, took pofleffion of the government
and, by the death of Ximenes, loft a minister, whose
abilities and integrity intitled him to direEt his as-
fairs. Many of the Flemish nobility had accom-
panied their sovereign to Spain. From that warm
predilection to his countrymen, which was natural
at his age, he consulted them with refped to all the
tranfations in his new kingdom, and they, with an
indiscreet eagerness, intruded themselves into every
business, and seized almost every department of ad-
ministration *. The direcion of American affairs
was an objea too alluring to escape their attention.
Las Casas cbferved their growing influence, and
though projecors are usually too sanguine, to con-
dud their schemes with much dexterity, he pof-
sessed a buffling indefatigable adtivity, which some-
times accomplishes its purposes with greater fuc-
cess, than the most exquisite discernment and ad-
dress. He courted the Flemish ministers with asti-
duity. He represented to them the absurdity of all
the maxims hitherto adopted with refpet to the go-
vernment of America, and particularly the defels
of that arrangement which Ximenes had introduc-
ed. The memory of Ferdinand was odious to the
Flemings. The superior virtue and abilities of
Ximenes had long been the objcet of their envy.
They fondly wished to have a plausible pretext for
condemning the measures, both of the monarch anid
of the minister, and of refleting some difcrediton
their political wifdiom. The friends of Don Diego,
Columbus, as well as the Spanifll courtiers, who

had
I-lifl. of Clianic; V. vol. ii.p. 4'3!

had been dissatisfied with the cardinal's adminiftra- B 0 0 K

Ill.

tion, joined Las Casas in censuring the scheme of
fending superintendents to America. This union 1s57.
of so many interests and passions was irrefitible;
and, in consequence of it, the fathers of St. Je-
rome, and their associate Zuano, were recalled.
Roderigo de Figueroa, a lawyer of some eminence,
was appointed chief judge of the island, and re-
ceived instructions, in compliance with the request
of Las Casas, to examine once more, with the ut-
most attention, the point in controversy between
him and the people of the colony, with refpe&f to
the treatment of the natives; and in the mean
time to do every thing in his power to alleviate their
sufferings, and prevent the extinction of the
race t.

Scheme of

THIS was all that the zeal of Las Casas could supplying
procure, at that junaure, in favour of the Indians. the colonies
The impoflibility of carrying on any improvement goe,.
in America, unless the Spanish planters could
command the labour of the natives, was an infu-
perable objection to his plan of treating them as
fre fubjeets. In order to provide fore remedy for
this, without which he found it was vain to men-
tion his scheme, Las Casas proposed to purchase a
sufficient number of negroes from the Portuguese
settlements on the coast of Africa, and to tran-
sport them to America, in order that they might be
employed as slaves in working the mines and cul-
tivating the ground. One of the firfl advantages
which the Portuguese had derived from their dif-
coveries in Africa, arose from the trade in slaves.
Various circumflances concurred in reviving this
odliouus commerce, which had been long abolifhled
in Europe, and which is no less repugnant to the
feelings of humanity, than to the principles of re-
ligion. As early as the year one thousand five

VOL. I. F f hundred
t Hcrrclr, dcc. z. lib, ii. c. i6. 19. zi. ib. iii.,

B O O K hundred and three, a few negro slaves had been

font into the New World t. In the year one
15 -7 thousand five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand per-

mitted the importation of them in greater num-
bers ++. They were found to be a more robust and
hardy race than the natives of America. They
-ere more capable of enduring fatigue, more pa.
tient under servitude, and the labour of one negro
w.as computed to be equal to that of four-Indians §,
Cardinal Ximenes, however, when solicited to en-
courage this commerce, peremptorily rejected the
proposition, because he perceived the iniquityof
reducing one race of men to slavery, while he was
consulting about the means of restoring libertyto
another 11. But Las Casas, from the inconfiften-
cv natural to men who hurry with headlong im-
petuofity towards a favourite point, was incapable
of making this diftindion. While he contended
(arneftly for the liberty of the people born in one
quarter of the globe, he laboured to enslave the in-
habitants of another region ; and in the warmth of
his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke, pro-
nounced it to be lawful and expedient to impose one
itill heavier upon the Africans. Unfortunately for
the ;ltter, Las Cafas's plan was adopted. Charles
granted a patent to one of his Flemiih favourites,
cotainingl an exclusive right of importing four
thoulfand negroes into America. IIe fold his patent
to iome (enocfe merchants for twenty-five thoufaild
ducats, and they were the sirs who brought into
ricullar forml that colmmerce for slaves betwen A-
frica and iAml-rica, which has since been carried on

lqX8. to such an amalzing extent '.

.ias Cal.s
iropic',,, BUT'r the Gcnocfe merchants, condueling their
t.Ij, t,, operations, attlrif, with the rapacity ofn onopoliftl,
I,1'q,.x,,,,L)1.,. cmnlllcd
Ii aii-uino~i. demanded

t 1I-li' err , (Ic(. I . li. v. c. z. bid. I il . vlii c. 9

§ bid. lib. ix.'. 5. ii

1 d.l dcc z. ib. ii c.

Z.
I Ibid. lib. ii.c' i'

demanded such an high price for negroes, that the B o o K
number imported into Hispaniola made no great i
change upon the slate of the colony. Las Casas ,17.
whole zeal was no less inventive than indefatiga-
ble, had recourse to another expedient for the relief
of the Indians. He observed, that most of the pcr-
sons who had fettled hitherto in America, were fol-
diers and sailors employed in the discovery or con-
quest of the country; the younger sons of noble
families, allured by the prospect of acquiring fud-
den wealth ; or desperate adventurers, whom their
indigence or crimes forced to abandon their native
land. Infread of such men, who were dissolute,
rapacious, and incapable of that fober persevering
industry which is requisite in forming new colonies,
he proposed to supply the new settlements in His-
paniola and the other islands with a sufficient num-
ber of labourers and husbandmen, who should be
allured by suitable premiums to remove thither.
These, as they were accuflomed to fatigue, would
be able to perform the work, to wlhich the Indians,
from the feebleness of their constitution, were un-
equal, and might soon become ufcful and opulent
citizens. But though Hispaniola stood much in.
need of a recruit of inhabitants, havi,ng been visit-
ed at this time with the small pox, which fwcpt
oft many of the natives, and though Las Casas had
thc countenanc of the Flemifl ministers, this
cfhemewas defeated by the bishop of lu rgos, who
thwarted all his projc-'s -.

LAS CASAS now despaired of procuring any re- Folrs tile

licf for the Indians in thofc placcs vwhcrc thc Spa- idea,,.
iairds were already littled . 'lhe evil was become

Ioillvetittc there, a;s not to admit of a cure. But

fich di coverics were daily nmaking in the conti-
ll'nt) as gave an high idea both of its extent and

1t f 2 populoufnlefi

I' 11t cnrk ,
al uc, .1. Iil,. ii. .;. Z..

B 0 0 K populoufinefs. In all those vast regions there was

,__ Ibut one feeble colony planted ; and except a fmnall
1517. spot on the ifthnus of Darien, the natives still oc.

cupied the whole country. This opened a new
and more ample field for the humanity and zeal of
Las Casas, who flattered himself that he might
prevent a pernicious fyflem from being introduced
there, though he had failed of success in his at-
tempts to overturn it, where it was already eftab-
iified. Full of this idea, he applied for a grant
of the unoccupied country, firetching along the
sea-coast from the gulf of Paria to the western fron-
tier of that province now Lnown by the nameof
Santa Martha. He proposed to fettle there witha
colony composed of husbandmen, labourers, and
ecclefiafrics. He engaged, in the space of two
years, to civilize ten thousand of the natives, and
to inflruc them so thoroughly in the arts of social
life, that, from the fruits of their indutry, an
annual revenue of fifteen thoulhnd ducats should
arise to the king. In ten years, he..expedted that
his improvements would be so far advanced, asto
yield annually sixty thouifnd ducats. He fiipulat-
ed, that no sailor or soldier Iliould ever be permitted
to fettle in this difirict ; and that lno Spaniard should
enter it without his pc :riflion. He even projctled
to cloihc the people whom he took along with him
in lIce pcctliar garmenit, which did not rcfcmble
the Spanish dress, that they might appear to the
lnatives to be a1 d(if-lrcnt race of men from th0of
whlo h;ad brought to many calamnitics utlpo thlir
country t. From this i(clh'me, of which 1 ha;ie
traced only the gr;at lincS, it is manifest that Las
Casa.s had fnrmced ideas colncerlling tlhe method (o
treating the Indians, fitlll u' to, lliol' by which thc
Jesuits afterwards carried on their great operatioll
in another part of the Lilnlc continent. He fuppolj(l

that
*(* H ii~cr~i) il;'. i,. I'l , i . c. *A.

that the Europeans, by availing themselves of that B o o K
ascendant which they po.ssesed in consequence of II
their superior progress in science and improvement, 1517.
might gradually form the minds of the Americans
torelifl those comforts of which they were destitute,
night train them to the arts of civil life, and ren-
der them capable of its fundtions.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council of Favourably

the Indies this project appeared not only chimerical, received.
but dangerous in a high degree. They deemed the
faculties of the Americans to be naturally so limit-
ed, and their indolence so exceflive, that any at-
tempt to instruct or improve them would be fruit-
less. They contended, that it would be extremely
imprudent to give the command of a country ex-
tending above a thousand miles along the coast, to
a fanciful, presumptuous enthusiast, a stranger to
the affairs of the world, and unacquainted with the
arts of government. Las Casas, far from being dif-
couraged with a repulse, which he had reason to
expect, had rccourfe once more to the Flemish fa-
vourites, who zealously patronized his scheme,
merely bccaufe it had been rejected by the Spanish
milifters. They prevailed with their malfer, who
had lately been raised to the Imperial dignity, to 19
refer the consideration of this meafurc to a felec
number of his privy-counfellors; and as Las Casas
excepted against the members of the council of the
Indics, as partial and interefled, all of them were
excluded. The decision of men chosen by recom-
mendation of the Flemings, was perfctly con-
formable to their f:ntiments. They warmly ap-
proved of Las Cafas's plan; and'gave orders for
carrying it into execution, but reltriacd the terri-
tory allotted him to three hundred miles along the
coalt of Cumana, allowing him, however, to extend
it as far as he pleated towards the interior part of
tle Coull-try t.. T

uT11r;

I' (;" m:i ;. I 1. CGcner. c. 77. Hlcilcrr , dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 3. Ovi<:e
"'i lib. ii , . .

B OK THIS determination did not pass uncenfured

Almofl every person who had been in the Wefi

1517. Indies exclaimed against it, and supported their

A folemrn opinion so confidently, and with such plausible
deliberation
concerning reasons, as made it advisable to pause and to re-
the mode of view the fubjedc more deliberately. Charles him-
treating the
Indians. self, though accustomed, at this early period of

his life, to adopt the sentiments of his miniters,
with such submission and deference as did not pro-
mise that decisive vigour of mind which distinguish.
ed his riper years, began to suspect that the eager-
ness with which the Flemings took part in every
affair relating to America, flowed from some im-
proper motive, and discovered an inclination to
examine in person into the state of the question
concerning the character of the Americans, and the
June z. proper manner of treating them. An opportunity

of making this inquiry, with great advantage,
soon occurred. Quevedo, the bishop of Darien,
who had accompanied Pedrarias to the continentin
the year one thousand five hundred and thirteen,
happened to land at Barcelona, where the court
then resided. It was soon known, that his senti-
ments concerning the talents and disposition of the
Indians differed from those of Las Casas; and
Charles naturally concluded, that by confronting
two refpetable persons, who, during their long
residence in America, had full leisure to observe
the manners of the people whom they pretended to
describe, he might be able to difcovcr which of them
had formed his opinion with the greatest difcein-
mcnt and accuracy.

A DAY for this solemn audience was appointed.

The emperor appeared with extraordinary pomp,
and took his feat on a throne in the great hall of
the palace. His principal courtiers attended.
Don Diego Columbus, admiral of the Indics, was
fuinmoncd to be prccint. The bishop of l)ariel

was

was called upon firfi to deliver his opinion. He, B 00 K
in a short discourse, lamented the fatal desolation ilI
of America, by the extinction of so many of its in- 1517.
habitants ; he acknowledged that this must be im-
puted, in some degree, to the excessive rigour and
inconsiderate proceedings of the Spaniards; but
declared, that all the people of the New World,
whom he had seen either in the continent or in the
islands, appeared to him to be a race of men marked
out, by the inferiority of their talents, for fervi-
tude, and whom it would be impoflible to inftrud
or improve, unless they were kept under the conti-
nual infpetion of a mailer. Las Casas, at greater
lengch, and with more fervour, defended his own
system. He rejected with indignation the idea that
any race of men were born to servitude, as irreligi-
ous and inhumane. He asserted, that the faculties
of the Americans were not naturally despicable, but
unimproved; that they were capable of receiving
inftrution in the principles of religion, as well as
of acquiring the industry and arts which would
qualify them for the various offices of social life;
that the mildness and timidity of their nature ren-
dered them so submissive and docile, that they
might be led and formed with a gentle hand. He
Iprofecfd, that his intentions in proposing the
scheme now under consideration were pure and
disinterested; and though, from the accomplish-
ment of his designs, inestimable benefits would re-
silt to the crown of Castile, he never had claimed,
nor ever would receive any recompcnce upon that
account.

CHARLiS, after hearing both, and consulting The scheme*

with his ninifrers, did not think himself fufficicntly ofLas C:aha
inforied to cftablifl any general arrangement with 12^0
rcIped to the state of the Indians ; but as he had
perfed confidence in the integrity of Las Casas,

and

B O O K and as even thebifhop ofDarien admitted his scheme

to be of fitch importance, that a trial should be
517s. made of its effets, he issued a patent, granting

him the diftrid in Cumana formerly mentioned,
with full power to establish a colony there accord.
ing to his own plan t.

Hisprepara- LAS CASAS pushed on the preparations for his
tions for voyage with his usual ardour. But, either from his
ecutingit. own inexperience in the conduct of affairs, or from

the secret opposition of the Spanish nobility, who
universally dreaded the success of an institution that
might rob them of the industrious and useful hands
which cultivated their estates, his progress inen-
gaging husbandmen and labourers was extremely
flow, and he could prevail on no more than two
hundred to accompany him to Cumana.

NOTHING, however, could damp his zeal. With

ADepricas this slender train, hardly sufficient to take possession
and meets of such a vast territory, and altogether unequal to
dable obfm- any attempt towards civilizing its inhabitants, he
cles. set fail. The firfi place at which he touched was

the island of Porto-Rico. There he received an
account of a new obstacle to the execution of his
scheme, more insuperable than any he had hitherto
encountered. When he left America in the year
one thousand five hundred and seventeen, the Spa-
niards had little intercourse with any part of the
continent, except the countries adjacent to the gulf
of Darien. But as every species of internal indus-
try began to itagnate in Hispaniola, when, by tlhe
rapid decrcafe of the natives, the Spaniards were
deprived of those hands with which they had hitherlto
carried on their operations, this prompted them to try

various

t HcIrrcr:l, idec. .. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfol Annallcs de AiragS
'r4. 97. Reniiiil Hil}. Gener. lib. ii. c. 19, 20.

various expedients for supplying that loss. Confi- B O O K
derable numbers of negroes were imported; but,
on account of their exorbitant price, many of the i517.
planters could not afford to purchase them. In or-
der to procure slaves at an easier rate, some of these
fitted out vessels to cruize along the coal of the
continent. In places where they found themselves
inferior in strength, they traded with the natives,
and gave European toys in exchange for the plates
of gold which they wore as ornaments; but where-
ever they could surprise or overpower the Indians,
they carried them off by force, and fold them as
slaves in Hispaniola :. In those predatory excur-
sions the noft atrocious ads of violence and cruelty
were committed. The Spanish name was held in
detestation all over the continent. Whenever any
ships appeared, the inhabitants either fled to the
woods, or rushed down to the Ihore in arms,
to repel those hated disturbers of their tranquility.
They forced some parties of the Spaniards to re-
treat with precipitation; they cut off others ; and
in the violence of their resentment against the whole
nation, they murdered two Dominican miflionaries
whose zeal had prompted them to fettle in the pro-
vince of Cumana t-. 1his outrage againt persons
revered for their fancrity, excited such indignation
among the people of Hifplaniola, who, notwith-
fianding all their cruel and licentious proceedings,
were pofFeflcdl with a wonderful zeal for religion,
and a fitpcrflitious rcfc fir its miniifrers, that
they determined to inflit& exemplary punifimlcnt,
not only upon the perpetrators of that crime, but
"pon the whole nation. With this view, they gave
the commland of five f-lips ;1a1( three h1undred mlen
lol)icgo ()cal po, wilh orders to lay \vaile the
CoUlttry of Cumana with fire and w'cl.d, anild to
tr-ilsport all the inhab;it:,t;ls as slaves to Ili).iiitla.
V01, .

. (i , ''i lis
I IlmCr ra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3. .[ Ovic o lill. ilb. xix. c. 3.

B 0 0 K l his armament Las Casas found at Porto-Rico, in

its way to the continent ; and as Ocampo refused
1517. to dcefer his voyage, he immediately perceived that

it would be inlpofible to attempt the execution of
his pacific plan in a country which was the
feat of war and desolation .

i.thiApril. IN order to provide againfi the effets of this
-t'ibou;s to urnortunate incident, he set fail directlv for St. Do-
lurnuunt i
trIrnuc mingo, leaving his followers cantoned out among

hle planters in Porto-Rico. From many concur-
ring causes, the reception which Las Casas met
with in Hifpaniiola was very unfavourable. In
his nec'ociations for the relief of the Indians, he
had ccnflurdc the conlduct of his countrymena set-
tled thlere with ilch honest severity, as rendered
him univcrfailv odious to them. They confidered
their own ruin as the inevitable consequence of his
success. They were now elated with hope of re-
ceiving a large recruit of slaves from Cumanll
which must be relinquished if Las Casas were as-
lifted in fettling his projeced colony there. Figue-
roa, in consequence of the instructions he had re-
ccived in Spain, had made an experiment concern-
inl the capacity of the Indians, which was reprc-
lfiited as dccifive ngainLt the lyfl-cm of Las Cafils.
-ie coilected in HIIifpaniola a good number of tlie
natives, and fettled them in two villages, leaving
themn at perfelt liberty, and with the uncontrollld
dire&tion of thcir own adCios. But that people,
accustomcd( to a mode of life extremely difllrent,
inclpable of afililming new habits at once, and de-
ccdted too with theirown misfortuncs as well as tho(l
of their country, exerted so little indlltifv in c1l-
ti'vating lthe grollund, ;ppea red so devoid of folicitllud
.or forclfi'htr in plrovidting for their own wants, :Il
lTwer ftiic'l ftlnrainger to a.rrlatlll g nt in colnduiliIl,

thci
I Ilril:ti, dt'c. 2. 1ib. ix., C. S, 9

their affairs, that the Spaniards pronounced them B 0 0 I

mIl.

incapable of being formed to live like men in social
life, and confidered them as children, who fliould 1517.
be kept under the perpetual tutelage of perions fu-
perior to themselves in wiidom and iagacityr.

NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumftanccs, Fin
which alienated the people to whom he applied from carriage of
himself and from his measures, Las Casas, by his his Kheme
activity and perseverance, by some conceflions, and
many threats, obtained at length a small body of
troops to p.otect him and his colony at their firi-
landing. But upon his return to Porto-Rico, he
found that the diseases of the climate had been fa-
tal to fcveral of his people; and that others having
got employment in that island, refused to follow
him. With the handful that remained, he set fail
and landed in Cumana. Ocampo had executed his
coirmifion in that province with such barbarous
rage, having maflacred many of the inhabitants,
sent others in chains to Hispaniola, and forced the
reft to fly for shelter to the woods, that the people
of a finall colony, which he had planted at a place
which he named TOLEDO, were ready to perifli for
want in a desolated country. There, however, Las
Casas was obliged to fix his reficlence, though de-
ferted both by the troops appointed to protect him,
:ad by those under the command of Ocampo, who
forcleilv and dreaded the calamities to which he must
be exposed in that wretched flation. lIe made the

1bes proi fio in his power for the fifety and sub-

fiflence of his followers ; but as his utmooft efforts

'avilced little towards securing either the one or the

"tlher, lhe returntled to T-lifpaniola, in order to soli-
cit inore c(flElu al aid for the preservation of men,
wlho froml conlidCence in himn had venturcd into a

G g 2 po{t

* HtrR~rS~ drh.
< . Nli. X. C. c.

B 0 0 K pofi of ol- much danger. Soon after his departure,

,_,_ the natives, having difcovcrcd the feeble and de-
1517. fcnceltefs tate of the Spaniards, assembled secretly,

attacked them with the fury natural to men exafpe-
rated by many injuries, cut off a good number,
and compelled the reft to fly in the utmost confler-
nation to the island of Cubagua. The small colony
fettled there, on account of the pearl fishery, catch-
ing the panic with which they had been seized,
abandoned the island, and not a Spaniard remained
in any pait of the continent, or adjacent islands,
from the oulf of Paria to the borders of Darien.
Astonished at such a fuccefion of disasters,, Las
Casas was ashamed to ihew his face after this fatal
termination of all his splendid schemes. He shut
himself up in the convent of the Dominicans at St.
D)omingo, and loon after assumed the habit of that
ordcr'l.

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony from Cu-

mana happened in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-one, I have chosen to trace the
progress of Las Casas negociations from their first
rife to their final issue without interruption. His
fyi:tem was the objct of long and attentive discus-
sion; and though his efforts in behalf of the op-
pne'lc'd Amncricans, partly from his own rafinefs
.;!d1 illprlude ce, and partly from the malevolent
o).p;fi iil of ihis adveCrfriaCs, were not attended
w,,ii, ili.it in:cc; i which he lpro)ildc with too fan-
(,'ii'n conlfi'lincer, tlhevy rive ri;fl to various regula-
ti ons which were of fl)me blenefit to that unhappy
!. 1il(. I rt:tlu L nowv t t the hillory of the S )aniill
(ifcovcries, as y
they occr ill the order of tinmet.

I)IEGO

:1 I d,::..i ,c. a, ,11.. .. ll . x.c . l

t. i .

. it. ii'. . 4, vid

r'[l i l. il. . ' t. (;,lllill.ln , . - 7. D .t, il.a l'.i. l ill . I c.- 7
I'..miii , lit.

h i b. libn . l i . . ' [' [Icrrcla, J11 .2. lib, l-

' .
I ' 3z9.

DIEGO VELASQUEZ, who conquered Cuba in BOOK
the year one thousand five hundred and eleven, still I
retained the government of that island, as the de- 1517.
puty of Don Diego Columbus, though he seldom Nveisdtfw-
acknowledged his superior, and aimed at rendering ardstheweft
his own authority altogether independent*. Under
his prudent adminifiration Cuba became one of the
most flourishing of the Spanish settlements. The
fame of this allured many persons from the other
colonies, in hopes of finding there either some per-
manent eftablifnment, or some employment for their
activity. As Cuba lay to the weft of all the islands
occupied by the Spaniards, and as the ocean, which
firetches beyond it towards that quarter, had not
hitherto been explored, there circumstances natu-
rally invited the inhabitants to attempt new disco-
veries. An expedition for this purpose, in which
activity and resolution might conduct to sudden
wealth, was more suited to the genius of the age,
than the patient industry requisite in clearing
ground, and manufacuring sugar. Instigated by
this spirit, several officers, who had served under
Pedrarias in Darien, entered into an association to
undertake a voyage of discovery. They persuaded
Francisco -lernandez Cordova, an opulent planter
il Cuba, and a man of diflinguifhed courage, to
join with them in the adventure, and chose him to
be their commander. Velasquez not only approv-
ede of the design, but assisted in carrying it on. As
the veterans from Darien were extremely indigent,
he and Cordova advanced money for purchasing
th'ree small veflcls, and furnished them with every
thing requisite either for traffic or for war, a hun-
dred and ten 1men embarked on board of them, and
ftiled frlio St. Jago de Cuba on the cighth of Fe-

bruary
g f IIlrcrl, Idcc. 2. libi. ii. c. 19.

B 0 0 K bruary one thousand five hundred and seventeen.

By the advice of their chief pilot, Antonio Ala-
J5,7. minos, who had servcd under the first admiral Co-

lumbus, they tsood directly weft, relying on the
opinion of that great navigator, who uniformly
maintained that a weftcrly course would lead to the
most important discoveries.

ON the twenty-firft day after their departure

from St. Jago, they saw land, which proved to be
CAPE COTOCHE, the eastern point of that large
peninsula projecting from the continent of America,
Yucatan. which still retains its original name of YUCATAN.

As they approached the shore, five canoes came
off full of people decently clad in cotton garments;
an aflonifhing fpedacle to the Spaniards, who had
found every other part of America possessed by naked
savages. Cordova endeavoured by small presents
to gain the good-will of these people. They, tho'
amazed at the firange objects now presented for the
first time to their view, invited the Spaniards to
visit their habitations, with an appearance of cor-
diality. They landed accordingly, and as they
advanced into the country, they observed with new
wonder tome large houses built with stone. But
they toon found that, if the people of Yucatan had
made progress in improvement beyond their coun-
trymen, they were lilcewife more artful and war-
like. For though the Caziquc received Cordova
with many tokens of fi'icndfliip, he had posted a
considerable body of his fubijets in ambufl behind
a thicket, who upon a signal givcp by him, ruflled
out and attacked the Spaniards with great boldncfs,
and fomnc degree of martial order. At the firlf
flight of their arrows, fifteen of the Spaniards were
wounded ; but the Indians were struck with lfuc
terror by the fulddeni cxplofin of the fire-arms, and
io fTurpriltfd at the execution doiL b thelm, by thle

crols-

cross-bows, and by the other weapons of their new B 0 I K
enemies, that they fled precipitately, and Cor-
(dova quitted a country where he had met with such 1 50.
a fierce reception, carrying off two prisoners, to-
gether with the ornaments of a small temple, which
he plundered in his retreat.

HE continued his course towards the weft with- Campcachy.

out losing fight of the coast, and on the sixteenth
day arrived at Campeachy. There the natives re-
ceived them more hospitably; but the Spaniards
were much surprised that on all the extensive coast
along which they failed, and which they imagined
to be a large island, they had not observed any
river%. As their water began to fail, they advan-
ced, in hopes of finding a supply; and at length
they difcovcrcd the mouth of a river at Potonchan,
lome leagues beyond Campeachy.

CORDOVA landed all his troops in order to protedt
the sailors while employed in filling the casks ; but
notwithstanding this precaution, the natives rulhed
down upon them with such fury,' and in such num-
lhrs, that fi)rty-feven of the Spaniards were killed
u1pon the spot, and one man only of the whole body
f'cl)aped unhurt. 'Their commander, though wound-
ed in twelve different places, dliretled the retreat
with precince of mind coual to the courage with
w;iich he had led them on in the engagement, and
';itlh Inlch ifficiulty they regained their flips.
Afticr this fatal repulrlf, nothingt remained but to
h;::i'l ba:tic to Cuba with their shattered forces.
In their pnlallt thither they fufl h

rcd the niofl cx-

qiltfite difitres lor want of water, that men wounded
aladl sickly, filut up in small vcftlis, and cxpofcd to

the.
" See NOTE XXVI.

B o O K the heat of the torrid zone, can be supposed to en-

dure. Some of them, finking under these calamij
s1o. ties, died by the way; Cordova, their commander

expired soon after they landed in Cuba*.

Voyage of NOTWITHSTANDING the dirafl-rous, conclusion
Grijava. of this expedition, it contributed rather to animate

than to damp a spirit of enterprise among the Spa.
niards. They had discovered an extensive country,
situated at no great diflance from Cuba, fertile in
appearance, and possessed by a people far superior in
improvement to any hitherto known in America,
Though they had carried on little commercial in-
tercourfe with the natives, they had brought off
some ornaments of gold, not considerable in value,
but of ingular fabric. These circumstances, re-
lated with the exaggeration natural to men desirous
of heightening the merit of their own exploits, were
more than sufficient to excite romantic hopes and
expecations. Great numbers offered to engage in
a new expedition. Velasquez, solicitous to diftin-
guifh himself by some service so meritorious, as
might entitle him to claim the government of Cuba
independent of the admiral, not only encouraged
their ardour, but at his own expence fitted out four
ships for the voyage. Two hundred and forty vo-
lunteers, among whom were several persons of rank
and fortune, embarked in this enterprise. The com-
mand of it was given to Juan de Grijalva, a young
man of known merit and courage, with inftruqtions
to obfcrve with attention the nature of the countries
which he fiould discover, to barter for gold, and
if circumstances were inviting, to fettle a colony

ill

* I-h'crerr, d('c. 7.. lib. ii. . X7, 17 . . inor. V,r(lad(lcr:( la ConquillJ
de Ia Nucva.i iE;l nl por IB'i i:i1 )i., iel Caflillo, cap. -7.

- O icd,

liI. xvii. c. 3. Cun5iarI, . P. I ,u1 tv. dc ili lit upei l jir i'vcl I
P. 3 "9,

in some proper station. He failed from St. Jago 0 0 OK
de Cuba on the eight of April one thousand five
hundred and eighteen. The pilot Alaminos held 5I8.
the fame course as in the former voyage, but the

Discovers

violence of the currents carrying the ships to the NewSpain.
south, the first land which they made was the island
of COZUMEL, to the eaff of Yucatan. As all the May 3.
inhabitants fed to the woods and mountains at their
approach, they made no long flay there, and with-
out any remarkable occurrence they reached Po-
tonchan on the opposite fide of the peninsula. The
dcfire of avenging their countrymen who had been
slain there, concurred with their ideas of good poli-
cy, in prompting them to land, that they might
chastise the Indians of that diftri&t with such exem-
plary rigour, as might firike terror into all the peo-
ple around them. But though they disembarked all
their troops, and carried ashore some field-pieces,
the Indians fought with such courage, that the
Spaniards gained the victory with difficulty, and
were confirmed in their opinion that the inhabi-
tants of this country would prove more formidable
enemies than any they had met with in other parts
of America. From Potonchan, they continued
their voyage towards the weft, keeping as near as
possible to the shore, and calting anchor every even-
ing, from dread of the dangerous accidents to which
they might be exposed in an unknown sea. Dur-
ing the day, their eyes were turned continually to-
wards land, with a mixture of surprise and wonder
at the beauty of the country, and the novelty of
the objets which they beheld. Many villages
were Icattcred along the coalt, in which they could
diftinguifl houses of stone that appeared white and
lofty at a difaiiance. In the warmth of their admi-
ration, they fancied these to be cities adorned with
towers and pinacles; and one of the soldiers hap-
pI(ling to remark that this country ricimbled Spain
Vol. I. H h in
i

B O 0 K in its appearance, Grijalva, with universal ap-

cn_ , plause, called it NEW SPAIN, the name which still
151s. diflinguifhes this extcnfive and opulent province of
Jlln 9. the Spanish empire in America. They landed in
Tabaico.

Tbaco. a river which the natives called TABASCO, and the

fame of their viCtory at Potonchan having reached
this place, the Cazique not only received them ami-
cably, but bestowed presents upon them of such va-
lue, as confirmed the high ideas which the Spa-
niards had formed with refpeA to the wealth and
fertility of the country. These ideas were raised
still higher by what occurred at the place where
they next touched. This was considerably to the
weft of T'abasco, in the province since known by
Cluixaca. the name of Guaxaca. There they were received

with the refpeD paid to superior beings. The peo-
plc perfumed them as they landed with incenl. of
ilum copal, and pretfnted to them as offerings the
molt choice delicacies of their country. They were
extremely fond of trading with them, and in fix
days the Spaniards obtained ornaments of gold, of
curious worimanfhip, to the value of fifteen thou-
land pesos, in exchange for European toys of finall
price. The two prisoners whom Cordova had
brought from Yucatan, had hitherto servcd as in-
terpreters ; but as they did not understand the lan-
gua:lg of thi - country, the Spaniards learned from
thle iatics by fi'ns, that the. were fulbjcts of a
i-r':at mmoa:rch c;illcd i.o)llnteztlln., whofc dominiion
exten(lided over th:it and many other provinces,
.T.ca\ in t.liis place, with which he had f o muchrca-
li11 to b,: pl i:ticd, Grijalva continued his colurfl to-
xvll ri( the ft. He lianided on a finall iflannd, which
he named tche ille of l rcifiees, because there the
Slpan ialrds b1,(.hIld, for the flr-f time, the horrid fpcc-
St.' olhni: taIcle of 1Pin:Inn victims, which the babalarous sI-

Uli.i pcrllitionl of the Il:tivcs ot!'lrcd to their gods. H

touched a:t :;nother finall island, which lie calllct

St.

St. John de Ulua. From this place he dispatchcd B 0 o K
Pedro de Alvarado, one of his officers, to Velasquez, _
with a full account of the important discoveries 151.
which he had made, and with all the treasure that
he had acquired by traffickingr with the natives.
After the departure of Alvarado, he himself, with
the remainling vessels, proceeded along the coast as
far as the river Panuco, the country still appearing
to be well peopled, fertile, and opulent.

SEVERAL of Grijalva's officers contended, that Reaftns for
it was not enough to have discovered those di lihllt- not leXinS

c'
°4a olly

ful regions, or to have performed, at their different tl,
landing-p)laces, the empty ceremony of taking pof-
feilion of themn for the crnwn of Cafiile, and that
their glory was inccm -n ct, unletfs ''c planted a
colony in bro;e proper station, which might not on-
ly ficure the Spaniiil nation a footing in the coun-
try, but, with the reinforcements; which they were
certain of receiving, might gradually subjeCt the
whole to the dominion of their sovereign. But the
* fqiudron had nicw been above five nmonths at ra a;
the greact'ft part of their provisions was exhaulted,
andJ wh?t remained of their flores to mruch corrupt-
ed b,1 tic heat of the climate, as to be almost unfit
for ule ; they had loft some men by dleath ; others
wre cficklv ; the country was crowded with people
who cincmd to be intelligent as well as brave ; and
they were under the government of one powerful
*mlTnarch, who could bring theln to acn against their
invaders with united force. T'o plant a colony
iundr( so many circumfitl ccs of diftlvantage, was
to cxpotf it to inevitable deftr{uctio. Grijalva,
though pofli;'fcd both of ambition and courage,
was (itcititlte of the ifu]perior talents capable of
forming or executting such a great plan. lie
juldcd it more prudent to return to Cuba, hav-

1 1 h ing

B O O K ing fulfilled the purpose of his voyage, and accom.
._¢ plifhed all that the armament which he commanded

i51S. enabled him to perform. He returned to St. Jago

de Cuba, on the twenty-fixth of Otober, from
which he had taken his departure about fix months
before *.

Preparati- THIS was the longest as well as the moit fuc.
onsforano- cefsful voyage which the Spaniards had hitherto
tion' expe. - made in the New World. They had discovered

that Yucatan was not an island as they had sup-
posed, but part of the great continent of America,
From Potonchan they had pursued their course for
many hundred miles along a coast formerly unex-
plored, stretching at firit towards the weft, and then
turning to the north ; all the country which they
had discovered appeared to be no less valuable than
cxtenfive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba, Ve-
lafquez, transported with success so far beyond his
most sanguine expectations, immediately dispatched
a person of confidence to carry this important in-
telligence to Spain, to exhibit the rich produ&ions
of the couttrics which had been discovered by his
means, and to solicit such an increase of authority as
might enable and encourage him to attempt the
conqucfl- of them. Without waiting for the return
of his eflicngelr, or for the arrival of Grijalva, of
whom he was become fojealous or diftrutful, that
he rcfolvcd no longer to employ him, he began to
prepare such a powerful armament, as might prove
equal to an enterprise of so much danger and im-l
portance.

BU'T as the expedition upon which Vclafqtte',
was 1ow intent, termlinated in conquests of greater

moment

* Hcrrern, dcc. I. lib. iii. c. I, z. 9, o. BernalDiazc, c , 17
Ovicdo I lift lib. xvii. c, 9. zo. Gomari, c. 49.

moment than what the Spaniards had hitherto at- B O K
chieved, and led them to the knowledge of a peo- i_
pie, who, if compared with such of the Americans 1518.
as were then known, may be confidered as highly
civilised; it is proper to pause before we proceed to
the history of events extremely different from those
which we have already related, in order to take a
view of the state of the New World when first dif-
covered, and to contemplate the policy and man-
ners of the rude uncultivated tribes, that occupied
all the parts of it, with which the Spaniards were
at this time acquainted.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV.

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

B O O K IV.

Be 0B~ 0O O K

W EN T Y-S I X years had now elapsed IV.

since Columbus conduceted the people of Europe to What parts
the New World. During that period the. Spa- of America
niards had made great progress in exploring its va- were then

0 'bo l t> known.

rioun regions, They had visited all the ifiands
scattcrcdl in difflrent cluflers throungh that part of
th( ocean which flors i-ir between North and South
1Am,,rica: . Tl'hc had failed alono the eastern coast
,ftlhe contincnt fromi the river )e la Plata to the
bott,)m of the RMlxican ,

ulf, and had found that

it ftrtche-d without interruption through this vast
poitioll of the globe. 'They had discovered the great
SoutlhcLii Oce(an, whlich epencd new proipects in
that quarter. They hlad acquilred some knowledge
°f the coafl of Florida, which led them to obfir-vc
the continent as it extended in ;an opposite dicreti-
o'; and though they puhlld their difcovcries no

farither

B O O K farther towards the north, other nations had visited

IV.
I_ . those parts which they negleced. The English,

in a voyage, the motives and success of which ihall
be related in another part of this History, had failed
along the coast of America from Labrador to the
confines of Florida; and the Portuguese, in quest
of a shorter paflage to the East Indies, had ventured
into the northern seas, and viewed the fame regi-
ons :. Thus, at the period where I have chosen
to take a view of the state of the New World, its
extent was known almost from its northern extre-
mity to thirty-five degrees south of the equator.
The countries which stretch from thence tothe
southern boundary of America, the great empire of
Peru, and the extenfivedominions subjea to the so-

Thevaftex- vereigns of Mexico, were still undiscovered.
tent of the l;
New orld. WHEN we contemplate the New World, the

firfi circumfiance that firikes us is its immenseex-
tent. It was not a finall portion of the earth, so
inconsiderable that it might have escaped the ob-
servation or research of former ages, which Colum-
bus discovered. He made known a new hemif-
phere, of greater extent than either Europe, or
Asia, or Africa, the three noted divifionsof the
ancient continent, and not much inferior in di-
menfions to a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its magni-

tude, but for its position. It Stretches from the
northern polar circle to a high fouthcrn latitude,
above fifteen hundred miles beyond the farthce
extremity of the old continent on that fide
of the line. A country of such extent pafles
through all the climates capable of becoming
the habitation of man, and fit for yielding. tle

various
t I-lerrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 16. .

various produtions peculiar either to the temperate o0 0 K
or to the torrid regions of the earth. --

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the Grand ob-
grandeur of the objeds which it presents to view jets it pre-
is most apt to strike the eye of an observer. Nature ens io
seems here to have carried on her operations with a
bolder hand, and to have distinguished the features
of this country by a peculiar magnificence. The Its moun-
mountains of America are much superior in height tains.
to those in the other divisions of the globe. Even
the plain of Quito, which may be confidered as the
base of the Andes, is elevated farther above the sea
than the top of the Pyrenees. This stupendous
ridge of the Andes, no less remarkable for extent
than elevation, rites in different places more than
one third above the Pike of Teneriffe, the highest
land in the ancient hemisphere. The Andes may
literally be said to hide their heads in the clouds;
the storms often roll, and the thunder burfis below
their summits, which, though exposed to the rays
of the fun in the centre of the torrid zone, are co-
vered with everlasting snows t.

FROM those lofty) mountains descend rivers pro- r;vcr;.
portionally large, with which the fireams in the
ancient continent are not to be compared, either for
length of course, or the vast body of water which
they roll towards the ocean. The Maragnon, the
Orinoco, the Plata, in South America, the Mifii-
fippi and St. Laurence in North America, flow in
filch spacious channels, that, long before they feel
the influence of the tide, they rcflmble arms of the
fca rather than rivers of freih water :[.
Vol. I. I i T HE

1 Sec NOTE XXVII. s Sec NOTE XXVIII.

B O O K THE lakes of the New World are nolefs confpi.

IV. cuous for grandeur than its mountains and rivers,
Lakes. There is nothing in other parts of the globe which

resembles the prodigious chain of lakes in North
America. They may properly be termed inland
seas of fresh water ; and even those of the second or
third class in magnitude, are of larger circuit than
the greatest lake of the ancient continent.

t form THiE New World is of a form extremely favour.

vourable to able to commercial intercourse. When a continent,
Commcrce. like Africa, is composed of one vast solid mass,

unbroken by arms of the sea penetrating into its
interior parts, with few large rivers, and thofeata
considerable distance from each other, the greater
part of it seems destined to remain for ever unci.
vilize(d, and to be debarred from any adive oren-
larged communication with the reft of mankind
When, like Europe, a continent is opened by inlets
of the ocean of vait extent, such as the Mediterra
nean and Baltic ; or when, like Asia, its coaftis
broken by deep bays advancing far into the coun.
try, such as the iBlack Sea, the gulfs of Arabia,of
Persia, of Bengal, of Siam, and of Leotang ; when
the furroundiln fleas are filled with large and fertile
illands, and the continent itfclf watered with a va
ricty of navigable rivers, those regions may be fali
to poisess whatever can facilitate the progress of
their inh:abitants in commerce and improvemelnt
1ii all thelL rcfpcEs America may bear a comparison
with the other quarters of the globe. The gulfd
Mexico, which flows in between North and South
America, may be confidered as a Mcditerraneanll fe
which opens a maritime commerce with all the fe'
tile countries by which it is cncircled. The
ifla:is fcaittercd in it are inferior only to tl"h
in the Indiman Archipelago, in number, in n;ln'

tidec

tude, and in value. As we firetch along the B 0 K
northern division of the American hemisphere, the ._._
Bay of Chefapeak presents a spacious inlet, which
conduAs the navigator far into the interior parts of
provinces no less fertile than extensive; and if
ever the progress of cultui'e and population shall
mitigate the extreme rigour of the climate in the
more northern diftri&ts of America, Hudson's Bay
may become as subservient to commercial inter-
course in that quarter of the globe, as the Baltic is
in Lurope. The other great portion of the New
World is encompassed on every fide by the sea, ex-
cept one narrow neck, which separates the Atlan-
tic from the Pacific Ocean ; and though it be not
opened by spacious bays or arms of the sea, its in-
terior parts are rendered acceflible by a number of
large rivers, fed by so many auxiliary fireams,
flowing in such various directions, that, without
any aid from the hand of industry and art, an in-
land navigation may be carried on through all the
provinces from the river De la Plata to the gulf of
Paria. Nor is this bounty of nature confined to
the southern division of America; its northern
continent abounds no less in rivers which arc na-
vigable almost to their sources, and by its immense
chain of lakes provision is made for an inland com-
munication, more extensive and commodious than
in any quarter of the globe. The countries stretch-
ing from the gulf of D)arien on one fide, to that of
California on the other, which form the chain that
binds the two parts of the American continent to-
gether, are not destitute of peculiar advantages.
T'heir coast on one fide is wafflcd by the Atlantic
Occan, on the other by the Pacific. Some of their
'ivcrs flow into the former, some into the latter,
:"rd secure to them all the commercial benefits that
a':ly rcfult from a communication with both.

I i 2 BUT

B o '0 K BUT what most diftinguiihes America from other

iv. }v. parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature of

Telmpera- its climate, and the different laws to which it is
tlire its fubjtc° with refpet to the distribution of heat

and cold. WVc cannot determine precisely the por-
tion of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely by
mealutring its d itance from the equator. The cli-
mate of a country is affcaed, in some degree, by its
elevation above the sea, by the extent of continent,
by the nature of the foil, the height of the adjacent
mountains, and many other circumstances. The
influence of these, however, is, from various
causes, less considerable in the greater part of the
ancient continent : and from knowing the position
of any country there, we can pronounce with more
certainty what will be the warmth of its climate,
and the nature of its productions.

Prrdomi- THE maxims which are founded upon obfervati.
ni-t': ot on of our hcmifphcre will not apply to the other,

There, cold predominates. The rigour of the fri-
gid zone extends over half of that which flould be
temperate by its position. Countries where the
grape and the fig should ripen, are buried under
fiow ore half of the year ; and lands situated in
the fame parallel with the moIt fertile and bclf cul-
tivated provinces in Europe, are chilled with per-
petual ftolts, which alinof destroy the powerof
vegetation §. As we advance to those parts of
America which lie in the fameu parallel with pro-
vinces of Asia tand Africa, blefled withnan uniform
cnjoyment of tifch geni;l wvarmth as is inoft fricnd-
iv to life and vcgetation, the dominion of cold
oonltilles to be fe:lt, and winter, though dtiurila
fliort period, often reigns with extreme fcvcrity.
If we proceed along tle AmericanL continent illto
the toLrid zone, we flall find the cold prevalent il

the
{ Sce NOTE XXIX.

the New World extending itself also to this region B o o K
of the globe, and mitigating the excess of its ser- v.
your. While the negro on the coast of Africa is
scorched with unremitting heat, the inhabitant of
Peru breathes an air equally mild and temperate,
and is perpetually shaded under a canopy of grey
clouds, which intercepts the fierce beams of the fun,
without obftruting his friendly influence -. Along
the eastern coast of America, the climate, though
more similar to that of the torrid zone in other parts
of the earth, is nevertheless considerably milder
than in those countries of Asia and Africa which
lie in the fame latitude. If from the southern tro-
pic we continue our progress to the extremity of
the American continent,, we meet with frozen seas,
and countries horrid, barren, and scarcely habita-
ble for cold, sooner than in the north $.

VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cli- Caufesof

mate of America so extremely different from that of this-
the ancient continent. Though the utmoit extent
of America towards the north be not yet discover-
ed, we know that it advances nearer to the pole
than either Europe or Asia. The latter have large
seas to the north, which are open during part of
the year; and even when covered with ice, the
wind that blows over them is less intensely cold
than that which blows over land in the fame high
latitudes. But in America the land firetches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and spreads
out immensely to the welt. A chain of enormous
ounttains, covered with snow and ice runs

through

V Voyage le Ullaa, tnm.i. p. 4 3. Anson's Voyage, p. 14.
Anson's V(oya:ge, p. 74; a nd Voyage .,1 (!iros;, clicz Hilt. Gen.

'I-s Voyages, torn, xiv. p. 83. Riichard Hilt. Natur. dc 1'Air, ii,
3)5, &c.

B OO K through all this dreary region. The wind, in par.

'd. siing over such an extent of high and frozen land,

becomes so impregnated with cold, that it'acquires
a piercing keenness, which it retains in its progress
through warmer climates, and is not entirely miti-
gated until it reach the Gulf of Mexico. 'Over all
the'continent of North America, a north-westerly
wind and excessive cold are synonymous terms.
Even in the most sultry weather, the moment that
the wind veers t6 that quarter, its penetrating in-
fluence is felt in a transition from heat to cold, no
less violent than sudden. To this powerful cause
we may ascribe the extraordinary dominion of cold,
and its violent inroads into the southern provinces
in that part of the globe t.

OTHER causes, no :less remarkable, diminish the

acive power of heat in those parts of the American
continent whlch lie between the tropics.. In all
that portion of the globe, the wind blows in an in-
variable direcion fromi east to weft. As this wind
holds its course across the ancient continent, it
arrives at the countries which stretch along the
western shore of Africa, inflamed with all the fiery
particles which it hath collected from the sultry
plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the Afri-
can defarts. The coast of Africa is, accordingly,
the region of the earth which feels the mot fervent
heat, and is cxpolcd to the unmitigated ardour of
the torrid zone. But this fame wind which brings
such an acccffion of warmth to the countries lying
between the river of Senegal and Cafiaria, travcrfes
the Atlantic Ocean before it reaches the American
fiore. It is cooled in its pa.flage over this vast body
of water, and is felt as a rcfrefhing gale along the
coafis of Brasil :1:, and Guiana, rendering tllefe
countries, though iamong the warmcet in Anericl,

telnpcrate

*t Charlwlvoix lif. dc Nov. Si. iii. 165. I-lief. general Voy;'ig'
to)m, xv. zJ5, &c. Sc NO'r XXX.

temperate, when compared with those which lie B 0 0 K
opposite to them in Africa t. As this wind ad- ; V.
vances in its course across America, it meets with
immense plains, covered with impenetrable forests,
or occupied by large rivers, marshes, and stagnating
waters, where it can recover no considerable degree
of heat. At length it arrives at the Andes, which
run from the north to the south through the whole
continent. In pafling over their elevated and frozen
summits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them hardly
feel the ardour to which they seem exposed by their
situation t. In the other provinces of America,
from Tierra Firmn westward to the Mexican em-
pire, the heat of the climate is tempered, in some
places, by the elevation of the land above the sea,
in others, by their extraordinary humidity, and in
all, by the enormous mountains scattered over this
tract. The islands of America in the Torrid
Zone are either finall or mountainous, and are
fanned alternately by refreshing sea and land
breezes.

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards the

southern limits of America, and in the seas beyond
it, cannot be ascertained in a manner equally satis-
fying. It was long supposed that a vast continent,
difiinguiihed by the name of TERRA AUSTRALIS
INCOCNITA, lay between the southern extremity
of America and the Antarctic pole. The fame
principles which account for the extraordinary de-
gree of cold in the northern regions of America,
were employed in order to explain that which is felt

Ct (ape Horn and the adjacent countries. The

immense extent of the southern continent, and the
large rivers which it poured into the ocean, were

mentioned

't Se NOTE XXXI. Acofla I-l. Novi Orlis, lib. ii.

C . " IF

B lll1n l lt . Naturecle, &c . tor. ii. 512, &c. ix. 107, &c
¢)l hn', Ctll a. oVY, 'c. i.. . ..

B 0 O K mentioned and admitted by philosophers as causes

Iv. sufficient to occasion the unusual sensation of cold,

and the still more uncommon appearances of frozen
seas in that region of the globe. But the imaginary
continent to which such influence was ascribed,
having been searched for in vain, and the space
which it was supposed to occupy having been found
to be an open sea, new conjetures mufl be formed
with refpet to the causes of a temperature of cli-
mate, so extremely different from that which we
experience in countries removed at the fame difiance
from the opposite pole §.

Condition AFTER contemplating those permanent and cha-
when first rafleriftic qualities of the American continent,

dicoered. which arise from the peculiarity of its situation,

and the disposition of its parts, the next object
that merits attention is its condition when firt
discovered, as far as that depended upon the in-
duftry and operations of man. The effeeds of hu-
man ingenuity and labour are more extensive and
considerable, than even our own vanity is apt at sirs
to imagine. When we survey the face of the ha-
bitable globe, no small part of that fertility and
beauty, which we ascribe to the hand of Nature, is
the work of man. His efforts, when continued
through a fucceflion of ages, change the appear-
ance and improve the qualities of the earth. As
a great part of the ancient continent has long been
occupied by nations far advanced in arts and indus-
try, our eye is accul{omed to view the earth in
that form which it afflmes when rendered fit to be
the residence of a numerous race of men, and to
supply them with nourifhmcnt.

Bur
§ Scc NOTE XXXII.

BUT in the New WVorld, the slate of malnkind B)

TV.

was ruder, and the afpe, of Nature cxtremely clif-
fcrcnt. Throughout all its vail- regions, there R ,:. r,
wcre only two monarchies remlarkable for extent of i,.-
territory, or diftinguifled by any progress in im-
provcmcnt. The reft of this continent was poITefi'
e.i by finall independent tribes, destitute of arts and
ind:iftry, and neither capable to correc the defets,
nor desirous to meliorate the condition of that
part of the earth allotted to them for their habita-
tion. Countries, occupied by such people, were
almnof in the lIar;c slate as if they had been without
inhabitants. inmmenfe forests covered a great part
of the uncultivated earth; and as the hand of in-
duliry had not taught the rivers to run in a proper
channlel, or drained off the flagnating water, many
o' the most fertile plains were overflowed with in-
undations, or converted into marshes. In the
fouthl'rn provinces, where the warmth of the fun,
the moiture of the climate, and the fertility of the
foil, combine in calling forth the most vigorous
powers of vegetation, the woods are so choked
wih its rank luxuriance, as to be almost imnprvi-
011O, and the surface of the ground is hid from the
e)e under a thick covering of shrubs and herbs and
wee'ts. In this state of wild unailifted nature, a
gr''t part of the large provinces in South America,
which extend from the bottom of the Andes to the
fca;, fill reinin. The European colonies have
clearedt and cultivated a few spots along the coast,
ltit the original inhabitants, as rude and indolent
1a, Cv, leve done nothing to open or improve a
coulnt)ry, poll:fling almost every advantage of fitua-
tion and cl'imate. As we advance towards the nor-
tlerlll P'rovinces of America, Nature continues to
we;"' the lfan uncultivated afpct, and in proporti-
(11 as the rigour of the climate increases, appelirs
Imoc desolate and horrid. T here, the forcfts,

'Ioh not encumlbcred with the f.mlle exu brance
o ln. L. K k of

B 0 0 K of vegetation, are of equal extent; prodigious

_,_- marshes overspread the plains, and few marks ap-

pear of human ativity in any attempt to cultivate
or embcllifll the earth. No wonder that the colo-
nies tent from Europe were astonished at their first
entrance into the New World. It appeared to them
waste, solitary, and uninviting. When the Eng-
lifh began to fettle in America, they termed the
countries of which they took possession, THE WIL-
DERNESS. Nothing but their eager cepctations of
finding mines of gold, could have induced the Spa-
niards to penetrate through the woods and marshes
of America, where, at every flep, they observed
the extreme difference between the uncultivated
face of Nature, and that which it acquires under
the forming hand of industry and art t.
t'nwhole- THE labour and operations of man not only im-

prove and embcllifll the earth, but render it more
wholesome, and friendly to life. When any region
lies negleced and destitute of cultivation, the air
Mtagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations arise
from the waters ; the surface of the earth, loaded
wsith rank vegetation, feels not thle purifying in-
fluence of the fun ; the malignity of-the diftem-
pers natural to the climate incrcafes, and new ma-
Altdics 110 lcf noxious are engendered. According-
ly, a;i tlie princes of Amcrica, when first disco.
vcred, were found to be remarkably unhealthy.
'This the Spaniards experienced in every expediti-
*n' into the New World, whether destincd for
ollcqitet or f'ttlcmen t. Though by the natural
coinflititlion of their bodies, their habitual temper-
aincc, and thec perfevcring vigour of their minds,
they were as muLch foruel(d as ally people in Euro)pe
for active lr:lvicc in a I.fltry climate, they felt

fevcrely
t Sec NOTE XXXIUI,

severely the fatal and pernicious qualities of those B O O K
uncultivated regions through which they marched, -
or where they endeavoured to plant colonies.
Great numbers were cut off by the unknown and
violent diseases with which they were infected.
Such as survived the deitrudive rage of those mala-
dies, were not exempted from the noxious effects of
the climate. They returned to Europe, according
to the description of the early Spanish historians,
feeble, emaciated, with languid looks, and com-
plexions of such a sickly yellow colour, as indicat-
ed the unwholfome temperature of the countries
where they had resided t.

THE uncultivated state of the New World affect-
ed not only the temperature of the air, but the Itsanimals,
qualities of its productions. The principle of life
seems to have been les active and vigorous there,
than in the ancient continent. Notwithstanding
the vast extent of America, and the variety of its
climates, the different fpecics of animals peculiar to
it are much fewer in proportion, than those of the
other hemisphere. In the islands, there were only
four kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest of
which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On the
continent, the variety was greater, and though tha
individuals of each kind could not fail of multiply-
ing exceedingly, when almost unnlolitcd by men,
who were neither so Inumerous, nor so united in
society, as to be formidable encmie s to the animal
creation, the number of diftinc fpecics tuft ltill
le confidered as extremely finall. Of two hundred
diftrcnt kinds of animals fircad over the face of
the earth, only about o.ii third cxiftcd in Amcrica,

I k at

r.Mirlyr, lipilt.. ^5. cad. P. 176.
P, I.)Ii)it 4i ~cd . 10

B O O K at the time of its difcovcry *. Nature was not on-

iv- ly less prolific in the New World, but fle appears

likewise to have been less vigorous in her produc.
tions. The animals originally belonging to this
quarter of the globe appear to be of an inferior race,
neither so robust, nor so fivrce, as those of the other
continent. America gives birth to no creatureof
such bulk as to be compared with the elephant or
rhinoceros, or that equals the lion or tyger in
strength and ferocity t. The TAPYR of Brasil,
the quadruped of the first magnitude in the New
WVorld, is not larger than a calf of fix months old,
The PUMA and JAGUAR, its fiercest beafis of
prey, which the Europeans have inaccurately de-
nominated lions and tygers, posSess neither the un-
daunted courage of the former, nor the ravenous
cruelty of the latter t. They are inactive and ti-
mid, hardly formidable to man, and often turn
their backs upon the least appearance of resistance §.
The fame qualities in the climate of America which
flinted the growth, and enfeebled the spirit, of its
native animals, have proved pernicious to such as
have migrated into it voluntarily from the other
continent, or have been transported thither by the
Europcans 1l. The bears, the wolves, the decr of
AmcriLca, are not equal in size to those of the 01Ol
Vorld l . Mloft of the domepcic animals, with
wiich the Europeans storcd the provinces wherein
tihev fctlcd, have degenerated with refpcl either
to bulk or qualilt, in a country whose temperature

ald

T' nifI,n 1ifi. N.ltlmllh, tom. ix. p. 86. -t Sec NOTE XXXIV,

- Bi11011 I-li. NI1,

I ll. 11. ix. p. 37. M arLta13 . ii 1-Itll. Nat. Bflil,

!.' ?. -. ~

-- ; r, :i' l;!;.Nat'. ;>- ix. 13. z03. Acolla HiFl . lib. iv'.c

.!' i'i:l ni, I;i(l .

p (i .

Ilerrcra, dc.4. liil. iv. c. z.lil.x. c. I'

i ,' cl,. hii;, v, l O. ¢m i. OvalhI Relat. of Chili Church. iii. I;

Sg, il i

. d; ' (1 vit.l)o, I. I.L---..2. VuI).te I.I DC:r Marcthlli, iii. "9'

Q i; 1:;'li',l . -iill. N Lt,. ix. 1u3. Kaihn Trv'i'r , i . I. Ilict Voy,
dr' I'Itl.C i'.liEluinx. p). 33J.

and foil fcem to be less favourable to the strength Ba 0 K
and perfecion of the animal creation p. _V_

THE fame causes, which checked the growth and Inserts an4
the vigour of the more noble animals, were friend- leptiles"
ly to tie propagation and increal, of reptiles and
inects. Though this is not peculiar to the New
World, and those odious tribes, the offspring of
hcat, moisture, and corruption, iifeft every part of
the torrid zone ; they multiply faster, periiaps, in
America, and grow to a more monitrous bulk. As
this country is, on the whole, less cultivated, and
less peopled, than the other quarters of the carth,
the ative principle of life waftes its force in pro-
duelions of this inferior form. The air is often
darkened with clouds of insets, and the ground
covered with shocking and noxious reptiIes. The
country around Porto-Bello swarms *with toads in
such multitudts, as hide the surface of the earth..
At Guyaquil, snakes and vipers are hardly less
numerous. Carthagena is infcftcd with numerous
flocks of bats, which unnoy not only iihe cattle but
inhabitants ::. In the islands, legions of ants have,
at different times, consumed every vegetable pro-
dudion §, and left the earth entirely bare, as if it
had been burnt with fire. The damp- sorers, andl
rank foil of the countrics on the banks of the Ori-
(noco and Ma;ragnon, teenm with alnofi every of-en-
live and poisonous creature, which the power of a
sultry fun can quicken into life: |.

THE

1 Scr NOTE XXXV. :r Voyage de Ulloia tom. i. p. 89.
I. I. l.i-. ler. e:', d::. 1. lib. ii. c. t. i9. iS (c NOT 1. X](XVI.

{! V' i', "

! Cliildtninel, p. 167.. IGurill:, iii. Hil

t. Hil.

'"''.* (.r, Vy¥l.;,: xiv. 317/. Dumont Mcmioirc Clur 1. Luuifianri,
'i'I'^. i o-2 ,,ii, ti .Uvniu, c. -... ..·

B o O K THE birds of the New World are not dilin.

Iv. guiflied by qualities so conspicuous and character.
Birds. iftical, as those which we have observed in its

quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of man,
and less affected by the changes which his induflry
and labour make upon the state of the earth. They
have a greater propcnfity to migrate from one coun-
try to another, and can gratify this inftinC of their
nature without difficulty or 'danger. Hence the
number of birds common to both continents is
much greater than that of quadrupeds; and even
such as are peculiar to America nearly resemble
those with which mankind were acquainted in fimi-
lar regions of the ancient hemisphere. The Ame-
rican birds of the torrid zone, like those of the fame
climate in Asia and Africa, are decked in plumage,
which dazzles the eye with the vivid beauty of its
colours ; but nature, satisfied with clothing them
in this gay dress, has denied most of them that me-
lody of found, and variety of notes, which catches
and delights the ear. The birds of the temperate
climates there, in the fame manner as in our conti-
nent, are less splendid in their appearance, but, in
compensation for that defedt, have all the power
and sweetness of music in their voice. In some
districts of America, the unwholesome temperature
of the air seems to be unfavourable even to this
part of the creation. 'The nuimber of birds is less
than in other countries, and the traveller is firuck
with the amazing fol itude and silence of its forcfts *
It is remarkable, however, that America, where the
quadrupeds are o dwarifillh ;nd dastardly, should
produce the CUNDUJR, which is intilled to pre-

eClilni lcc

* Bougucr Voy, au tPcnmi 17. Cli.anv.iloii, Vo)age a l.a Matitliqiuec
j. 96. WiWarrcn l)cf i, t u in.,ll. ()Iimno'.e! Coll. t. ii. 2: .* I.t'
n~.it EIlif. xxiv. P, ?3go. 'I ..lc. . IliI, .. 1, NMv. I .iic,. iii-. rloj

eminence over all the flying tribe, in bulk, in B o o K
Itrength, and in courage . v

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as America, Soil
must of course be extremely various. In each of
its provinces, we ihall find some distinguishing pe-
culiarity, the description of which belongs to those
who write their particular history. In general, we
may observe, that the moisture and cold, which
predominate so remarkably in all parts of America,
muf have great influence upon the nature of its
foil; countries lying in the fame parallel with those
regions which never feel the extreme rigour of win-
ter in the ancient continent, are frozen over in
America during a great part of the year. Chilled
by this intense cold, the ground never acquires
warmth sufficient to ripen the fruits, which are
found in the corresponding parts of the other conti-
nent. If we would rear in America the productions
which abound in any particular diitria of the
world, we must advance several degrees nearer to
the line, than in the other hemisphere, as it requires
such an increase of heat to counterbalance the na-
tural frigidity of the foil and climate -. At the
Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants, and
fiuits peculiar to the countries within the tropics,
are cultivated with success ; whercas. at St. Au-
gttitine, in Florida, and Charlcs-Town, in South-
Carolina, though considerably' nearer the line,
they cannot be brought to thrive with equal cer-
tainty :1. But, if allowance be made for this di-
vcrfity, the foil of America is naturally as rich and
fertile as in any part of the earth. As the country
was thinly inhabited, and by a people of little
iniduftly, who had no11n of the donicilic animals,

which

' Voyage tit (ll.)n, i. ?361. V viv:g<e lr Cnul;m'inr , 175. ntn'on

h L. N Ot

Xi.

. vi 4. V(oy.tt.il du i;c Marclhais, iii. 3'0.
'j Soe NOTE XXXVIh 1, See NOTE XXXVIIL.

B 0 o K which civilized nations rear in such vait numbers,

' the earth was not exhaufled by their coniulption,

The vegetable productions, to which its fertility
gave birth, often remained untouched, and being
luffered to corrupt on its surface, returned with in,
create into its boiom -. As trees and plants derive
a great part of their nourishment from air and wa-
ter, if they were not destroyed by man and other
animals, they would render to the earth more, per-
haps, than they take from it, and feed rather than
impoverilh it. Thus the unoccupied foil of Ame-
rica, might go on enriching for many ages. The
vast number as well as enormous size of the trees in
Amcrica, indicate the extraordinary vigour of the
foil in its native itate. TWhen the Europeans f(iil
began to cultivate the New XVorld, they weMe

y i:o-

nilhed at the luxuriant power of vegetation in its
virgin mould ; and in several plhces the ingenuity
of the planter is itill employed in diminilhing and
wafting its superfluous fertility, in order to bring it
down to a slate fit for ufcful culture -.

I-T-w wa,.
A,*,)ica HAVING thus furvcyed the slate of the New
peopcd ? World at the tilme of its difcovcry, and confidcrcd

thc pecul;:r fatures and qualities which difinguifll
and char;i ccrilc it, the next inquiry that merits at-
tention is, Hw-was America peopled ? By what
courfc did Isindlilll miigrat e

from the one contillillt

to the otlhr ? and iln what quartcr is it moil proba-
ble that. a communication was opened betwee
them ?

IWE

*( Bullon,, lI;ll. N.ltm'. i. 24. . K l' h, i. 5r.
t Chl.ri cvoi -, lilf. Id Nouv. 1Fr.. iii.4. Vo y

r eX oile (lu 1)
cali.i, iii. zz29. Lery ap D)c lry, part iii. p. 174. Se. NOT1'E XXXI'X

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all the B 0 V K
human race spring from the fame source, and that
the descendants of one man, under the protection No tradition
as well as in obedience to the command of Heaven, it among
multiplied and replenished the earth. But neither themselves.
the annals nor the traditions of nations reach back
to those remote ages, in which they took poffeflion
of the different countries where they are now set-
tled. We cannot trace the branches of this first
family, or point out with certainty the time and
manner in which they divided and spread over the
face of the globe. Even among the most enlight-
ened people, the period of authentic history is ex-
tremely short, and every thing prior to that is fabu-
lous or obscure. It is not surprising, then, that
the unlettered inhabitants of America, who have
no solicitude about futurity, and little curiosity
concerning what is past, should be altogether un-
acquainted with their own original. The Cali-
fornians and Efquimaux, in particular, who occupy
those countries in America which approach nearest
to the ancient continent, are so remarkably rude,
that it is altogether vain to fcarch among them for
such information as might discover the place from
whence they came, or the ancestors of whom they
are descended*. Whatever light has been thrown
on this fubje&, is derived, not from the natives of
America, but from the inquisitive genius of their
conquerors.

WHEN the peop'lc of Europe unexpcetcelly disco- variols
vercd a New World, removed at a vast diflance theories.
from every part of the ancient continent which was
then known, and filled with inhabitants whose ap-
pearancc and manners differed remarkably from the
rclt of the hLumllan fpecics, the qucelion colcerning

VOL. I. L their

* Vecncgas Hill . of California, i. 60.

B 0 0 K their original became naturally an object of curio.

^^ ~ fity and attention. The theories and fpeculationsof

ingenious men with refped to this subjet, would
fill many volumes; but are often so wild and chi-
merical, that I should ofFcr an insult to the under-
flanding of my readers, if I attempted either to enu-
merate or to refute them. Some have prefumptu-
oufly imagined, that the people of America were
not the offspring of the fame common parent with
the reft of mankind, but that they formed a separate
race of men difinguifllable by peculiar features in
the conflitution of their bodies, as well as in the
charaleriffic qualities of their minds. Others con-
tend, that they are dcfcended from some remnant
of the antediluvian inhabitants of the earth, who
survived the deluge, which fwvcpt away the greatest
part of the human fpccies in the days of Noah; and
prepofi:eroufly suppose rude, uncivilized tribes, scat-
tered over an uncultivated continent, to be the most
ancient race of people on the earth. There is hard-
ly any nation from the north to the south pole, to
which some antiquary, in the extravagance of con-
jcture, has not ascribcd the honour of peopling
America. The Jews, the Canaanites, the Phteni-
cians, the Carthaginians, the Greeks, the Scythi-
ans in ancient times, are ft)ppofled to have fettled
in this weftcrn world. The Chinese, the Swedes,
the Norwleians, the WTcifll, the Spliiiards, arc liid
to have f lit colonies thither in latelr igcs, it (if-
ferenti periods, and oln various occasions. Ze;ali
.;Idvoc:tL;S It:lnd forth to support the reflieii'ec
clilams of thlol people ; 1nd though they reft upon
no better fOund(lation than the cafuliail Crliblancc
of loime cuftonims, or !11,' fl pplil'd afli;nitv lctwcic
a few words in th'ir d li!'-lt:nt llmlgu '

age, mluc

erudition a111(1 molre ,.il h ae c been emCployed, to
little ptl rpof, in dftl;-e o(f the olppofite yfleins.
I holt rcc oill of conljicturr and controversy bc-

ion.g

long not to the historian. His is a more limited B o O K
province, confined to what is established by certain _ }
or highly probable evidence. Beyond this I fliall
not venture, in offering a few observations, which
may contribute to throw some light upon this cu-
rious and much agitated quefiion.

i. THERE are authors who have endeavoured Ought not

by mere conjeaures to account for the peopling of ted=',
America. Some have supposed that it was origi- conjelaure,
naily united to the ancient continent, and disjoined
from it by the shock of an earthquake, or the ir-
ruption of a deluge. Others have imagined, that
some vefiel being forced from its course by the vio-
lence of a westerly wind, might be driven by ac-
cident tovards the American coast, and have given
a beginning to population in that desolate conti-
nent t. But with refpeat to all those systems, it is
vain either to reason or inquire, because it is im-
possible to come to any decision. Such events as
the) suppose are barely poflible, and may have hap-
pened. That they ever did happen, we have no
evidence, either fiom the clear testimony of history,
or from the obfcttre intimations of tradition.

2. NOTHIING can be more frivolous or uncertain or onrefem-

than the attempts to difcovcr the original of the i;,'ce of
Americans, merely by tracing the resemblance be-
tween their manners and those of any particular
people in the ancient continent. If we suppose
two bodies of men, tholigh in the most remote re-
gions ol the globe, to be placed in a state of focicty
finilar in its degree of improvement, they nmulft

L 1 z feel

1 Ii'r Rfon emains of Jalphet, p. .z4.o. Ancicnt Univcrf. I-fli,

v ol xx . i.l. 1). I.evjn, 'rf.,e o Critico, Ltum. v. p. 304, &c. A-
colt Hi-ilt . Mo, l. Nuvi rbis, lib. i. c .
6 19.

B O o K feel the fame wants, and exert the fame endeavours

IV. to supply them. The fame objects will allure,

the fame passions will animate them, and the fame
ideas and sentiments will arise in their minds. The
character and occupations of the hunter in Ame.
rica muff belittle different from those of an Asiatic,
who depends for subsistence on the chace. A tribe
of savages on the banks of the Danube must nearly
refenlble one upon the plains waffed by the Mif-
fifippi. Instead then ofprefuming, from this fimi.
larity, that there is any affinity between them, we
should only conclude, that thedifpofition and man-
ners of men are formed by their situation, and a-
rife from the state of society in which they live.
The moment that begins to vary, the characerof
a people muff change. In proportion as it advances
in improvement, their manners refine, their powers
and talents are called forth. In every part of the
earth the progress of man hath been nearly the fame,
and we can trace him, in his career from the rude
simplicity of savage life, until he attains the indus-
try, the arts, and the elegance of polished society.
There is nothing wonderful then in the fiiilitude
between the Americans and the barbarous nations
of our continent. Had Lafitau, Garcia, and many
other authors, attended to this, they would not
have perplexed a fubjcct which they pretend toil-
lultrate, by their fruitless endeavours to efiablifll ia
affinity between various races of people in the old
and new continents, upon no other evidence than
fuclh a rcfemblance in their manners as neccfsarily
arifcs from the simil.arity of their condition. There
are, it is true, among every people some cufloims,
which, as they do not flow from any natural want
or detire peculiar to their situation, may be deo-
minated uftgcs of arbitrary inititution. If between

two

two nations fettled in remote parts of the earth, a B o o K
perfect agreement with respect to any of these IV.
ihould be discovered, one might be led to fufped
that they were connected by some affinity. If a
nation were found in America that consecrated the
seventh day to religious reft, if in another the first
appearance of the new moon was celebrated with fef-
tivy, we might jufly suppose that the former had
derived its knowledge of this usage of arbitrary in-
flitution from the Jews, while the latter might be
confidered as nothing more than an expression of
joy natural to man on the return of the planet
which guides and cheers him in the night. The
instances of customs, merely arbitrary, common
to the inhabitants of both hemispheres, are, indeed,
so few and so equivocal, that no theory concerning
the population of the New World ought to be
founded upon them.

3. THE theories which have been formed with or of religs-

refped to the original of the Americans, from ob- ous rites.
servation of their religious rites and practices, are
no less fanciful, and deflitute bs solid foundation.
When the religious opinions of any people are nei-
ther the result of rational inquiry, nor derived from
the inftrulcions of revelation, they must needs be
wild and extravagant. Barbarous nations are incapa-
ble of the former, and have not been blesscd with the
advantages arising from the latter. Still, however,
the human mind, even where its operations appear
moftwild and capricious, holds a courle foregular,
that in every age and country the dominion of par-
tictilar passions will be attended with similar effeits.
The favyage of Europe or America, when filled with
flperftitious dread of invisible beings, or with in-
qlifitive solicitude to penetrate into the events of
futurity, trembles alike with fear, or glows with
i"nlpticnce. He has rccourfc to rites and praticcs

of

B O O K of the fame kind, in order to avert the vengeance

IV.
___ vwhich he supposes to be impending over him, or to

divine the secret which is the object of his curio-
fity. Accordingly, the ritual of superstition, in one
continent, fcems, in many particulars, to be a tran-
script of that citablifhed in the other, and both au-
thc-ife similar institutions, sometimes so frivolous
as to excite pity, sometimes so bloody and barbarous
as to create horror. But without supposing any con-
sanguinity between such distant nations, or ima-
gining that their religious ceremonies were con-
veyed by tradition from the one to the other, we
may ascribe this uniformity, which in many inftan
ces seems very amazing, to the natural operation
of superstition and enthufiafin upon the weakness
of the human mind.

Not peopled 4. WVE may lay it down as a certain principle
byanynati- in this inquiry, that America was not peopled by

ivhliyed. any nation of the ancient continent, which had

made considerable progress in civilization. The
inhabitants of the New World were in aftate of so-
ciety so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted with
those arts which are the firfi essays of human inge-
nuity in its advance towards improvement. Even
the most cultivated nations of America were firan-
gers to many of tliofe simple iriventions, which
were almost coeval with society in other parts o
the world, and were known in the earliest periods
of civil life. From this it is maniffit, that the
tribes which originally nigoratced to America, c;a11e
off from nations which Imuff have been no lcls
;baIrbarous thlla tlhei pof)Oeity, at the time when
they were firilt discover, t by the Eu ropeans. lo'0
alttrhough the clegant and refined arts may declile
or pcrifh, amid(f the violent shocks of those rc'5o-
lutionls and dir.afe(rs to which nations are Cxpo)lc',
thl Iluccflary larts of lif, when once t:hey have been
introduced lamong any people, are never loll. No'ni

of

ft' the vicissitudes in human affairs assed there, and B 0 0 K
they continue to be praCtised as long as the race
of men exists. If ever the use of iron had been
known to the savages of America, or to their
progenitors, if ever they had employed a plough,
a loom, or a forge, the utility of these inventions
would have preserved them, and it is impoifible that
they should have been abandoned or forgotten. We
may conclude then, that the Americans sprung
from some people, who were themselves in such an
early and unimproved stage of society, as to be un-
acquainted with all the necessary arts, which re-
mained unknown among their posterity.

5. IT appears no less evident, that Americawas no from
not peopled by any colony from the more fouihern tht south-
nations of the ancient continent. None of tie "ofrgon-
rude tl-ibcs fettled in that part of our hemisphere tinunt-
can be supposed to have visited a country foremote.
They pofieted neither enterprise, nor ingenuity,
nor power, that could prompt them to undertake,
or enable them to perform, such a distant voyage.
That the more civilized nations in Asia or A-
frica are not the progenitors of the Americans is
manifest, not only from the observations which I
have already made concerning their ignorance of
the most finmple and necessary arts, but from an
additional circumflance. When ever any people
have experienced the advantages which men enjry,
by their dominion over the inferior animals, they
call neither futbifil without the nollriflimcnt which
they altord, nor carry on their operations indepen-
dcnt of their miniflry and labour. Accordinglgy,
the firil care of the Spaniards when they fettled in
America, was to (fock it with all the doimeilic ani-
malso( i',r( pe, an)(l if prior to tlhem, the T'yrilans,
tilh (-:th;ini:.lns, the C.hinefc, or any other po-
Ililhed pcople, had takien po1)iffioni of thatt conti-

tm\tf,

B 0 o K nent, we hould have found there the animals pe.

. culiar to those regions of the globe where they

were originally feated. In all America, however,
there is not one animal, tame or wild, which pro.
perly belongs to the warm, or even the more tem.
perate countries of the ancient continent. The
camel, the dromedary, the horse, the cow, wereas
much unknown in America, as the elephant or the
lion. From which it is obvious, that the people
who firit fettled in the western world did not ifue
from the countries where those animals abound,
and where men, from having been long accustomed
to their aid, would naturally confider it, not only
as beneficial, but as indispensably necessary to the
improvement, and even the preservation, of civil
society.

The two 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
continents America is fiored, we may conclude that the near-
seem to be
moftconti- efi point of contacd between the old and new con-
guous to- tinents is towards the northern extremity of both,
wOrd the and that there the communication was opened,

and the intercourse carried on between them. All
the extensive countries in America which lie within
the tropics, or approach near to them, are filled
with indigenous animals of various kinds, entirely
different from those in the corresponding regions of
the ancient continent. But the northern provinces
of the New World abound with many of the wild
animals which arc common in fich parts of our he-
mifphcrc as lie in a similar situation. The bear, tlh
wolf, the fox, the ha;re, the deer, the roebuck, the
elk, and Itveroal other fpiccics frequent the forcfts o
North America, no lcls than those in the north of
.Europe and Alia*. It feeins to be evident then, that

tlhe
* Buflsn lift. Nat. ix. p. 97, A&c.

the two continents approach each other in this B 0 K
quarter, and are either united, or so nearly adjacent, ,__,
that these animals might pass from one to the other.

7. THE aAual vicinity of the two continents is This afcer-

so clearly established by modern discoveries, as re- difvey.
moves the chief difficulty with refpecA to the peo-
pling of America. While those immense regions
which stretch eastward from the river Oby to the sea
of Kamchatka were unknown, or imperfe&ly ex-
plored, the north east extremities of our hemisphere
were supposed to be so far distant from any part of
theNewWorld, that itwas not easy to conceive how
any communication flould have been carriedon be-
tween them. But the Ruffians, having subjected the
weltern part of Siberia to their empire, gradually
extended their knowledge of that vafi country, by
advancing towards the east into unknown provinces.
These were discovered by hunters in their excurfrons
after game, or by soldiers employed in levying the
taxes, and the court of Moscow estimated the im-
portance of those countries only by the small additi-
on which they made to its revenue. At length, Pe-
ter the Great ascended the Ruffian throne. His en-
lightened, comprchenfive mind, intent upon every
circumflance that could aggrandize his empire, or
render his reign illustrious, discerncd consequences
of those discoveries, which had escaped the obfcer-
vation of his ignorant predecessors. He perceived,
that in proportion as the regions of Asia extended
towards the east, they Inuft approach nearer to A-
lmerica; that the communication between the two
conltinellts, which had long been flarchled for in
vain, would probably be found in this quarter, and
that by opCnilng this intercourlf, fumle part of the
wealth and conmmerce of the weflern world miight
be nade to flow into his dominions by a: new cllin-
VOL. I. Mm ncl

B O O K nel. Such an objet suited a genius that delighted

IV. in grand schemes. Peter drew up inftrutions

with his own hand for prosecuting this design, and
gave orders for carrying it into execution :.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued his

plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court em,
ployed in this fervicc, had to ftrugglevith so many
difficulties, that their progress was extremely flow.
Encouraged by some faint traditions among the
people of Siberia, concerning a successful voyage
in thle year one thousand fix hundred and forty-
eight, round the north-east promontory of Aia,
they attempted to follow the fame course. Veflel$
were fitted out, with this view, at different times,
fiom the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a froz-
en ocean, which nature teems not to have destined
for navigation, they were exposed to many difafiers,
without being able to accomplish their purpose,
No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian court ever dou-
bled this formidable Cape t ; we are indebted for
what is known of those extreme regions of Asia, to
the dilcoveries made in cxcurfions by land. In all
thole provinces, an opinion prevails, that countries
of great extent and fertility lie at no considerable
distance from their own coasts. These the Ruffians
imnails d to be part of America ; and fcveral cir-
citiftances concurred not only in confirming
them in this belief, but in persuading them that
foine portion of that contilent could not be very
remote. 'i'rees of various kinds, unknown in those
naked regions of Alia, arc driven upon the coast by
an eallerly wind. By the fame wind, floating ice
is brought thither in a few days ; flights of birds
arrive annually from the fame quarter; and a tra-

dition

t Muiller Vi.\ .el e*t D c(>uvelte par Icsle ufl'cs, tom. i. p. 4i 5' 14h'
*1\ Se: NOTLE XL,.

dition obtains among the inhabitahts) of an inter- B 0 0 K
course formerly carried on with some countries si- iv.
tuated to the east.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and com-

paring the position of the countries in Asia which
they had discovered, with such parts in the north-
weft of America as were already known, the Ruffian
court formed a plan, which would have hardly oc-
curred to any nation less accuffomed to engage in
arduous undertakings, and to contend with great
difficulties. Orders were issued to build two vessels
at Ochotz, in the sea of Kamchatka, to fail on a
voyage of discovery. Though that dreary uncul-
tivated region furnished nothing that could be of
use in conftructihg them, but some larch trees;
though not only the iron, the cordage, the fails,
and all the numerous articles requisite for their e-
quipment, but the provisions for viCtualling them,
were to be carried through the immense defarts of
Siberia, along rivers of difficult navigation, and
roads almost impassable, the mandate of the fove-
reign, and the perseverance of the people, at last r741
surmounted every obstacle. Two vessels were si- June4.
nifhed, and, under the command of the captainr
Behring and Tfchirikow, failed from Kamchatka
in quest of the New World, in a quarter where it
had never been approached. They shaped their
course towards the cast; and though a florm soon
separated the vessels, which never rejoined, and ma-
ny difafiers bcfcl them, the expectations from the
voyage were not altogether frustratcd. Each of
the commanders discovered land, which to them
appeared to be part of the American continent;
and, according to their oblfervations, it seems to be
situated within a few degrees of the north-west coast
of California. Each set some of his people ashore;

m m but

B O O K but in one place the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians

Iv.
;I_ approached ; in another, they carried off those who

landed, and dcfrroyed their boats. The violence
of the weather, and the distress of their crews, ob-
liged both to quit this inhospitable coast. In their
return they touched at several islands, which firetch
in a chain from east to weft between the country
which they had discovered and the coast of Afa,
They had tome intercourse with the natives, who
seemed to them to resemble the North Americans.
They presented to the Ruffians the CALUMET, or
pipe of peace, which is a symbol of friendihip uni-
versal among the people'of North America, and an
usage of arbitrary institution, peculiar to them.

THE ifands of this new Archipelago have been

frequented by the Ruflian hunters since that time;
but the court seemed to have relinquished itsfcheme
of prosecuting discoveries in this quarter. It was
unexpeCtedly resumed in the year one thousand le-
ven hundred and fixty-cight, and captain Krenit-
zin had the command of two finall vessels fitted out
for that purpose. In his voyage outward he held
nearly the iame course with the former navigators,
he touched at the fame islands, obfervdd their fitua-
tion, and produlSlions more carefully, and discover-
ed itvcral new illands, with which they had not
fallen iin. Though he did not proceed so far to
the eafl as to revisit the countrywhich Behring ald
lTchiirikow iul)poled to be part of the American
contintcnt, yet, by returning in a course confidcra-
bly to the north of theirs, he corlirecd some capital
iniflakcs into which they had fallen, and has col-
triibutd to facilitate the progress of futurc ni.viga'
tors in those f:as :':.

Sece NOTE XL.

THUS the possibility of a communication be- B o o K
tween the continents in this quarter refis no longer iv
upon mere conjecture, but is established by un-
doubted evidence $. Some tribe, or rome families
of wandering Tartars, from the restless spirit pe-
culiar to their race, might migrate to the nearest
islands, and, rude as their knowledge of navigation
was, might, by passing from one to the other, reach
at length the coast of America, and give a begin-
ning to population in that continent. The dif-
tance between the Marian or Ladrone islands and
the nearest land in Asia, is greater than that be-
tween the part of America which the Ruffians dif-
covered, and the coast of Kamchatka; and yet the
inhabitants of those islands are manifestly of Asia-
tic extract. If, notwithtranding their remote situ-
ation, we admit that the Marian islands were peopled
from our continent, distance alone is no reason why
we should hesitate about admitting that the original
of the Americans may be from the fame source,
It is probable that future navigators in those seas,
by fleering farther to the north, may find that the
continent of America approaches ifill nearer to Asia.
According to the information of the barbarous peo-
ple, who inhabit the country about the north-east
promontory of Asia, there lies, off the coast, a finall
island, to which they fail in less than a day. From
that, they can descry a large continent, which, ac-
cording to their description, is covered with forests,
and 1poli(flcd by people whose language they do not
unlelilanl d 1. By them they arc supplied with the
flins of martens, an animal unknown in the nor-
thern parts of Siberia, and which is never found
hut in countries abounding with trees. If we could
r'ly on this account, we might conclude, that the
Americun continent is separated fiom ours only by

a narlrow

1 Mullr, i; Voyages, tom. i. .4. &c. 267. 276.
'- Mullcr', Voy, c, Dccotuv. i. 166. !

B 0 0 K a narrow strait, and all the difficulties with refpea

Iv. to the communication between them would vaniih,

Perhaps the merit of ascertaining this is reserved
for the fovercign now feated on the throne of Peter
the Great, who, by perfeding his plan, may add
this fplehdid event to those which already diftin.
guifh her reign.

Another IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries,
communica- that an intercourse between our continent and A-
tion by the
north-west. merica might be carried on with no less facility
A. D. S3o. from the north-west extremities of Europe. As

early as the ninth century, the Norwegians disco.
vered Greenland, and planted colonies there, The
communication with that country, after a long in-
terruption, was renewed in the last century. Some
Lutheran and Moravian missionaries, prompted by
zeal for propagating the Christian faith, have ven-
tured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated re-
gion *. To them we are indebted for much curious
information with refpeE to its nature and inhabi-
tants. We learn, that the north-west coast of
Greenland is separated from America by a very nar-
row firait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this itrait conducts, it is highly probable
that they are united t ; that the inhabitants of the
two countries have some intercourse with one ano-
ther; that the Efquimaux of America perfetly re-
femble the Green landers in their asped, dress, and
mode of living ; that fnne sailors, who had acquir-
ed the knowledge of a few words in the Greenland-
ifl language, reported that there were undertlood
A. . 1764. by the Efquimaux ; that, at length, a Moravian

Miflionary, well acquainted with the language of
Greenland, having visited the country of the Es-

quilnaux,

* Crantz Hist. of Gicenl. i. 242, 2.44. Prevot c1if. Gen. dce
Voyagei, com. xv. 15z, not. (96). Eggedc, p. 2, 3.

quimaux, found, to his aflonifhment, that they B o0 K
spoke the fame language with the Greenlanders,
and were in every refpe& the fame people, and he
was accordingly received and entertained by them
as a friend and a brother *.

BY these decisive faas, not only the cofangui-
nity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is eft.b-
lifled, but the poflibility of peopling America from
the north of Europe is demonstrated. If the Nor,
wegians, in a barbarous age, when science had not
begun to dawn in the north of Europe, possessed
such naval fkill'as to open a communication with
Greenland, their anceflors, as much addiaced to
roving by Tea, as the Tartars ar.e to wandering by
land, might at some more remote period, accom-
plifh the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there,
whose descendents might, in progress of time, mi-
grate into America. But if, instead of venturing
to fail direcly from their own coafi to Greenland,
we suppose that the Norwegians held a more cauti-
ous course, and advanced from Shetland to the
Feroe Islands, and from them to Icel. nd, in all
which they had planted colonies, their progress
mlay have been so gradual, that this navigation can-
not be confidered as either longer or more hazard-
ous, than those voyages which that hardy and en-
terprifing race of men is known to have performed
in every age.

8. TuOUGH it be possible that America may Probably
have received its first inhabitants from our conti- peid'!ed

o Euop or thenfrort hce

nent, either by the north-wefl of Europe or the northn eat.i
north-caf of Asia, there seems to be good reason for
f1lppofing that the progenitors of all the American
nations, from Cape Horn to the southern confines

of
Crintz Hill. of GCcenl. p. z6x, 26X.

B 0 0 K of Labrador, migrated from the latter rather than

i_. the former. The Efquimaux are the only people

in America, who, in their asped or character, bear
any resemblance to the northern Europeans. They
are manifestly a separate species of men, diftinc
from all the nations of that continent, in language,
in disposition, and in habits of life. Their original,
then, may warrantably be traced up to that source
which I have pointed out. But, among all the
other inhabitants of America, there is such a ftrik-
ing similitude in the form of their bodies, and the
qualities of their minds, that, notwithstanding the
diversities occasioned by the influence of climate,
or unequal progress in improvement, we must pro-
nounce them to be descended from one source.
There may be a variety in the fhadcs, but we can
every where trace the fame original colour. Each
tribe has something peculiar which distinguishes it,
but in all of them we discern certain features com-
mon to the whole race. It is remarkable, that in
every peculiarity, whether in their persons or dif-
positions, which charaderife the Americans, they
have fomne resemblance to the rude tribes scattercd
over the north-east of Asia, but almost none to the
nations fettled in the northern extremities of Eu-
rope. We may, therefo-c, refer them to the former
origin, and conclude that their Asiatic progenitors,
having fettled in those parts of America, where
the Ruffians have discovered the proximity of the
two continents, spread gradually over its various
regions. This account of the progress of populati-
on in America, coincides with the traditions ofthe
Mexicans concerning their own origin, which, im-
perfect as they are, were prefirved with more ac-
curacy, and merit greater credit, than those of aay
people in the New WVorld. According to them,
their anceflors came fiom a remote country, fitta-
ted to the north-eall. of Mexico. They point out

their

their various stations as they advanced from this, E °0 K
into the interior provinces, and it is precisely the __
fame route which they must have held, if they had
been emigrants from Asia. The Mexicans, in de-
scribing the appearance of their progenitors, their
manners, and habits of life at that period, exadcly
delineate those of the rude Tartars, from whom I
suppose them to have sprung .

THUS have I finished a difquifit;on which has
been deemed of so much importance, that it would
have been improper to omit it in writing the hico-
ry of America. I have ventured to inquire, but
without presuming to decide. Satisfied with offer-
ing conjecures, I pretend not to eftabliflh any sys-
tem. When an investigation is, from its nature, so
intricate and obscure, that it is impossible to arrive
at conclusions which are certain, there may be some
merit in pointing out such as are probable t.

THE condition and character of the American Condioion
nations, at the time when they became known to and charac-

ter of the

the Europeans, deserve more attentive confiderati- mericians.
on, than the inquiry concerning their original.
The latter is merely an object of curiosity, the for-
mer is one of the most important as well as infitruc-
tive researches, which can occupy the philosopher
or historian. In order to complete the history of
the human mind, and attain to a perfet knowledge
of its nature and operations, we rnuft contemplate
mnan in all those various situations wherein he ihas
been placed. We mutt follow him in his progress
through the diiff:rent fiages of society, as ihe gra-
VOL. I. N n dually

* Acofn la-fi. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Garci Oiicein die

1 o IniIos, lih. v. c. 3. 'orquemada Monir. I l. il. i. c. 2, &'.
lBotulrini lcladluci Idie dc iii:un il , i. r
t l Amnlr. Scptl)rit. S xvii. p.

'7. M mnoircl fur la L.ouiliane, par. Iiilluiit, loinli.ip. 119.

B o o K dually advances from the infant rfate of civil life

Iv.

_I>,V
_ towards its maturity and decline. We mufft ob-

lerve, at each period, how the faculties of his un-
derffanding unfold, we must attend to the efforts of
his acctive powers, watch the motions of affection as
they rifie in his breast, and mark whither they tend,
and with what ardour they are exerted. The phi-
lofophers and historians of ancient Greece and
Rome, our guides in this as well as every other
disquisition, had only a limited view of this sub-
jeEt, as they had hardly any opportunity of survey-
ing man in his rudest and molf early -fate. In all
those regionr of the earth with which they were ac-
qurainted, civil society had made considerable ad-
vances, and nations had finished a good part of
their career before they began to observe them,
The Scythians and Germans, the rudest people of
whom any ancient author has transmitted to us an
authentic account, possessed flocks and herds, had
acquired property of various kinds, and, when com-
pared with mankind in their primitive state, may be
reckoned to have attained to a great degree of ci-
vilization.

Lcfs im- BUT the discovery of the New World enlarged
proved thnt the fpherc of contemplation, and presented nations
In ani pin't
oifthecarth. to our view, in flages of their progress, much less

advanced than tholl wherein they have been obferv-
ed in our continent. In America, iman appears unl-
der the rudclt: form in which we can conceive him
to lublift. We behold communities just beginning
to unitc, alnd may examine the sentiments and
aStions of hIllnan beings in the infancy of social
life, while they feel but imperfectly the force of its
tics, and have scarcely rclinqnifihed their native
libl(rty. ' hat state of primanval finplicity, whicll
was klnown in our conltilnent only by the -anciful
dcfcription of poets, rcally exiflcd in the other.

'1'l ..

The greater part of its inhabitants were firangers B O K
to indufiry and labour, ignorant of arts, and almost
unacquainted with property, enjoying in common
the blessings which flowed spontaneously from the
bounty of nature. There were only two nations
in this vast continent which had emerged from this
rude Itate, and had made any considerable progress
in acquiring the ideas, and adopting the inftituti-
ons, which belonged to polished societies. Their
government and manners will fall naturally under
our review in relating the discovery and conquef- of
the Mexican and Peruvian empires; and we shall
have there an opportunity of contemplating the
Americans in the slate of highest improvement to
which they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches shall be This inqui-

turned to the finall independent tribes which occu- ry confned
pied every other part of America. Among there, deft tribes,
though with some diversity in their character, their
manners and institutions, the state of society was
nearly similar, and so extremely rude, that the de-
nomination of SAVAGE may be applied to them all.
In a general history of America, it would be high-
ly improper to describe the condition of each petty
community, or to investigate every minute circum-
flance which contributes to form the character of
its members. Such an inquiry would lead to de-
tails of immeafutrable and tirefomie extent. The
qualities belonging to the people of all the diffe-
rent tribes have such a near resemblance, that they
may be painted with the fame features. Where any
circumiftances fcem to constitute a divcrfity in their
charadter and manners worthy of attention, it will
be sufficient to point these out as they occur, and to
inqtuire into the caufcs of such peculiarities.

N n 2 IT

B 0 0 K IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying and

authentic information concerning nations while

1)iti;fculy of they remain uncivilized. To discover their true
%bt;ir. ing character under this rude form, and to colled the
information,

tfeatur s by which they are distinguished, requires
an obf'rver poffilFed of no less impartiality than
difcernmenlt. For, in every fRage of society, the
facultics, the sentiments and desires of men are so
accommodated to their own slate, that they become
standards of excellence to themselves, they affix the
idea of perfection and happiness to those attain-
ments which resemble their own, and wherever the
objects and enjoyments to which they have been
accustomed are wanting, confidently pronounce a
people barbarous and miserable. Hence the mutual
contempt with which the members of communities,
unequal in their degrees of improvement, regard
each other. Polished nations, conscious of the ad-
vantages which they derive from their knowledge
and arts, are apt to view rude nations with peculiar
scorn, and, in the pride of superiority, will hardly
allow either their occupations, their feelings, or
their pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has fel-
dom been the lot of communities, in their early
and unpolifhed state, to fall under the observation
of persons, endowed with force of mind superior to
vulgar prejudices, and capable of contemplating
man, under whatever asped he appears, with a
candid and di cclning eye.
from tlc in- T'I-iE Spaniards, who firfR visited America, and

liwho had an op(portunity of beholding its various

lilt fn i ob- 0
.1.-1,, tribes, while Cietire and ttnliifbd(ied, were fl firom

poAflfhing the qualities rcqluifite for observing the
11rikiIr fpeIcccle prcfinted to their view. Nei-
ther the acge in which they lived, nor the natioll to
which they l)tlogedd, had nmlade filch l)rogref in
truCe Icil lc, as infpirci ct larged aid liberal fcllti-

* taneiVS,

ments. The conquerors of the New World were B 0 K
mofly illiterate adventurers, destitute of all the IV.
ideas which ihould have directed them in contem-
plating objects, so extremely different from those
with which they were acquainted. Surrounded
continually with danger, or struggling with hard-
{hips, they had little leisure, and less capacity for
any speculative inquiry. Eager to take poffeflion
of a country of such vast extent and opulence, and
happy in finding it occupied by inhabitants so inca-
pable to defend it, they hastily pronounced them to
be a wretched order of men, formed merely for ser-
vitude; and were more employed in computing the
profits of their labour, than in inquiring into the
operations of their minds, or the reasons of their
cuftons and institutions. The persons who pene-
trated at subsequent periods into the interior pro-
vinces, to which the knowledge and devastations of
the first conquerors did not reach, were generally
of a similar character ; brave and enterprising in an
high degree, but so uninformed as to be little qua-
lified either for observing or dcfcribing what they
beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of and their
the Spaniards, render their accounts of the people prejudices
of America extremely defective. Soon after they
planted colonies in their new conquests, adiflerence

1i 1 opinion arose with rcfpedt to the treatment of the

natives. One party, solicitous to render their ser-
Vitlde perpetual, reprefientcd them as a b-rutifl, ob-
inlaIte race, incapable either of acqui ring religious
knowleldge, o of being trained to the fuindions of

(cial liic. ' 'he other, full of pious concern for
tihi c(xll'rfion, contended that, though rude and
g""nr)llt, they were gentle, liiOnat, i dcile,

do ieand

hv prliper illnl-lulliolls and regulations might be
Islllcld gradually into good Christians alnd useful

citizens.

B o o K citizens. This controversy, as I have already re.

iv' lated, was carried on with all the warmth which is

natural, when attention to interest on the one hand,
and religious zeal on the other, animate the difpu.
tants. Most of the laity espoused the formeropini-
on ; all the ecclesiastics were advocates for the lat-
ter; and we shall uniformly find that, accordingly
as an author belonged to either of these parties, he
is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate the de-
feEts of the Americans beyond measure. Those
repugnant accounts increase the difficulty of at-
taining a perfeA knowledge of their character, and
render it necessary to peruse all the descriptions of
them by Spanish writers with difiruft, and to receive
their information with some allowance.

and from the ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the difcove-
pfyhftms ry of America, before the manners of its inhabi-
phers. tants attraAed, in any considerable degree, the at-

tention of philosophers. At length, they discover-
ed that the knowledge of their condition and cha-
racter might enable them to fill up a considerable
chasm in the history of the human species, and lead
to speculations no less curious than important.
They entered upon this new field of fludywith
great ardour; but, instead of throwing light upon
the subjet, they have contributed, in some degree,
to involve it in additional obscurity. Too impa-
tient to inquire, they hastened to decide; and be-
gan to erec fyflcms, when they flould have been
searching for fadts on which to establish their foun-
dations. Struck with the appearance of degener'l
cy in the human Ifccics throughout the New
World, and astonished at beholding a vast conti
nent occupie( by a naked, feeble, and ignorant lrce
of men, fomne authors of great name have maintll;i
ed, that this part of the globe had but lately cmn;rg

ed

rd from the tea, and become fit for the residence of B o o K
man; that every thing in it bore marks of a recent .
original; and that its inhabitants, lately called
into existence, and fill at the beginning of their ca-
reer, were unworthy to be compared with the peo-
ple of a more ancient and improved continent *.
Others have imagined, that, under the influence of
an unkindly climate, which checks and enervates
the principle of life, man never attained in America
the perfection which' belongs to his nature, but
remained an animal of an inferior order, defeative
in the vigour of his bodily frame, and deRfitute of
sensibility, as well as of force, in the operations of
his mind T. In opposition to both these, other phi-
lofophers have supposed that man arrives at his
highest dignity and excellence long before he reach-
es a state of refinement ; and, in the rude simplicity
of savage life, displays an elevation of sentiment, an
independence of mind, and a warmth of attach-
ment, for which it is vain to search among the
members of polished societies .t They seem to
confider that as the most perfec slate of man which
is the Icaft civilized. They describe the manners
of the rude Americans with such rapture, as if they
proposed them for models to the ref of the fpecics.
'fhcfe contradi&ory theories have been proposed
with equal confidence, and uncommon powers ot
genius and eloquence have been exerted in order to
c!othe them with an appearance of truth.

As all those circumtl anices concur in rendering
1" inhquiry into the state of the rude nations in A-
"li;,a intricate and obfcture, it is nccclllry to car-
'r it on with caution. When guided in our re-
le'lrhcs by the intelligent obfcrvations of the few

phil ofophcrs

* M. le l131ln fin. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. 103. 114.

I . 1I 1. l' ]c

P(dr l Icis Philof'. hfur lcs Aineric. p;nlirn.
1 M'. l" .,",l ,. .

B O O K philosophers who have visited this partof the globe,

Iv.

we may venture to decide. When obliged to have
recourse to the superficial remarks of vulgar tra-
vellers, of sailors, traders, buccaneers, and miflion-
aries, we must often pause, and comparing detach-
ed fads, endeavour to discover what they wanted fa-
gacity to observe. Without indulging conjecure,
or betraying a propensity to either system, we must
tfudy with equal care to avoid the extremes of ex-
travagant admiration, or of supercilious contempt
for those manners which we describe.

Merthod ob- IN order to conduc this inquiry with greater ac-
served in the
inquiry. racy, it ihould be rendered as simple as possible.

Man existed as an individual before he became the
member of a community ; and the qualities which
belong to him under his former capacity ihould be
known, before we proceed to examine those which
arise from the latter relation. This is peculiarly
necessary in investigating the manners of rude na-
tions. Their political union is so incomplete,their
civil inflitutions and regulations so few, so fimplc,
and of such fmnall authority, that they ought to be
viewed rather as independent agents, than as mem-
bers of a regular society. The character of a fa-
vage results almnoft entirely fi-om his sentiments or
feelings as an individual, and is but little influenc-
ed by his irmperfec fiibjclion to government and
order. I shall conciut mny rcfeaerches concClern11g
the manners of the Americans in this ilatur:ll or-
der, proceeding gradtually froim what is fimpic to
what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, r. The bodily conifitution f

the Americans in thofic regions now under rcvic'.
I1. The qualities of their minds. III. Their l'
mecfic slate. IV. I'lheir political state and ilAsi-
tutions. V. Their fvftcm of war, and plblic

tiCurity).

security. VI. The arts with which they were ac- B o0 K
quainted. VII. Their religious ideas and infii-
tutions. VIII. Such singular detached customs as
are not reducible to any of the former heads. IX.
I shall conclude with a general review and efti-
mate of their virtues and defe6s.

I. THE bodily conititution of the Americans. The confli-
The human body is less affected by climate than t'itnio of
that of any other animal. Some animals are con-
fined to a particular region of the globe, and can-
not exif beyond it; others, though they may be
brought to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to
them, cease to multiply when carried out of that
difiri&, which Nature defined to be their mansion.
Even such as seem capable of being naturalized in
various climates, feel the effei of every remove
from their proper flation, and gradually dwindle
and degenerate from the vigour and perfedion pe-
culiar to their species. Man is the only living
creature whose frame is at once so hardy and so
flexible, that he can spread over the whole earth,
become the inhabitant of every region, and thrive
and multiply under every climate. Subject, howe-
ver, to the general law of Nature, the human body
is not entirely exempt from the opcration of cli-
mate, and when exposed to the exrecmes either of
heat or cold, its size or vigour diminilles.

T1IE first appearance of the ilnhabitants of the Complnx;-
New World, filled the difcovercrs with stich aflo- ''
ilfhmenlt, that thy were apt to inagile them a
race of men difiri\ nt from ihole of t:he other li-
mi'iiphre. Their conilplcxion is of a reddilh brown,
nearly rlenlblinl, the colour of copp)r l) . 'I he
hair of their heads is always black, long, coarflc,
VOL. I. 0 o and
* Ovicdo Somario, p. 4,, D, Life of Columbus, c. Z4.

B o o K and lank. They have no beard, and every partof

their body is perfeAly smooth. Their persons ar
of a full size, extremely straight, and well propor.
tioned *. Their features are regular, though often
distorted by absurd endeavours to improve the beau.
ty of their natural form, or to render their afpeat
more dreadful to their enemies. In the islands,

OMur fee- where four-footed animals were both few and small,
i"e. and the earth yielded her productions almost fpon-

taneoufly, the confitution of the natives, neither
braced by the active exercises of the chace, norin-
vigorated by the labour of cultivation, was ex.
tremely feeble and languid. On the continent,
where the forests abound with game of various
kinds, and the chief occupation of many tribes was
to pursue it, their frame acquired greater firmness.
Still, however, the Americans we're more remarka-
ble for agility than frrength. They resembled beasts
of prey, rather than animals formed for labourt.
They were not only averse to toil, but incapable of
it; and when rouzed by force from their native in-
dolence, and compelled to work, they funk under
talks which the people of the other continent wbuld
have performed with cafe::. This feebleness of
conflitution was universal among the inhabitantsof
those regions in America which we are fitrveying,
and may be confidered as charadceriftic of the fpe-
cies there 1.

TFI-E benir(dlcs countenance and finooth flkci of

the American ltcms to indicate a dcfcEt of vigol)r,
occafioledl by fOine vice in his frame. He is dei-
lute of one Iitln of ianihood and of flrength. T'llis

peclliarity,

Sc NOT()E'r . XII. See NOTE XLIII.

:t (thic ) ':,!1. p. 51 , C. Voy. dle (orreal, ii. 138. Wafer's D

f.'ripti.),p . i 3. 1, |] 1B.

1 I.it, (Cifas Bnrcv. Rel.ic. p. 4. T°r'l""'

Motna'i. i... U dOvicd. S m,,.io, p.41. Ilillor. lib. iii. c. 6. li
r.-rr, dc:. I,. ix.

i .
.. ;. nlio , 1 4 1.

peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the New B o o 1K

Iv.

World are distinguished from the people of all o-
ther nations, cannot be attributed, as some travel-
lers have supposed, to their mode of subsistence -.
For though the food of many Americans be so ex-
tremely insipid, that they are altogether unacquain-
ted with the use of salt, rude tribes in other parts of
the earth have subsisted on aliments equally simple
without this mark of degradation, or aly apparent
symptom of a diminution in their vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads us Lefsappe.
to fufped that there is tome natural debility in their tite.
frame, the smallness of their appetite for food has
been mentioned by many authors as a confirmation
of this suspicion. The quantity of food which
men consume varies according to the temperature of
theclimate in which they live, the degree of auLivi-
ty which they exert, and the natural vigourof their
constitutions. Under the enervating heat of the
torrid zone, and when men pass their days in indo-
lence and ease, they require less nourifhlment than
the acdive inhabitants of temperate or cold coun-
tries. But neither the warmth of their climate,
nor their extreme lazincfs, will account for the un-
common defect of appetite among the Americans,
The Spaniards were aftonifed with observing this,
not only in the islands, but in icveral parts of the
continent. The conflitutional tcmperance of the
nativcs far exceeded, in their opinion, the abfli-
nn"ce of the most mortificd hermits-- ; while, on the
other hand, the appetite of the Spaniards appeared
to' the Americans insatiably voracious; and they
aIlirmed, that one Spaniardl devoured more food in a

0 o 2. day

F Clarlev H il. ide Nouv. Fr. iii. 310. - Railmro, ii. 0
,j 3 A, S ilonl Conijuiila, &c. p. 39. Hkluyt, iii,. 68. 5oS.

B 0 0 K day than was sufficient for ten Americans.

Iv.

I.ls vehe- A PROOF of some feebleness in their frame fiill
nenceof more striking, is the insensibility of the Americans
desire, to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.

That passion which was destined to perpetuate life,
to be the bond of social union, and the fourceof
tenderness and joy, is the most ardent in the human
breast ; and though the perils and hardships of the
lavage state, though excessive fatigue, on some oc-
cafions, and the difficulty at all times of procuring
subsistence, may seem to be adverse to this passion,
and to have a tendency to abate its vigour, yet the
rudest nations in every other part of the globe seem
to feel its influence more powerfully than the inha-
bitants of the New World. The negro glows with
all the warmth of desire natural to his climate;
and the molt uncultivated Asiatics discover that fen-
fibility, which, from their situation, we ihould ex-
pe& them to have felt. But the Americans are, in
an amazing degree, itrangers to the force of this
firfi inftint of nature. In every part of the New
\World the natives treat their women with coldness
and indifference. They are neither the objets of
that tender attachment which takes place ilC civi-
lized society, nor of that ardent desire conspicuous
among rude nations. Even in climates where this
passion usually acquires its greatest vigour, the fa-
vage of America views his female with disdain, as
an animal of a less noble species. He is at no pains
to win her favour by the afliduity of courtship,
and fill less fblicitous to preserve it by indulgenc
and gentleness ::. Miflionarics themselves, not-

withiftading

' Hlerrera, dec. lib. ii. c. 16. | Hennepin Moctirs(lesalva-
gcS, 32, &c. Roch) 'rr I-lift. d( Ines cs Antilles, p. 461. Voyage d0

Cocl, ii. 141. R;miiflio, iii. 309. F. Loza:no )cfrc. dcl C('i

Cla:co, 71. Falkrllr's 1)elcr. of Patagon, p. z25. Lelttredi P. Ca'
t;.nco ap. Muratori 11. Chlrifiali. IFlicc, i. 305.

withstanding the austerity of monastic ideas, can- B -o o K
not refrain from expressing their astonishment at
the difpaflionate coldness of the American young
men in their intercourse with the other sex *. Nor
is this reserve to be ascribed to any opinion which
they entertain with respect to the merit of female
chastity. That is an idea too refined for a savage,
and fuggefied by a delicacy offentiment and affeci-
on to which he is a stranger.

BUT in inquiries concerning eitler the bodily or Refleaion
mental qualities of particular races of men, there is with refpet

''~~~ r j * to these.

not a more common or more seducing error, than
that of ascribing to a tingle cause, those charade-
riftic peculiarities, which are the effect of the com-
bined operation of many causes. The climate and
foil of America differ, in so many refpeds, from
those of the other hemisphere, and this difference is
so obvious and striking, that philosophers of great
eminence have laid hold on this as sufficient to ac-
count for what is peculiar in the conflitution of its
inhabitants. They reft on physical causes alone,
and confider the feeble frame and languid desire of
the Americans, as consequences of the temperament
of that portion of the globe which they inhabit.
But the influences of political and moral causes
ought not to have been overlooked. These operate
with no less cffecd than that on which they reft as a
full explanation of the singular appearances which
have been mentioned. Wherever the state of so-
cicty is such as to create many wants and defircs,
which cannot be satisfied without regular exertions
of indultry, the body accustomed to labour be-

comes

Clanvalin, p. 1. 5Ec li'.r f. tom. xxiv. 318. Tcrtrc, ii. 377.
Vlclg i.al i , ].i ibas His. de los Triumf. p. i.

B O O K comes robust and patient of fatigue. In a more

v., simple Rate, where the demands of men are so few

and so moderate, that they may be gratified, alnoft
without any effort, by the spontaneous productions
of nature, the powers of the body are not called
forth, nor can they attain their proper strength,
The natives of Chili and of North-America, the
two temperate regions in the New World, who
live by hunting, may be deemed an aAtive and vigor-
ous race, when compared with the inhabitants of
the isles, or ofthofe parts of the continent where
hardly any labour is requisite to procure fubfiflence,
Theexertions of a hunter are not, however, so re-
gular, or so continued, as those of persons employ.
ed in the culture of the earth, or in the various arts
of civilized life, and though his agility maybe
greater than theirs, his strength is on the whole in-
ferior. If another direction were given to the active
powers of man in the New World, and his force
augmented by exercise, he might acquire a degree
of vigour which he does not in his present state
possess. The truth of this is confirmed by expe-
rience. Wherever the Americans have been gra-
dually accuffomed to hard labour, their conftituti-
ons become robufR, and they have been found ca-
pable of performing such talks, as seemed not only
to exceed the powers of such a feeble frame as has
been deemed peculiar to their country, but toequal
any effort of the natives, either of Africa or of u-
rope 1:.

THE fame rcafoning will apply to what has been

obfcrvcd concerning their slender demand for food.
As a proof that this ihould be ascribed, as much to
their extreme indolence, and often total want of
occupation, as to any thing peculiar ill the

phyfic;l
i: Sec NOTE XLIV.

physical structure of their bodies, it has been ob- B 0 0 K
served, that in those diftridcs, where the people of IV.
America are obliged to exert any unusual effort of
activity, in order to' procure subsistence, or where-
ver they areemployed in severe labour, their appe-
tite is not inferior to that of other men, and, in some
places, it has itruck observers as remarkably vora-
cious t.

THE operation of political and moral causes is
fill more conspicuous, in modifying the degree of
attachment between the sexes. In a state of high
civilization, this passion, inflamed by restraint, re-
finad by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, occu-
pies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer a fim-
ple inftint of nature ; sentiment heightens the ar-
dour of desire, and the most tender emotions of
which our frame is susceptible, soothe and agitate
the foul. This description, however, applies only
to those, who, by their situation, are exempted
from the cares and labours of life. Among persons
of inferior order, who are doomed by their conditi-
on to incefant toil, the dominion of this passion is
less violent, and their solicitude to procure fubfif-
tencc, and to provide for the first demand of nature,
leaves little leilfre for attending to its second call.
But if the nature of the intcrcourfe between the
fexcs varics so much in persons of different rank in
polilfed focieiies, the condition of man, while he
remains uncivilized, mult occasion a variation still
more apparent. We may well suppose, that amidst
tllchardlfliips, the dangers, and the simplicity of la-
\'ige life, where fubfiftencc is always precarious,
ald ofteln scanty, where men are almost continually
engaged in the pursuit of their enemics, or in
gutlarding againfi their attacks, and where neither
drecs nor reclrvc arc employed as arts of female al-

lurellent,

Cunmill., ii;. o2.7. 237. Laifitau, i. 515. OvallQ Clurch. iii.
/Vui.m, lii i. 295.

B O 0 K lurement, that the attention of the Americans to

Iv-. their women would be extremely feeble, without

imputing this solely to any physical defec orde.
gradation in their frame.

IT is accordingly obferyed, that in those coun.

tries of America, where, from the fertility of the
foil, the mildncfs of the climate, or tome farther
advances which the natives have made in improve.
ment, the means of subsistence are more abundant,
and the hardships of savage life are less severely
felt, the animal paflion of the sexes becomes more
ardent. Striking examples of this occur among
some tribes feated on the banks of great rivers well
fiored with food,-among others who are matters of
hunting-grounds abounding so much with game,
that they have a regular and plentiful supply of
nourishment with little labour. The superior de-
gree offecurity and affluence which they enjoy, is
followed by their natural effe&s. The pafflions
implanted in the human frame by the hand of nature
acquire additional force ; new taftes and desires are
formed; the women, as they are more valued and
admired, become more attentive to dresl and orna-
ment; the men, beginning to feel how much of their
own happiness depends upon them, no longer dif-
dain the arts of winning their favour and affeition.
The intercourse of the sexes becomes very different
from that which takes place among their ruder
countrymen ; and as hardly any restraint is impof-
ed on the gratification of desire, either by religion,
or laws, or decency, the dillolution of their man-
ners is exceffivc -.

None of NOTWITHSTANDING the fec:ble make of the
them dc-
formcdl. Americans, almost none of thelm are defornl-

ed, or mutilated, or defective in any of their
senses. All travellers hWave beean struck

with
Biet. 389. Cliarlcv. iii. 4z. Dunmlol M\,.in. fur Louifianec i. 'Sr

with this circumstance, and have celebrated the B o o K
uniform symmetry and perfection of their external I
figure. Some authors search for the cause of this
appearance in their physical condition. As the pa-
rents are not exhausted or over-fatigued with hard
labour, they suppose that their children are born
vigorous and found. They imagine, that in the
liberty of savage life, the human body, naked
and unconfined from its earliest age, preserves
its natural form; and that all its limbs and mem-
bers acquire ajufter proportion, than-when fettered
with artificial restraints, whjch stint its growth,
and distort its shape *. Something, without doubt,
may be ascribed to the operation-of these causes;
but the true reasons of this apparent advantage,
which is common to all savage nations, lie deeper,
and are closely interwoven with the nature ancd
genius ofthatftate. The infancy of man is so long
and so helpless, that it is extremely difficult to rear
children among rude nations. Their means of
subsistence are not only scanty, but precarious.
Such as live by hunting must range over extensive
countries, and liift often from place to place. The
care of children, as well as every other laborious
tafic, is devolved upon the women. The diftieffes and
hardships of the savage life, which are often such as
can hardly be supported by persons in full vigour,
must be fatal to those of more tender age. Afraid
of undertaking a talk so laborious, and of such long
duration, the women, in some parts of America,
extinguifhl the first sparks of that life which they
are unable to cheriflh, and by the ule of certain herbs
procure frequent abortions :-. Sensible that only
flout and well-formed children have force of con-
ftitution to itruggle through such ;an hard infancy,

VQL. I. P Ip other

'I l'ifo p. 6. f' Elli'a Voycage tJ I-tirudlii' IBy, 1oS. -lHIrtln ,
let 7. Ub. ix, c. ,.

B OO K other nations abandon or destroy such of their pro.

Iv.
i_ geny as appear feeble or defedive, as unworthy of

attention *. Even when they endeavour to rear all
their children without diftindion, so great a pro.
portion of the whole number perishes under theri.
gorous treatment which must be their lot in the
savage state, that few of those who. laboured under
any original frailty attain the age of manhood t.
Thus, in polished societies, where the means of sub.
fiftence are secured with certainty, and, acquired
with ease ; where the talents.of the mind are.often
of more importance than the powers of the body;
children are preserved notwithfianding their defects
or deformity, and grow up to be u.eful citizens, In
rude nations, such persons are either cutoff as
loon as they are born, or becoming a burdento
themselves and to the community, cannot long pro.
trad their lives. But in those provinces of.theNcw
World where, by the establishment of the Euro.
peans, more regular provision .has been made for the
fubfillence of its inhabitants, and they are.reitrain-
ed from laying violent hands on their children, the
Americans are so far from being eminent for any
superior ,perfedtion in their form, that onefhould
rather fufpet some peculiar imbecillity in the race,
from the extraordinary number of individuals wlh
are deformed, dwarfish, mutilated, blind, or
deaf :t.

Uniformity HOWEVER feeble the conflitution of the Ameri'
pfara ce.
CP cans nlay be, it is retnmrkable, that there is lSs

variety in the human form throughout the NC"
World, than in the ancient continent. When Co`
lumbus and the other difcovercrsfirft visited the dif'

fercnt

- Gun lilla Ilit. ii. 134. Teclld's ftlt. of PliragiatNy, ay
Churchiljl's Colleat. vi. ioX. '1 Crcuxii Silt. Caiad. I1) i7'

*t Voyage de Ullo3, i. 232.

ferent countries of America which lie within the B O o K
torrid zone, they naturally expe&ed to find people v.
of the fame complexion with those in the corref-
ponding regions of the other hemisphere. To their
amazement, however, they discovered that Ameri-
ca contained no negroes *; and the cause of this
singular appearance became as much the objet of
curiosity, as the fadt itself was of wonder. In what
part or membrane of the body that humour resides
which tinges the complexion of the negro with a
deep black, it is the bifinefs ofanatomiits to inquire
and describe. The powerful operation of heat ap-
pears manifestly to be the cause which produces this
striking variety in the human species. All Europe,
alnmot the whole of Asia, and the temperate parts
of Africa, are occupied by men -of a fair complexion.
All the toirid zone in Africa, some of the warmer
regions adjacent to it, and a few countries in Afii,
are filled with people of a deep black colour. If we
trace the nations of our continent, making our
progress from cold and temperate countries towards
those parts which are exposed to the influence of
vehement and unremitting heat, we ihall find, that
the extreme whiteness of their skin soon begins to
diminish; that its colour deepens gradually as we
advance; and after passing through all the fuccefive
gradations of Ihade, terminates in an uniform unva-
rying black. But in America, where the agency of
heat is checked and abated by various causes, which
I have already explained, the climate seems to be
defitute of that force which produces such wonder-
ful effects on the human frame. The colour of the
natives of the torrid zone, in America, can hardly
be sii(d to be of a deeper hue than that of the people
in the more temperate parts of their continent. Ac-
cllr;te obfervcrs, who had an opportunity of view-
i'g the Americans in very different climates, and in

P p 2 countries

P. Martyr, dec. . 71.
!

B o o K countries far removed from each other, have been

JiV. struck with the amazing similarity of their figure

and aspect *.

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one standard in fashioning the human
form in Ahmerica, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables thatwere
current in the ancient continent, have been revived
with refpea to the New World, and America too
has been peopled with human beings of monfirous
and fantastic appearance. The inhabitants of cer-
tain provinces were described to be pigmies of three
feet high; those of others to be giants of an enor-
mous iize. Some travellers published accountsof
people with only one eye, others pretended to have
discovered men without heads, whose eyes and
mouths were planted in their breasts. The variety
of Nature in her productions is, indeed, so great,
that it is presumptuous to set bounds to her fertili-
ty, and to reject indiscriminately every relation that
is not perfectly consonant to our own limited ob-
servation and experience. But the other extreme,
of yielding an haity assent, on the flightelf evidence,
to whatever has the appearance of being tfrange and
marvellous, is no leCs unbecoming a philosophical
inquirer, as, in every period, men are more apt to
be betrayed into error, by their weakness in believ-
ing too much, than by their arrogance in believing
too little. In proportion as science extends, and
nature is examined with a discerning eye, the won-
ders that amulcd ages of ignorance disappear. The
talcs of credulous travellers concerning America are
forgotten ; the monflers which they describe have
been lcarched for in vain ; and those provinces

where
* Sec NOTE XL.V.

where they pretend to have found inhabitants of B 0 0 K
singular forms, are now known to be possessed by IV
people no wife different from the other Ameri-
cans $.

THOUGH these relations may, without difcuflioa,
be reje&ed as fabulous, there are other accounts of
such varieties in the human species in some parts of
the New World, which reft upon better evidence,
and merit more attentive examination. This varie-
ty has been particularly observed in three different
difiridts. The first of there is situated in the ifth-
mus of Darien, near the centre of America. Lio-
nel Wafer, a traveller possessed of more curiosity
and intelligence than we should have expeEted to
find in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there a
small, but singular race of men. They are of low
ifature, according to his description, of a feeble
make, incapable of enduring fatigue. Their colour
is a dead milk white ; not resembling that of fair
people among Europeans, but without any tinAure
of a blush or sanguine complexion. Their skin is
covered with a fine hairy down of a chalky white,
the hair of their heads, their eye-brows, and eye-
lashes, are of the fame hue. Their eyes are of a
singular form, and so weak, that they can hardly
bear the light of the fun ; but they fee clearly by
moon-light, and arc most acive and gay in the
"ight §. No race similar to this has been disco-
vered in any other part of America. Cortes, in-
decd, found some persons exactly resembling the
white people of Darien, among the rare and mon-
firous animals which Montezuma had collceted 1.
But as the power of the Mexican empire extended
to the provinces bordering on the isthmus of Darien,
they were probably brought fiom thence. Singu-

lar

1 Set NOTE. XLVI. . Wafir Dcrclipt. on .

o p. Dampicr, iii,.

f', 346. 11 Co(rtcl ap Rl . imi . .

4ii .
. 1 .

B O 0 K lar as the appearance of those people may be; they

cannot be confidered as constituting a diftint fpe-
cies. Amnong the negroes of Africa, as well as the
natives of the Indian islands, nature Sometimes pro-
duces a finall number of individuals, with all the
charaareril'ic features and qualities of the white
people of Darien. The former are called ALBIONS
by the Portugiiefe, and the latter KACKERLAKES
by the Dutch. In Darien the parents of those
WHITES are of the fame colour with the other na.
tives of the country; and this oberiration applies
equally to the anomalous progeny of the negroes
and Indians. The fame mother who produces
Come children of a colour that does not belong to
the race, brings forth the reft of the complexion
peculiar to her country t. One conclusion may
then be formed with refpedt to the people described
by Wafer, the ALBIONS and the KACKERLAKES;
they are a degenerated breed, not a separate class of
men; and from some disease or defea of their pa-
rents, the peculiar colour and debility which mark
their degradation is tranfinitted to them. As a de-
cifive proof of this, it has been observed, that nei-
ther the white people of Darien, nor the Albions of
Africa, propagate their race: their children are of
the colour and temperament peculiar to the na-
tives of their refpetive countries ::.

THE second diftriA that is occupied by inhabi-

tants differing in appearance from the other people
of America, is lituated in a high northern latitude,
extending from the coast of Labrador towards the
pole, as far as the country is habitable. The pco,
ple scattercd over those dreary regions, arc known
to the Europeans by the name of EsQUJIMAUX.
They themselves, with that idea of their own fd-
pcriority, which consoles the rudest and molt

wretched

- Mar-gray. 1Hiltl. ter, Nat, Bras. lib. viii. c. 4. t Wafier$

p. 348. DIemnct. I-lilt. de 'Afrique, ii. 234. Rechicrch. llo1111
fitr les Arcl. ii. I. &e.

wretched nations, assume the name of KERALIT or B O :.
MEN. They' are of a middle size and r6bit, 1, .
with heads of a disproportionate bulk, and feet as
remarkably small. Their complexion, though
swarthy, by being continually exposed to the ri-
gour of a cold climate, inclines to the European
white, rather than to the copper colour of America,
and the men have beards which are fornctimes
bushy and long t. From these marks of diflin>ji
on, as well as:fro:i; one iill .less equivocal, the as-
finity of theirlanguage to that of the Grecnlaniers,
which I have already mentioned, we may concluue,
with some degree of confidenci , that tlie l'-jvii-
maux are a race different from the reft of the A Zc-
ricans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty con-
cerning the inhaibitants of the third diitric, fcuat-
ed at the ifoithcrn extremity of Airserica. These
are the farnous :PATAAGONIANS, Vwho, curiii. tVw
centuries and a half, have afforded a fubje&( of con-
troverfy.to the learned, and an objct of v;roder to
the vulgar. Th.y are supposed to he onc o oi'e
w.lladering tribes, which occupy.that vafi, 1but ,.ki
known region of America, which extends from :he
river Dc la Plata to the Straits of M iell;a. Tn.T ir
proper station is in that part of the interioi countr,,
wliich lies on the banks of the riva: I^x.rro ; but
in the hunting beafon they often roa'. :s far as; the
itraits which .separate '.Terra dcl Fue:o froirT the
main-land The filft accounts of this peop!e i-r.r
brought to Europe by th: companions of M.ia-
geilan 1::, who dcli:ribed them as :a gigantic r:;.:c,
above cight feet high, and of -icngwth in o t!: , cn
to their enormous size. Amnoig severaL trJli. s .-

t Ellis Voy. to Hutllf* B , .

y 13. 139. D) la Potlleric, t .i,. i.

P' 79. W;les Jouri. of a Voy. to Chuircllill l'iver. I'hil. Titiaf.
01 Ix 9log.
. F 1,ilCIIcr' D)cl'riptioul of Patagonia, 1. loe.

B o 0 K Animals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable, may

IV be observed. Some large breeds of horses and dogs

exceed the more diminutive races in stature and
strength, as far as the Patagonian is supposed to rife
above the usual 1tandard of the human body. But
animals attain the highest perfeAion of their species,
only in mild climates, or where they find the mort
nutritive food in greatest abundance. It is not
then in the uncultivated waste of the Magellanic
regions, and among a tribe of unprovident savages,
that we should expec to find man, poffefling the
highest honours of his race, and diftinguilhed by a
superiority of size and vigour, far beyond what he
has reached in any other part of the earth. The
most explicit and unexceptionable evidence is re-
quifite, in order to establish a fact, repugnant to
those general principles and laws, which seem to as-
fed the human frame in every other initance, and to
decide with refneae: to its nature and qualities. Such
evidence has not hitherto been produced. Though
several persons, to whose testimony great refpet is
due, have visited' this part of America since the
time of Magellan, and have had interviews with
the natives; though some have affirmed, that such
as they saw were of gigantic stature, and others
have formed the fame conclusion from measuring
their footsteps, or the Skeletons of their dead ; yet
their accounts vary from each other in so manyef-
fential points, and are mingled ;with so many cir-
cumftances nianifefily false or fabulous, as detraC
much from their credit. On the other hand, foni
.navigators, and those among the molt eminent
of their order for dlifcernjllenlt and accuracy,
have . aflcrted that the ntives of Patagolia,
with whom they had intcrcourei, though sl0ut

'' See NOT'E XJlT..

and well made, are not of such extraordinary size as B ° 0 K
to be distinguished from there tof the human species. 1.i
The existence of this gigantic race of men, seems,
then, to be one of those points in natural history,
with refped to which a cautious inquirer will he-
fitate, and will chufe to suspend his assent until
more complete evidence shall decide, whether he
ought to admit a sac, seemingly inconsistent with
what reason and experience have discovered con-
cerning the firudure and condition of man, in all
the various situations in which hehas been observed.

IN order to form a complete idea with refped to Theiriate
the constitution of the inhabitants of this and the hl
other hemisphere, we should attend not only to the
make and vigour of their bodies, but confider what
degree of health they enjoy, and to what period of
longevity they usually arrive. In the simplicity of
the savage slate, when man is not oppressed with
labour, or enervated by luxury, or disquieted with
care, we are apt to imagine that his life will flow
on almost untroubled by disease or fufering, until
his days be terminated, in extreme old age, by the
gradual decays of nature. We find, accordingly,
among the Americans, as well as among other rude
people, persons, whose decrepit and Shrivelled form
seems to indicate an extraordinary length of life.
But as most of them are unacquainted with the art
of numbering, and all of them as forgetful of what
is pad, as they are improvident for what is to come,
it is impoflible to ascertain their age with any de-
gree of precision*. It is evident, that the period of
their longevity muifl vary considerably, according
to the diversity of clilates, and their difl'rcnt modes

VOL. I. Q q of
Ulloa Notic. A 3rer^i . 3 Bancroft Nat. Hilf. of Guiana, 334.

3 0 O K of fubfiftenee. They seem, however, to be every

where exempt from many of the distempers which
afflic' polished nations. None of the maladies,
which are the immediate offspring of luxury, or
sloth, ever visited them ; and they have no names
in their languages by which to ditfinguifh thisnu-
merous train of adventitious evils.
&iieaifs. BUT, whatever be the situation in which mall is

placed, he is born to susser; and his diseases, in the
savage tPate, though fewer in number, are, like
thole of the animals whom he nearly resembles in
his mode of life, more violent, and more fatal. If
luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of one
fpccies, the rigour and difireffes of savage life bring
on those of another. As men, in this slate, are
wonderfully improvident, and their means of sub-
fiftence precarious, they often pass from extreme
want to exuberant plenty, according to the vicif-
fitudes of fortune in the chace, or to the variety in
the productions of the seasons. Their inconfide-
rate gluttony in the one situation, and their revere
abstinence in the other, are equally pernicious.
For, though the human constitution may be ac-
curolned by habit, like that of animals of prey,
to tolerate long famine, and then to gorge voraci-
oufly, it is not a little affected by such sudden and
violent transitions. The strength and vigourof
savages arc, at some fcafons, impaired.by what they
fufloir, from scarcity of food ; at others, they are
afflic'ted with disorders arising from indigestion and
fupcrfluity of gross aliment. IThei last are so com-
mon, that they may be conliderecd as the unavoi-
dable confic ucnce of their mode of fiubfiling, and
cut of-' confidrlable lnumbers in tile prime of lik.
They are likewifc cxtremely ftLbjcct to conful"l'P

tiolls,

tions, to pleuritic, asthmatic, and paralytic difor- B o o K
ders*, brought on by the immoderate hardships t V.
and fatigue which they endure in hunting and in
war; or owing to the inclemency of the seasons to
which they are continually exposed. In the savage
fate, hardships and fatigue violently assault the
conRfitution. In poliihed societies, intemperance
undermines it. It is not easy to determine which
of them operates with most fatal effct, or tends
most to abridge human life. The influence of the
former is certainly most extensive. The pernicious
consequences of luxury reach only a few members
in any community, the difireffes of savage life are
felt by all. As far as I can judge, after very mi-,
nute inquiry, the general period of human life is
shorter amonIg savages, than in well-regulated and
industrious societies.

ONE dreadful malady, the severest scourge, with
which, in this life, offended Heaven chastens the
indulgence of criminal desire, seems to have been
peculiar to the Americans. By communicating it
to the conquerors, they have not only amply aveng-
ed their own wrongs, but by adding this calamity
to those which formerly embittered human life,
they have, perhaps, more than counterbalanced all
the benefits which Europe has derived from the dif-
covery of the New World. This diflemper, fiom
the country in which it first raged, or from the
people by whom it was supposed to have been spread
over Europe, has been fomctimes called the Nea-
politan, and sometimes the French disease. At
its first appearance, the infection was so malignant,

q 2 its

Charlev. N. Fr.iii. 364. Lafi , .
16oi . 3 c la Pothcrie, ii. 37

B 0 0 K its symptoms so violent, its operations so rapid and
aV_. fatal, as to baffle all the efforts of medical skill.

Aftoniflment and terror accompanied this unknown
afflition in its progress, and men began to dread
the extintion of the human race by such a cruel
visitation. Experience, and the ingenuity of phy.
ficians gradually discovered remedies of such vir.
tue as to cure or mitigate the evil. During the
course of two centuries and a half, its virulence
seems. to have abated considerably. At length, in
the fame manner with the leprosy, which raged in
Europe for some centuries, it may waste its force
and disappear; and in some happier age, this
western infection, like that from the East, may be
known only by description.

Power and II. AFTER confidering what appears to be pecu-
qualities of liar in the bodily constitution of the Americans,
·heir minds.

our attention is naturally turned towards the pow-
ers and qualities of their minds. As the individual
advances from the ignorance and imbecillity of the
infant state, to vigour and maturity of understand-
ing, something similar to this may be observed in
the progress of the species. With respect to it, too,
there is a period of infancy, during which several
powers of the mind are not unfolded, and all are
feeble and defective in their operation. In the
early ages of society, while the condition of man
is simple and rude, his reason is but little exercised,
and his desires move within a very narrow sphere.
Hence arise two remarkable characqeriftics of the
lniman mind, in this slate. Its intclledual powers
arc cxtremely limited; its emotions and efforts
are few and languid. Both these diftindions are

co*n
u Sec NOITE XLVIIX.

conspicuous among the rudest and most unimproved B O K
of the American tribes, and constitute a striking
part in their description.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called fpecu- Intelletual
lative reasoning or refcarch, is altogether unknown fryliieted.
in the rude itate of society, and never becomes the
occupation or amusement of the human faculties,
until man be so far improved as to have secured,
with certainty, the means of subsistence, as well as
the poffefion of leisure and tranquillity. The
thoughts and attention of a savage are confined
within the finall circle of objecs, immediately con-
ducive to his preservation or enjoyment. Every
thing beyond that, escapes his observation, or is
perfetly indifferent to him. Like a mere animal,
what is before his eyes interests and affeeas him ,
what is out of fight, or at a distance, makes no im-
pression t. There are several people in America
whose limited underflandings seem not to be capa-
ble of forming an arrangement for futurity; nei-
ther their solicitude nor their foresight e,:tend so
far. They follow blindly the impulse of the ap-
petite which they feel, but are entirely regardless
ofdiftant consequences, and even of those removed
in the least degree from immediate apprehension.
While they highly prize such things as serve pre-
sent use, or minifier to present enjoyment, they set
no value upon those which are not the objec of
some immediate want *. When, on the appi ? h
of the evening, a Caribbee fees himself difpc I
togotoreft, no consideration will tempt him i
fell his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he is
*allying out to the business or patinme of the day, he

will

f UlloaNoticias Amcic. v.,. s Venegas I-iR. oC Calif. i.

66. Scpl). Ciu.c h Cull. v. 693. Bordc Dclfr. dei Caraibes, ). 16.
EUliVoy. 194,.

B O 0 K will part with it for the slightest toy that catches

V his fancy t. At the close of winter, while the im-

prefion of what he has suffered .from the rigour of
the climate is fresh in the mind of the North Ame-
rican, he sets himself with vigour to prepare mate-
rials for eresting a comfortable hut to protect him
against the inclemency of the succeeding season;
but as soon as the weather becomes mild, he forgets
what is past, abandons his work, and never thinks
of it more, until the return of cold compels him,
when too late, to resume it :.

IF in concerns the most interesting, and seemingly

the moss simple, the reason of man, while rude and
destitute of culture, differs so little from the thought-
less levity of children, or the improvident inftinftof
animals, its exertions in other direcions cannot be
very considerable. The obje&s towards which rea
son turns and the disquisitions in which it engages,
muff depend upon the state in which man is placed,
and are suggested by his neceflities and desires.
Disquisitions, which appear the most neceifaryand
important to men in one state of society, never oc-
cur to those in another. Among civilized nations,
arithmetic, or the art of numbering, is deemed an
efiential and elementary science, and in our conti-
nent, the invention and use of it reaches back to a
period so remote as is beyond the knowledgeof
history. But among savages, who have no property
to estimate, no hoarded treasures to count, no va-
riety of objects or multiplicity of ideas to enume-
rate, arithmetic is a superfluous and useless art.
Accordingly, among some tribes in America itfecims
to be quite unknown. Thlere arc many who can-

lot

t Lahalt Voyages, ii. 7x4, H15. Tort.e, ii. 38:.
j Adair I-ilt. of Amcr. IIldiiiisA . 417.

not reckon farther than three; and have no denomi- B O F K

1v.

nation to distinguish any number above it . Several
can proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When
they would convey an idea of any number beyond
these, they point to the hair of their head, intima-
ting that it is equal to them, or with wonder de-
care it to be so great. that it cannot be reckoned t
Not only the Americans, but all nations, while ex-
tremely rude, seem to be unacquainted with the
art of computation t. As soon, however, as they
acquire such acquaintance or connection with a
variety of objects, that there is frequent occasion
to combine or divide them, their knowledge of
numbers increases, so that the slate of this art
among any people may be confidered as one fland-
ard, by which to estimate the degree of their im-
provement. The Iroquois, in North America,
as they are much more civilized than the rude in-
habitants of Brasil, Paraguay, or Guiana, have
likewise made greater advances in this refpec ;
though even their arithmetic does not extend be-
yond a thousand, as in their petty tranfations they
have no occasion for any higher number § . The
Cherokee, a less considerable nation on the fame
continent, can reckon only as far as a hundred, and
to that extent have names for the several numbers;
the finaller tribes in their neighbourhood can rife
no higher than ten I[.

IN other refpeds, the exercise of the under- No abfraC
flanding among rude nations is flill more li-
iuted. 'I'he firfl ideas of every human being

msii:

C Ilarm, p. 67. St:dlits np. de Bry, ix. 128. Lery. ibid. z51.
ict .

36z. Let. dif. 23. 314. * lD)unont Louis. i. 187.

'lhrrcl.t, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. Biet , 396. Borde 6. t This in
tl: c.(ie with tlie Grccnl;anlder, CIratz. i. '2,2. ;Ind w'ith Kl ilm-

ltkidici.;, NM. l'Abll) Chal;ppe, iii. 17. § Charlev. Noiuv.
l'tcllC, i. ,102. |1 Adaitr lift. of Amar. lhdiAipn, 77. So.,
N01'E XIiX,

>-·

o °o K nmurt be such as he receives by the senses. But, in
^^, < the mind of man, while in the savage ifate, there

fctm to be hardly any ideas but what enter by this
ZvIniue. The objects around him are presented to
his eye. Such as may be subservient to his use, or
can gratify any of his appetites, attract his notice;
he views the reft without curiosity or attention.
Satisfied with confidering them under that simple
mode, in which they appear to him, as separate
and detached, he neither combines them so as to
form general clarfes, nor contemplates their qua-
lities apart, nor bellows a thought upon the ope-
rations of his own mind concerning them. Thus,
he is unacquainted with all the ideas which have
been denominated UNIVERSAL, or ABSTRACT, or
of REFLECTION. The range of his understanding
must, of course, be very confined, and hisrea-
soning powers be employed merely on what is fen-
fible. This is so remarkably the cafe with the ru-
der nations of America, that their languages, (as
we shall afterwards find) have not a word to ex-
press any thing but what is material or corporeal.
TIME, SPACE, SUBSTANCE, and a thousand other
terms which reprefcnt abftraóc and universal ideas,
are altogether unknown to them [ . A naked fa-
vagc, cowering near the fire in his miserable cab-
bin, or fl-retched under a few branches which as-
ford him a temporary flelter, has as little inclina-
tion as capacity for ufelcfs speculation. His
thoughts extend not beyond what relates to all-
imal life; and when they are not directd towards
fomlc of its concerns, his mind is totally inative.
In situations where no cxtroardinary effort, either
of ingenuity or labour is requisite, in order to
fatisfythel simple demands of nature, the powers of
the nlind are so felldom rouLtd to any exertionl, that

:.,I~~~~~~

Cond~ the
i Condlun. p. 54.

the rational faculties continue alinoif do:rnlnt and ,' o i
unexercifed. The numerous tribe~ iccattcred <;vc

: ht

rich plains of South Ainrica, t:}', i;' .i-'i.t! o!'
some of the islands, and of fiver; frc..!;. plai:;:- .t;
the continent, come under this d-.c, -i; ;,. r''r -
vacant countenance, their st.-ring, .-rl.

- .'-',

their lifeless inattention, and toI i' . :,',: of
fubjeas, which seem to be the nfri 'w-ich <',:.,::id
occupy the thoughts of ration jl be;ng: n. id i' .'i
impression upon the Spaniards, wh.n tlley firi be-
hell those rude people, that they confidered them as
animals of an inferior order, and could not believe
that they belonged to the human species :. It re-
quired the authority of a papal bull to counterac
this opinion, and to convince them that the Ame-
ricans were capable of the functions, and intitled
to the privileges, of humanity t. Since that time,
persons more enlightened and impartial than the
dircoverers or conquerors of America, have had an
opportunity of contemplating she mofl savage of its
inhabitants, and they have been aftonifned and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, in this
condition, approaches to the brute creation. But in
feverer climates, where subsistence cannot be pro-
cured with the fame cafc, where men must unite
more closely, and act with grcater concert, nccefli-
ty calls forth their talents, and flharpens their in-
vention, so that the intelligent powers arc nore
exercised and improved, The North-Americans
"land natives of Chili, who inhabit the temperate re-
gions in the two great difirics of America, arc peo-
ple of cultivated and enlarged iunderflandilgs, when
viewed in conlparifon with tome of those feated in
thle inands, or *oi the banks of the Maraglnon and
(rinoco. Their occupations are more various,
their fyflt' of policy, as well as of war, more

V()1. I. R r complex,
I lcrrc"lr, dcc, . Iib,, ii, C. I '. 'oqucncm. Mon. Ind. iii. iqS.

B o o K complex, their arts more numerous. But, even

v. among them, the intelleaual powers are extremely

limited in their operations, and unless when turned
directly to those objecs which inrereft a savage,
are held in no estimation. Both the North-Anme.
ricans and Chilefe, when not engaged in some of
the funtions belonging to a warrior or hunter,
.loiter away their time in thoughtless indolence,
unacquainted with anyother subjed worthy of their
atcention, or capable of occupying their minds t
_. even among them, reason is so much circumfcrib-
ed in its exertions, and never arrives, in its highef
attainments, at the knowledge of those general
principles and maxims, which serve as the foun-
dation of science, we may conclude, that the intel-
lectual powers of man in the savage fiate are defti-
ture of their proper objeL, and cannot acquire any
confiderablc degree of vigour and enlargement.
.,Mive -o- FROM the fame caufcs, the aEcive efforts of the

--, iot ninid are few, and, on most occasions, languid. If
an^1 ilan;iih we examine into the motives which rouze men to

activity in civilized life, and prompt them to per-
fivere in fatiguing exertiolln of their ingenuityor
frcength, we fialla find that they arise chiefly from
aciqiired wants and appetites. These are numerols
andl importunate, tlhy keep the mind in perpetual
ag itation, ;11d, in ordler to gratify them, inventiQt
Iltuft he always on the flretch, andl indiuflry Imuf be
inceestintly employed. But the desires offimplena-
ture are t'w, alnd where a favourable climate yields
allmoft i)(,tall oufly what fiffices them, tlly
fcarccly flir the foul, or excite any violent cmotion.
l-inlce the people of 1cvceral tribes in America walte
their life in a liflels indolence. To be firee from

occupatiol')
't~ La8'l;ittL ii. z.

occupation, seems to be all the enjoyment towards B O O K
which they aspire. They will continue whole days
stretched out in their hammocs, or feated on the
earth, in perfect idleness, without changing their
posture, or railing their eyes from the ground, or
uttering a single word t.

SUCH is their aversion to labour, that neither the Improvident
hope of future good, nor the apprehension of future
evil, can surmount it. They appear equally indif-
ferent to both, discovering little solicitude, and
taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to secure
the other. The cravings of hunger may rouse them;
but as they devour, with little distinction, whatever
will appease its inftindive demands; the exertions
which there occasion are of short duration. Defti-
tute of ardour, as well as variety ofdefire, they feel
not the force of those powerful springs which give
vigour to the movements of the mind, and urge the
patient hand of industry to persevere in its efforts.
Man, in some parts of America, appears in a form
so rude, that we can discover no effects of his aci-
vity, and the principle of understanding which
Ihould dire& it, seems hardly to be unfolded.
Like the other animals, he has no fixed residence;
he has erected no habitation to shelter him from the
inclemency of the weather ; he has taken no Inea-
fures for securing a certain fubfifcnce ; he neither
sows nor reaps ; but roams about as led in search
f the plants and fruits which the earth brinrs forth
in fucceflion ; and in qucfi of the game which he
kills in the forefis, or of the fish which he catches
in the rivers.

TllIs description, howvever, applies only to some Some ',i:.
tribes. Man cannot continue long in this fi-ate of ty willti-

spc(.t Lo A1
fccilc and uninformed infallncy. le was made for thI:fi:.

R r 2 induflry
1 I'outiguc l Voy. Pen ou, lo. 1orlde, 15.

B O o K ind atnrv a;!d ation, and the powers of his nature

1V.

.as well as the necessity of his condition, urge him
to fulfil his dcffiny. Accordingly, among most
of the American nations, especially those feated in
rigorous climates, some efforts are employed, and
some previous precautions are taken, for securing
subsistence. The career of regular industry is be-
gun, and the laborious arm has made the firfR es-
fays of its power. Still, howeverj the improvident
and slothful genius of the savage state predominates.
Even among those more improved tribes, labour is
deemed ignominious and degrading. It is only to
work of a certain kind that a man will deign to put
his hand. The greater part is devolved entirely upon
the women. One half of the community remains in-
aciSive, while the other is oppressed with the mul-
titude and variety of its occupations. Thus their
indiutry is partial, and the foresight which regulates
it, is no less limited. A remarkable infRance of
tl'is occu.rs in the chief arrangement with refpec to
their manner of living. They depend for their
fubfiRfence, during one part of the year, on fill-
in ; during another, oh hunting; during a third,
on the produce of their agriculture. Though ex-
perience has taught them to foresee the rcturn of
those various seasons, and to make folme provfion
for thc;r refpeEive exigencies, they either want fa-
gacity to proportion this provision totheir confulp-
tion, or are so incaapable of any command over their
appetites, that, from their inconfideratc waftc, they
often fcel the calamities of famine as severely as the
rlldefl- of the savage tribes. What they fulfcr o0le
year does not aig-inlint their ilndul)ry, or render
thelm itn o providciit to prevent fimllilar difrlecs t.
'I his iiiconlllidcrate thoughtlneflies about futrtll)',
tile cateCt- of ignorance and the caufc of sloth, ac-

colnlptiiie;

-. Clih,'lrv. N. Fr. ill. L3

. I.ettr. Edlif. 23. 2q. )e.icfipt. 01'
Fl.ncdic Oullb'ii's Colced. ii. 88o. pc la Potleric, ii. 63.

companies and characterizes man in every stage of B 0 0 K
savage life § ; and by a capricious singularity in ,
his operations, he is then least solicitous about sup-
plying his wants, when the means of satisfying
them are most precarious, and procured with the
greatcft difficulty 11.

III. AFTER viewing the bodily constitution of Their social
the Americans, and contemplating the powers slate.
of their minds, we are led, in the natural order of
inquiry, to confider them as united together in
society. Hitherto our researches have been con-
fined to the operations of underifanding refpecling
themfclves, as individuals, now they will extend
to the degree of their sensibility and affection to-
wards their species.

THE domeflic state is the first and mos firmple Domefic
form of human association. The union of the sexes, unio,.
among different animals, is of longer or ihorter du-
ration in proportion to the ease or difficulty of
rearing their offspring. Among those tribes where
the feaibn of infancy is short, and the young soon
acquire vigour or agility, no permanent union is
formed. Nature commits the care of training up
the offspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
necf;, without any other assistance, is equal to the
task. But where the itate of infancy is long and
hclplefs, and the joint assiduity of both parents is
rcq(ifite in tending their feeble brood, there a more
intimiate connection takes place, and continues un-
til the piu)rpofe of nature be accomplifled, and the
nw :ice grot up to full maturity. As the infancy
ol' nan is miorc'fecble and hclpllfs than that of any
,lthcr alimal, and he is depenldnct, dluring a much
1olge1 I)cpiodl, on the care and foresight of his pa-
''"uts, the union between husband and wife came

early
H.il.(,fi'i N.it.. Ilf3. of Gui.1i1 326. 33 3. See NOTE L.

B 0 0 K early to be confidered, not only as a solemn, but a

e_ _
' permanent contrad. A general slate of promifcu-

ous intercourse between the sexes never existed but
in the imagination of poets. In the infancy of so-
ciety, when men, destitute of arts and indufry,
lead a hard precarious life, the rearing of their pro-
geny demands the attention and efforts of both pa-
rents ; and if their union had not been formed and
continued with this view, the race could not have
been preserved. Accordingly, in America, even
among the rudest tribes, a regular union between
husband and wife was universal, and the rights of
marriage were understood and recognized. In those
diftrids where subsistence was scanty, and the diffi-
culty of 'maintaining a family was great, the man
confined himself to one wife. In warmer or more
fertile provinces, the facility of procuring food con-
curred with the influence of climate, in inducing
the inhabitants to increase the number of their
wives t. In sone countries the marriage union
subsisted during life ; in others, the impatience of
the Americans under restraint of any species, toge-
ther with their natural levity and caprice, prompted
them to diflolve it on very flight pretexts, and of-
ten without assigning any cause :.

Condition BUT whether they confidered the obligation of this
of women. contract as perpetual, or only temporary, the con-

dition of women was equally humiliating and mi-
ferable. Whether man has been improved by the
progress of arts and civilization in society, is a
qucftion, which, in the wantonness of disputation,
has been agitated among philofophcrs. That wo-
men are indebted to the refinements of polinlcd

manners

1 L.ettr. Edif. 23. 3iX. Iaitiil MolIlrc i. 554. lry Ia1 de Bry

ill. 234.. J(ourn.l i1

(' ill tI c' Bri lliiclae, . 88. i li itatii, i. 5S0.

Joiitel Journ. I-iit'or. 3.4 . d'.lrino l)c:r. tcl (Gran Cllhio, 70. IHci-
nrpin Mocu r (I. lls . tv,
I v.L: , p. 3i. 3. 3.

manners for a happy change in their state, is a point B O o K
which can admit of no doubt. To despise and to V
degrade the female sex, is the charaFeriftic of the
savage slate in every part of the globe. Man, proud
of excelling in strength and in courage, the chief
marks of pre-eminence among rude people, treats
woman, as an inferior, with disdain. The Ameri-
cans, perhaps from that coldness and insensibility
which has been confidered as peculiar to their con-
flitution, add negleEt and harshness to contempt.
The most intelligent travellers have been firuck
with this inattention of the Americans to their
women. It is not, as I have already observed, by
aftudied display of tenderness and attachment, that
the American endeavours to gain the heart of the
woman whom he wishes to marry. Marriage it-
self, instead of being an union of affection and in-
terest between equals, becomes, among them, the
unnatural conjuntion of a master with his slave.
It is the obfcrvation of an author, whose opinions
are deservedly of great weight, that wherever wives
are purchased, their condition is extremely deprefi-
cd t. They become the property and the slaves of
those who buy them. In whatever part of the
globe this custom prevails, the observation holds.
In countries where refinement has made some pro-
grefs, women, excluded from focicty, and fhutup in
Icquieftercd apartments, are kept under the vigilant
guard of their nmalers. In rude nations, they are
digraded to the meanefl functions. Among many
people of America the marriage-contract is properly
a purchase. The man buys his wife of her parents;.
I'hough uni'cqiiaintcd with the uif of money, or
with such conim ercial traiifatdionls as take place in
more improved lociety, he knows how to give an
cq'livalclnt for any object which he dcfircs to pofltfs.
In fume places the suitor devotes his service for a

ccrtaiin
'I' ketches ~us h-11i1. ofM .m, i. i3 .,

B O O K certain time to the parents of the maid whom he

1V_ j .courts; in others, he hunts for them occasionally,

or assists in cultivating their fields, and forming
their canoes; in others, he offers presents of such
things as are deemed most valuable on account of
their usefulness or rarity t. In return for these, he
receives his wife; and this circumifance, added to
the low efiimation of women among savages, leads
him to confider her as a female servant whom he has
acquired, and whom he has a title to treat as an in-
ferior. In all unpolifhed nations, it is true, the
funetions in domeffic ceconomy, which fall natu-
rally to the share of women, are bo many, that they
are fubjeEted to hard labour, and mufl bear more
than their full portion of the common burden. But
in America their condition is so peculiarly griev-
ous, and their dcpreflion so complete, that servitude
is a name too mild to describe their wretched slate.
A wife, among most tribes, is no better than a beait
of burden, destined to every office of labour and fa-
tigue. While the men loiter out the day in sloth,
or spend it in amufeinent, the women are condemn-
ed to incefant toil. Talks are imposed upon them
without pity, and lervices are received without com-
placence or gratitude -. Every circumitance re-
minds women of this mortifying inferiority. They
must approach their lords with reverence; they
must regard themn as more exalted beings, and arenlot
permitted to cat in their prefcnce §. There are dif-
trids in America where this dominion is to grievous,
and so fenfilly felt, that fonmewomen, in a wildemo-
tion of mnaternal tcndernefs, have deltroycd their

female

t Liaitau Mocirs, &c. i. 56o, &c. Charlev . 5i , &c t. 'er,1
dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. ])umoln t, ii. 156. t 'I cm: , ii. i2z. Io0le
Rclat. (les Moeiurs tic: C.iriic, i, . 2. 1Bir i, 357. Coilam"'i ,

ro. Fermiin. i. 79 Gurl .

u il 1

i. 53. Ila.rcrc, 164. Labalt
Voy. ii. 78. Chl o;lClj l, 51. 'I'erlrc ii. 300.

female children in their infancy, in order to deliver B O 0 K
them from that intolerable bondage to which they
knew they were doomed *. Thus the sirs inftitu-
tion of social life is perverted. That frate of do-
meftic union towards which nature leads the human
species, in order to soften the heart to gentleness
and humanity, is rendered so unequal, as to eftab-
lifh a cruel distinction between the sexes, which
forms the one to be harsh and unfeeling, and hum-
bles the other to servility and fubjetion.

IT is owing, perhaps, in some measure, to this Theirwo
state of depression, that women in rude nations are men not

prolific.

far from being prolific -. The vigour of their con-
fritution is exhausted by excessive fatigue, and the
wants and distresses of savage life are so numerous,
as to force them to take various precautions in or-
der to prevent too rapid an increase of their proge-
ny. Among wandering tribes, or such as depend
chiefly upon hunting for fubfiufence, the mother
cannot attempt to rear a second child, until the first
has attained such adegree of vigour as to be in some
measure independent of her care. From this mo-
tive, it is the universal pratice of the American
women to nurfc theirchildren during several years ;
and as they seldom marry early, the period of their
fertility is over, before they can finish the long but
neceflary attendance upon two or three fucccflive
children j:. Among Tome of the Icaft polishcd
tribes, whose industry and forcfight does not extend
so far as to make any regular provision for their
own subsistence, it is a maxim not to burden them-
rclves with rearing more than two children § ; and
VOL I. S s no

C Gumilini, ii 33. 23. . I-crrelia, dec. 7. b.
l; i. X . . 1- L-

90ll . Cl aicvoix, iii. 3o.. j I-lerreri, dec.

6i . lib. i. C. 4

lii''ev. i 'i 303 )U. )fir L' i.i ill.u, ii. i7. :70. DUelys
t s Iq lin't;; Ar i(,,i,,it OF Palai.\ nv, &, c. Cl Iu l. ( i.
*Od ULI.E~ LI. ni..A. ?.uu, . oii,»iul)dn-;. n".

B O O K no such numerous families, as are frequent in ci-

-_.. vilized societies, are to be found among men inthis

slate "'. WVhen twins are born, one of them corn
monly is abandoned, because the mother is not e-
qual to the talk of educating both t. When amo-
ther dies while she is nursing a child, all hope of
preserving its life fails, and it is buried together
with her in the fame grave t. As the parents are
frcl'qu.'ctly exposed to want by their own improvi-
dent indolence, the difficulty of sustaining their
c!-ildr n becomes so great, that it is not uncommon
to) abandon or destroy them |1. Thus their expe-
riencc of the difficulty of training up an infantto
maturlity, am idft the hardfliips of savage life, often
ftiflcs the voice of nature among the Americans, and
lupprelFes the strong emotions of parental tender-
ness.

Parental as- B ur, though neceflity compels the inhabitants of
Cn ilsndi' Amincrica thus to iet bounds to the increase of their
filial duty

flilies, they are not deficient in affestion and at-
tachment to their offspring. They feel the power
,f this inflin&t in its full force, and as long as their
progeny continue feeble and helpless, no people ex-
ceed them in tcndcrncfs and care .. But in rude
nations, the dcp::ndence of children upon tleir pa-
rents is of florter continuance than in poliihcd so-
cictics. WVv'hcen men miuf be trained to the vari-
otus funtltions of civil life by previous discipline
and cducatioii, when the knowledge of abflrife
fcincies iuiti 1)i: taught, and dexterity in intricate
arts nilibt be acquircd, beforie a young man is pre-
Ipared to begin his career of aftion, the attentive

feelings

} M icdlet,'., J~.ournal, 61. .t l,tt. diclif. x, too. ece N011:

Li. iC:.h, i v. ili. 3(6 . l,.ct. .liif. x. zoo. p. Mclch. "1rnl
Mirinor. drI (.h1,riUili. Col ellt, Co.lledt .

()li. Pap. i. V
l-ill. oi[l'Ca.lil'm'n. i. 2. § Giinilla, i. ,11. liert. 390.

feelings of a parent are not confined to the years of B 0 O K.
infancy, but extend to the eftablitmment of his child I.
in the world. Even then, his solicitude does not
terminate. His protection may fill be requisite,
and his wisdom and experience fill prove useful
guides. Thus a permanent connection is formed;
parental tenderness is exercised, and filial refped .
returned, throughout the whole course of life. But
in the simplicity of the savage Prate, the affection of
parents, like the inst-inCtive fondness of animals,
ceases almost entirely as soon as their offspring at-
tain maturity. Little inftrucoion fits them for that
modeof life to which they are defined. The pa-
rents, as if their duty were accomplished, when
they have conduted their children through the
helpless years of infancy, leave them afterwards at
entire liberty. They seldom advise or admonish,
they never chide or chastise them. - They susser
them to be absolute masters of their own actions *.
In an American hut, a father, a-mother, and their
posterity, live together like persons assembled by ac-
cident, without seeming to feel the obligation of the
duties mutually arising from this connection t. As
filial love is not cherished by the continuance of
attention or good offices, the recollection of bene-
fits received in early infancy is too faint to excite
it. Conscious of their own liberty, and impatient
of refiraint, the youth of America are accustomed
to a& as if they were totally independent. Their
parents are not objects of greater regard than other
personss. They treat them always with negledt,
and often with such harfhncfs and infolencc, as to
fill those who h'ave been witnefies of their con-

S s 2 dudt

Charif.v. iii..72. Biet. 390. Gumilla, i. is. Lafitau, i. 6o..

Cuxii, Hill. Cianad.lp. 7I. Fernandez, Rldac. Hist. de los Chequit.
' t C'llrlcv. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. z73.

B O O K du<& with horror *. Thus the ideas which seem

e to be natural to man in his savage state, as they re-

fult from his circunftances and condition in that
period of his progress, assert the two capital rela-
tions in domestic life. They rend.r the union be-
tween husband and wife unequal. They ihorten
the duration, and weaken the force, of the connec-
tion between parents and children.
Political IV. FROM the domestic state of the Americans,

the transition is natural to the consideration of
their civil government and political institutions.
In every inquiry concerning the operations of men
when united together in society, the first objet of
attention should be their mode of subsistence. Ac-
cordingly as that varics, their laws and policy mufi
be different. The institutions suited to the ideas
and exigencies of tribes, which subsist chiefly by
filhing or hunting, and which have hardly formed
a conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which muRf take place
when the earth is cultivated with regular industry,
and a right of property, not only in its productions,
but in the foil itfclf, is completely ascertained,

l,&dc o ALL the people of America, now under review,
;!;.cJcc.. hclcng to the formcr clais. But though they may

all be comprehended under the general denomina-
tion of savage, the advances which they had made
in the art of procuring to tliemfelves a certain and
Dtlclltiful fublflcnce, were x cry Llnequal. On the

vast

» (urinili, i a, . Teri'tre, ii . 76. Cliarlc(. Hill. dlN.I :rsnc

lii. 9. Ch. larlev. Hiill. ! P'.ti, ,, . ;. l,. Lo;.Lo, Il)1 crip'. 'lr Ir1
1h.i.&t, t. 6Ou. AL,, ACt, iAellland. l lac, Illillur. dc lo Cjiquit.'4I

vas plains of South-America, man appears in one B ° 0 K
of the rudeRt tates in which he has been ever ob-
served, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes de-
pend entirely upon the bounty of nature for fubfif-
tence. They discover no solicitude, they employ
little foresight, they scarcely exert any industry, to
secure what is necessary for their support. The
TOPAYERS of Brasil, THE GUAXEROS of Tierra-
Firms, the CAIGUAS, the Moxos, and several o-
ther people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with
every species of cultivation. They neither sow nor
plant. Even the culture of the manioc, of which
caffada bread is made, is an art too intricate for
their ingenuity, or too fatiguing to their indolence.
The roots which the earth produces spontaneously,
the fruits, the berries, and feeds, which they gather
inthewoods,together with lizards and other reptiles,
which the heat engenders in a fat foil, moistened by
frequent rains, supply them with food during rome
part of the year *. At other times they subsist by Byfilhing.
ilfhing; and nature seems to have indulged the la-
zinefs of the people, by the liberality with which
he ministers, in this way, to theirwants. The vast
rivers of South-America abound with an infinite
variety of the most delicate fish. The lakes and
marflies, formed by the annual overflowing of the
waters, are filled with all the different species, where
they remain huft up, as in natural reservoirs, for
the life of the inhabitants. They swarm in such
shoals, that in rome places they are catched without
art or industry 1-. In others, the natives have dif-
CoVered a method of infcting the water With the
juice of certain plants, by which the fifl arc so in-

toxicated,

i ," Nicho'fl, Hilt. of

I rafil. Church Coll. ii. 134 Simonl, Conqui(na

I, il } 1mrJ, p. 166. Tc'cho, AccountiL o laiay ul's, , &c. Clhurcih.

e1l. ' I t', . Edlit' a2'. 84. lo . · .

() L. z.ll)o, Dirc:l . dil GIrall

·CIL,1
, ',
; l- Ribhlas, Hidiir. de los triutilfos, &c. p. 7.

Ie Scc NOTE 111.

B O 6 K toxicated, that they float on the surface, and are

IV. taken with the hand . Some tribes have ingenui-

ty enough to preserve therm without salt, by drying
or smoking them upon hurdles over a flow fire t.
The prolific quality of the rivers in South-Ameri-
ca induces many of the natives to resort to their
banks, and to depend alnoft entirely for nourish-
ment on what their waters supply with such profu-
sion t. In this part of the globe, hunting seems
not to have been the first employment of men, or
the first effort of their invention and labour to ob-
tain food. They were fishers before they became
hunters 3 and as the occupations of the formerdo
not call for equal exertions of activity, or talents,
with those of the latter, people in that state appear
to possess neither the fame degree of enterprise, nor
of ingenuity. The petty nations, adjacent to the
Maragnon and Orinoco, are manifestly the most in-
acive and leaf intelligent of all the Americans.

NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can
By huntl. sustain themselves in this manner. The greater

part of the American nations, dispersed over the so-
refts with which their country is covered, do not
procure subsistence with the fame facility. For al-
though these forests, especially in the southern con-
tinent of America, are stored plentifully with
game II, considerable efforts of activity and ingenui-
ty are requisite in pursuit of it. Neceflity incited
them to the one, and taught them the other. Hunt-
ing became their principal occupation; and as it
called forth firenuous exertions of courage, of force

and

See NOTE LIII.. - Cordan. 159. Gumillai, 37 ttr
Edif. 14. 199. 23. 328. Acugna, Rclat. de la Riv. dcs Amaz. 3

t B3arrcre, Rclat. de Fr. Eqiin. p1. 155. 1 P' Martyr I ccd
324. trblnill, ii. 4, &C. Acugna,1i. 156.

and of invention, it was deemed a fiundion no less B o o K
honourable than necdfiary. This was peculiar to IV.
the men. They were trained to it from their ear-
liet youth. A bold and dextrous hunter ranked
next in fame to the distinguished warrior, and an
alliance with the former is often courted in prese-
rence to one with the latter'*. Hardly any device,
which the ingenuity of man has discovered for'en-
snaring or destroying wild animals, was unknown
to the Americans. While engaged in this favou-
rite exercise, they flake off the indolence peculiar
totheir nature, the latent powers and vigour of
their minds are roused, and they become ative,
perfcvering, and indefatigable. Their sagacity in
finding their prey, and their address in killing it,
are equal. Their reason arid their senses, being
constantly direited towards this one obje;, the for-
mer displays such fertility of invention, and the
latter acquire such a degree of acutcnefs, as appear
almost incredible. They discern the footsteps of a
wild beast, which escape every other eye, and can
follow them with certainty through the pathless
forest. If they attack their game openly, their ar-
row seldom errs from the mark §; if they endeavour
to circtumlent it by art, it is almost impofible to
avoid their toils. Among several tribes, their young
men were not permitted to marry, until they had
given lIch proofs of their skill in hunting as put it
bhyo'nd doubt that they were capable of providing
for a family. Tlheir ingenuity alwayson the firetch,
and ilarpencd by emulation, as well as nccctlity,
has Itrluck out many inventions, which greatly fa-
cilittlt success in the chafe. The mofl linllular of
tltiL is the dicovcry of a poison in which they dip
thleallows cnmploydl in huntiig. l'ic flightcft wound

wilh

I'r ,,

' ' ilj i Ie ., N. France, iii. 115. § Bice Voy.
"cl.ivf,' 357. Davic' D)ilfuv. of the River of' Am.\ . 'tr-

cai~ .1 17.

B 0 0 K with those envenomed lhafts is mortal. If they

IV.' only pierce the skin, the blood fixes and congeals in

a moment, and the strongest animal falls motionless
to the ground. Nor does this poison, notwithitand.
ing its violence and subtlety, inset the flesh of the
animal which it kills. That may be eaten with
perfect safety, and retain its native reliih and quali-
ties. All the nations along the Maragnon and
Orinoco are acquainted with this compolition, the
chief ingredient in which is the juiceextrated from
the root of the CURARE, a species of withe *. In
other parts of America, they employ the juice of the
MANCHENILLE for the fame purpose, and it ope-
rates with a no less fatal activity. To people pof-
fcffed of those secrets, the bow is a more defirucive
weapon than the mulfet, and, in their skilful hands,
does great execution among the birds and beaRs
which abound in the forefls of America.

BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man to
tuBre a t ate more advanced. The chafe, even where

prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
much improved, affords but an uncertain mainte-
nance, and at some seasons it must be fufpcndedal-
together. If a savage trufls to his bow alone for
food, he and his family will often be reduced to ex-
treme distress §. Hardly any region of the earth fur-
nifhes man spontaneously with what his wants re-
quire. In the mildest climates, and most fertilefoils,
his own industry and foresight muff be exerted, in1
foinm degree, to secure a regular supply of foo(d
Their expericnce of this surmounts the abholrencel
of labour natural to savage nations, and compels tlhem
to have recourse to culture, as fibfidiary to llunltilg
In particular situations, ftmc final1 tribes may fubfidl

Cllmnilla, .,,ii . & ,c .

C oln . zoS. R chrchl. IPilT ii. 239'
Bliicro(l Nat. Hil. of C; iii: ,a, 2l,; &c. e Scc NO'l E LIV

by fiDhing, independent of any produclion of the r, oo K
earth, raised by their own industry. But throuvh- ,- '
out all America, we scarcely meet witl any nation
of hunters, which does not praclife some species of
cultivation.
THEIR agriculture, however, is neither ectenive

Ths varinus

nor laborious. As game and fiih are their principal shu;'s of
food, all they aim at by cultivation, is to fupplv any 1'cii 1!-
occalional defe& of these. In the southern conti- t-
nentof America, the natives confined their indutil-rv
to rcarinT a few plants, which, in a rich foil and
warm climate, were easily trained to maturity. The
chief of thcfe is MAIZE, well known in Europe .b
the name of Turkey or Indian wheat, a grain ex-
tremely prolific, of ftmple culture, agreeable to the
taRfe, and affording a strong hearty nourifllment.
The fecord is the MANIOC, which grows to the
lizeofa large shrub, or finall tree, and produces
roots somewhat resembling parsnips. After care-
fully squeezing out the juice, these roots are grat-
ed down to a fine powder, and formed into thin
cakes, called CASSADA bread, which, though infi-
pid to the tafl-e, proves no contemptible food '1. AS
the juice of the manioc is a deadly poison, Ibne au-
thors have celebrated the ingenuity of the Amcri-
cans, in converting a noxious plant into wholeloime
Inourinllent. But it fliould rather be coniidered
asole of the desperate expedicnts for procuring sub-
fiflence, to which necessity reduces rude nations;

t' perhaps, men were led to the ule of it by a pro-

grcrs, in which there is nothing marvellous. One
cciesofnmanioc is altogether firee of any poisonous
iFallity, and may be eaten without any preparation
but that of roasting it in the embers. This, it is
Iloba;ble, was firt used by the Americans as food ;

VOL. I. 'T t and1
t Sl; il . of Jmn. Introd(.i. It. Lpi;t. .3 . Acofn I ill.
'. 0[cil. Nthrl.. lib. ivc. 17. Ullo;l, i. 62. Au llh:r Mc I1 1l if
'l"cbC. llilt. des Pllantcs, tilu.. ii. p. 6, ,&c.

.B 0 0 K and necessity having gradually taught them the art

lV'
, of separating its pernicious juice from the other

species, they have by experience found it to be the
molt prolific as well as the mofi nourishing plant
of the two t. The third is he PLA1N-
TAIN, which though it rifes to the height
of a tree, is of such quick growth, that in less than
a year it rewards the industry of the cultivator with
its fruit. This, when roastcd, supplies the placeof
bread, and is both palatable and nourishing :. The
fourth is the POTATOE, whose culture and quali-
ties are too well known to need any description,
The fifth is PIMENTO, a finall tree, yielding a
strong aromatic spice. The Americans, who, like
other inhabitants of warm climates, delight in
whatever is hot and of poignant flavour, deem this
seasoning a necessary of life, and mingle it copious-
ly with every kind of food they take §.

SUCH are the various productions, which were

the chief object of culture among the hunting tribes
on the continent of America,. and with a moderate
exertion of a&ive and provident industry, thete
might have yielded a full supply to. the wants of a
numerous people. But men, accufiomed to the free
and vagrant life of hunters,. are incapable of regu-
lar application to labour ; and confider agriculture
as a secondary and inferior occupation.. According-
ly, the provision for fubfiftencc, arising from culti-
vation, was To limited and scanty among the Aine-
ricans, that, upon any accidental failure of their
usual success in hunting,, they were often reduced
to extreme diltrefs.

IN

I-V Martyr dlcad. 3ai. Lbat. i. 4i . Guml1 i. i1'

?r

chuli:l Milic Indi.ua,, 164. Sce NO'rE LV.

L Sec NOTE LV
6 Gt;will., iii. 171. Acola, lib. iv. c. zo.

IN the islands, the mode of fubfifling was confi- 3 0 0 K
derably different. None of the large animals which i.
abound on the continent were known there. Only
four species of quadrupeds, besides a kind of small
dumb dog, exiffed in the islands, the biggest of
which did not exceed the size of a rabbit t. To
hunt such diminutive prey, was an occupation
which required no effort either of activity or cou-
rage. The chief employment of a hunter in the
isles was to kill birds, which on the continent are
deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the pur-
suit of boys t. This want of animals, as well as
their peculiar situation, led the islanders to depend
principally upon fishing for their subsistence §.
Their rivers, and the sea with which they are fur-
rounded, supplied them with this species of food.
At some particular seasons, turtle, crabs, and
other shell-fish, abounded in such numbers, that
they could support themselves with a facility in
which their indolence delighted 11. At other times,
they ate lizards, and various reptiles of odious
forms a. To fishing, the inhabitants of the islands
added some degree of agriculture. Maize *, ma-
nioc, and other plants, were cultivated in the
fime manner as on the continent. But all the fruits Their igri
oftheir industry, together with what their foil and culture scry
climate produced spontaneously, afforded them but limited.
a scanty maintenance. Though their demands for
food were very sparing, they hardly raised what
was sufficient for their own consumption. If a
few Spaniards fettled in any diflrict, such a finall
addition, of fuperlnulnerar y mouths soon exhausted
their scanty flores, and brought on a famine.

T t 2 Two

I Oviedlo, lib. xii. in Iploin, t Riha I-lift. de ios triumph, p.
'3. Dc la]otLho a ie ii. 33 0

iii.
* § Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. i.

; Ois

Xii.

ceCer. c . 11. C Gomain ral i. Gcene. c. 9. I.;)Ibat,
. Z>z- >&c l Ovicdo, lib. xiii. c. 3. * See NOTE LVII,

B 0 0 K Two circumstances, common to all the favagr

'-v <nations of America, concurred with those which'
) iis have already mentioned, not only in rendering their

o. tl ;!npcr-
airn.1"' agricutlture imperfca, but in circumscribing their

powcr in all their operations. They had no tame
anmlals; and they were unacquainted with the use
of metals.

The wiant
The Wt;a IN other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest
aiWmais. state, appears as lord of the creation, giving lawto

various tribes of animals, which he has tamed and
reduced to fubjction. The Tartar follows his
prey on the horle which he has reared; or tends
his numerous herds, which furnish him both with
food and clothing ; the Arab has rendered the ca-
rnel docile, and avails himfelfof its perseveri.ng
ftrc;r: th ; the Laplander has formed the rein-deer to
be fubliervicnt to his will ; and even the people of
Kamnchatka have trained their dogs to labour.
This command over the inferior creatures is one of
the noblest prerogatives of man, and among the
greatct crforts of his wifdominand power. Without
this, his dominion is incomplete. He is a monarch,
who has no fuibjcas ; a nmafer, without servants,
and must perform every operation by the {frength of
his own arm. Such was the condition of all the
rude nations in America. Their rcafon was so lit-
tl, improved, or their union so incomplete, that they
f( clm not to have be'n conscious of tle superiority
of their nature, and fmufl-cred all the animal creation
to recain its liberty, without cftlablifiing their owul
auithorits over any one species. Most of the ani-
ma!ls, iindecld, which have been rendcred donmetic
in oir conriillnt, (10o not exit in the New Worll;
but tlolfc pcct.uliar to it are neitherl so fierce, nor f'
formidhitile, as to have exempted them from il'r'Vi-
tude. 'T'hre are tlome animals of tlhe lfaic fpccies
in bolth continents. But the Irin-decCr, which has

bccll

been tamed and broken to the yoke in the one he- B O 0 K
mifphere, runs wild in the other. The BISON of _
America is manifeiely of the fame species with the
horned cattle of the other hemisphere t. These,
even among the rudeftr ations in our continent,
have beei rendered domestic ; and in - consequence
of his dominion over them, man can accomplifli
works of labour with greater facility, and has made a
vast addition to his means of subsistence. The in-
habitants of many regions in the New World,
where the bison abounds, might have derived the
fame advantages from it. It is not of a nature so
indocile, but that it might have been trained to be
as filbfcrvient to mail as our cattle t. But a fa-
vage, in that uncultivated tate wherein the Ameri-
cans were discovered, is the enemy of the other ani-
mals, not their superior. He waftes and destroys,
but knows not how to multiply or to govern
them §.

THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diflinsCion be-
tweecn the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized men
above Such as continue rude. The greatest operati-
ons of man in changing and improving the face of
nature, as well as his most considerable efforts in
c'lltiatiang the earth, are accomplished by means of
the lid which he receives from the animals whom
le has tamed and employs in labour. It is by their
firelgth that he ifubducs the itubborn foil, and con-
verts the desert or marsh into a fruitful field. But
"al", in his civilized slate, is so accustomed to the
rvice of the (lonieftic animals, that he seldom rc-
scUts upon the vast benefits which he derives from
it. If we were to fiuppofe him,'evcn when most

imp)roved

7 ,' c. BI;ON. * N'ouv. Dccouverte pir Flennepin, p,

~' K(lit. d^ i 2luR . g I,'tttl;fli Hl ift. Nat, lx. 85. Ilift. Philo' .

et dang

,i. de..

....
. ,

B O O K improved, to be deprived of their useful ministry,

IV. his empire over nature muff in some measure cease
·C^ ~and he would remain a feeble animal, at a loss how

to subsist, and incapable of attempting such arduous
'undertakings as their assistance enables him to exe.
'cute with ease.

Wantof the IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion of
useful me-
tals. man over the animal creation, or his acquiring the

u'se of metals, has contributed most to extend his
power. The aera of this important discovery is un-
known, and in our hemisphere very remote. It is
only by tradition, or by digging up some rude in-
ftruments of our forefathers, that we learn that
mankind were originally unacquainted with'the use
of metals, and endeavoured to supply the want of
them by employing flints, Ihells, bones, and other
hard substances, for the fame purposes which ietals
serve among poliihed nations. Nature completes
the formation of sone metals. Gold, silver, and
copper, are found in their perfect fate, in the clefts
of rocks, in the fides of mountains, or the channels
of rivers. These were accordingly the metals first
known, and first applied to use. But iron, the most
serviceable of all, and to which man is most indebt-
ed, is never discovered in its perfec form; its
.gross and stubborn ore muff feel twice the force of
fire, and go through two laborious processes, before
it becomes fit for use. Man was long acquainted
with the other metals, before he acquired the art of
fabricating iron, or attained filch ingenuity as to
perfcA an invention, to which he is indebted for
those instruments wherewith he subdues the earth,
and commands all its inhabitants. But in this, as
well as in many other refpecs, the inferiority of the
Americans was confplicuous. All the savage tribes,
fcattcred over the continent and ilands, wcre total-
ly unacquainted with the metals which the foil

produces

produces in great abundance, if we except some B 0 o K
trifling quantity of gold, which they picked. up in
the torrents that descended from their mountains,
and formed into ornaments. Their devices, to
supply this want of the serviceable metals, were
extremely rude and aukward. The mos limple
operation was to them an undertaking of immense
difficulty and labour. To fell a tree with no other
instruments than hatchets of tone, was employment
for a month *. To form a canoe into shape, and
to hallow it, confumtd years ; and it frequently
began to rot before they were able to finish it t.
Their operations in agriculture were equally flow
and defecive. In a country covered with woods
of the hardest timber, the clearing of a finall field
destined for culture required the united efforts of a
tribe, and was a work of much time and great toil.
This was the business of the men, and their indo-
lence was satisfied with performing it in a very
slovenly manner. The labour of cultivation was
left to the women, who, after digging, or rather
firring the field, with wooden mattocks, and Rakes
hardened in the fire, sowed or planted it; but were
more indebted for the increase to the fertility of the
foil, than to their own rude industry :.

AcGCULTURE, even when the. strength of man is
seconded by that of the animals which he has sub-
jctcd to the yoke, and his power augmented by the
ule of the various infsruments with which the dif-
covery of metals has furnishcd. him, is still a work
of great labour; and it is with the fwcat of his
brow that he renders the earth fertile. It is not
wonderful, then, that people destitute of both thele

adv-antages

Gninil 11l, iii. 196. 1 1 orde Relat. deIsl Ciraibes, p. 22
'.1 unilla, iii. 166, &c. Lettr. EdiJ. xij. 1o.

B O 0 K advantages should have made so little progress ill
^ ,a_ cultivation, that they must be confidered as depend-

ing for subsistence on fishing and hunting, rather
than on the fruits of their own labour.

Political in- FROM this description of the mode of fubfifing
ftitutions a-
rifiag from among the rude American tribes, the form and
thiiftate. genius of their political inflitutions may be dedu-

ced, and we are enabled to trace various circum-
stances of diftintion between them and more
civilized nations.

A. Div:ded
intoofmall I. THEY were divided into small independent
comninwi- communities. While hunting is the chief source of

subsistence, a vast extent of territory is requisite for
supporting a small number of people. In propor-
tion as men multiply and unite, the wild animals,
on which they prey, diminish, or fly at a greaterdif-
tance from the haunts of their enemy. The increase of
a society in this slate is limited by its own nature,
and the members of it must either disperse, like the
game which they purfile, or fall upol some better
method of procuring food, than by hunting. Bc;eits
of prey are by nature solitary and unsocial, they go
not forth to the chafe in herds, but delight in tholf
recellfs of the forest where they c m roam and de-
stroy undisturbed. A nation of hunters refcmbles
them, both in occupation and in genius. Ihey
cannot form into lauge conmmlunities, because it
would be impossible to find subsistence, and they mult
drive to a diftaince every rival who may encroach 0o
those domains, which they confider as their ownl
This was the state of all the Amcrican tribes, the llum.
bers in each were fimall, though fcattcred overval
countries they were far remnovcd from one anothlcr

}11U

and engaged in perpetual hostilities or rivalthip *. B 0 0 K
In America, the word NATION is not of the fame __
import as in other parts of the globe. It is applied
to small societies, not exceeding, perhaps, two or
three hundred persons, but occupying provinces
larger than some kingdoms in Europe. The coun-
try of Guiana, though of larger extent than the
kingdom of France, and divided among a great
number of nations, did not contain above twenty-
five thousand inhabitants t. In the provinces which
border on the Orinoco, one may travel several
hundred miles in different directions, without find-
inga single hut, or observing the footfieps of a hu-
man creature t. In North America, where the
climate is more rigorous, and the foil less fertile,
the desolation is still greater. There, vast journeys
of some hundred leagues have been made through
uninhabited plains and forefls§. As long as hunt-
ing continues to be the chief employment of man
to which he trusts for subsistence, he can hardly be
said to have occupied the earth I|.

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are Unacq,
trangers to the idea of property. As the animals ted with the
on which the hunter feeds are not bred under his idea ofpro-

Perty.

inlpc&tion, nor nourished by his care, he can claim
no right to them, while they run wild in the forest.
Where game is so plentiful that it may be catched
with little trouble, men never dream of appropriat-
ing what is of finall value, or of easy acquisition.
Where it is lo rare, that the labour or danger of the
chafe requires the united efforts of a tribe, or vil-
VOL. I. U lage,

7at- , D,'Jcr.n de l GCr.an Chlac, So. 6(. F 'nmi(lde7 Relic.

[i - ,

l .-

d .sClijlit t-6). 't V yages dc 'l l ciai, . iv. 353. 1. (GI il-

I K) 1[ 1 I I

. I§ 'al'y, quoted hy Buillon, iii. 4,S. I,;it11.iu, ii. 179.

)13.ki l'iil., thirml ii Lliil.li;i. j i.

Sec

NONO E l.VIlI.
II .Sc NO T; 1.

B o o K lage, what is killed is a common stock, belonging

Iv' equally to all, who, by their (kill or their courage,

have contributed to the success of the excursion.
The forest, or hunting-grounds, are deemed the
property of the tribe, from which it has a title to
exclude every rival nation. But no individual ar-
rogates a right to any diftrid of these, in preference
to his fellow-citizens. They belong alike to all,;
and thither, as to a general and undivided store, all
repair in quest of fufetnance. The fame principles,
by which they regulate their chief occupation, ex-
tend to that which is subordinate. Even agricul-
ture has not introduced among them a complete idea
of property. As the men hunt, the women labour
together, and after they have shared the toils of the
seed-time, they enjoy the harvest in common *. A-
mong some tribes, the increase of their cultivated
lands is deposited in a public granary, and divided
among them, at flated times, according to their
wants t. Among others, though they lay up fe-
parate fores, they do not acquire such an exclfiuve
right of property, that they can enjoy superfluity,
while those around them susser want 4. Thus the
diftinLions arising from the inequality of poffeflions
are unknown. The terms rich or poor enter not
into their language, and being tl-angcrs to proper-
ty, they are unacquainted with that, which is the
great objec of laws and policy, as well as the chief
motive which induced mankind to eflablifh theva-
rious arrangemenlts of regulIr government I1.

I-ligh f.nfe 3. PEOLE in this ftatc retain a high felfeof
oJ'ic11.illy eq ality and ilndepenCdence. Whlereve the ideaof
dectncoa.el- property is not cflablifhed there can be no aditillni-

i 1).. :cr lro,' .i y, i '. G nilla, i. S . ic lid.I

o, N. C.uaol. 3,7. .S NO ' tELX .

I N

'. Nattl'. i 392.

1 .

3' II. I1

M 1irlv, Dec;d,. 1 45. Vcii;. l-l l. lt ol ,

.
Locy, Nayvit. inll br,.il. c. 17.

0n among men, but what arises from personal qua- B o O K
lities. These can be conspicuous only on such oc-
cafions as call them forth into exertion. In times
of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wisdom and
experience of age are consulted, and prescribe the
nieafurcs which ought to be pursued. When they
take the field againit the enemies of their country,
the warrior of noft approved courage leads the youth
tothe combat . If they go forth in a body to ths
chafe, the moif expert and adventurous hunter is
foremoit, and directs their motions. But during
seasons of tranquility and inaction, when there is
no occasion to display those talents, all pre-emi-
nence ceases. Every circumstance indicates, that
all the members of the community are on a level.
They are clothed in the fae simple garb. They
'eedonthe fame plain fare. Their houses and fuir-
niture are exacaly similar. No diftindion can arire
frcm the inequality of poffefilons. Whatever forms
dependence on one part, or conflitutes superiority
on the other, is unknown. All are fieemen, all feel
themselves to be such, and assert with firnnefs the
|rights which belong to that condition t.' This fen-
1utimnt of independence is imprinted so deeply in
their nature, that no change of condition can cra-
dicate it and bend their minds to servitude. Accuf-
;toied to be abfolutc maflers of their own conduc',
they disdain to execute the orders of another, and,
having never known control, will not fuibmit to
orreclion :1:. Many of the Americans, when they

found that they were treated as slaves by the Spa-

thiards, died of grief; many dctlroyed( thecmfelvcs in

i IJU 11 2 4- AMONG

A n} 1il lib

viP. 9. Stl.diiqc, -lif .

. Bh lit

l . Ii. c. ,

ir"ol 'P, ll. w

i et .

1. Labat vi. 124. Brickcll. Hill.

tftc]l' ^ ,1 SI N,' (OT'I LX . § Ovicdo, litb il c. 6. P. 9.

1 "n'l luv .0 l. l .l

i d;l,

c. 30 "i 416, Lb;l., ii. «1,8

al /
1 o. ir i i c 5

B 0 0 K AMONG people in this slate, government can

affulme little authority, and the sense of civil sub-
Senfrof ub- ordination must remain very imperfet. While the

perdlfein . idea of property is unknown, or incompletely con-

ceived, and the spontaneous productions of the
earth, as well as the fruits of industry, are confider-
ed as belonging to the public frock, there can hard-
ly be any fich subjed of difference or difcuflion a-
mong the members of the fame commuriity, as will
require the hand of authority to interpose in order
to adjust it. Where the right of separate andex-
clufive possession is not introduced, the great obh
jeEt of law and jurifdiftion'does not exiit. When
called into the field, either in.their own defence, or
to invade the territories of their enemies, when en.
gaged in the toil and dangers of the chafe, the
members of a tribe perceive that they are part of a
political body. They are conscious of their own
connecion with the companions in conjunCion
with whom they as ; and-they follow and reverence
such as excel in conduct and valour. But, during
the intervals between such common efforts, they
are scarcely conscious of the ties of political union*.
No visible form of government is established. l'he
names of MIAG.ISTRATE and SUBJECT are not in
use. Every one fcems to enjoy his natural inde-
pendcncc almoin entire . If a scheme of public uti-
lit) be proposed, the members of the community
are left at liberty to chute whether they will afli[
or not in carryillg it into execution. No fatutc
imposes any fcrvice as a duty, no compullory l:','5
oblige tlhe to perform it. All their rcfolutionsare
voluntary, and flow from the irnpulfe of their 0oW,,
minds t. T he firit ftcp toward'; italililling a It'-

' l hic

1), c

si

. (;1. oi l ci:.

-t

: 3 Melen izt, TNforo. VI'r,'

, l,).;, ii. -.l. S;c NOT'; , XII. -[ Clarlev. I-it. N0ov. I"rln
;i, .... .()'...

lic jurifdiaion has not been taken in th6fe rude so- B o0 K
cieties. The right of revenge is left in private
hands 1. If violence is committed, or blood is -hed,
the community does not affime the po:er either'
of infliing or of moderating the purifhment. It
belongs to the famnily and friends-of the person in-
jured or slain to avenge the wrong, or to. accept of
the reparation offered by the aggrefflr. :If the- el-
ders interpose, it is to advise, not-to decide; and it is
seldom their counsels are listened to ;-for as it is
deemed pusillanimous to susser an ofPicnder to escape
with impunity, reieitrment is implacable a.-' c,,_'r-
l Ifting T. The objec of governrne-it amrn.r?. -a-
i: vges is rather foreign than' d'omtic. Tlihy d'
not aim at maintaining interior order arid police by
public regulations, or the exei:tions of any perma-
nent authority, but labour to preserve ftch union
among the 'mnnbersof their tribe, that they may
watch the motions of their enemies, and act agairift
! them with' concert and vigour.

SUCH was the form of political: order efifthlifhed To what
among the greater part of the Ameri'car nations. peoplethofe

, defriptions

In this iate were most of;the tiibes, spread over the apply,
vast provincesextending eastward of the Mississippi,
fionn the mouth of the St. Laurence' to the confines
of Florida. In a fir\ilar condition were the people
of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, and several
tribes in Paraguay and Guiana, and in the countries
: which stretch from the mouth of the Oiinoco to

the peninfila of Yucatan. Among such an infinite
number of petty aflociations, there may be peculia-
rities which conflitute a diflinCtioln, and mark the

various

I; t lCIcr,,idc., , iHC. cr. c. , Chalriv. Hist. N. Franc, iii.
7 ,' -7', I.;fit, . ,
i. Ca6. ( i -lift, dc Nucvo R.eyn'odc rala-

órdi ._d

B o OK various degrees of their civilization and improve.

ment. But an attempt to trace and enumerate these
would be vain, as they have not been obfervedby
persons, capable of discerning the minute and deli-
cate circumffances, which serve to discriminate na-
tions resembling one another in their general cha-
racter and features. The description which I have
given will apply,.with little variation, to the policy
of every people in America, which to fiffing and
hunting had added some degree of agriculture.

RUDE and imperfed& as those inflitutions may

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced in
their political progress. Among all those petty na-
tions which trufPed for subsistence entirely to fishing
and hunting without any species of cultivation, the
union was so incomplete, and their sense of mutual
dependence so feeble, that hardly any appearance of
government or order can be discerned in their pro-
ceedings. Their wants are few, their objets of
pursuit simple, they form into separate tribes, and
ad together, from instinct, habit, or conveniency,
rather than fiom any formal concert and affociati-
on. To this class belong the Californians, several
of the small nations in the extensive country of Pa-
raguay, rome of the people on the banks of the Ori-
noco, and on the river St. Magdalene, in the new
kingdom of Granada -t.

Sorre irre- BUT though among these lait-mentioned tribes
tular Iap- there was hardly any ihalow of regular government,

pand even among those which I sirs described, its

authority is slender and confilld within narrow
bounds, there were some places in America where

it

- Vcnegas. i. 62. l.ettr. Edlif ii. i76. T:cho. Hist I.ofParog.
Churchill, vi. 78. 1iflt. ,Gen. des VTy.,gcs, xiv. '/4

it was carried far beyond the degree which fems B o K
natural to rude nations. In surveying the political IV.
operations of man, either in his savage or civilized t ^
!tate, we discover singular and excentric inflituti-
oils, which start as it were from theiritation, and fly
oF so wide that we labour in vain to bring them
within the general laws of any system, orto account
for them by those principles which influence other
communities in a similar situation. Some instances
of this occur among those people of America,whom
I have included under the common denomination
of savage. Thlfe are so curious and important that
I fllal describe them, and attempt to explain their
origin.

IN the New World, as well as in other parts of
the globe, cold or temperate countries appear to be r rfome of
the favourite feat of freedom and independence. the warler
There the mind, like the body, is firm and vigor- r"gions
otis. Conscious of their own dignity, and capable
of the greatell efforts in afterting it, men aspire to
indcpendence, and their stubborn spirits stoop with
ciu tatnce to the yoke of servitude. In warmer
clilnate;, by whofc influence the whole frame is so
iuch enlrvat-ed, that plrfent pleasure is the supreme
lliciiy, and icere repofc is enjoyment, men acqui-
tlcc, alinofi without a struggle, in the dominion of
a fl prior. Accordingly, if we proceed from north
to lboth annnl the continent of America, we ihall
filn tlIc p)wcr of thole ' cited with authority gra-
dua;ly ;ilrc;fing, and the spirit of the people be-
c;lilg 111(1irc tile and pafive. In Florida, the au-
itllJrity of tlhc Icliciis, caziqucs, or chiefs, was not
: t;!) itlltn , cL buLt liercdtit;lry. They were di-

tli ilhlRd 1))y ipetui;lr ornanmlents, they enjoyed pre-
,; . iveofs of arious kinds, and were treated by
i; tl"'l lilj:d.s with thaiL rvcrcnce whicth people

i'; naccuflto med

E c O K accustomed to fubjeAion, pay to a master*. Among

the nation of the Natchez, situated on the banks of

-. 6 the Mississippi, a difference of rank took place, with
Nzatnei. which the northern tribes were altogether unac-

ouainted. Some families were reputed noble, and
e:-yed hereditary dignity. The body of the peo-
p't .as confi;.ered as vile, and formed only for fib-

jco. This diftinacion was marked by appella-

ti.,ns which intimated the high elevation of the one
Rate, and the ignominious depression of the other,
The former were called RESPECTABLE ; the latter,
the STINKARDS. The great Chief, in whom the
supreme authority was vested, is reputed to be a
being of ft.perior nature, the brother of the Sun,
th frole obje& of their worihip. They approach
him with religious veneration, ahd honour him as
thi representative of their deity. His will is a law,
to which all submit with implicit obedience. The
lives of his fubjets are foabfolutely at his disposal,
thatif any one has incurred his displeasure, hecomes
with profound humility and offers him his head,
Nor docs their dominion end with their lives;
their principal officers, their favourite wives, toge-
ther with many domestics of inferior rank, are fa-
crificed at their tombs, that they may be attended
in tiir next world by the fame persons who served
them inthis; and such is the reverence in which
they are held, that those victims welcome death
with exultation, deeming it a recompence
their fidelity and a mark of dlifiniaion, to be
feleEted to accompany their deceased lmafkl t
Thus a perfet dcfpotifin, with its full train
of superstition, arrogance, and cruelty, is 'ii
blifhcd among the Natchcz, and by a
faitllity

fatallity,

Cardlenas y Cano Ellfnayo . lalisl'. de Firi.,'4

Le Moylle de Iol,-glt. jeoi l... loiln . Al). dl- BlY. l'y"lidi'
Cha'rlev. Hifi. Nl. Fir;anc)"i.

i.47,?4ór .-l) nsill.t I' itr,

Ed if. zo.. x A. l
x· i

fitality, that people has tassed of the worif calami- B3 0 K
ties incident to polished nations, though tthey th - i_ V.
feives arc not far advanced beyond the tribes around
t!:,n in civility and improvement. In Hispaniola, Inthe 1i-
Cua^,, and the larger islands, their caziqucs or lands.
chiefs pofclLFcd extensive power. The dignity was
tranlinitted by hereditary right from father to son.
Its honours and prerogatives were considerable.
''heir fubjcas paid great refpeA to the caziques,
,nd executed their orders without hesitation or re-
ferye . They were diftinguifned by peculiar or-
naments, and in order to preserve or augment the
veneration of the people, they had the address to
call in the aid of superstition to uphold their autho-
ritv. They delivered their mandates as the oracles
cf heaven, and pretended to polIefs the power of
rcgulating the seasons, and of dispensing rain or
fnlhine, according as their fubljeLs stood in need of
thelm.

I' frome parts of the continent, the power of the I,, Bogota.
caziques seems to have been as extensive as in the
iflcs. In Bogota, which is now a )rovince of the
Nev kingdom of Granada, there was fettled a na-
tion, mo1re considerable in number and more im-
pr'oved in the various arts of life, than any people
in Amicrica except the Mexicans or Peruvians.
I h ey fulbfi -ed chiefly by agriculture. The idea of
propirty was introduced among thelm, and its rights
lfcurcll by laws, handed down by tradition, and ob-
f',\'dc with great caIre--. 'They lived in large towns.
I yhy were clothed in a dccillt manner, and their
Ilil's Imay be termed coimmodio!us, when comnpar-
ed with tlio(C of the people around them. The cf-

V()l. 1. Xx cls

tI1 ,

: , ) . Iih. i. . .si. li,. jji C 44.
c .... . .clt C.

* I rila[litlt Ilidl. ilc 1:: col n/i ull. ,11 N. .t U lr {.,ran.

LC 0o 1 f
0 K s ori thi; u:.corlm io ci.viiizaticJn wverc confpici-

__ y ouo. Govenl- enl t ha:d afi'lrmed a regular form. A

j uri ';i dtion was cfrabli ned, which took cogn izance
oi irti.rent crilmcs, and punished them with rio0ur.
A diiitinition of ranks was known ; their chief, to
whom the Spaniards gave the title of monarch, and
who merited that name on account of his fplendlour
;:s \-tll as po.evr, reigned with absolute authoritt,,
i-Me was attended by officers of various condition;
il; never appcared in public without a numerous lc-
tiint? ; he was carricd in a fort of p:lanqunlin srll
Ilntchi pomlp, a!nd h:11bi!liges went before lim tu
I, cp tlhe rio:'l and f^rew it. vitl flowers. This un-
common pw'n'ip v.ias ft' iiporcd by presents or tax.s
jr'cei\c d t"-l:n lls fulaje ls, to whom their prince was
fulc1 : I1 j obij C.' f

0 enilration, that none of tlhcli pre-

fum'dcl to look hiil directlly in the iface, or ever ap.
proacniedl him but with an averted countelnnce *,
There * were other tribes oil the fame continent,
alingr vVnlill ithouhl fa'r lel's adv: nced tli the
pceo-i,! of 10oota in th.ir progrels towvards ri'nc-
niciit:, Lie ifreedom and iindepndeince, ntlIrel to
mi;;n in hi<s iat'.,C$ 11.', v:as much abridgedi , ;id
thei' c.az.i !uci had ;l'liim:d cxtenl ivc auilnoity.

C t

-; f T i: not cai'y to poinlt out the circumlitncc, or

'l'*'./', to d:'I l: '. '.t tllte .ttml.is v'w ich co:trilbuted to intlo-
p".irxr,.cc. dtc,.: ;;:ai ':ih !:lil ainonl each of those 1PLsl!c t

i',,~ ll , ';" '.''lli, t f1) diH'!':rent fro'n thI;t ol i"j

t !:'01( i;l;'1 i) C)lllit to

ts

,lt t.:itlli

ti'bL'y ,i id iit a ,id ol repugnan)tlt to the "'""
of{' ,!k,:.! lLi(lis. Iftile l)Crlos vwho hall an opl')ir-
ttlllii ( il"

o !,l:rv'iti/ lhtem, in their or-igilnal ftel ,)
hi:d Iicnl more ilti:entivc and more difcerninCg, vw

n1s, IVt

j Ih 1l 1 ., .*,r.. lib. i . c. Z. lib. v.
t.v . , I'icdilr. :ltil c. 5. P''

ih lit have recCiC(d informnationl rrom t!hem fuis- l B 00;-

cai',tA' to pjlatu US

i

ltUs
it;t 1y Ift the tl-anlale- i-

ra ° -'l unacquatinteld with the ufc of let-

v ( ,uli'it LtAve d"cri ed some in folrmation from that
lilrcc. L'- ' no)thi i.ts ry can be .':, ;-
c,, ciiiler fi'ui tlie accounts of the SpanialrJ;, cr
foin0 their own traditio:ns, v mu have rccoulr-l
to conjci:tir :, in or Jr to explain the irregular ap-
l::;;-Inccs ii; tl po litical f-tce of the people whom
I:;vc ir.cei;'iocd. As all those tribes which had
1 osl thiri na:'iv liberty and independence were feat-
' d inZ

the ,oirid Zone, or in the countriies approach-

il:: t , the climate may be supposcd to have had
i li:-c inll-:'nce in formin., their minds to that fervi-
t'n'J, iwhich seems to be the dcfliny cf man in tholi
ri-ilns of thc ,Icbe. But though the influence of
cii:::',te, more powerful lthanl that of any other na-
ttir:ll cause, is not to be overlooked ; that alone
caiinot be admitted as a solution of the point in
?q]Liftion. The operations of men are ib complex,
thlt we muf' not attribute the form which they as-
'i:, to th

l: force of a single principle or caifl:.
i' hhoulh ildelotifmn be confined in Anircrica to the

I'To;id Zone, and to the warlm regions bordering

il ,i:.h it, L have already obflrvcd that thefte coun-
=i;tics contain various tribes, some of which pofiis
ai hlih decgre of firedomn, iand others arc altogctlhcr
i;lc""(lLaintcLd with the reltraints of gove'nment.
i Ih intdol!cie :tnd timnidity peculiar to the ilnhbi-
Itiits of tlhe il:llndl, rIdcl-ecd themi so incapable of
h-fc ntiinlts o<r e-orts nccefiary for maintaining
t1i'li.ileliicc, th;lt there is no occasion to search for
Uylotitr c;ulile of their tlame filmilion to the will
fa uii rl, ior. 'h li. fUjelion of the Iatchcz, and
1 1llt P1'l,'e- ol: l)ogota, tecims to have been the
:i 'l"ilice fa ( dislcelcc in their ilaLte from that

.X x 2 of

B 0 K of the other Americans. They were fettled nati-

1iV, onIs, residing constantly in one place. Hunting

was not the chief occupation of the former, and the
latter feein hardly to have trufled to it for any part
of their fubfifience. Both had made such progress
in agriculture and arts, that the idea of property
was introduced in some degree in the one commu.
nity, and fully eftabl'iihed in the other. Among
people in this state, avarice and ambition have ac-
quired objets, and have begun to exert their power;
views of interest allure the felfi h; the desire of
pre-eminence excites the enterprising ; dominion is
courted by both ; and passions unknown to man in
his savage slate prompt the interested and ambitious
to encroach on the rights of their fellow-citizens,
MIotives, with which rude nations are equally un-
acquainted, induce the people to fiubmit tamelyto
the usurped authority of'their superiors. But even
among nations in this itate, the spirit of fuijcds
could not have been rendered so obsequious, or the
power of rulers so unbounded, without the inter-
vention of fiiperfition. By its fatal influence, the
hutman mind, in every flage of its progreis, is dce
pircflcd, land its native rvigour and independcllce filb
dued. WVhocver can acquire the diredion of tlis
formidable enginel, is iecure of dominion overlis
fpccics. Unfi-rtu ntc]ly for the people whose inlti'
tutions lar tllc ill)jcct: of' ilinqiry, this power was inu
the hands of tl idr chlid's. The caziqucs of Ihe
isles cotdd plut what trcfpImics they pleased into(ti
mouths of their CrF Pls or gtds; a'lnd it wasy
their interpolitionl, ;nd l in iliir iamne that tlh
ionp.ofid ,<nv triblte or burden on their people *
'l'i great clic*f ot ell NIatulheI was the plripi
, iiniloer ;ss well a; tihe rcpr: ;intative of the t"
rheir deity. 'I'le rt fpcdi whicl the pcoplf s lI

* i dei:]i ci . l. lib. iii. C- 3.

cota paid to their nonarchs, was inspired by religi- B 0 0 K
on, and the heir apparent of the kingdom was edu- t-.
ca;,d ia the innermost recess of their principal
tenCilil, under such auflere discipline, and with such
pccLliira rights, as tended to fill his fubjeds with
high sentiments concerning the fanhity f his cha-
ra.ctr, and the dignity of his station *. Thus fu-
pr ill:ion, which, in the rudest period of society,
i::"thOr altocether unknown, or walles its force in
c!lindi ,unmeaning pralices, had acquired such an
fe:,ld.uit .ver those people of America, who had
1!.'.c fune little progress towards rcfincment, that
it ;'c;.mn the chief inilrurnent of bending their
i:, to an untimely servitude, and subjected them,
ii h bteinning of their political career, to a def-
Ft.iha; hardly lets- rigorous, than thnt which awaits
naI,;:;, ii the last stage of their corruption and
decline.

V. AFTER, examining the political institutions Theirart of
oftthe rude nations in America, the next objeEt of war.
attelnion is their art of war, or their provision for
ublc frcuirty and defence. The fnall tribes dif-
p,' iid over America are not only independent and
iincicn,!~'cld, but engaged in perpetual hofiilities
i wti a noLtheir t. Thouglh irangers to the idea
( I f ,;arate property vested in any'individual, the
; rtllcll of thj American nations arc well acquainted
' witil the riiht of each community to its own do-
mnaiins. lI'his right they hold to be persecd and cx-
cu!fiv., entitling the poicillor to oppose the cn-
' ci,: c!ii,,lt otf nt ci ,}hlhoril" trilbs. As it is of the
iilo'>; cifoiiqlince to prevent thl.ll froml dcftroy-
il, i. dil drii'n: tlheg:tune in trh,.ir luitin grou inds,
tl ')' 1',u1t1 ;lhis n;ltional property with a jealous; at-
>tt')ivn, t;uit as their territories are extnllive, aind

the

B 0 0 K the boundaries of them not exalcly ascertained, in.

IV. numerable fubjcds of dispute arise, which feldoin

terminate without bloodshed. Even in this simple
and primitive fate of society, interest is a source of
discord, and often prompts savage tribes to take
arms, in order to repel or punish such as encroach
on the forests or plains, to which they trust for
subsistence.

Their mo- BUT interest is not either the mort frequent.or
tivcs fnor c the mot powerful motive of the incessant hostilitics
wvar . among rude nations. Thefc must be imputed to

the passion of revenge, which rages with such vio.
lence in the breast of savages, that cagernefs to gra-
tify it may be confidercd as the diflinguifhing cha-
raaeriftic of men, in their uncivilized thate. Cir-
cumftances of powerful influence, both in the int:-
rior government of rude tribes, and in their cxtcr-
nal operations against foreign enemies, concur in
cheritiing and adding strength to a passion fatal to
the general tranquility. When the right of re-
dressing his own wrongs is left in the hands of eve-
ry individual, injuries are felt with cxquifitc fcnfi-
bility, and vengeance exercised with unrclenting
rancour. No time can obliterate the memory of an
offence, and it is seldom that it can be expiated
but by the blood of the offender. In carrying on

From the their public wars, savage nations are influenced by
spirit of
venseancc. the fame ideas, and animated with the fame spirit,

as in prosecuting private vengeance. In finall com-
munities, every man is touched with the injury or
affront offered to the body of which he is a member,
as if it were a personal attack upon his own honour
or safety. The desire of revenge is communicatcd
from breast to breast, and soon kindles into r;ge.
As feeble societies can take the field only in ,fil!
parties, each warrior is conscious of the importance
of his own arm, and feels that to it is, committed ,

confidcrabic

conficlerable portiop of the public vengeance. War, E 0 0 K
which betvween extensive kingdoms is carried on ,
with littleanimtofity, is prosecuted by fiall tribes
;ith all the rancour of a private quarrel. The re-
fclnt;cnt of nations is as implacable as thatof indi-
viduals. It nmay be diffcmbled or fuppreied, but is c th
nv\er cxtinguiihcd ; and often, when leafs ex- ferocity of
pn.cl or drcaz.d, it burfrs out with redoubled thet rwars,
f,:ry'. V'hen polished nations have obtained the
nlory of vitory;' or have acquircd an addition of
t-rr;ter, they may terminate a war with honour.
],ut favac^s are not satisfied until they extirpate
tlhe communiity, which is the objea of their rage.
'li'y fillt not to conquer, but to defcroy. If they
el1g·e i1n hlibilities, it is with the resolution never
to l;c thc f::ce of the enemy in peace, but to prose-
cute tle quarrel with immortal enmity t. The

o

filre ofvcngeance is the firfl, and almost the only
principle, which a savage inlfils into the minds of

hiis cKl':.'en. This grows up with him as he

:.d:'nces in life ; and as his attention is dircacd to
few oljces, it acquires a degree of force unknown
anlon:i men wvhofe passions are dissipated and weak-
cncJ lI t' : v:riety of their occupations and pur-
flits. The desire of vengeance, which takes pof-
felon of the heart of savages, rcfembles the inftinc-
tivc rage of anaanim.sl, rather than the paaion of a
"mn. It turns, with undifeerning fury, even againf
illnilmate olbjcts. If hurt accidentally by a itonc,
they often sLize it in a tranrport of anger, rad cn-
davour to wreak their lvengeance upon it §. If truck

with

[

0ticlicr -1ill. N:at. dc N. France, p. 9g. Charlev. Hist. dr N.

'. i. .

. ',~ . ,. :,.y a; Dllry, ii. sz.. Crel::. }.lil. Cain d.

:'.
. le:l{> Del. r !cl (:t -.;; . 'Ch.;co, . Hcn.-,!;S . MolUel ldr

; . Chialcv. -lilt. N. Fr. iii. ' . Coldcei, i. xoS. ii.

1' ,

'"r.'''' - z' o,'73 f Cha:lev. N. Fr. iii. z6. Lcry a3

i!. 'l dle

I;36.

.3 .: ii.

'.

- : Ii l r. i.
d . 1 44. Lcr ap Dc

B o 0 K with an arrow in battle, they will tear it from tihe
_^_^ Vv5wUnd, break :.n ' bite it with their teeth, and dafll

it on the iground . WTVith refpe& to their enemies,
the ..rc cf v-- n,.?.lce knows no bounds. When
tnder t?-c don:in;lon of this paflion, man becomes the
ro(1- cr:-c of ::!! a:inials. He neither pities, nor
forgivce, nor fip.rcs.

Tir- forcc, of this passion is so well underfiood

Ib th. Amcn-icanns thernfelves, that they alway)s ap.
p ty to it, iii oi-J:r to excite their people to take arms,
if tlhc ck;crs of any tribe attempt to rouze their
yot'dt from iot-h, if a chief wifles to allure a baind
of .a:rrors to follow him in invading an enemy's
coun:,nr, the nlai r pcrfiafive topics of their martial
eloquence are d:;-wn from revenge. " The bones
of our countrymen," iay they, " lie uncovered;
their bloody bed has not been washed clean. Their
spirits cry against us; they mufl be appeased. Let
us go and devour the people by whom they were
{fin. Sit no longer inactive upon your mats; lift
the hatchet, confle the spirits of the dead, and tell
them that they shall be avenged t."
,.nj tlu ir ANIMATED with such exhortations, the youth

snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raiiiethe
song of war, and burn with1 impatienc to imnlrle
their hands in thc blood of their enemies. Private
chiefs often :iC:tlle finall partics, and inv;itdc:
ho':ile tribe, without consulting the rulers of the
comllnuniity. A tingle warrior, prompted by c:Tprce
or !rc'cig, will L;lke the fieldt alonll, andt mlar
fevcr,.;l lhuindred !iles, to furprit and cut

al rti
flragglinig citen ly . '[he Cxploits of ai 11't

iWA) 1 O1L

' a I.yap te ny,ii. zo . I-lS.l 'ra, klcc. .lil. vi.c.- .
[ C'l5.1rlrv. Iii.' N. 1.:, iii. 1',. ., . L

rll,
-iii, ' " 'a'

warrior, in fiuch solitary excursions, often form the O O K
chief part of the hiffory of an American campaign ; I;
and their elders connive at such irregular sallies, as
they tend to cherish a martial spirit, and accuftomn
their people to enterprise and danger t. But when
a war is national, and undertaken by public autho-
rity, the deliberations are formal and flow. The
elders aifcmble, they deliver their opinions in solemn
speeches, they weigh with maturity the nature of
the enterprise, and balance its lbeneficial or difad-
vantageous consequences with no inconsiderable
portion of political discernment and sagacity. Their
priests aud soothsayers are consulted, and sometimes
they ask the advice even of their women ::. If the
detcrmination be for war, they prepare for it with
much ceremony. A leader offers to condulct the
expedition, and is accepted. But no inI;n is con-
Itrained to follow him ; the resolution of the com-
Imunlity to commence hostilities imposes no obliga-
tion upon any member to take part in the war.
ach individual is frill master of his own conduCt,
aind his engagement in the service is perfectly vo-
I luntaiv 11.

'I ir. maxims by which they regulate their mili- Mr,
taiy) operations, though extremely diffrent fioml cl-yi; o
those which take place among more civilized and w'"
pO)t[ulous nations, are well suited to their own po-
ticail ftatc, and the nature of the country in which
th)e at. They never take the field in nulIcrous
bodics, as it would rc1l]tIirc a greater ell-ort of fore-
i ;lt lnd ilndudrity, hlan is ufuital almonirg 'lvlagcs, to
I'rovidt lfor their fubliflence during a miarch of some
ini .llrIed iilrs through dreary forefis, or during al

;, voyage upuon tl Ceir lakes and rivers. heir

\ 01,

I Y y arlmies

.. !')T

N 11 IXV . '. -

' i'1i .1 0

i .. 1.-.l : ap l : .
.v.

N1,'t 1 i M IM1.,8 ;.1myv 411. -I.,.f( II ii. 1Go. t ('!1Ilv.

,,,
M ) *215, *1t,

Bjo , 31. 1'"- l .l.Icl . 11ill. N.
1~~~~~~~3 '

B o0 K armies are not encumbered with baggage or milita.

1-V_ ry stores. Each warrior, besides his arms, carries

a mat and a small bag of pounded maize, and with
there is completely equipped for any service. While
at a distance from the enemies frontier, they dif-
perse through the woods and support themselves
with the game which they kill, or the fish which
they catch. As they approach nearer to the terri-
tories of the nation, which they intend to attack,
they colle their troops, and advance with greater
caution. Even then they proceed wholly by strata-
(cm and ambuscade. They place not their glory
in attacking their enemies with open force. To
furpi-il: and defroy is the greatest merit of a corn-
mr and r, and the hi ghe pride of his followers,

iWar and hunting are their only occupations, and
they co-i,;iuJL both with the fame spirit and the fame
ai ts. 'lhiv so llow the track of theirenemies through
the fi)r.fi. 'i'hey endeavour to difcovcr their haunts,
tli.:y Ilrk in some thicket near to these, and with
the patience of a sportsman lying in wait for game,
.viii continlte in their fiation day after day, until
tlihy can ruiL utpon their prey when molt secure,
and lc,it able to re ift them. if they meet no
{I ,1' li n' p.'ir ty ofl the enemy, they advance towards
their vil!;it, Ls, but with such solicitude to conceal
tlh-ir p!i;roah, that they often creep on their hands
a.11 ti-, t thirouh the woods, and paint their skins
otf the l.ia colr Cot with the withered leaves, in or-
1;'r to

a, idl de t:ctiona I. If so lortunate as to re-

r;lagn itl).'r\.clq 'd, they 1;t on fire their huts in tilc
dlad(l of niliht, ;aId miall;icre the inhabitants, as they
fly ntked ;;nd dc'l it lcls fromil the flames. If they
hoIl to e 'cl.' ; rct.1'.':at: without being pursued, they
carry off ii, 'e pr ill rs, whlioi they rcfcrve for l

ITmore

(1. l i. lit. ,N. Ir. iii. 237, 23. I- ilnnr p. Moulrt lec Sauv
1· j , [

more dreadful fate. But if, notwithstanding all B

o o K

their address and precautions, they find that their -
motions are discovered, that the enemy has taken
the alarm, and is prepared to oppose them, they
usually deem it most prudent to retire. They regard
it as extreme folly to meet an enemy who is on his
guard, upon equal tzrms, or to give battle in an
open field. The most distinguished succe.ss is a dif-
grace to a leader, if purchased with any confidera-
ble loss of his followers *; and they never boast of
a vialory if stained with the blood of their own
countrymen t. To fall in battle, instead of being
reckoned an honourable death, is a misfortune
which lubjects the memory of a warrior to the inl-
putation of rashness or imprudence -.

THIS system of war was universal in America, N'ot owving
and the small uncivilized tribes, difprlfcd through oy
all its different regions and climates, difplav more cui-e.
craft than boldness in carrying on their hostilities.
Struck with this conduct, so opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit pc-
culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any
generous or manly exertion §. But when we re-
fleE that many of these tribes, on occasions which
c:ll for extraordinary efforts, not only defend t!hem-
fclves with obstinate resolution, but attacl t!lhir
enernics with the molt darilln courage, and that
thlic poflls fortitude of mind superior to the fctnl
of danger or the fear of death, we mluft aicribe their
hab;itual caution to some other cause than conftLitu-
ti(oial timidity |I. T'lhe number 6f men iln each
ibe is lo finall, the difficulty of rearing new relln-

Y y bcrs,

1' Sc NO'lT. I.XV. *[- Clharl v. -lift. N. Fr. iii. 23,I. 0;,'.

I
i ' si. Lillm M ,h.:,l tirdes SnIv. ii. 7,0 . 1 Charlev. iii. 3;'6.

r Nt'rEIlXVi. § Rkecherchlca; I'hiliof slur IC, Ami c. I, i 1r.
0 ¾).i(;cl M.nl.i. iv. p. H. i Lalitau Mw.rrs clr.; ;.v. ii. i.l;,

! !' (.ha:ll^. N. I'r. iii. 307.
j

B 0 0 K bclrs, amidlt the harlihips and dangers of savage life,

f o grcat, that the life of a citizen is extremely pre-
cious, and the preservation of it becomes a capital
object in their policy. Had the point of honour
been th

t lhe e among the feeble American tribes, as

among the powerful nations of Europe, had they
been taught, in contempt of danger and death, to
court tanme or vidiory, they must have been ruined
by maxims, so ill adapted to their condition, But
xwherever their communities are more populous, so
that they can at with considerable force, and can
fusain the loss of fcveral of their members, without
being fenf;blv weakened, the military operationsof
the American1s more nearly resemble those of other
natians. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes
situatcd upon the banks of the river De la Plata, of-
ten take the field in fuchl numerous bodies, as de-
serve the nanm of armies -t. They defy their ene-
mnics to the combat, engage in regular battles, and
maintain the conflict with that desperate ferocity,
v hich is natural to men, who have no idea of war
but that of exterminating their enemies, and who
nciecr give or ta!ke quarter :. In the powcrful em-
pires of Mexico and Peru, great armies were aclltm-
blcd, flcttic:l battles were fought, and the theory
as; well as plraice of war were diflerent from what
t,) (, pl.icc in tlol(e pelty locietics which afIline the

. .

.1 thou,. i, h i'i la.lce and attention are the qua-

.' '" '- l;l ics chlilcly reqtui rit,. where the objdt of war isto
' "'' ideciive and tl, si pr'ile ; an though the Anericans,

v.hcl, tin; titl, displ:ay an amazing degre o

:.ldrcfs in co'ealing their owIl moitiOlls, and (difo-
vcring tleti olf an cncmy, yet it is rearlble

I li,.i V lill's. pl.iip. India ap ti

. , yl vii. p, 4.. Scc NOi

X. V I I.
ts<V *1.

that, when they take the field in parties, they can B 0 K
seldom be brought to observe the precautions most ,V.
eliential to their own security. Such is the difficul-
ty of accustoming savages to subordination, or to ac
in concert ; such is their impatience under restraint,
and such their caprice and presumption, that it is
rarely they can be brought to conform themselves
to the counsels and direecions of their leaders.
'lhey never ilation centinels around the place where
they reft at night, and after marching some hundred
miles to surprise an enemy, areoften surprised them-
selves, and cut oft; while funk in as profound sleep
as if they were not within reach of danger t.

IF notwithfranding this negligence and security,
which often frufirate their most artful schemes,
they catch the enemy unprepared, they rush upon
them with the utmoif ferocity, and tearing off the
scalps of all those who fall victims to their rage :,
they carry home those firange trophies in triumph.
These they preserve as monuments, not only of their
own prowess, butof the vengeance which their arm
has inflicted upon the people who were objects of
public refcntment §. They are fiill more folici-
tous to seize pri foncrs. During their retreat, if
they hope to eft-'c; it unmolcfled, there are con-
"lonly exempt from any insult, and treated with
iOnle degree of hiimanity, though guarded with
'the ilna i'rict attention.

u'i' after this temporary fitfpelfion, their rage ri-atm, t

'kiindles with new fury. As iton as they ap- ofri)ifulnei
Ipr'ch their ownv frontier, iome of their number
'c lplatelid to

i n frm
t heir countrymen with re-

to tl

t e 'teiccefs of the c pcdition. T'hen the
P'rilfoner lgin to fccl tile wrctchllcdefs of their

colidition.

* L|;,' y, .

'

. Ir. iii. 2 3i, 7".3 . Ia.ttr. Elidf. 17. ; 8. 2.. ;. 1,.

; 'i,.uM,"',' ;':jl7. lhlllln Sii.
z7e. - See NO'IE LXVIII.

1'1! II.~r~

B 0 0 K condition. The women of the village, together

IV.

with the youth who have not attained to the age of
bearing arms, assemble, and forming themselves in-
to two lines, through which the prisoners must
pass, beat and bruise them with sticks or stones in
a cruel manner -. After this first gratification of
their rage against their enemies, follow lamentations
for the loss of such of their own countrymen as
have fallen in the service, accompanied with words
and actions which seem to express the utmost an-
guifh of grief. But, in a moment, upon a signal
given, their tears cease, they pass, with a sudden
and unaccountable transition, from the depthsof
sorrow to transports of joy, and begin to celebrate
their victory with all the wild exultation of a bar-
barous triumph t. The fate of the prisoners re-
mains frill undecided. The old men deliberate con-
cerning it. Some are destined to be tortured to
death, in order to satiate the revenge of the con-
querors; some to replace the members which the
community has loft in that or former wars. They
who are rcfcrved for this milder fate, are led to the
huts of those whose friends have been killed. The
women meet them at the door, and if they receive
them, their sufferings are at an end. They are
adopted into the family, and, according to their
phrase, are scated upon the Inat of the deceased.
They aftume his name, they hold the fame rank, are
treated thenceforward with all the tenderness due
to a father, a brother, a husband, or a friend. But
if, either from caprice, or an unrelenting desire of
revenge, the women of any family refufc to accept
of the prisoner who is ofl'ercd to them, his doom is
fixed. No power can then save hliii front torture
and death.

Their iiIf- WHI-LE their lot is in furfpcnfe, the prisoners

cov'uingC tllhenliflves appear altogether unIncolerned ,about
thcii fat, whlt

V l.l hontan, ii. 1S4. . CharIlev. Illl. N. Fl. iii..-. 2 lAfita
MNeuir, ii. z64.

what may befal them. They talk, they eat, they B 0 o K
{lsep, as if they were perfecly at ease, and no dan-
ger impending. When the fatal sentence is inti-
mated to them, they receive it with an unaltered
countenance, raise their death-fong, and prepare to
susser like men. Their conquerors assemble as to ad forti-

tude under

a solemn feflival, resolved to put their courage to torture.
the utmost proof. A scene ensues, the bare def-
cription of which is enough to chill the heart with
horror, wherever men have been accustomed, by
milder in{fitutions, to refpece their species, and to
melt into tenderness at the fight of human susser-
ings. The prisoners are tied. naked to a ftakc, but
so as to be at liberty to move around it. All who
are prcfcnt, men, women, and children, rush upon
them like furies. Every fpecics of torture is ap-
plied that the rancour of revenge can invent.
Some burn their limbs with red-hot irons, fiome
mangle their bodies with knives, others tear their
ficfh from their bones, pluck out their nails by the
roots, and rend and twist their sinews. They vie
with one another in refinements of torture. No-
thing fcts bounds to their rage, but the dread of
abrildin!g the duration of their vengeance by haflen-
in:t the death of the fuf}erers; and such is their
crill ingenuity in tormenting, that by avoiding in-
ul(triollfly to hurt any vital part, they often pro-
lown' this scene of anguifl for several days. In fpitc
of all that they fufci-Lr, the vidCims contin ue to chant
t''ilr (tlth-lf;l)n with a firm voice, threy boafi: of
tiri owln cxploits,, thl y inful t their torlentors for
tihir want of' (kill iln avening their

l rinds and re-

Iltion11, tlWy warn tlhem of the vcneance which
aw;ilIs IChem, on acctount of their death, and excit:
thIir r,'Crci t)/ y thel' ool provoking rIproachl. s and
hrrllts. 'I'o tliifplay Illndallnted ortitlide in fuich
dicll full fitillions is the nob!of, ir tumphl of a war--
ri". '1'o ; ,oid the t:2i. by a vldunt'ir, dClth, (r

I o3

B O O K to shrink under it, is deemed infamous and coward-

L__ ly. If any one betray symptoms of timidity, they

often dispatch him at once with contempt, as un-
worthy of being treated like a man *. Animated
with those ideas, they endure, without a groan,
what it seems almost impoflible that human nature
should sustain. They appear to be not only infenfi.
ble of pain, but to court it. " Forbear, said an a-
ged chief of the Iroquois, when his insults had pro-
voked one of his tormentors to wound him with a
knife, forbear theie stabs of your knife, and rather
let me die by fire, that those dogs, your allies, from
beyond the sea, may learn by my example to susser
like men t." This magnanimity, of which there
are frequent inflances among the American war-
riors, instead of exciting admiration, or calling
forth fyinpathy, exasperates the fierce spirits of their
torturers to fiefh acts of cruelty t. Weary at
length of contending with men, whose constancy of
mind they cannot vanquish, some chief in a rage
puts a period to their ful'Trings, by dispatching
them with his dagger or club §.

Somcetime 3 THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded by one
ec t thir no less shocking. As it is imnpoffible to appease the

fell spirit of revenge which lrges in the heart of a
savage, this frequently prompts the Amcricans to
devour thole unhappy pcrfons, who have been the
viclims of their cruelty. In the ancient world,
tradition has prcferved the memory of barbar--
ous nations of cannibals, who sied on hunlan frll.
Biut in every part of the New World, there
were people to whom tils cuflom was fa-

mili r i.

Dl e 1, I'ot.l h':ie, i;. iii. .

i l C(odi!n, rnil. of Iv"el ' N''

t;,-n,, i. 2ro. 1t V*n .'Jr'! de I.

>!, i. 2

I. ' § C'., rl''. Il.t

N . i'r. iii. ;'"-, &c . 3t; i. I,,it; I\;~ r' ,u.,, ,

11 .

2 ' IC. il, [I.

C('aih~. l. 7; I -lcn i

.e M ir'i ik.; .';Ilt, p. l, '.

'h :. I,-;
2,.3 , & . 'T'c l.le, ii, ' ,'5 I)c i, ['tln, .c, ii. 2., b'c.

miliar. It prevailed in the southern continent *, B 0 K
in several of the islands t, and in various diftri4ts lv
of North-America 1. Even in those parts, where
circumstances, with which we are unacquainted,
had in a great measure abolished this practice, it
seems to have been so well known, that it is incor-
porated into the idiom of their language. Among
the Iroquois, the phrase by which they express their
resolution of making war againit an enemy is,
" Let us go and eat that nation." If they solicit
the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they invite it to
" eat broth made of the flesh of their enemies I1."
Nor, was the pradtice peculiar to rude unpolifhed
tribes, the principle from which it took rife, is so
deeply rooted in the minds of the Americans, that
it subsisted in Mexico, one of the civilized empires
in the New World, and relics of it may be disco-
vered among the more mild inhabitants of Peru. It
was not scarcity of food, as some authors imagine,
and the importunate cravings of hunger, that forc-
ed the Americans to those horrid repasts on their
fellow-creatures. Human flesh was never used as
common food in any country, and the various rela-
tions concerning people, who reckoned it among
the fated means of subsistence, flow from the cre-
dulity and mistakes of travellers. The rancour of
revenge first prompted men to this barbarous adi-
on §. The fiercest tribes devoured none but pri-
foncrs taken in war, or such as they regarded as
enemies q[. Women and children who were not
VOL. I. Z z the

Statlius ap de Bfry, iii 12z3 Iery, ilid. io. Biet, 384. Lcttr.

r(s. z3. 341 . Pifo, . Condalnit . . 4.7 l.ibiha, Ililf. de le s l'iiiulnpl.
173. 'I Lif o(fColunrb. 529. Mart. Dcc. p. g. Icrtrc, ii.405.

It I)mollt, MeIi. i. 254. Ch lrlev. Hilt. N.Fr. i. 259. ii. 14. iii.

21. D)c l I'otlletic iii. 50. |I Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 208, 209.
Lttr;. Edif. 23. p. 277. Dela Potlicic, ii 2.9. Sec NOTE LXIX.
, Birt,3, 3. Blanco, Converfio tie Pi(tll, p 2z. BIanlcroft, Nat.
il, o1(u'lal)Ja. ). 159&C, qT See NOTE LXX.

1B 0 K the objets of enmity, ifnot cut off in the furyof

1v. their first inroad into an hostile country, seldom sus.

sered by the deliberate effiecs of their revenge %

THIE people of South-America gratify their re.

venge in a manner iomewhat different, but with no
less unrelenting rancour. Their prisoners, after
meeting at their firfl- entrance, with the fame rough
reception as among the North-Americans t, are not
only exempt from injury, but treated with the
greatest kindness. They are feasted and caressed,
and fione beautiful young women are appointed to
attend and solace them. It is not easy to account
for this part of their conduc, unless we impute it
to a refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem
studious to attach their prisoners to life, by supply-
ing them with every enjoyment that can render it
agreeable, their doom is irrevocably fixed. On a
day appointed, the victorious tribe assembles, the
captive is brought forth with great solemnity, he
views the preparations for the sacrifice with as much
indificrencc, as ifhe himself were not the vicqim,
and meeting his fate with undauntcd firmnnes, is
dispatchcd with a fin]le blow. The moment he
falls, the women seize the body, and dress it for the'
fcaft. They bcfinear their children with the blood,
in ord(lr to kindle in their bosoms a hatred oftheir
lCIncmis, which is never cxtingliifhed, and all join
in fee(ding upon the flci with amazing grecdillcfs
and cxultation :. TIo dtlvour the body ofa flaugh-
tcted eCili)my, they deem the moll: complete and cx-
(liqifit gratification of revelnge. Wherever this

pr; clice

', l'ict, 5.: nT;Ba !ini, Vit.i di Ain.rict,, 'q4.. l'rirc,45']:5 1r-

»lin, SL ls p

I c

i. J . iiii. 9i. 4. S1- t.lcqibid.. . ;', iii. p.4.' Il'
'i St.,lius aip dc [;)-, iii. 12S, &c, Lc'y, ilid. z.1.[.

p'raCice prevails, captives never escape death, but B O 0o 1
they are not tortured with the fihne cruelty as a- -_jj
mong the tribes which are lefc accuromed to futch
horrid seass ".

As the conflancy of every American warrior may
be put to Ifchd severe proof, the great obicet of edu-
cation and discipline in the New World is to form.
the mind to fufiain it. ¥When nations carry on war
with open force, defy their enemies to the combat,
and vanquifl them by the tfperiority of their tiill
or courage, soldiers are trained to be aive, vigor-
ous, and enterprising. But in America, wvhere the
ecnius and inaxiins of war are extrc.mcly diiferert,
paflive forlitude is the quality in highefv cl.imation.
,ccordingly, it is early the study of the Americans
to acquire a talent, which will enable them to be-
have like men, when their refolutioln hall bc put to
the proof. As the, youth of other nations excrcife
theiiifelves in feats of acivity and force, thole of
America vie with one another in exhibitions of their
patiencc under sufferings. 'They harden their nerves
by those voluntary trials, and gradually accuitom
thncmfelves to endure the fharpefl pain without com-
plaining. A boy and girl will bind their naked
armns together, and place a burning coal betcweel
them, in order to try who firll discovers such impa-
tiCnce as to fliake it off 1-. All the trials, cufl-oma-
ry in America, when a youth is admitted into the
dass of warriors, or when a vwarrior is plromnoted to
the dignity of captain or chief, arc accommodated
to this idea of manliners. 'lhey arc not dil]flays of
aloir, but of patience ; they are not exhibitions of
teir ability to ofl'end, but of their capacity to fuifler.
Anong the tribes on the banks of the Orinoco, if a

Z z 2 warrior
N S'N0tl LXXI. 't' Charlcv. I-Hl, N. F1r.

B o° K warrior aspires to the rank of captain, his probati.

iv.

on begins with a long fast, more rigid than any e-
ver observed by the most abstemious hermit. At
the close of this, the chiefs assemble, each gives him
three laihes with a large whip, applied so vigorously,
that his body is almost flayed, and if he betrays the
least symptom of impatience or even sensibility, he is
disgraced for ever, and reje&ed as unworthy of the
honour. After some interval, the confrancy of the
candidate is proved by a more excruciating trial,
He is laid in a hammoc with his hands bound fait,
an innumerable multitude of venomous ants, whose
bite occasions exquisite pain, and produces a violent
inflamation, are thrown upon him. The judges of
his merit frand around the hammoc, and, 'while
these cruel infecs fasten upon the most sensible
parts of his body, a sigh, a groan, an involuntary
motion expressive of what he suffers, would exclude
him from the dignity which he is ambitious to ob-
tain. Even after this evidence of his fortitude, it
is not deemed to be completely ascertained, but
must fRand another test more dreadful than any he
has hitherto undergone. He is again suspended in
his hammoc, and covered with leaves of the palmet-
to. A fire of tinking herbs is kindled underneath,
lb as he may feel its heat, and be involved in smoke .
Though scorchcd and almost suffocated, he mufR
continue to endure with the fame patient infenfibi-
lity. Many pcrifh in this rude essay of their firni
ness and courage, but such as go through it with
applause, receive the cnfigns of their new dignity
with much solemnity, and arc ever after regarded is
leaders of approved resolution, whose behaviour, in
the most trying situations, will do honour to their
country `. In North-Amcrica, the previous trial

of
C' Cu 1111h, il, 28Ci, c. Bict, 37(i ' cf.

of a warrior is neither so formal, nor so severe. B o

O K

Though even there, before a youth is permitted to _
bear arms, his patience and fortitude are proved by
blows, by fire, and by insults, more intolerable to
a haughty spirit than both 1.

THE amazing steadiness, with which the Ameri-
cans endure the most exquisite torments, has in-
duced some authors to suppose that, frorh the pecu-
liar feebleness of their frame, their sensibility is not
so acute as that of other people; as women, and
persons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be less
asseted with pain than robust men, whose nerves
are more firmly braced. But the constitution of the
Americans is not so different, in its texture, from
that of the reft of the human species, as to account
for this diversity in their behaviour. It flows from
a principle of honour, instilled early and cultivated
with such care, as to inspire man in his rudest Rate
with an heroic magnanimity, to which philosophy
hath endeavoured, in vain, to form him,when more
highly improved and polished. This invincible
constancy he has been taught to confider as the
chief diftindion of man, and the highest attainment
of a warrior. The ideas which influence his con-
duct, and the passions which take possession of his
heart, are few. They operate of course with more
decisive effc:, than when the mind iscrowded with
a multiplicity of objects, or diftrated by the varie-
ty of its pursuits ; and when every motive that ope-
rates with force on the mind of a savage, prompts
them to susser with dignity, they will bear what
might seem to be impossible for human patience

to
t Ch,'rlcv. lft. N. Fr. iii. z19.

B O O K to sustain. Bit wherever the fortitude of the Ame-

ricans is not roused to exertion by their ideas of
honour, their feelings of pain are the fame with
those of the reft of mankind t. Nor is that pati-
ence under fufl'erings for which the Americans have
been fojuitly celebrated an universal attainment.
The constancy of many of the viAtims is overcome
by the agonies of torture. Their weakness and la-
mentations complete the triumph of their enemies,
and refle& disgrace upon their country $.

Wafted by THE perpetual hostilities carried on anmoig the
their perpe- American tribes are productive of very fatal effecls.
tual wari.

As their imperfed industry does not supply them
with any superfluous store ofprovifions, even iniea-
sons of tranquility, when the irruption of an ene-
my desolates their cultivated lands, or disturbs them
in their hunting excuriions, such a calamity reduces
a community, naturally unprovident and destitute
of resources, to extreme want. All the people of
the diftri& that is invaded, are frequently forced to
take refuge in woods or mountains, which can as-
ford them no subsistence, and where many of them
perish. Notwithstanding their excesSive caution in
conducting their military operations, and the soli-
citude of everyleader to preserve the lives of his fol-
lowers, as they seldom enjoy any interval of peacc,
the loss of men among the Americans is confidera-
blI in proportion to the degree of population. hus
famine and the iword combinc ill lhinning their
numbers. All their tribes are feeble, and many
which were once lowerful have graduall)y wafled
anvay and at last di appeared. Nolting now re-

mains

; See NOTE() I.XXII. ; Cl.. :!vr. tli-. N, FIr. iii. z4.S. 5S'
P .C .. i)'ll '-i>'. iii, ,';[

malds of several nations, which were once confi- B IV K
derable, but the name ;-. .-

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are ecrcUt
t ii;.s which endeavour to recruit their national theirnum-

, · bei's bv a-

i force wchn exhaiuited, by adopting prifoncrs taken doisng pri-
in var, and by this expedient prevent their total ex- foners.
j 'n, on. The pracaice, however, is not univcrfally

-recc'ied. Refcntment operates more powerfully a-
inong favagecs, tihan considerations of policy. Far
te 'rra.ter part of their captivcs was anciently fa--
c!il.ced to th.rir vengeance, and it is only fi'ce their
rnuilb:; ibe?.n to dccline fall, that they have a-
diop;:d nilcdr max;ims. But such as they do na-
tur::iizc, renounce for ever their native tribe, and
. i:ne ti:e manners as well as paflions of the peo-
p' wi -.honm they are idopted :, so entirely, that
i;,c' r,,lcn join them in their expeditions againif
ticl;:' own countrymen. Such a sudden transition,
;iri ) repugnant to one of .the mos powerfiul in-
' i;ils implanted by nature, would appear firange
; ii(ong !iny people; but, among the members of
! I communities, where national enmity is vio-
inct ;iand Jeep-rooted, it is more unaccountable. It
fcrins, howev\er, to rclillt naturally firom the princi-
p'i upon (:iilich war is carried on in America.
1i:: rit.rionHs aim at exterminatin ; their cnernmics,
n() <c il;:ii oif pri foners can ever take place. TFrom
t1' Il(;t: OiC one is made a prisoner, his country
:d his si ii..o; conltlder him i.
s dead . T: hs in-

W'Jl,'1 i,1d l'il1c bldit race by furleri n:i hilileff to be

hi;i''i( ,, r ; i

be taken by an enen' ; Uand were he
t" tIll iluul;li, ;after firuc a slain u,1,pn his honour,

his

I~"::'.' i 11I, X V',

i;i ' .'.,z :n2i., ,
?.. (iNi -'! , &c.

1 i

* )l I 111 ?.. i

* : l l)lt . . -.r-.'S
3.. ' ,O; F'L I,. IXlll.

B O O . his neareit relations would not receive or even ac-
« V., Eknowledge that they knew him t. Some tribes

were frill more rigid, and if a prisoner returned, the
infamy which he had brought on his country was
expiated, by putting him instantly to death $. As
the unfortunate captive is thus an outcast from his
own country, and the ties which bound him toit
are irreparably broken, he feels less relutance in
forming a new connetion with people, who, as an
evidence of their friendly sentiments, not only de-
liver him from a cruel death, but offer to admit him
to all the rights of a fellow-citizen. The perfec
similarity of manners among savage nations facili-
tates and completes the union, and induces a cap-
tive to transfer not only his allegiance, but his as-
fe&ion, to the community into the bosom of which
he is received.

Their infe- BUT though war be the chief occupation of men
rioSrty in in their rude-ftate, and to excel in it, their highest
lihednati- diftindion and pride, their inferiority is always ma-
ons. nifeft when they engage in competition withpolifh-

ed nations. Destitute of that foresight which dif-
cerns and provides for remote events, firangers to
the union and mutual confidence requisite in form-
ing any extensive plan of operations, and incapable
of the subordination no less requisite in carrying
into execution such plans, savage nations may a-
flonilh adifciplinedencmy by their valour, but fel-
dom prove formidable to him by their condut, and
whenever the contcl[- is of long continuance, mull
yield to superior art §. The empires of Peru and
Mexico, though their progrcfs in civilization, when
measured by the E uropean or Asiatic Itandards,

was

t Lahont. ii. SL, 5 Si . 1 Itern er:, dec, 3 lib. iv

. 16. i, . 1'7'
$ See NOTE LXXIV

was inconsiderable, acquired such an ascendency B o K
over the rude tribes around them, that they subjec- IV
ted moss of them with great facility to their power.
When the people of Europe over-ran the various
provinces of America, this superiority was still
more conspicuous. Neither the courage nor
number of the natives could repel a handful of in-
vaders. The alienation and enmity, prevalent a-
mong barbarians, prevented them from uniting in
any common scheme of defence, and while each
tribe fought separately, all were subdued.

VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted with Their arts.
the use of metals, hardly merit any attention on
their own account, but are worthy of some notice,
as far as they serve to display the genius and man-
nersofa people. The firfl difirefs a savage must Drerfa a

orlnalents.

feel, will arise from the manner in which his body
is asseted, by the heat, or cold, or moisture, of the
climate under which he lives; and his first care
will be, to provide some covering for his own de-
fence. In the warmer and more mild climates of
America, none of the rude tribes were clothed.
To mofft of them Nature L sd not even fuggeffed
any idea of improprie:y in being altogether unco-
vered t . As under a mild climate there was little
need of any defence irom the injuries of the air,
and their extreme indolence shunned every species
of labour to which it was not urged by absolute
necessity, all the inhabitants of the isles, and a
considerable part of the people on the continent,
remained in this state of naked simplicity. Others
were satisfied with some flight covering, such as de-
cency required. But though naked, they were not
unadorned. They drefced their hair in many
different forms. They fastcred bits of gold, or
VOL. I. A a a fells,

t Lery Navigat. ap. De ry, iii. p. r6... Life of Columbus, c.
14. Vlilelas Hilt. of Californ. p. 7o.

B o o K shells, or shining fRones, in their ears, their notes,

and cheeks *

. They stained their skins with a

great variety of figures; and they spent much
time, and submitted to great pain, in ornamenting
their persons in this fantastic manner. Vanity,
however, which finds endless occupation for its in-
genuity and invention, in nations where dress has
become a complex and intricate art, is circumfcrib.
ed within so narrow bounds, and confined to so
few articles among naked savages, that they are not
satisfied with those simple decorations, and havea
wonderful propensity to alter the natural form of
their bodies. This practice was universal among
the rudest of the American tribes. Their opera-
tions forthat purpose begin as soon as an infant is
born. By compressing the bones of the ikull, while
still loft and flexible, some flatten the crown of
their heads ; some squeeze them into the fhapeofa
cone; others mould them as much as poflible into
a square figure t ; and they often endanger the
lives of their posterity by their violent and absurd
efforts to derange the plan of Nature, or to improve
upon her designs. But in all their attempts either
to adorn or to new-model their persons, it seems to
have been less the objct of the Americans to please,
or to appearbeautiful, than togive an air of dignity
and terror to their aspect. Their attention to dress
had more reference to war than to gallantry. The
diffrcncc in rank and cftimation between the
two foxes was so great, as extinguifled, in some
meaflurc, their folicitudc to appear mutually amia-
ble. The man deemed it beneath him to adorn
his pcrfol, for the flke of one on whom he was
.Iccuiftomed to look down as a slave. It was
when the warrior had in view to enter the council
of his nation, or take the field against its enemics,

that

' Lcry ap. lc livy, iii. 165. Lettr. Edifiantes, 20. 123.
-1 )JOiedlio Jiil;l . iii, C. 5. t!llo, i. 3?9. V .';lG" (C'IA '
ii. 77. Cl.rlevoix, iii. 32 . GuC millA , i. 197. &c- Ai lgli
Rela.. dIcltlliv.dcs AiAilz. ii, 83. Lawvfon'i Voy. to Ctartil
i'. 33.

that he affuned his choicest ornaments, and deck- B 00 K
ed his person with the nicest care * . The deco- i__
rations of the women were few and simple ; what-
ever was precious or splendid was reserved for the
men. In several tribes the women were obliged to
spend a considerable part of their time every day in
adorning and painting their husbands, and could be-
flow little attention upon ornamenting themselves.
Among a race of men so haughty as to dcli)ife, or
tb cold as to negleEt them, the women naturally
became careless and slovenly, and the love of fine-
ry and mhow, which has been deemed their favou-
rite passion, was confined chiefly to the other sex t.
To deck his person was the diftindion of a warrior,
as well as one of his more serious occupations. In
one part of their dress, which, at first fight, appears
themofl: singular and capricious, the Americans
have discovered considerable sagacity in providing
against the chief inconveniencies of their climate,
which is often sultry and moist to excess. All
the different tribes, which remain unclothed, are
accustomed to anoint and rub their bodies with the
grease of animals, with viscous gums, and with
oils of different kinds. By this they check that
profuse pcrfpiration, which, in the torrid zone,
waftes the vigour of the frame, and abridges the
period of human life. By this too, they provide a
defence against the extreme moiffure during the
rainy season : . They likewise, at certain fcafons,
temper paint of different colours with those unc-
tuous substances, and bedaub themselves plentifully
with thatcompofition. Sheathed with this impe-
netrable varnifli, their skins are not only protected
from the penetrating heat of the fun, but, as all

A a a 2 the

Wafel's Voyage, p. I4z. Lery ap dc Bry, iii. 167. Charlyv.

Hifl. N. Frai. iii. 216. 222. t Charlev. Hist. de la Nouv.
France, iii. ,78. 327. Lafitat, ii. 53. K.alm' Voyage, iii. 273.
cly i). De Bry, iii. 69, 170. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. RibiiL
'hsi. delos triumph, &c. 472. s Sec NO'E LXXV.

|I Suc NOTE LXXVI.

B 0 0 K the innumerable tribes of insets have an antipathy

IV.
e__v to the finell or taste of that mixture, they are deli-

vered from their teazing persecution, which, amidst
forests and marshes, especially in the warmer regi.
ons, must have been altogether intolerable in their
state of nakedness t .
Habitationa. THE next obje& to dress that will engage the

attention of a savage, is to prepare some habita.
tion that may afford him shelter by day, and a
retreat at night. Whatever is connected with his
ideas of personal dignity, whatever bears any refe.
rence to his military character, the savage warrior
deems an obje& of importance. Whatever relates
only to peaceable and inadive life, he views with
perfect indifference. Hence, though finically at-
tentive to dress, he is little solicitous about the ele-
gance or disposition of his habitation. Savagena-
tions, far from that tfate of i;mprovement, in which
the mode of living is confidered as a mark of dif-
tinfion, and unacquainted with those wants,
which require a variety of accommodation, regu-
late the conftruqion of their houses accordingto
their limited ideas of necessity. Some of the Ame-
rican tribes were so extremely rude, and had ad-
vanced so little beyond the primeval fimplicityof
nature, that they had no houses at all. During the
day, they take shelter from the scorching rays of
the fun under thick trees; at night they forma
shed with their branches and leaves . In the
rainy season they retire into covers, formed by the
hand of nature, or hollowed out by their own
industry § . Others, who have no fixed abode,
and roam through the for-cets in quest of game, so-
journ in tcmporary huts, which they ereCt with lit-

tle

t L.ablit, ii. 71. (umilla, i. o. 20zo2. Bancroft Nat. Hilt. f
Guo:ini. 81, z8o I| See NOTE LXXVII § Lettres Edif. v. 273

Vci:.. '!,I t. of alifor i. 76. Lozano Defcrip. l (l Gran Cl co

p. < I,.,tlris Idif, ii. 176. Ounlilla,i. 383, IluicroftN.it, lill
o, Gutli;ila, 277.

tie labour, and abandon without any concern. B 0° K
The inhabitants of those vast plains, which are de- _

1

luged by the overflowing of the rivers during the
I heavy rains that fall periodically between the tro-
pics, raise houses upon piles fattened in the ground,
orplace them among the boughs of trees, and are
thus safe amidst that wide extended inundation
which surrounds them * . Such were the first es-
fays of the rudest Americans towards providing
themselves with habitations. But even among
tribes which were more improved, and whose refi-
dence was become altogether fixed, the ltruaure of
theirhoufes was extremely mean and simple. They
were wretched huts, sometimes of an oblong and
sometimes of a circular form, intended merely for
shelter, with no view to elegance, and little atten-
tion to conveniency. The doors were so low, that
it was necessary to bend or to creep on the hands
and feet in order to enter them. They were with-
out windows, and had a large hole in the middle
of the roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow
travellers in other minute circumstances of their
description, is not only beneath the dignity of his-
tory, but would be foreign to the obje& of my
researches. One circumstance merits attention, as
it is singular, and illustrates the characer of the
people. Some of their houses were so large as to
contain accommodation for fourscore or a hundred
persons. These were built for the reception of dif-
ferent families, which dwelt together under the
farne roof t, and often around a common fire,
without separate apartments, or any kind of fcrcen
°rpartition between the spaces which they refpec-
tively occupied. As Toon as men have acquired
diftinl ideas of property; or when they are so
"uch attached to their females, as to watch'
them with care and jealousy ; families of course

divide

Gumrillia, . 1J Herrera, dec. i. li. ix. c. 6. Ovied Som-
p ' 53, C. 1 So NOTl LXXVIII.

B O o K them in the fun, so as they could endure the fire.

1V . In North America, they hollowed a piece of hard

Drefling wood into the form of a kettle, and filling it with
teir food. water, brought it to boil by throwing red-hot

itones into it ;

. These veflels they used in prepar.

ing part of their provisions; and this may be con.
fidered as a ftep towards refinement and luxury, for
men in their rudest state were not acquainted with
any method of drefling their viEtuals, but by roast.
ing them on the fire; and among several tribes in
America, this is the only species of cookery yet

Conftruc- known t. But the malter piece of art, among the
tion of their savages of America, is the confirudion of their
canoes. canoes. An Efkimaux, shut up in his boatof

whale-bone, covered with the skins of feals, can
brave that stormy ocean, on which the barrenness
of his country compels him to depend for the chief
part of his fubfiifence : . The people of Canada
venture upon their rivers and lakes, in boats made
of the bark of trees, and so light that two men can
carry them, wherever ihallows or cataracs obf-
trua the navigation J! . In these frail vessels they
undertake and accompliih long voyages §. The
inhabitants of the ifies and of the southern conti-
nent form their canoes by hollowing the trunk of
a large tree, with infinite labour, and though in ap-
pearance extremely aukward and unwieldy, they
paddle and fleer them with such dexterity, that
Europeans, well acquainted with all the improve-
ments in the science of navigation, have been ato-
nifhed at the rapidity of their motion, and the quick
nces of their evolutions. Their PIROGUES, or war-
boats, are so large as to carry forty or fifty melt;
their canoes employed in filhing and in short voyages

arc

* Charley. Hitt. of N. Fr iii. lg. See NOTE LXXXIl
Ellia Voy. 133. See NOTIE LXXXII. § Lafi
MOuri, &C. ii. 113.

are less capacious *. The form as well as mate- B O O K
rials of all these various species ofveflcls is well a- l
dapted to the service for which they are destined;
and the more minutely they are examined, the me-
chanifm of their ftruture, as well as neatness of
their fabric, will appear the more admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards industry among Liflerficf6
the Americans, one firiking quality in their cha- wiih which,
rater is conspicuous. They apply to work with- theyaiply
out ardour, carry it on with little acivity, and,
like children, are easily diverted from it. Even in
operations which seem the most interesting, and
where the mofi powerful motives urge them to vi-
gorous exertions, they labour with a languid listless-
ness. Their work advances under their hand with
such slowness, that an eye-witness compares it to
the imperceptible progress of vegetation t. They
will spend so many years in forming a canoe, that
it often begins to rot with age before they finish it.
They will susser one part of a roof to decay and
perish, before they complete the other t. The
{lightest manual operation consumes a vass length
oftime, and what in polishcd nations would hardly
be an cffort of industry, is among savages an ardu-
ous undertaking. This slowness of the Americans
in executing works of every kind may be imputed
to various causes, Among havages, who do not de-
pend for subsistence upon the efforts of regular in-
duflry, time is of Co little importance, that they set
n1o value upon it; and provided they can finish a
design, they never regard how long they are employ-
ed about it.' The tools which they employ are IQ
aukward and dcfcetive, that every work in which
they engage mull neccflinrily be tedious. The hand
VOL. I. B b b of

*'l"bat VrwYgs, ii 9 , &c. 131 t Gumilla, ii. 297
\lrd "' RIio.Juaes C.l.aib us;, 24,.

B o0 K of the most induifrious and skilful artiftwereit

. furnished with no better instrument than a flone

hatchet, a shell, or the bone of rome animal, could
hardly perfec the most simple work. It is by length
of labour, that he must endeavour to supply his de-
sea of power. But, above all, the cold phlegmatic
temper peculiar to the Americans renders their ope-
rations languid. It is almost i-mpoflible to rouze
them from that habitual indolence in which they
are funk; and unless when engaged in war or hunt-
ing, they seem incapable of exerting any vigorous
effort. Their ardour of application is not so great
as to call forth that inventive spirit which fuggefis
expedients for facilitating and abridging labour.
They will return to a task day after day, but all
their methods of executing it are tedious and ope-
rose +. Even since the Europeans have communi-
cated to them the knowledge of their instruments,
and taught them to imitate their arts, the peculiar
genius of the Americans is conspicuous in all their
attempts. They may be patient and affiduousin
labour, they can copy with a servile and minuteac-
curacv, but discover little invention, and no talents
for dispatch. In spite of ijth°'yion and example,
the spirit of the race predominates ; their motions
rre naturally tardy, and it is vain to urge them to
quicken their paci. Among the Spaniards in Ame-
rica, THE WOVRK o .; AN INDIAN is a phrase by
which they describe any thing, in the exccutionof
which an iinmcnfe time has been employed, and
much labour waStcd §.

VII, No circumstance refpcling rude nations has
been the object of greattr culriolity than their religi-
ous tenets and rites ; and nonle, perhaps, has been so
imnprfectly u:Cndiitlood, or rcplrefictcd with folittle

fidelity,

t S.r Ns T LXAX1::IJI. § Voige JIc JUlot. i. 315. e"'
»'.ii;', *:i, 15.3 , ,

fidelity. Priests and mifionaries are the persons 1 o 0 K
who have,had the best opportunities of carrying on Ivy
thisinquiryi among the most uncivilized of the Pcuniardif.
American tribes. Their minds, engrossed by the ficut;es il
doctrines of their own religion, and habituated to thisinquiy.
its institutions, are apt to discover Something that

j resembles those objec-s of their veneration, in the o-
! pinions and rites ofevery people. Whatever they

c contemplate, they view through one medium, and

i draw and accommodate it to their own system.
: They study to reconcile the infitutions, which fall

under their observation, to their own creed, not to
explain them according to the rude notions of the
| people themselves. They ascribe to them ideas

which they are incapable of forming, and fippofe

! them to be acquainted with principles and sacs,
i which it is impoflible that they flould know. Hence,

even among themoft barbarous nations in America,
some missionaries have been induced to believe,
that they had discovered traces, no less diftinE than
amazing, of their acquaintance with the fublimn

t mysteries and peculiar institutions of Chriflianity,
| From their own interpretation of certain exprefions

and ceremonies, they concluded that thcfe people
had rome knowledge of the doAriine of the Trinity,
ofthe incarnation of the Son of God, of his expia-,
tory sacrifice, of the virtue of the cross, and of the
efficacy of the sacraments §. In such unintelligent
and credulous guides As these, we can place little
} confidencc.

Bur, even when we make our choice of conduce

j tors with thegrcatcff care, we mull not follow them
lWith implicit faith, An inquiry into the religious
nltions of rude nations is involved in peculiar in-

13 b b 2 tricacics,

I Vcenels,;L 8x. 9?2 'Tolrclqulemadaii 44 q. .Grcia O iigl. 1z,.
i'ctt ducl. 4 lib c 7 de;c.
l, lib. iv . c 7,

B o0 K tricacies, and we must often pause in order to fepa-

rate the fads which our informers relate, from the
reasonings with which they are accompanied, or
the theories which they build upon them. Several
pious writers, more attentive to the importance of
the subject than to the condition of the people
whose sentiments they were endeavouring to disco-
ver, have bestowed much unprofitable labour in re-
searches of this nature §.

Confined to THERE are two fundamental doctrines, upon
two articlek.

which the whole system of religion, as far as it can
be discovered by the light of nature, is eitabliihed.
The one refpets the being of a God, the other the
immortality of the foul. To discover the ideas of
the uncultivated nations under our review with re-
gard to these important points, is not only an object
of curiosity, but may afford inftrution. To these
two articles I shall confine my researches, leaving
subordinate opinions, and the detail of local super-

TO being" ftitions, to more minute inquirers. Whoever has
of God.

had any opportunity of examining into the religious
opinions of persons in the inferior ranks of life, c-
ven in the noft enlightened and civilized nations,
will find that their fyflem of belief is derived front
inllruction, not discovered by inquiry. That nu-
merous part of the human species whose lot is labour,
whore principal and alnofl sole occupation is to fe-
cure fulfiftcnce, views the arrangement and opera-
tions of nature with little reflection, and has neither
lcif re nor capacity for entering into that path of
refined and intricate fpectlation which conduits to
the knowledge of the principles of natural religion.
In the early and mofi rude periods of savage life,
fiich dis-quisitions are altogether unknown. Whec
the i itcllc'hal talpowers are ju ft beginning to n folld,
;andl their sirs- fcchle exertionl: are ditrcAcd towards a
few lobjects of plrimlary ncccffity and ulfc; when the

facultics
§ S.e NOT( I.iXXXIV.

faculties of the mind are so limited, as not to have. Bn o K
formed abftraa or general ideas ; when language is v
Io barren, as to be destitute of names to distinguish
any thing that is not perceived by some of the
enses ; it is prepollerous to expe& that man should
be capable of tracing with accuracy the relation be-
twcee cause and effet ; or to suppose that he should
rife fron the contemplation of the one to the know-
lelrge of the other, and form juif conceptions of a
Deity, as the Creator and Governor of the universe.
The idea of creation is so familiar, wherever the
n;ind is enlarged by science, and illuminated with
rcvelation, that we feMom refleEt how profound
Iand( abitrufe this idea is, or confider what progress
man inutl have made in obfcrvation and refearchl;
before he could arrive atany knowledge of this ele-
mentary principle in religion. Accordingly, feve-
ral' tribes have been discovered in America, which
have no idea whatever of a Supreme Being, and no
rites ofreligious werfhip. Inattentiveto that mag-
nificent fpedacle of beauty and order presented to
their view, unaccustomed to reflecD either upon
what they tihemfelves are, or to inquire who is the
author of their existence, men, in their savage sLate,
pals their d;,ys, like the animals aroynd them, with-
O!t knowledge or veneration of any superior power,
lhcy have not in their languages an) name forl'thi
l)eity, nor have the most accurate observers been a-
bt!e t discover any pracice or inflitution whicli
ircmeld to imply that they recognized his authority,
Or werc solicitous to obtain his favour §. It is on-
Iy among men in the most uncultivated slate of na-

ture,

. it', Q, LvLclya De IBry, iii. 221. NicihofPf. C(lurc!l. Chull.

'1i . 'I.etr. Edif. . .

1.

17 V rcne'gs, i. 87. Iazizno

^l1t.1t. Iel GC 'lll ChIaIco, q. I:clUnl,. Milli l>. dt ('ili(il it. q9.
,,n"ih, ii. 156 Rnclefrilt dfi( slf} Antillcs, 46S. M46gr.tve
}1 1tl

, Ape'.nd *Ie C hilkn(lilb '., 2S6O. 11lloa Not;c. Alncric. 3^ q a, c.

e, " ."18, 2qc). Ilarcourtr Vov. to (ui.lni PI rch. P'ilti. iv p.

"l, 'i 0C 1 0ctolnBc.;iil, by ;I I'ortt!iuiUL.C . liJd l. I
S9. JI ,,ic.;'

"!' t). S'e NO'I' LXXXV.

B o o K ture, and while their intelleAual faculties are so

IV.
· _^ - feeble and limited as hardly to elevate them above

the irrational creation, that we discover this
total insensibility to the impressions ofany invisible
power. But the human mind, formed for religion,
soon opens to the reception of ideas, which are
destined, when correded and refined, to be thegreat
source of consolation amidst the calamities of life.
Among some of the American tribes, still in the in-
fancy of improvement, we discern apprehensions of
,some invisible and powerful beings. These appre.
henfions are originally indiftin6t and perplexed,
.and feerm to be suggested rather:by the dread of im.
pending evils, than to flow from gratitude for blef-
sings received.. While nature holds on her course
ivith uniform and undisturbed regularity, men en,
joy the benefits resulting from it, without inquir-
ing concerning its :cufe. Butevery deviation from
this regular course rouzes and astonishes them.
When they behold events to which -they.are not ac-
customed, they search for the reasons of them with
eager curiosity. Their underfianding is unableto
penetrate into these ; but imagination, a more for-
ward, and ardent faculty of the mind, decides with,
out hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary oc-
currences in nature to the influenceof invisible be-
ings, and supposes that the thunder, the hurricane,
and the earthquake, are effects of their interpofifti
on. Some fuch.confufed notion of spiritual or in-
visible power, superintending over those natural
calamities which frequently desolate the earth, and
terrify its inhabitants, may be traced among many
rude nations §. But betides this, the diltatcrs and
dangers of savage life are so many, and men often
find themselves in lituations so formidable, that the
mind, sensible of its own weakness, has no rcfource
but in the guidance and protee'ion of wifdo`l

See NOTE LUXXSVI.

and power superior to what is human. DejeEted B O O K

I with calamities which oppress him, and exposed to 1V..
! dangers which he cannot repel, the savage no longer
I relies upon himself; he feels his own impotence,
i ai)d fees no profpeL of being extricated, but by the
1 interposition of some invisible arm, Hence, in all
i

unenlightened nations, the sirs rites orpractices,
i which bear any resemblance to ads of religion, have
I it for their object to avert evils which men susser or
I4 dread. The MANITOUS or OKKIS of the North
i; Americans were amulets or charms, which they i-
! magined to be of such virtue, as to preserve the per-
! sons who reposed confidence in them from every dif-
I afrous event, or they were confidered as tutelary

spirits, whose aid they Inight implore in circumftan-
ces of diflrefs t. The CEMIS of the islanders were
reputed by them the authors of every calamity that
afflicts the human race ; they were represented un-
der the moRs frightful forms, and religious homage
was paid to them with no other view than to ap-
pease those furious deities 1[. Even among those
tribes whose religious system was more enlarged,

'

and who had formed sone conception of benevolent
beings, delighted with conferring benefits, aswell as
ofmalicious powers prone to infl iE evil; superstition
i ill appears as the offspringof fear, and all its efforts
were employed to avert calamities. They were per-
fuaded that their good deities, prompted by the be-
neficencc of their nature, would bcflow every blef-
fting in their power, without folicitationr or acknow-
le(ldgment; and their only anxiety was to soothe
i and d'prccatc the wrath of the powers whom they
regardcd as :the enemies of mankind '.

1 t :h'llcv. N. Fr. iii. 4.3, &c. Crctxii Hii-' Ctan;id. p. 82, sc.
, ,Tlilih iji . 1. p. 111. P.
t.rrtyr, d(ci d p. 102, c.

kó. n"tr'.i

3(>5 o i, r IP. 14. St;itl of Virginia; by;i l;tive,
",1,, ,.' ^+;;,12 Dou n i. , 3. iacrnif;t N.it. /til. ol Gaiia.xi

B O , K SUCH were the imperfect conceptions of the great.

Iv.

er part of the Americans with refpec to the inter.
positions of invisible agents, and such, alnoft uni-
verfally, was the mean and illiberal object of their
fuperilitions. Were we to trace back the ideas of
other nations to that rude itate in which history firit
presents them to our view, we fiould discover a
furprifin, resemblance in their tenets and practices;
and should be convinced, that, in similar circum-
stances, the faculties of the human mind hold nearly
the fame course in their progress, and arrive at al-
most the fame conclusions. The imprefions offear
are conspicuous in all the systems of fuperflition
formed in this situation. And the moftexaltedno-
tions of men rife no higher than to a perplexed ap-
prehension of certain beings, whose powerthough
fupcrnatural, is limited as well as partial.

,emark:a- BUT, among other tribes, which have beenlonger

ble dierfity united, or have made greater progress in improve-
in their re- ment, we discern some feeble pointing towards more
tions. just and adequate conceptions of the power that

presides in nature. They seem to perceive that there
must be some universal cause to whom all things arc
indebted for their being. If we may judge by sonic
of their expreflions, they appear to acknowledge a
divine power as the maker of the world, and the dif-
poser of all events, They denominate him the
GREAT SPIRIT t. But these ideas are faint and
confused, and wl:oal they attempt to cxplail
them, it is manifest, that among them the word
SPIRIT has a meaning very differcnt from that
in which iwe employ it, and that they have 10
conception of any deity but what is corporeal.
They believe their gods to be of the hI,
man form, though of a nature more excellent
than man, anld retail such wild ilicolcllt
t CGiilb;, N. Fr. ifi. 343. Sagard, Voy. J1h ly'; des "lol)o ' l1

fables concerning their functions and operations, as B o o K
are altogether unworthy of a place in history, IV
Even among these tribes, there is no established
form of public worship; there are no temples
erected inhonour of their deities ; and no ministers
peculiarly consecrated to their service. They have
the knowledge, however, of several fupertitious ce-
remonies and pradtices handed down to them by tra-
dition, and to these they have recourse with a child-
ih credulity, when rouzed by any emergence from
their usual insensibility, and excited to acknowledge
the power, and to implore the protection of fuperi-
or beings t.

THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of Bo-
gota had advanced beyond the other uncultivated Syfhm of

the Nat-

nations of America in their ideas of religion, as chez.
well as in their political inflitutions ; and it is no
less difficult to explain the cause of this diftinótion
thanof that which we have already confidered. The
Sun was the chiefobject of religious worship a-
mong the Natchez. In thir temples, which were
conftrultcd with some magnificence, and decorated
with various ornaments, according to their mode of
architeture, they preserved a perpetual fire, as the
purest emblem of their divinity. Mlinifters were ap-
pointed to watch and feed this sacred flame. The
sirs funtion of the great chief of the nation, every
morning, was an al of obeyfance to the fun ; and
fcfiivals returned at stated fcalons which were ce-
lebrated by the whole community with folcmn but
ulnbloody rites: :. This is the most refined species

VOL. I. C c c of

j ChlNil, N. Fr. i45 de, . 17.

1 Colden Dumont, i.
'I, &c, Charley. N. Fr. 1iii.47, &-c. 429 Lafitau, i. 67.

I

B 0 0 K of superstition known in America, and, perhaps,

one of the most natural as well as most seducing
The fun is the apparent source of the joy, fertility,
and life, diffused through nature, and whilethe
human mind, in its early essays towards inquiry,
contemplates and admires his universal and ani-
mating energy, its admiration is apt to stop fhortat
what is visible, without reaching to the unseen
cause; and pays that adoration to the most glori-
ous and beneficial work of God, which is due only
to him who formed it. As fire is the pureftand
most acive of the elements, and in some of its qua-
lities and Cflsct's resembles the fun, it was, not im-
properly, chosen to be the emblem of his powerful
operation. The ancient Perfiahs, a people farfu-
perior, in every respect, to that rude tribe whose
rites I am dclcribing, founded their religious fyltem
on timilar principles, and eftabliflled a form of pub-
lic worship, less gross and exceptionable than that
of any people destitute of guidance from revelation,
This surprising co-incidence in sentiment between
two nations, in such different flates of improve-
ment, is one of the many singular and unaccount-
able circuinmfances which occur in the hiftoryof
human affairs.

AMONG the p)Ioillc of Bogota, the fun and moon

we're, likewif, thc chief oljects of veneration.
Their fyftim ol' religio n was more regular and com-
plete, though lis pure, than tlat of the Natchezc
'l'hey had timpplus, altars, )pricfs, sacrifices, anl1
that long train of cerelmonies, which fippefiitioli
introduces wherevc\er file has fully eflablilhed herdo-
niinioi(I over thi minids of men. But the ritesof
ti ir worship vwerei crlicl :ilid bloody. They oftcr-
cd hIllla vic tiiilis to lihir decities, and many of their
iprltiicic s Ilc.lrIly rtlL ulilc tihe barbarous inflitutioils
of till- l Icic,.:S, the 'eniius of which we fllall lave

illl

.n opportunity of confidering more attentively in B K
its proper place. t .I-,

WITH refpec to the other great doctrine of re- Their ideas
ligion, conccrning the immortality of the foul, the corcerning
f ntiments of the Americans were more united: the tality ofthe
human mind, even when least improved and invi- foul,
gorated by culture, shrinks from, the thoughts of di f-
solution, and looks forward with hope and expec-
tation to a frate of future existence. This senti-
mcnct, resulting from a secret consciousness of its
own dignity, from an inflin&tive longing after im-
mortality, is universal, and may be deemed natural.
Upon this, are founded the most exalted hopes of
man in his highest frate of improvement; nor has
I nature withheld from him this soothing consolation,
inthe most early and rude period ofhis progress. rWe
can trace this opinion from one extremity of Ame-
rica to the other. In some regions more faint and
0 obscure, in others more perfecly developed, but no
where unknown. The most uncivilized of its fa-
age tribes do not apprehend death as the extinction
of being. All hope for a future and more happy
i ate, where they shall be for ever exempt from the
calamities which embitter human life in its present
conditio. This they figure as a delightful coun-
try, blfced with perpetual spring, whose forests
, )bound with game, whose rivers fiarm with fish,
' where faminc is never felt, and uninterrupted plein-
tyfhall be enjoyed without labour or toil. But
; as men, in forming their firfit imperfet ideas con-
Cerniilg the invisible world, suppose that there they
1 i :ll continue to feel the fame desires, and to be
jCen"ag:d in the fiime occupations ; they naturally
nc ricli emlinence and (liftifn(lion, in that flatc, to

C c c 2 the
I' 1 iIr.iit: l Coni. del. N. Rlyno, p. 17, &c. liercrn,, dec. 6,

3 0 0 K the fame qualities and talents which are here the

.v, objeCt of their esteem. The Americans, according.

ly, allotted the highest place, in their country of
spirits, to the skilful hunter, to the adventurous and
successful warrior, to such as had surprised and slain
the greatest number of enemies, who had tortured
many of their captives, and devoured their flesh t
induce hem These notions were so prevalent, that they gave

c.ur'y rife to an universal cufiom, which is, at once, the

a:-ms, &:c.
w :h me ifrongeft evidence that the Americans believe in a

deac. future fRate, and the best illustration of whatthey

expect there. As they imagine, that the dead be-
gin their career anew in the world whither they are
gone, that they may not enter upon it defenceless
and unprovided, they bury with them theirbow,
their arrows, and other weapons used in hunting or
war ; they depofite in their tombs the skins or
frufrs of which they make garments, Indian corn,
manioc, venison, doinefic utensils, and whatever
is reckoned among the neccffaries in their simple
mode of life I. In some provinces, upon the de-
cease of a caziquc or chief, a certain number of his
wives, of his favourites, and of his slaves, were put
to death, aid interr-:d together with him, that he
might appear w;th the fame dignity in his future
station, and bh wvaited upon by the fame atten-
dants . Thi. pcrfuiafion is so deep-rooted, that
m:nr.- of tl,: r rict;lincrl- o ri- tlhcimfll ves as voluntary
vitimi, land court the privilege of accompanying j

their j

-I l.er np Dr B , 2ii. Cl: l v N. I:Fr. iii. 3 , c. )cl

I, thtc.:'; , ii. z; q, &c. i;ii. J. C,;: nic,l dr Cieca dd Lcon, c. -'
S.';,::r l, 2oS. Crc.. . l-:. Ca..Il,!. 1 *. R hi. Rj ;l.' t, Hilf.di A lt:Jlc,
LCle ~i i-' , ei

their departed master, as an high diftinEion. It has B o o K

IV.

been found difficult, on some occasions, to set V
bounds to this enthusiasm of affectionate duty, and
to reduce the train of a favourite leader to such a
number as the tribe could afford to spare .

AMONG the Americans, as well as other uncivil- Superfttion
ized nations, many of the rights and observances with edv-
which bear some resemblance to ads of religion, tion.
have no conne&ion with devotion, but proceed from
a fond desire of prying into futurity. The human
mind is most apt to feel, and to discover this vain
curiosity, when its own powers are most feeble and
uninformed. Astonished with occurrences, of
which it is unable to comprehend the cause, it na-
turally fancies that there is something mysterious
and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed at events,
of which it cannot discern the issue or the confe-
quences, it has recourse to other means of discover-
ing them, than the exercise of its own sagacity.
Wherever superstition is so established as to form a
regular system, this desire of penetrating into the
secrets of futurity is connected with it. Divination
becomes a religious ad. Prielts, as the ministers
of Heaven, pretend to deliver its oracles to men.
They are the only soothsayers, augurs, and magi-
cians, who possess the ficred and important art of
disclosing what is hid from other eyes.

BUr, among rude nations, who pav no venera-
ion to any fuperintcnding power, and who have no Tlis dc-
R:1iblifhlw rites or minifftrs of religion, their cu- Ibe"lngs t
riofty to discover what is future nind unknown is their pl)hyl
chcrifle by a diffcrent principle, anl derives ci

firen gth
Sree NOTE LXXXVB.

B o o K Pfrcngth from another alliance. As the difeafesof

i t nmen, in the savage f.:at-, are like those of the animal

creation, few but extremely violent, their impati-
ence under what they fuffcr, and solicitude for the
recovery of health, soon inspired them with extra-
ordinary reverence for such as pretended to under-
frand the nature of their maladies, or to preserve
them from their sudden and fatal effecs. These
ignorant pretenders, however, were such utter
fhrangers to the f-ruLCure of the human frame, as to
be equally unacquainted with the causes of its dif-
orders, and the manner in which they will termi-
nate. Enthufiafin, mingled frequently with some
portion of craft, supplied what they wanted in
fcicnce. They imputed the origin of difeafesto
supernatural influence, and prcfcribcd or performed
a variety of inmyrerious rites, which they gave out
to be of power fuficicnt to remove them. The
credulity and love of the marvellous, natural to un-
informed men, favoured the deception, and prepared
them to be the dupes of their imposture. Among
savages, their firfr physicians are a kind of conjurers
or wizards, who boast that they know what is past,
and can foretell what is to come. Incantations,
sorcery, and mummeries of diverse kinds, no less
strange than frivolous, are the means which they
cmploy to expl the imaginary causes of maligni-
ty * ; and, relying, upon the efficacy of thcrc, they
prcdiil with confidence what will be the fate of
their dclulded patients. Thus fupcr{ritionl il its
carliefl- form flowed from the flicitude of Iman robe
(dlivcered froml prlcnt distress, not froml hisdrcad of
evils awaiting him in a future life, and was origi-
naily ill:!rafccd on medicine, not on religion. One
of the lirlt, and lmofl intelligenlt hiufloians of lAnle-
rica was fliruc with this alliance cbetween t'he ;'

1'. Mckch [lcrnandoz, MnmorLtl

1r, (.'I;;!ni

Collr. ;
P.p. i .

of divination and that of physic, among the people B O O K

IV.

of Hispaniola t. But this Was not peculiar to
them. The ALEXIS, the PIAYAS, the AUTMOINS,
or whatever was the diftinguifling name of their
'iviners and charmers in other parts of America,
werc all the physicians of their refpeclive tribes, in
tlh fame manner as the BUHITOS of Hi-spaniola.
As their function led them to apply to the human
mind when enfeebled by sickness, and as they found
it, in that season of dejection, prone to be alarmed
with imaginary fears, or amused with vain hopes,
tiley easily induced it to rely with implicit confi-
delnce on the virtue of their spells, and the certainty
if their predicions t.

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of fu- Gradually
pcrnatural power and discernment in one instance, exte""s.
they have a propensity to admit it in others. The
A:ncricans did not long suppose the efficacy of con-
ijration to be confined to one fubjeit. They had
recourse to it in every situation of danger or distress.
When the events of war were peculiarly disastrous,
when they met with unforefcen disappointments in
hunting, when inundation or drought threatened
their crops with def-ruction, they called upon their
conjurers to begin their incantations, in order to
difcoevr the causes of those calamities, or to fore-
tell what would be their issue T. Their confidence
in this dclufive art gradually increased, and mani-
tftlcd itfclf in all the occurrences of life. When
involved in any difficulty, or about to enter upon

alny

Ovi

O. ,, lil. v. c. . ( I

Icrrcr, (ec. 1. lib. iii. c. 4. O0!!ilile,

( '* ,lbl. DL. uiom i9, :i. ci, . Chl.lev. N . F:'. iii. C(i. t6,
a I'N. l, .1"'on, N21. Rib., TCiui2l'i. p 7.
17. lrt, 356.

1 ' illclit:, ii. 35, &c. C ilev. N. 'r. iii. 3. Iunion , i.

I ,

* Fln lld . c. b:.

1

s.

.Lo.il, '. '. r-
*;:.''% *'"79.

B o o K any transaction of moment, every individual regu.

IV. larly consulted the forcerer, depended upon his in.

'Lr>r
' Rftrudtions to extricate him from the former, and to

diret his conduct in the latter. Even among the
rudest tribes in America, fuperflition appears in
this form, and divination is an art in high esteem,
Long before man had acquired such knowledge of}
deity as inspires reverence and leads to adoration, we
observe him stretching out a presumptuous hand to
draw aside that veil with which providence kindly
conceals its purposes from human knowledge; and
we find him labouring, with fruitless anxiety, to
penetrate into the mysteries of the divine admini.
fration. To discern, and to worship a fuperin-
tending power, is an evidence of the enlargement
and maturity of the human understanding ; a vain
desire of prying into futurity, is the error of its in-
fancy, and a proof of its weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded, likewise, the faith
of the Americans in dreams, their observation of
omens, their attention to the chirping of birds and
the cries of animals, all which they suppose to be
indications of future events, and if any one of there
prognostics is deemed unfavourable, they initantly
abandon the pursuit of those measures on which
they are most eagerly bent -.

Dctiched VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea of
cusloms. the uncultivated nations of America, we must not

pass unobfcrvcd some singular customs, which,
though univcrfal and charaterliftic, could not
be reduced, with propricty, to any of the

articles

'1 Clharlev. N. Fr. iii. z62. 35. Stndius ,

.t

a d ic By, iii. 12zo

Cricxii, Hlift. a. Canl . ' c4. hc , l-,i. of l'arag. Ch uicl. ('ol
37. e
)c li; otl lic, iii. 6.

'. articles into which I have divided my inquiry con- B O O K
- cerning their manners, I

- AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, the Love of

love of dancing is a favourite paflion. As a great
: part of their time languishes away in lifllefs indo-

l; ence, without any occupation to rouze or interest
:; them, they delight universally in a pastime which
i' calls forth the active powers of their nature into
i exercise. The Spaniards, when they first visited

America, were astonished at the fondness of the na-
; tives for dancing, and beheld with wonder a peo-
ple, cold and unanimated in most of their other
pursuits, kindle into life, and exert themselves
with ardour, as often as this favourite alnufement
recurred, Among them, indeed, dancing ought
not to be denominated an amusement. It is a fe-
rious and important occupation, which mingles in
every occurrence of publip or private life. If any
intercourse be necessary between two American
tribes, the ambassadors of the one approach in a
solemn dance, and present the calumet or emblem
ofpeace ; the sachems of the other receive it with
the fame ceremony * If war is denounced against
jn enemy, it is by a dance, exprcflive of the rc-
fjntment which they feel, and of the vengeance
which they meditate t . If the wrath of their gods
is to be appeased, or their bencficcnce to be cl.loe
brated; if they rejoice at the birth of a child,
or mourn the death of a friend :, they have
dances appropriated to each of there fituatiols,
I 1nd suited to the different fcntimcnts with which
they are then animated. If ;1 pcr-fon is indif-

}olftl.,

VOL, I. ) ( d

l)e
D a 1otherl lrtji ii. x7, &. Charlt e. N. I'r. iii. zl.
O^lrr i^. G'^. c 19ó."" 1.

G 0 0 K pored, a dance is prescribed as the most effec.

Jv. tual means of restoring him to health
. alid if lh

himself cannot endure the fatigue of such anexer-
cife, the physician or conjurer performs it inhis
name, as if the virtue of his activity could be
transferred to his patient *

ALL their dances are imitations of some afion;

aind though the nufic by which they are regulated,
is extremely imnple an;d tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, some of their dances appear won.
derfully e:preflive and animated. The war-dance
i;, perhaps, the most striking. It is the reprefenti.
tiol of a complete American campaign. The depar.
ttre of the warriors si om their village, their march
into the enlcmy's country, the caution with which
they encamp, the' address with which they flation
fomle of their party in ambufn, the manner of fur-
prifing the enemy, the noii: and ferocity of the
combat, the fcalpirn of those who are slain, the
seizing of prifoncrs, the triumphant return of the
conquerors, and the torture of the vitims, are luc-
ceflively exhilbitcd. The performers enter witl
such cllthuiiaftic ardour into their several part',
their gail-ic .c, tilir countenanlce, thcir voice e;ili
wvill d

;lll to wll aidalptd to thetir various fituationll

thiat Lu r)opreans c:'n hi ;iAdy

ll ciic ve it to be a m'inic

I-Ce;1, (-r i;c\v it vitlluilt llnetiolis of fear anld lho
rui- r:

P]LI'T hONloever cxipr flive f,()le of the AinriclC

(l'::l('cs I1;in V

l .', therl' is oic ci-Circtllftmnlllce ill thIll

c( ,;:tik;,)lt, :ind(l CO :ieLiCd withl the clilhra tcr of
thie I!c(. 'i: (n°I':, the (.ilncc: the alnulcnicill
of,1 (.tlhTr eitiu.i:, cA A (iCii : of the IIltillientS which

illlilllltt¢

· I';ló ,' It,(t. .. ? . !,;.il..!l,

37:. l)c l

*;(. '

1c 1. I ;}.c ,:',, ,. l, ,. Cl, lclo N. IL '' "

';
i,,ill~.lil, 1. 5: ,'

nimate their hearts, are often adapted to difplayor B 0 o K
C excite that sensibility which mutually attaches the
f xes. Among forne people, such is the ardour of
this paflion, that love is almost the sole object of
: felivity and joy ; and as rude nations are ifran-
(rers to delicacy, and unaccuflomed to disguise any
emotion of their minds, their dances are often ex-
tremely wanton and indecent. Such is theCALEN-
A, of which the natives of Africa are so palion-
ately fond ' ; and such the feats of the dancing
' irls, which the Asiatics contemplate with so much
avidity of desire. But, among the Americans, more
cold and indifferent to their females, from causes
which I have already explained, this pa.ilon min-
jgles but little with their festivals and paflimes.
i Their songs and dances are mostly solemn and mar-
tial, they are connected with ibme of the serious
and important affairs of life 1-, and having no
rlation to love or gallantry, are seldom common
to the two sexes, but executed by the men and wo-
men apart . If, on rome occasions, the women

Ir permitted tojoin in the feflival, the characclr of

the entertainment is fill the fame, and no move-
ment or gcfru-e is expressive of attachment, or cn-
couraiges familiarity .

Ax immloderate love of play, efpccially at games Palinn fr
of hllzard, which seems to be natural to all peo- sgmirg,
i'a uIaccufiilomeld to the occutations of regular in-
duitl'y, is likewifi univcrfll iamong the Amiicricans.

The

D d d 2
% ,A!i 'X[Y to Seneg 11, p. ii. 87 !.:lnc, Voovger,, iv. 4óq.

...., 1. , it ".' * ll o l. I . I 1. , I
'fr i p .

(3i ' ailltv. N. Fr. iii. . 14. I \W.is,' , Accunt

'l-l, i
' &c. h 'I.cly :I' l'c Pr, iii 177. I,."."", Hill.

H

.. ' r - ,

r c

Ic .ilc . liil vi c. c, 8 e . 4. li).

.4 Ste Nol, uLXXt VlI. r

X Vcr .

[ . r.:
E .l'gn.191.

B 0 0 K The fame causes, which so often prompt persons at

IV. their cafe in civilized life to have recourse to this

pastime, render it the delight of the savage. The
former are independent of labour, the latter do not
feel the necessity of it, and as both are unemployed,
they run with transport to whatever is of power to
stir and agitate their minds. Hence the Americans,
who at other times are so indifferent, so phlegmatic,
so silent, and so disinterested, as soon as theyen.
gage in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy,
and almost frantic with eagerness. Their furs,
their donmefic utensils, their clothes, their arms,
are flaked at the gaming-table, and when all is loft,
high as their fcnfe of independence is, in awild
enmotion of dcfpair or of hope, they will oftenril,
their personal liberty, upon a single cast. t . A-
nong fevcral tribes, such gaming parties frequently
recur, and become their most acceptable entertain-
mnent at every great feflival. Superstition, which
is apt to take hold of those passions which are moR
vigorous, frequently lends its aid to confirm and
ftrcngthcn this favourite inclination. Theircon-
jurers are accustomed to prescribe a solemn match
at play, as one of the most efficacious methodsof
appeasing theic gods, or of restoring the sick to
health .

FROM causes similar to those which render
and f"or them fond of play, the Americans arc etremcly

aiddicted to drunkenness. It fecms to have been
one of the firt[ exertions of human ingenuityto
di cover fume conpofition of an intoxicating
quality ; and there is Ihardly any nation to riudC,
or fti dcltitute of invention, as not to have filc

ceccde

-t Charlev. N. F1. iii, .6il, lt8. L:ifitAl, ii . . , &c.IibIl
Ti'timl. 13. BrikcAll, 335; § Cliailcv, N. Fr. ill. 6z

1i

ceeded in this fatal research. The most barbarous B 0 0 K
of the American tribes have been To unfortunate 1V
as to attain this art; and even those who are so
deficient in knowledge, as to be unacquainted with
the method of giving an inebriating strength to li-
quors by fermentation, can accomplish the fame
end by other means. The people of the islands, of
North America, and of California, used, for this
)ptlpote, the smoke of tobacco, drawn up with a
certain inftrumcnt into the noitrils, the fumes of
which ascending to the brain, they felt all the
transports and frenzy of intoxication * . In almofl
evcry other part of the New World, the natives
p0oflled the art of extracting an intoxicating liquor
irom maize or the manioc root, the fame substances
which they convert into bread. The operation by
which they effect this, nearly resembles the com-
mon one of brewing, but with this difference, that in
place of yeft, they use a nauleous infusion of a cer-
tain quantity of maize or manioc chewed by their
women. The saliva excites avigorous fermenta-
tion, and in a few days the liquor becomes fit for
drinking. It is not disagreeable to the taste, and
wheln swallowed in large quantities, is of an intoxi-
cating quality - . This is the general beverage of
thc Americans, which they distinguish by various
names, and for which they feel such a violent and
i!;ltiable desire, as it is not cafy either to conceive
or ddlcribe. Among polished nations, where a
Ifccefiion of various funicions and amufcments keep
tlhe ninid in continual occupation, the dcfire for
Ilrong drinkl is regulated, in a great measure, by
tlic climatc, and increases or dininilhcs according
o tlhe variations of its temperature. In warm rc-

gions,

()vicdl Hill. np. Rumuf. iii. 113. Vcncgos, i. 68. Nau.
i?4l, iC Cl.ihca dC Vaca, cap. 36. Sce NOTE LXXXIX.

| ,itliu yl de liry, iii, i i. Lcry ibid. itS.

B o o K gions, the delicate and sensible frame of the inha-

1V' bitants does not require the frimulation of fermen

ted liquors. In colder countries, the constitution
of the natives, more robuf and more sluggish, flands
in need of generous liquors to quicken and animate
it. But among savages, the desire of something
that is of power to intoxicate, is'in every situation
the fame. All the people of America, whether na-
tives of the torrid zone, or inhabitants of its more
temperate regions, or placed by a harder fate in the
severe climate's towards its northern or southern ex-
tremity, appear to be equally under the dominion
of this appetite * . Such a similarity of tafte,a-
mong people in such different situations, muftbe
ascribed to the influence of rome moral cause, and
cannot be confidercd as the effed of any physical or
conflitutional vwant. WVhile engaged in war or in
the chafe, the favagc is often in the molt interefiing
situations, and all the powers of his nature are rouz-
ed to the most vigorous exertions. But those ani-
mating scenes are succeeded by long intervals of re-
pose, during which the warrior meets with nothing
that he deems of fuffcient dignity or importance to
merit his attention. He languiflles and mopesin
this season of indolence. The poflure of his body
is an emblem of the state of his mind. In one cli-
mate, cowering ovcr the fire in his cabin ; in ano-
ther, stretchcd under the lhade of some tree; he
dozes away hi- time in flecp, or in an unthinkilg
joyless inaCtivi-, not far removed from it. As
firong liquors :av.kec him from this torpid ftatc,
give a brisker notion to his spirits, and enliven
him more thorc;nl!ly thal either dancing or gan-
ing, his love ,f' t:hem is cxccflive. A favagc, whl e
not cngaged in aiction, is a peniivc melancholy nll-

111l ;

* CGumill;i, Vi. .- l,:?.I .) 1)cfciji. 1c Gra i Chac0(), B6, 1.

R]ih.s . Is loi,

g8. llo. 1' Mu'chai, iv. 416. lFI'rmJ

M illion, dce la C'lii.l .. 1,. I;alrce:, p. '.13, Il.i, oo Co.vuc'i
I'i itu, 31.

mal ; but as soon as he tafies, or has a prospect of N o o a
tafling, the intoxicating draught, he becomes gay v.
and froliclbme . Whatever be the occasion, or
pretext, on which the Americans affleble, the
meeting always terminates in a debauch. Many
of their feflivals have no other objeEt, and they
wclcone the return of them with transports of joy.
As they are not accuflomed to restrain any appetite,
they ft no bounds to this. The riot often conti-
nucs without internniffion several days: and what-
ever be the fatal effEtls of their excess, they never
ca;ile from drinking as long as one drop of liquor
remains. The persons of greatest eminence, the
molt distinguished warriors, and the chiefs most re-
nowned for their wisdom, have no more command
ol thnimelves than the mori obscure member of the
comm;l: unity. Their eagerness for present enjoyment
rcind;rs them blind to its fatal consequences; and
those verymen, who, in other situations, seem to
popolfs a force of mind more than human, are in this
in:lance inferior to children in foresight, as well as
confidcration, and mere slaves of brutal appetite t.
\Vhen their pafions, naturally strong, are heighten-
cd an inflamed by drink, they are guilty of the
moil ;eorlnous outrages, and the festivity seldom
concludus without deeds of violence, or bloodfled :.

lUT, amidil this wild debauch, there is one cir-

ctl r' .nec renlarkable ; the wonlln, in most of the
Aintiican tribes, are not permitted to partake ofit 1[.
T .iclr province is to prepare the liquor, to serve
It abollt to tie ulcfs, and to take care of their hus-

:n tdid firicnds, when their Creafnll is overpow-

cred.
'tl 'lt.i i Vforns Vcr(lad. iii. -t'o. -I Rili, 9. Iiloa, i.

I. ltr, l 'f. i '. T

ortlic,,ada M ul. ind. i. 3

5.
.. , NOT2 XC.

B O O K ered. This exclusion of the women from an en-

V_ ' joyment so highly valued by savages, may bejuftly

confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and as an
additional evidence of that contempt with which
they were treated in the New World. The people
of North America, when firit discovered, were not
acquainted with any intoxicating drink; but as the
Europeans early found it their interet tofupply
them with spirituous liquors, drunkenness soon be.
aame as universal among them as among their coun.
trymen to the south ; and their wonmen having ac-
quired this new taste, indulge it with as little de-
cency and moderation as the men *

Puttodeath IT were endless to enumerate all 'the detached
the aged and culoms which have excited the wonder of travel-
rcurab!e. lers in America; but I cannot omit one fcemingly

as singular as any that has been mentioned. When
their parents and other relations become old, or la-
bour under any distemper which their slender know-
ledge of the healing art cannot remove, they cut
fllort their days with a violent hand, in order tobe
relieved from the burden of supporting and tending
them. This practice prevailed among the ruder
tribes in every part of the continent, from Hudson's
Bay to the river De la Plata ; and however shock-
Mg it may be to those lfntiments of tcndernefs and
attachment, which, in civilized life, we are aptto
co(nfider as congenial with our friamne, the condition
of man in the ifvage Hlate leads and reconciles
him to it. The fame hardships and difficullt
of procuring fiitfitlntnce, which deter savages, 1i
thme cail(s, from rearing their children, propl)t
them to deftlroy the aged and infirm. The
declining slate of the one i s s hclplcfs il

the

' Iltchlnfi n,

I H;t. of ,M.sihctL', 4fó0. I,>flrnt, il Is. '
S'?ralrd, 1 h,.

the infancy of the other. The former are no lcfs B .0 o K
Inable than the latter to perform the funRions that Iv
belong to a warrior or hunter, or to endure those
various distresses in which savages are so often in-
0olved, by their own want of foresight and induftrv.
Their relations feel this; and incapable of attend-
in to the wants or weaknesses of others, their im-
patience under an additional burden prompts them
toextinguifh that life which they find it difficult to
sustain. This is not regarded as a deed of cruelty,
but as an ac of mercy. An American, broken
with years and infirmities, conscious that he can no
longer depend on the aid of those around him, places
himself contentedly in his grave; and it is by the
hands of his children or nearest relations that the
thong is pulled, or the blow inflited, which re-
leal'eshim for ever from the sorrows of life t.

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American
tribes in such various lights, after taking a view of timnral f
tL * n

i * titnatc of

their customs and manners from so many different thei, ciha
Itations, nothing remains but to form a general efli- raAcr
mate of their character, compared with that of more
po'ilhed nations. A human being, as he comes
originally from the hand of nature, is every where
the fame, At his firt appearance in the state of in-
fancy, whether it be among the rudest favagcs, or
ilthe mofl-civiized focicty, we can difccrn no qua-
lity which marks any diflinaionl or filperiority.
Thecapacity of improvement seems to be the fame;

tnd the talents lie may afterwarlds acquire, as well

as thevirtues he may be rendered capable ofexercif-
ing, depend entirely upon the slate of society in
hich he is placed, To this slate his mind natu-
vi' 0. I. E c crally

(e
i7qi . Relyr dc Grao. p. 300. Pi 6.

J 133.

B 0 0 K rally accommodates itself, and from it receives its

_ discipline and ctilture. In proportion to the wants

which it accufloms a human being to feel, and the
fundions in which these engage him, his intellec-
tual powers are called forth. According to the con.
neections which it eftabliihes between him and therelt
of his species, the affections of his heart are exerted,
It is only by attending to this great principle, that
we can discover what is the charadter of man in
every different period of his progress.

IntelleAual IF we apply it to savage life, and measure the at.
powers. tainments of the human mind in that state by this

flandard, we shall find, according to an observation
which I have already made, that the intellecual
powers of man must be extremely limited in their
operations. They are confined within the narrow
fohere of what he deems necessary for supplying his
own wants. Whatever has not tome relationto
thife, neither attracts his attention, nor is theob-
jecc of his inquiries. But however narrow the
bounds may be within which the knowledge ofa
savage is circulnfcribed, he possesses thoroughly
that finall portion of it which he has attained. It
was not communicated to him by formal inftruci-
on ; he does not attend to it as matter of mere fpe-
culation and tcuri)lity ; it is the result ofhisown
ob(crvation, the fruit of his own experience, and
accommodated to his condition and exigencies.
While employed in the active occupations of war
or hunting, he often finds hiiil( If in difficult anl
perilous fitiations, fr'om which the efforts of his
own sagacity nuff: extricate him. IIc is frequently
engaged in mlic.efurcs where every flcp depends uponl
his own ability to decide, where he imuft rely folcly
upojln his own pt.lntralicIo to difccrn the dangelrs t
which he is cxpofcd, ;,dll upon his own Mwifdonm i
providinig; again f thieim.

As the talents of individuals are exercised and B 0 0 K
improved by such exertions, much political wis- .
dom is said to be displayed in conducting the affairs
of their small communities. The council of old Political
g men in an American tribe, deliberating upon its in- talents.
| terests, and determining with refped to peace or
war, has been compared to the senate in more po-
lifhed republics. The proceedings of the former,
we are told, are often no less formal and sagacious
| than those of the latter. Great political wisdom is
exhibited in pondering the various measures pro-
I posed, and in balancing their probable advantages,
against the evils of which they may be productive.
Much address and eloquence are employed by the
leaders, who aspire* at acquiring such confidence
with their countrymen, as to have an ascendant in
those aflemblies t. But, among savage tribes,
the field for displaying political talents cannot be
extvnfive.' Where the idea of private property is
unknown, and no criminal jurifdiAion is eftab-
lilhed, there is hardly any function of internal go-
:vernment to exercise. Where there is no corn-
merce, and scarcely any intercourse among separate
tribes; where enmity is implacable, and hostilities
are carried on almost without intelrifflon ; there
will be few points of public concern to adjurt with
their neighbours ; and that department of their as-
fairs which may be denominated foreign, cannot be
so intricate as to require any refined policy in con-
duitinii it. Where individuals are so thoughtless
a"ad improvident as fcldom to take cffceltal precau-
tions soir lflf-prefcrvation, it is vain to expect that
pl'blic Incal'ures and deliberations will be regulated
by tle conltclmpllation of remote events. It is the

igtli is of li vaI:s to act flom the impulse of present
lihoi. L 1 hcy have neither foretight nor temper to

E c c 2 form

. t Chnllcv. N. Fr. iii. 269, &c,
,,

B o o K form complicated arrangements with refpeE to

IV. i.^ , their future conduct. The consultations of the

Americans, indeed, are so frequent, and theirne.
gociations are so many t, and so long protracted, as
to give their proceedings an extraordinary asped of
wisdom. But this is not owing so much to the
depth of their schemes, as to the coldnefsand
phlegm of their temper, which render them flow in
determining t. If we except the celebrated league,
that united the Five Nations in Canada into a fede-
ral republic, which shall be confidered in its proper
place, we can discern few such traces of political
wisdom, among the rude American tribes, as disco-
vers any great degree of foresight or extent of intel-
lectual abilities. Even among them, we Ihall find
public meailures more frequently directed by the im-
petuous ferocity of their youth, than regulated by
the experience and wisdom of their old men.

Degree of As the condition of man in the savage slate is un.
"ficdion. favourable to the progress of the understanding, it

has a tendency likewift, in tome refpets, to check
the exercise of afFedtion, and to render the heart
tontracdied. The ftronlge, feeling in the mind ofa
favange is a sense of his own independence. He has
sacrificcd so finall a portion of his natural liberty by
becomingl a member of society, that he remains, in
a great dcgree, the bAle nmltcr of his own acotions
HI often takes his resolutions alone, without con-
fulting, or feeling any connection with the perfolls
around h im. In many of his operations, lie ltaind
as much detached from the reft of his species, as if
he had formed no union with them. Confcioiis
how little he depelnds upon other men, he is apt to
view tllen with a carclefs ildifl-crenc. EveCI thec

force

-t S.v N OTlE XCIl. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 271
dfu L JWl)it~n. t12 Itc ¢lu iiil £L. 13.

force of his mind contributes to increase this un- B O0 K
concern, and as he looks not beyond himself in de- iV.
liberating with refpea to the part which he flould
a&, his solicitude about the consequences of it fel-
dom extends farther. He pursues his own career,
and indulges his own fancy, without inquiring or
regarding whether what he does be agreeable or of-
fenfive to others, whether they may derive benefit,
or receive hurt from it. Hence the ungovernable
caprice of savages, their impatience under any fpe-
cies of rcftraint, their inability to suppress or mode-
rate any inclination, the scorn or neglect with
which they receive advice, their high efl-imation of
thcmfelves, and their contempt of other men.
Among them, the pride of independence produces
slmot the fame effe&s with intereftednefs in a more
advanced state of focicty, it refers every thing to a
man himself, and renders the gratification of his
own wishes, ,the measure and end of conduEt.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hardness Hardnes of
of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all savage Iheart.
l.ltions. Their minds, rouzed only by strong emo-
tio!s, are little fufccptible of gentle, delicate, or
tender ifec.tions t-. Their union is so incomplete,
tlat each individual acs as if he retained all his na-
tural rights entire and undiminiflhcd. If a favour
is conflrrcd upon him, or a service performed for
his behoof, he receives it with much fatisfacion,
lec;aife it contributes to his enjoyment ; but this
fintinlent extends not beyond himself, it excites no
enlse of obligation, he neither feels gratitude, nor
thintks of making any return :|:. Even, among
IPerfn)s the imofl closely connctted, there is little
c'Trr(cfl)dcncc or exchange of tholf good offices

which

h Al'' N Fl

' Ii 3c'9·
i1 OvieJo lidt. lib. Kvi. c. . 2 hcC

B O 0 K which strengthen attachment, mollify the heart, and

Iv.

sweeten the intercourse of life.' Their high ideas of
independence nourish a fullen reserve, which keeps
them at a distance from each other. The nearest
relations are mutually afraid to make any demand
or to solicit any service t, left it should be confider-
ed by the other as imposing a burden, or layinga
restraint upon his will.
Insensibility I HAVE already remarked the influence of thishard

unfeeling temper upon domestic life, with refpeft to
the connection between husband and wife, as well
as that between parents and children. Its effects
are no less conspicuous, in the performance of those
mutual offices of tenderness which the infirmities of
our nature frequently exact. Among some tribes,
when any of their number are seized with a dif-
temper, they are generally abandoned by all around
them, who, careless of their recovery, fly in the
utmost confiernation from the supposed danger of
infection t. But even where they are not thus de-
ferted, the cold indifference with which they are
attended can afford themn little consolation. No
look of sympathy, no soothing expreflions, no offi-
cious services contribute to alleviate or to make
them forget their sufFerings §. Their nearest rela-
tions will often refuse to submit to the frnalleft in-
conveniency, or to part with the leafr trifle, howe-
ver much it may tend to their accommodation or re-
lief l. So little is the breaff of a savage lilceptible
of those sentiments which prompt men to that feel-
ing attention which mitigates dliitrcfs, that, in some
provinces of America, the Spaniards have found it
necessary to inforce the common duties of humanity

by

t De Ia Potlheie, ii.2. f cI.etre dc P. Catanco M":litori
(Chii i·n, i.oo309. Tl trC, ii. 410. l I.ozio, o10. I- lcir'cr, (IcC. '
ill) viii. c. 5.'Cle. 5. lib. iv. c. .2 l.ill; Iccr', DIclcrip. of l'nt:lgo'I.l 9'
§ CGullilli, i. 329:. Loz:ao, z10. Clrica OliiI) &c. 90
Il-rrcr.t, dcc, 4. lib. viii. c, 5.

bypofitive laws, and to oblige husbands and wives, B OO K
parents and children, under revere penalties, to I
take care of each other during their sickness t. The
fame harshness of temper is frill more conspicuous
in their treatment of the animal creation. Prior to
their intercourse with the people of Europe, the
North-Americans had some tame dogs, which ac-
companied them in their hunting excursions, and
served them with all the ardour and fidelity peculiar
to their species. But, inifead of that fond attach-
W ment, which the hunter naturally feels towards
~ those useful companions of his toils, they requite
their services with neglet, seldom feed, and never
| caress them t. -In other provinces, the Americans
have become acquainted with the domestic animals
E of Europe, and avail themselves of their service;
C but it is universally observed that they always treat
! them harshly $, and never employ any method ei-
ther for breaking or managing them, but force and
cruelty. In every part of the deportment of man in
I his savage tfate, whether towards his equals of the

:

human species, or towards the animals below him,

we recognize the fame chara&cr, and trace the ope-
rations of a mind, intent on its own gratifications,
and regulated by its own caprice,' without much at-
tention or sensibility to the sentiments and feelings
of the beings around him.

AFTEn explaining how unfavourable the savage c
flatc is to the cultivation of the understanding, and
to the improvement of the heart, I should not have
thought it necessary to mention what may be deem-
cd its lesser dcfecds, if the charalecr of nations as

well
Il 9llsl(lo - ift. de Yiucathan. p- 300. t Charlcv.HiF. N. Fr.

31
')9 337. § Ullo,a Notic. AJlnericun. 312.

B 0 0 K well as individuals, were not often more diflindly
_1P _ marked by circumstances apparently trivial, than

by those of greater moment. A savage, frequently
placed in situations of danger and difirefs, depend-
ing on himself alone, and wrapt up in his own
thoughtsand schemes, is a serious melancholy ani-
mal. His attention to others is small. The range
of his own ideas is narrow. Hence that taciturni-
ty which is so difgufling to men accustomed to the
open intercourse of social conversation. When not
engaged in acion, the Americans often fit whole
days in one posture, without opening their lips t.
When they go forth to war, or to the chace, they
usually march in a line at rome distance from one
another, and without exchanging a word. The
fame profound silence is observed when they row to-
gether in a canoe T. It is only when they are ani-
mated by intoxicating liquors, or rouzed by the jol-
lity of the festival and dance, that they become
gay and convertible.
Cnning,. To the fame causes may be imputed the refined

cunning with which they form and execute their
schemes. Men, who are not habituated to a liberal
communication of their own sentiments and withes,
are apt to be so distrustful, as to place little confi-
dence in others, and to have recourse to an infidi-
ous craft, in accomplishing their own purposes. In
civilized life, those persons, who, by their situation,
have but a few objects of pursuit on which their
minds incefantly dwell, arc mofi remarkable for
low artifice in carrying on their little projects
Among favagcs, whose views are equally confined,
and their attention no less perfevcring, those cir-
cumftances muff operate still more powerfully, and
gradually accustom them to a difitgenuous ubtlety

ill

in all their tran faAions. The force of this is in- B 0 o K
created by habits which they acquire in carrying l,
on the two most intcrefting operations wherein
they are engaged. With them war is a sy'sem of
craft, in which they trust for success to stratagem
more than to open force, and have their invention
cntinu:illy on the stretch to circumvent and fur-
prise their enemies. As hunters, it is their con-
frint object to enfiare, in order that they may de-
froy. Accordin-gly, art and cunning have been
univcriLlly observed as diftinguiihingr characterif-
tic; of .J l savages. The people of the rude tribes
o0 AtIerica are remarkable for their address and du-
p!cicty. Impenetrably fccret in forming their
nciurcs, they purlue them with a patient unde-

l:.:t,nl: ttcution, and there is no refinement of dif-

fimnul.,:iowhich they cannot employ, in order to
ini.re their success. The natives of Peru were en-
gard above thirty years, in concerting the plan of
th-ir iinurrection, under the vice-royalty of the
miiquis d V illa-Garcia, and though communi-
c(atd to a g-rc :t. number of all di fTerent ranks, no
iiilicaiLion of it ever transpired dur;ng that long
pcrioJl; no iman betrayed his trult, or by an un-
gF.ni(td look, or rash word, gave rife to any fufpi-
ci,; of what was intended t. Th' difliinulation
a1; crlft of individuals is no lcf; remarkable than
t':,t of nations. 'Whr1n iet upon deceiving, they
l!'iap thcmliLlvcs up) so artiiicially, that it is impof-
fiIc to p.'iet rate into their intentions, or to detcL't
tlCIr defio s :1:.

3ur if there be defecas or vices peculiar to the Virtucs.

f.'liJc Ithtce, there are, likewise, virtues which it
lIpll'e,, aitd good qiil ]itiis, to the exercifci of
Vol. I. F f which

l' V,y, c lc Ullua,1 ii. 309o , uiiilli,i. Ga,. Cliail0v. iij,
Lt

B 0 0 K which it is friendly. The bonds of society fit so

1 oose upon the members of the more rude American

Injcpendent tribes, that they hardly feel any restraint. Hence
spirit. the spirit of independence, which is the pride ofa

savage, and which he confiders as the unalienable
prerogative of man. Incapable of controul, and
disdaining to acknowledge any superior, his mind,
though limited in its powers, and erring in many of
its pursuits, acquires such elevation by the confci-
oufiefs of its own freedom, that he ads on fomeoc.
cafions with aftonilhing force, and perseverance,
and dignity.
Fortitude. As independence nourishes this high spirit among

savages, the perpetual wars in which they are en-
gaged call it forth into action. Such long intervals
of tranquility are as frequent in poliffied societies, j
are unknown in the savage state. Their enmities,
as I have observed, are implacable and immortal.
The valour of the youth is never allowed to rust in
inaction. The hatchet is always in their hand,
either for attack or defence. Even in their hunt-
ing excilrfions, they must be on their guard againfi
surprise from the hostile tribes, by which they arc
surrounded. Accustomed to continual alarms,
they grow familiar with danger, and courage be-
comes an habitual virtue, resulting naturally from
their situation, and ftrengthcned by conitant exer-
tions. The mode ofdifplaying fortitude may not
be the fame in fiall and rude communities, as in
more powerful and civilized flates. Their system
of war, and tfandard of valour may be formed upol
different principlel , but in no situation does the
human mind rife more fiuperior to the sense of ilil-
ger, or the drcad of death, than in its most fimplle
and uncultivated slate.

ANOT'rIER

ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages, is B o0 K
attachment to the community of which they are Iv.
members. From the nature of their political union, Attachment
one might expect this tie to be extremely feeble. tconmity.
But there are circumstances which render the in-
fluence, even of their loose mode of association, very
powerful. The American tribes are finall; com-
bined against their neighbours, in prosecution of
ancient enmities, or in avenging recent injuries,
their interests and operations are neither numerous
nor complex. These are obje&s, which the uncul-
tivated underfianding of a savage can comprehend.
His heart is capable of forming connetAions, which
are so little diffused. He assents with warmth to
public measures, dicated by passions, similar to those
which influence his own conduct. Hence the ar-
dour with which individuals undertake the moif
perilous service, when the community deems it ne-
ceffary. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted antipa-
thy to the public enemies. Hence their zeal for
the honour of their tribe, and that love of their coun-
try, which prompts them to brave danger that it
may triumph, and to endure the most exquisite tor-
ments without a groan, that it may not be dif-
graced.

THUS, in every situation where a human being Satista1on
can be placed, even the most unfavourable, there with thlei

owncondll.

are virtues that peculiarly belong to it ; there are tion,
afTeEtions which it calls forth ; there is a species of
happincfs which it yields. Nature, with most be-
neficent intention, conciliates and forms the mind to
its condition, the ideas and wifhcs of man extend not
beyond that state of focicty to which he is habitua-
ted. What it presents as objecs of contemplation
or Cenjoyment, fill and satisfy his mind, and he can
lardly conceive any other mode of life to be pleasant
or evcn tolerable. The Tartar, accustomed to

F1 f f 2 roanl

B O O K roam over extensive plains, and to subsist on the

Iv.

produc of his herds, imprecates upon his enemy, as
the greatest of all curses, that he may be condemn-
ed to reside in one place, and to be nourished with
the top of a weed. The rude Americans, fond of
their own pursuits, and satisfied with their own lot,
are equally unable to comprehend the intention or
utility of the various accommodations, which, in
more polished society, are deemed eifential tothe
comfort of life. Far friom complaining of their
own situation, or viewing that of men in a more
improved slate with admiration or envy, theyregard
themselves as the standard of excellence, as beings
the belt entitled, as well as the most perfectly qua-
lified, to enjoy real happiness. Unaccustomed to
any reltraint upon their will or their aions, they
behold with amazement the inequality of rank, and:
the subordination which take place in civilized life,
and confider the voluntary fubmiflion of one manto.
another, as a renunciation, no less base than un-
accountable, of the first diftinltion of humanity.
Void of foresight, as well as free from care th(ln-
filves, and delighted with that state of indolent lc-
curity, they wonder at the anxious precautiols,
the unceasing incldii[tly, and con-iplicated arrange-
nienlts of }Luropc:m!a, in guarding againt distant
evils, or pi-;i)vi;;, t)r1- futliur w;lits, and cxcliilu
againi: their prcpuofcrou. follv, in thus niLlillply-
ing the troubles, and incrafing the labour ofl l it C
'hiis prlferellce ofitheir own in;lulners is conllficiiis
on every occanlon. I' vci the nanms, b) whichi til
varioui nationi, wi:h to be (li tinglifhcd, lare Iafilltct
flrol this idea of their (wvin pi-)l-llillcice. T^I :' I1'
pcllation which the Ir-qcluois give to tlicmeilvs is,
TI-IE C IIIEF o( MEN 1 CA RAIE iI', the ori11,ll
naime of the licice iihI;lbiltaut of the will(iwl,
', Ch;iulcv. N. Ft. iii, 308. L.ajiiitii , ii. 97.- f Coldo ' l I3'

islands, signifies THE WARLIKE PEOPLE *. The B o o K
Cherokee, from an idea of their own superiority, n
call the Europeans NOTHINGS, or the ACCURSED
RACE, and assume themselves the name of The be-
loved people t. The fame principle regulated the
notions of the other Americans concerning the
Europeans ; for although, at first, they were filled
with astonishment at their arts, and with dread of
their power, they soon came to abate their eftima-
tion of men, whose maxims of life were so different
from their own. Hence they called them the froth
of the sea, men without father or mother. They
supposed, that either they had no country of their
own, and therefore invaded that which belonged to
others : ; or, that, being destitute of theneceffaries
of life at home, they were obliged to roam over the
ocean, in order to rob such as were more amply
prov.ided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are far
from any inclination to relinquifl their own habits,
or to adopt those of civilized life. The transition
is too violent to be suddenly made. Even where
endeavours have been used to wean a savage from
his own cuffomns, and to render the accommodati-
ons of polified focicty familiar to him ; even
wlcre he has been allowed to taftc of those
plcafilrcs, and has been honoured with those dif-
til'liiols, which are the chief objccts of our dcfire,
lc droops and languiflhs under the restraint of laws
'1and forms, he feizcs the firn opportunity of brcak-
iln leool fronl them, and returns with transport to
t'li orfll or the wild, where he can enjoy a carelc:s
a;ld Iilcntci, tulcd freedom
c §.

TH IJS

iRle t rl li! i. de, /\nt:'. , 4l . J- A ailr, Hi ft fA er. fndlinns,

'':'- I lcnu n, Hith. s uvli UrbiL:s, li iii. c, !. § Chalrlov,
, F,1" ii. a .

B O O I THUS I have finished a laborious delineation of

Iv.

the characer and manners of the uncivilized tribes
scattered over the vast continent of America. In
this, I aspire not at rivalling the great mailers who
have painted and adorned savage life, either in bold-
ness of dcfign, or in the glow and beauty of their
colouring. I am satisfied with the more humble
merit of having persisted with patient industry, in
viewing my subjec in many various lights, and in
collecting from the most accurate observers such
detached and often minute features, as might enable
me to exhibit a portrait that resembles the original.

General BEFORE I close this part of my work, one obfer-
caution
with' repea vation more is necessary, in order tojuftify the con-
to this in- clufions which I have formed, or to prevent the
quiry. mistakes into which such as examine them may fall.

In contemplating the inhabitants of a country so
widely extended as America, great attention should
be paid to the diversity of climates under which
they are placed. The influence es this I have point-
ed out with refpeat to several important parti-
culars, which have been the object of research;
but even where it has not been mentioned, it ought
not to be overlooked. The provinces of America
are of such different temperament, that this alone is
sufficient to conflitute a diflinction between their
inhabitants. In every part of the earth where man
cxifts, the power of climate operates, with decisive
influence, upon his condition and characer. 1I
those countries which approach near to the ex-
tremes of heat or cold, this influence is so confpicl-
ous as to firike every eye. Whether we colfidcr
rnan merely as an animal, or as a being endowed
with rational powers, which fit him for activity and
fpcculation, we hlall find that he has uniformly at-
tained the ycatcfl prfIcCtion of which his natlue i's

c:1ip'iblc

capable, in the temperate regions of the globe. B 0 0 K
There his constitution is most vigorous, his organs I_.
mott acute, and his form most beautiful. There,
too, he possesses a superior extent of capacity,
greater fertility of imagination, more enterprising
courage, and a sensibility of heart which gives
birth to passions, not only ardent, but persevering.
In this favourite situation he has displayed the ut-
most efforts of his genius, in literature, in policy, in
commerce, in war, and in all the arts which im-
prove or embellish life *.

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt most
sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater es-
sets than in Societies more highly polished. The
talents of civilized men are continually exerted in
rendering their condition more comfortable; and
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a
great measure, supply the deferls, and guard against
the inconveniencies of any climate. But the im-
provident savage is affected by every circumstance
peculiar to his situation. He takes no precaution
either to mitigate or to improve it. Like a plant,
or an animal, he is formed by the climate under
which he is placed, and feels the full force of its
influence.

IN furvcying the rude nations of America, thiq
natural diffindion between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable.
Tlhey may, accordingly, be divided into two great
clatfes. The one comprehends all the North Ame-
ricans, from the river St. Lawrence to the Gulf of
Mexico, together with the people of Chili, and a

few

r
I). l:frlgnuf' EliTy rul tdlit ifl. of CKiv Socitc, eirt ;UN c. i.

B O O K few small tribes towards the extremity of the

IV- southern continent. To the other belong all the

inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled in the
various provinces which extend from the iflhmus
of Darien almost to the southern confines of Brasil
along the east fide of the Andes. In the former, the
human species appears manifestly to be more perfec.
The natives are more robust, more adtive, more in-
telligent, and more courageous. They possess, in
the most eminent degree, that force of mind, and
love of independence, which I have pointed out as
the chief virtues of man in his savage state. They
have defended their liberty with persevering forti-
tude against the Europeans, who subdued the other
rude nations of America with the greatest ease.
The natives of the temperate zone are the only peo-
ple in the New World who are indebted for their
freedom to their own valour. The North Ameri-
cans, though long encompassed by three formidable
European powers, still retain part of their original
possessions, and continue to exist as independent
nations. The people of Chili, though early invad-
ed, hill maintain a gallant contest with the Spa-
niards, and have set bounds to their encroachments;
whereas, in the warmer regions, men are more
feeble in their frame, less vigorous in the efforts of
their mind, of a gentle but dastardly spirit, more
enslaved by pleasure and funk in indolence. Ac-
cordingly, it is in the torrid zone that the Euro-
peans have most completely efl;abliflicd their domi-
nion over America; the moss fcrtile and desirable
provinces in it are lfubjcted to their yoke;
and if several tribes there frill enjoy inde-
pendence, it is either bccaufei they have never
been attacked by an enemy already satiatcd
with conquest, and poltefn(d ol larger territoriis
than he was ablc to occupy, or becalufc they

h;ve

have been saved from oppression by their remote and B o o K
inacccffible situation. IV

CoNsPIcUOUS as this diftinstion may appear be-
tween the inhabitants of those different regions, it
is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly observed, affedt the dif-
position and charaEter of individuals as well as na-
tions, frill more powerfully than the influence of
climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes, in
various parts of the torrid zone, possessed of cou-
raoe, high spirit, and the love of independence, in
adegree hardly inferior to the natives of more tem-
perate climates. We are too little acquainted with
the history of those people, to be able to trace the
several circumifances in their progress and ftuation,
to which they are indebted for this remarkable pre-
eminence. The fad, nevertheless, is certain. As
early as the first voyage of Columbus, he received
information that several of the islands were inha-
bited by the CARIBBEES, a fierce race of men, no-
wife resembling their feeble and timid neighbours.
In his second expedition to the New World, he
found this information to be juit, and was himself
a witness of their intrepid valour *. The fame
charafter they have maintained invariably in all
fubfequcnt contests with the people of our conti-
nent t ; and, even in our own times, we have seen
them make a gallant stand in defence of the last
territory which the rapacity of the Europeans had
let in their pot'cflion 1. Some nations in Brasil
were no lets eminent for vigour of mind, and
bravery in war §. The people of the iOhmus of
VoL. 1. G g gI)aricJ

* Life iC( Columbus, c. 47, 4S. SeL NOTE X C;II,
I [(ouilorl l' ilt. itis Antills , 531. 1 Slc NOT'IE XCIV.

§ Lery al«j De Bry, iii. 2u7/, &c.

B O K Darien boldly met the Spaniards in the field,

IV- and frequently repelled those formidable invaders *,

Other instances might be produced. It is not by
attending to any single cause or principle, however
powerful and extensive its influence may appear,
that we can explain the aEtions, or account for the
charaaer, of men. Even the law of climate, more
universal, perhaps, in its operation than any that
affeds the human species, cannot be applied, in
judging of their conduc, without many excep.
tions.

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. a.paffim.

NOT E

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

Ggg2

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUS TRATIO NS.

NOTE I. p. 7.

TYRE was situated at such a distance from the
Arabian Gulf or Red Sea, as made it impossible to con-
vey commodities from thence to that city by land car-
riage. This induced the Phenicians to render themselves
malters of RHINOCRURA, or RHINOCOLURA, the
nearell port in the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
They landed the cargoes which they purchaied in A-
rabia, Ethiopia, and India, at Eiath, the safest har-
bour in the Red Sea towards the north. Thence they
were carried by land to Rhinocolura, the distance not
being very considerable; and being relhipped in that
port, were transported to Tyre, and dillributed over the
.world. Strabon. Georgr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p.
1128. Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. I-iltor. Edit. Weffe-
lengi, lib. i. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. 1i.

HE Pcriplus H-annonis is the only authentic mo-

"nlmont ofthe Carthaginian fiill in naval afihirs, and one
Of tei molt curious fragmcnts tranfinittcd to us by an-
tlllty. Tlhe learned and indiltrious Mr. Dodwell, in
a diflirtation prefixed to the Periplus of Hnnno, in
the edition of the Minor Geographers publilhed at Ox-
ordl, cndcavourls to prove that this is a spurious work,

the

the composition of omne Greek, who assumed Hanno's
name. But M. de Montesquieu, in his l'Efprit des
Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de Bouganville, in a differ.
tation publilhed tom. xxvi. of the Memoires de l'Aca.
denmie des Inscriptions, &c. have ellablifhed its authenti.
ciit by argumrents which to me appear unanswerable.
Ramuflo lias accompanied his translation of this curious
voyage with a diflertation tending to illuftrateit. Ra.
coite de Vi.,ggi, vol. i. p. I i . M. de Bouganville has,
with great learning and ability, treated the fame ub.
jcts. It appear- that Hanno, according to the mode
cf'mcient nL-igation, undertook this vc)age in fmaillvef.
fe-, so cont.rudted that he could keep cloie in with the
'coit. He failed frro Gades to the iiland of Cerne in
tv r, c days. iThis i:; probably what is known to the
moderns by the ;iame ut t ilc ine of Arguim. Itbe-
C2ar!C the thief Ilation of the Carthaginians on that
coail; and M. c- Bouganvil'e contends, that the cisterns
found there ;. (: monuments of the Carthaginian power
and ingenuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and ltillfol.
lowing the winding of the coast, he arrived, in seventeen
days, at a promontory which he called THE WEST
lHORN, probably Cape Palmas. From this he advan-
ced to another promontory, which he named THE
SOUTH HORN, and which is manifeltly Cape deTres
Puntas, about five degrees north of the line. All the
circumstances contained in the flort abftraA of his jour-
nal, which is handed down to us, concerning the ap-
pcarance and Tate of the countries on the coast of
Africa, are confirmed and illufirated by a conmpaifon
with the accounts of modern navigators. Even those
circumflances, which, fiom their teeming improbability,
have been produced to invalidate the credibility of
his relation, tend to confirm it. IHe observes, that
in the country to the foutl of Cerne, a profoundli-
lcncc reigned througlh the day ; but during the nightl
innumcrable fircs were kindled along the banks of tle
rivers, and the air resounded with the noise of pipes
and drums, and tl e cries of joy. The fame thing,
as Ranlitio ( lfclves, rill takes place. The cxcellive
heat obligsc the negroes to takc Iheltcr in the woods, or

in

in their houses, during the day. As soon as the fun
sets, they sally out, and by torch light enjoy the
pleasure of music and dancing, in which they ipend
the night. Ramus. i. 113, F. In another place, he
mentions the sea as burning with torrents of fire. What
occurred to M. Adanfon, on the fame coalt, may ex-
plain this. " As soon," fays he, " as the fun dipped
beneath the horizon, and night overspread the earth
with darkness, the sea lent us its friendly light. lWThile
the prow of our vessel ploughed the f.baiing surges,
it seemed to set them all on fire. Thus we failed
in a luminous inclofure, which surrounded us like a
large circle of rays, from whence darted in the wake
of the ship a long stream of light." Voy. to Sene-
gal, p. I176.

N O T E II. p. I.

L ONG after the navigation of the Phenicians and
of Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the most intelli-
gent and best informed hiltorian of antiquity, affirms,
that it was not known, in his time, whether Africa
was a continued continent, stretching to the so,uth,
or whether it was encompafled by the sea. Poybii
Hist lib. iii. Pliny the naturalist asserts, that there
can be no communication between the southern and
northern temperate zones. Plinii Hill. Natur. Edit.
in ufuli Delph. 4to, lib. ii. c. 68. If they had given
full credit to the accounts of those voyages, the for-
mer could not have entertained such a doubt, and tile
latter could not have delivered such an opinion.
Strabo mentions the voyage of Eudoxus, but 'rcats
it as a fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. i5.; and, acrord-
ing to his account, no other judgment can be fr,-m-
el with refpcct to it. Strabo fccins not to have known
iny thing with ccrtainty concerning the form and lalte
ofthe southern parts of Africa. Georgr. lib. xvii. p.

X18o. Ptolemy, the moll inquisitive and learned of all
thc ancient gcographers, was equally unacquainted
Vith any part-of Afiica situated a tewv dlegirees beyond
the ettquinolial line ; for lhe fillofes that this great con-

tinent

tinent was not surrounded by the sea, but that it stretch.
ed without interruption, towards the south pole : and
he so far miitakes its true figure, that he defcribcs the
continent as becoming broader and broader as it advan-
ced towards the south. Ptolomai Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9,
Brietii Parlallela Geogr. veteris et novxe, p. 86.

N O T E IV. p. 17.

A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very frong
and singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients with
refpe&t to the situation of the various parts of the earth,
When Alexander marched along the banks of the Hy-
dafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which fall into the
Indus, he observed that there were many Crocodiles in i
those rivers, and that the country produced beans of'
the fame species with those which were common in E-
gypt. From thl fe circunitances, he concluded that he
had difcovcred the i'uiirce of the Nile, and prepared a
fleet to fail down the H-Idafpes to Egypt. Strab,
Geogr. lib. xv. p. ozo2. This amazing error did not
arire from any ignor:nce of geography peculiar to
that monarch ; for we are informed by Strabo, that
Alexander applied with particular attention in order to
acquire the kno\xlei ge ufthiis science, and had accurate
maps or dcfcriptions ofi the countries through which Ihe
marched. Lib. ii. p. 10o. But, in his age, the know-
ledge of the G-reeks did not extend beyond the limitsof
the Mediterranean.

N 0 T E V. p. 17.

Aj S the flux and refl ix of the sei is remarkably glica
at the loluthl of the rivle Indllus, lilis would rendur the
phencmenon more lbmlllidable to the Greeks. V;tc.'-
Geogr. vol. i. . 25 .

N 0T ''

NO T E VI. p. 20..

IT is probable that they were feldon induced to ad-
vance so far, either by motives of curiosity, or views of
commercial advantage. In consequence of this, the idea
of the ancients concerning the position of that great
river was very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch
of the Ganges which he distinguishes by the name of
the Great Mouth, in the hundred and forty-fixth degree
of longitude from his first meridian in the Fortunate If-
lands, But its true longitude, computed from that me-
ridian, is now determined by afironomical observations
to be only a hundred and five degrees. A geographer
so eminent muff have been betrayed into an error of
this magnitude by the imperfection of the information
which he had. received concerning those distant regions;
and this affords a striking proof of the intercourse with
them being extremely rare. With refpet to the coun-
tries of India beyond the Ganges, his intelligence was
Rill more defective, and his errors more enormous. I
liall have occiion to observe in an ther place, that he
has placed the country of the Seres, or China, no less
than sixty degrees farther east than its true position.
M. de Anville, one of the molt learned and inqui-
fitive of the modern geographers, has let this matter in
a clear light, in two dissertations publilhed in Mem. de
]'Academ. des Infcript. &c. torn. xxxii. p. 573. 604.

N O T E VII. p. 21.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients

im'e made chiefly by land; thole of the lmoderns are
made chiefly by lea. The progrcfs of conquell led to
the former, that of commerce to the latter. It is a ju-
dicious obfcrvation of Strabo, that the conquells of A-
lexander the Great made known the Eait, tlofe of the
Romans opened the Welt, and those of Mithridates kiing
of P'Pntus the North. Lib. i. p. zG. When diloy.cry
VOL. 1. H hh is

is carried on by land alone, its progress must be flow,
and its operations confined. When it is carried on only
by sea, its sphere may be more extensive, and its
advances more rapid ; but it labours under peculiar de.
sects. Though it may make known the position of dif.
ferent countries, and ascertain their boundaries as far
as there are determined by the ocean, it leaves us in
ignorance with rcfpect to their interior itate. Above
two centuries and a half have elapsed since the Euro-
peans failed round the southern promontory of Africa,
and have traded in most of its ports ; but, in a confider.
able part of that great continent, they have done little
more than survey its coatls, and mark its capes and
harbours. Its interior regions are in a great measure
unknown. The ancients, who had a very imperfet
knowledge of its coalts, except where they are washed by
the Mediterranean or Red Sea, were accutomed tope-
netrate into its inland provinces, and, if we may rely on
the tellimony of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, had
explored many parts of it now altogether unknown. Un-
less both modes of discovery be united, the geogra-
phical knowledge of the earth must remain incomplete
and inaccurate.

N O T E VIII. p. 24.

T I-I E notion of the ancients concerning such an
cxc.livc dci;rce of heat in the torrid zone, as rendered
it l inhallitaiblc, and their perfilting in this crror long
nftcr theyv lc:ian to have some commercial inter-
counile with fc\ eral parts of India lying within the tro-
pics,1 mull appear Io linlgul;r and absurd, that it may
nmt b1 un:)cKcpta.blc to tonme of my readers to produce
evidence of their holding this opinion, and to account
for the appare:cnt inconlijllcne of their theory with their
experienic. Cicero, who liad bellowed attention upon
tverlv part of phillofphlv known to the ancients,
fccrm, to have bclieved that the torrid zone was uninl;i-
bital)lc, and, of confitlelllnce, that there could be so
iiitcrcoliiiC'lc hettwen the northerni and southern tell-
pc:rate zoiL,. lie introdulces Ariicaunus thus addlreli"llg

tleh

the younger Scipio: " You fee this earth encompassed
and bound in by certain girdles, of which, two, at the
greatell dillance from each other, and futiaining the op-
polfte poles of heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold;
the middle one, and the largeit of all, is burnt with the
heat of the fun; two are habitable, the people in the
southern one are antipodes to us, with whom we have no
connection." SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS,C. 6. Geminus,
a Greek philosopher, contemporary with Cicero, de-
livers the lame doctrine, not in a popular work, but
in his EISAGOGE EIS PHAINOMENA, a treatise purely
scientific. " When we speak," fays he, " of the
southern temperate zone, and its inhabitants, and con-
cerning those who are called antipodes, it must be al-
ways understood, that we have no certain knowledge
orinformation concerning the southern temperate zone,
whether it be inhabited or not. But fiom the spherical
figure of the earth, and the course which the fun
holds between the tropics, we conclude that there is ano-
ther 7one, situated to the south, which enjoys the fame
degree of temperature with the northern one which we
inhabit." Cap. xiii. p. 31. ap. Petavii Opus de Doetr.
Tempor. in quo Uranologium five Sytlemata var. Auc-
torum. Amft. 1705. vol. iii. The opinion of Pliny
the naturalilt, with respect to both these points was the
fame: " There are five divisions of the earth, which
are called zones. All that portion which lies near to
the two opposite poles is opprefled with vehement cold,
and etcrnal fiolt. There, unblefl with the aspect of mild-
er Itars, perpetual darkness reigns, or at the utmoll a
felele light refleeed friom surrounding fnovws. The
middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the fun,
l scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery va-
p'0o1r. Between these torrid and fiozen dilliidts lie
I0 othler portions of the earth, which are temperate;
bult, on account of the burning region interposed,
t'lre an be no communication between them. Tlus
1ie;lrc has deprived us of three parts of the earth."
Lb ii. c 68. Strabo delivers his opinion to the famne
e1}, il terms no less explicit: " The portion of
"t earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid zone,
i rtlcldete unilihabitable by heat." Lib. ii. p. 154.

H1 h 1I 2 To

To these I might add the authority of many other
refpedable philosophers and hifiorians of antiquity.

Is order to explain the sense in which this doatrine

was generally received, we may observe, that Parmeni.
des, as we are informed by Strabo, was the first who di-
vided the earth into five zones, and he extended the li.
mits of the zone, which he supposed to be uninha.
bitable on account of heat, beyond the tropics. Ariflo-
tie, as we learn likewise from Strabo, fixed theboun.
daries of the different zones in the fame manner as
they are defined by modern geographers. But the pro-
grefs of diicovery having gradually demonstrated that
ieveral regions of the earth which lay within thetro-
pics were not only habitable, but populous and fertile,
this induced later geograpers to circumscribe the li-
mits of the torrid zone. It is not easy to ascertain with
precision the boundaries which they allotted to it, From
a pafiage in Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only
author of antiquity from whom we receive any hint con-
cerning this subjea, I hould conjeEture, that those
who calculated according to the measurement of the :
earth by Eratollhenes, supposed the torrid zone to
comprehend near sixteen degrees, about eight on each
fide of the equator; whereas such as followed the
computation of Pofidonius allotted about twenty-four `
degrees, or fomewhlat more than twelve degrees on
each fide of the equator to tilc torrid zone. Strabo,
lib. ii. p. i51. According to the former opinion,
about two thirds of that portion of the earth which lies
between the tropics was confidered as habitable; ac.
cording to the latter, about one half of it. With
this rellriition, the doctrine of the ancients concern-
ing the torrid zone appears lcfs absurd; and we caa,
conceive the reason of their aferting this zone to be
uninhabit;able, even after they had opened a comnui"ll
c;t:ion with fIcveral places within the tropics. WIln,

en of flicnlce spoke of tlhe torrid zone, they confi-,

dlred it as it was limited by the definition of gco"
graphers to lixtcen, or at the utmolt to twenty-f""'r
dcgres ; and as they knew almofl nothing of thl
ctullLtrics nearer to thie eqiuator, they might lill lip"

1p0l

pose them to be uninhabitable. In loose and popu-
lar discourse, the name of the torrid zone continued to
be given to all that portion of the earth which lies
within the tropics. Cicero seems to have been unac-
quainted with the ideas of later geographers, and ac-
cording to the division of Parmenides, defcrihes the
torrid zone as the largef of the five. Some of the an-
cients rejeced the notion concerning the intolerable
heat of the torrid zone as a popular error. This, we
are told by Plutarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras,
and we learn from Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Po-
lybius had adopted the fame opinion, lib. ii. 154.
Ptolemy seems to have paid no regard to the ancient
doctrine and opinions concerning the torrid zone.

NOTE IX. p. 42.

THE court of inquisition, which effectually checks
a spirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improvement,
wherever it is established, was first introduced into
Portugal by John III. who began his reign, A. D.
121.

NOTE X. p. 49.

AN intfance of this is related by Hackluyt, upon
the authority of the Portuguese hillorian Garcia de
Refende. Some Englifl merchants having resolved
to open a trade with the coat} of Guinea, John II.
of Portugal dispatched ambassadors to Edward IV. in
order to lay before him the right which lie had acquired
by the Pope's bull to the dominion of that country,
and to request of him to prohibit his fubjets to pro-
fecute their intended voyage. Edward was so much
ftisfied with the exclusive title of the Portuguese,
that he iflied his orders in the terms which they de-
fired. Iackluyt, Navigations, Voyages, and Traffics
of the Englifl, vol. ii. part ii . p2.

NOTS

NOTE XI. p. 59.

T H E time of Columbus's birth may be nearly
ascertained by the following circum nlances. It appears
from the fragment *cf a letter, :Ldreffec by him to
Ferdinand and Isabella, A. D. 7ji;o, that hehad,at
that time, been engaged forty years in a sea-faring
life. In another letter, he informs them, that he
went to sea at the age of fourteen ; fiom those facts
it follows, that he was born A. D. 1447. Lifeof
Chrill. Columbus, by his son Don Ferdinand. Church.
ill's Collection of Voyages, vol. ii. p. 484, 485.

N O T E XII. p. 6S.

T HE spherical figure of the earth was known to
the ancient geographers. They invented the method,
fill in use, of computing the longitude and latitude
of different places. According to their doctrine, the
equator or imaginary line which encompasses the earth
contained three hundred and sixty degrees; these they
divided into twenty-four parts, or hours, each equal to
fifteen degrees. The country of SERES or SIN, :,
being the farthell part of India known to the anci-
ents, was supposed, by Marinus Tyrius, the mofie-
minent of the ancient geographers before Ptolemy, to
be fifteen hours, or two hundred and twenty-five dc-
grees to the cait of the firll meridian, passing throiughl
the Fortunate Islands. Ptoloma:i Geogr. lib. i. c. 11.
If this supposition was well-founded, the country of'f
the Seres, or China, was only nine hours, or one
hundred and thirty-five degrees well fiom the For-
tunate, or Canary Illands; and the navigation, in
that direction, was much lhorter than by the coullei
which the Portugueze wereplofrling. Marco Polo, i"
his travels, had dcfcribcd countries, particularly the
flnand of Cipango or Zip;angri, fupipofed to be Japanl,
considerably to the call of any part of Asia, knowln

to

to the ancients. Marcus Paulus de Region. Orien-
tal. lib. ii. c 70. lib. iii. c. 2. Of course, this ccunl-
try, asit extended farther to the eafc, was still near-
er to the Canary Islands. The conclusions of Colum-
bus, though drawn from inaccurate observations, were
jult. If the suppositions of Marinus had been well
founded, and if the countries, which Marco Polo
vilited, had been situate to the eaff of thole v,-.ofe
longitude Marinus had ascertained, the prper and
nearest course to the East Indies ma!t have been
to lleer diretly weft. Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c.
2. A more extensive knowledge of the globe has
noW discovered the great error of Marinus, in flip-
posing China to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and
twenty-five degrees east from the Canorv Iflards, and
that even Ptolemy was miitaken, whcn he red:,.ed
the longitude of China to twelve hours, or one hun-
dred and eighty degrees. The longitude of the weft-
rn frontier of that vail empire is seven hours, or one
hundred and fifteen degrees from the meridian of the
C.nary Islands. But Columbus followed the light,
which his age afforded, and relied upon the autdo-
ity of wvriters, who were, at that time, regarded as
the inlru'tors and guides of mankinu mi the science of
.eography.

N O T E XIII. p. 86.

~AS the Portugueze, in making their difcov:-?i:s,
id not depart far fiom the cotll of .Africa, they
Iolici!dcd tlvtt birds, whose flight they oibfrvced with
rtat atteition, did not venture to an' coniidlcrable

hlance fr i land. In the infancy of naviration. it
Ia not knlown, that birds often 'tretch their flig,:t at
ninllcniLfe dillance fiom any land. In s;!iing towards

c Welt-lIndian islands, birds are off:.: seen at the

;lance of two hundred leagues from any land. Sloanc's
at. Hill. of ;amaica, vol. i. p. 30. Cate;by saw
o01 a;t sea, when the flhip was fix hundlred leagues
ilt:i fromn land. N:!t. 1-lill. of Carolinii, prcf. p.

lill. N;ituiclle de M. dc Btfion , loin. xvi. p. 32.
1'hlihl it appears,ht thitts i ndication of land,

oII

on which Columbus seems to have relied with fomr
confidence, was extremely uncertain.

N OTE XIV. p. 96.

IN a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Ilfa
bella, he describes one of the harbours of Cuba, with
all the enthusiastic admiration of a discoverer.---"
discovered a river which a galley might easily enter;
the beauty of it induced me to found, and I foun
from five to eight fathoms of water. Having pro.
ceeded a considerable way up the river, every thin
invited me to fettle there. The beauty of the river
the clearness of the water, through which I could fe
the sandy bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of di
ferent kinds, the tallest and finest I had seen, anda
infinite number of other large and flourilhing treei
the birds, and the verdure of the plains, are so won
derfully beautiful, that this country excels all other
as far as the day surpasses the night in brightie
and splendour, so that I often said, that it would
in vain for me to attempt to give your highnef
a full account of it, for neither my tongue nor r
pen could come up to the truth, and indeed I a
so much amazed at the fight of such beauty, that
know not how to describe it." Life of Colurno
c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. 0oo.

HE account which Columbus gives of the

inanity and orderly behaviour of the natives ons
occasion is very trilcing. "' The king (fays lc,'
a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella) hLavig l
informed of our nliiortune, cxprcflcd great
for our loss, and immediately sent aboard all
people in the place in many large canoes; w
unloaded the flip of every thing that was upon
as the king gave us gre.t aililancc, he limcló:'

ii 32

his brothers and relations, took all possible care, that
every thing mhould be properly done both aboard and
on shore. And, from time to time, he sent some of
his relations weeping, to beg of me not to be de-
jelted, for he would give me all that he had. I can
assure your highnefies, that there would not have been
so much care taken in securing our effeds in any
part of Spain, as all our property was put together
in one place near his palace, until the houses which
he wanted to prepare for the cuitody of it were emp-
tied. He immediately placed a guard of armed men,
who watched during the whole night, and those on fllore
lamented as if they had been much interested in our
loss. The people are so affedionate, so tradable, and
so peaceable, that I swear to your highnesses, that there
is not a better race of men, nor a better country in
the world. They love their neighbour as themselves ;
their conversation is the fweetelt and mildeit in the
world, cheerful, and always accompanied with a smile.
And although it is true that they go naked, yet your
highnesses may be assured that they have many very com-
mendable cuitoms ; the king is served with great Itate,
and his behaviour is so decent, that it is pleasant to
fee him, as it is likewise to observe the wonderful
memory which there people have, and their desire of
knowing every thing, which leads them to inquire into
its caufcs and effecs. Life of Columbus, c. 32. It
is probable that the Spaniards were indebted for this
oficious attention, to the opinion which the Indians
entertained of them as a fupcrior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. Io6.

EVERY monument of such a man as Colombus
is valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdinand
and lfilbclla, describing what palced on this occasion,
Cehibits a most itriking picture of his intrepidity, his
htllanity, his prudence, his public spirit, and court-
I taddrile. " 1 would have bedn less concorned for

Mis mlisfor..tunc, hlad alone been in danger, both

bacur(e mly life is a debt that I owe to the Suprelme
V01, I. Ii i Creator,

Creator, and because I have at other times been ex.
posed to the molt imminent hazard. But what gave me
infinite grief and vexation was, that after it had
pleased our Lord to give me faith to undertake this
enterprize, in which I had now been so successful,
that my opponent would have been convinced, and the
glory of your higlheffes, and the extent of your ter.
ritory increased by me ; it fliould please the Divine
Majesty to stop ail by my death. All this would have
been more tolerable, had it not been attended with
the loss of those men whom I had carried with me,
Lpon promile of the greatest prosperity, who feeing
themselves in such dif'rcfs, cursed not only theircolm
ing along with me, but that fear and awe for me,
which prevented them from returning as they óften
had refoived to have done. But betides all this, my
sorrow was greatly increased, by recolleeting that I had
left my two sons at school at Cordova, destitute of
friends, in a foreign country, when it could not in
all probability be known that I had done such ser-
vices as might induce your highnesses to remember
them. And though I comforted myself with the faith
that our Lord would not permit that, which tended
so much to the glory of his church, and which I had
brouglht about with so much trouble, to remain in-
pericst, yet I confidered that, on account of my fins, it
was his will to deprive me of that glory, which I
might have attained in this world. While in thisj
confused ltate, I thoLught on the good fortune whichl
accoip:lanlls your luighnefis, and imagincd, thit al i
thou'lln i lould pcrifli, and the vcltll be loll, it was
poliilble tliat volu miighlt somehow come to the knlvow-
ledtge of lmy vo;lyagec, and the flccefs with which iti
wa; attended. For t;hat Ireafon I wrote upon parclillient,
with the brevity which the lituation required, that I had
dilcovcred the lands which 1 promifed,l in how niayi
d(l;iy I had done it, ;rnd what course I had followcd.:
I mentioned the goodncfs of the country, the ce^
r;allci of the inhabitants, and thiat your higlincLci
futi jl', , wi're lc ft iu po fl ion of all tllh t I laiti f
covcied. l .iinig cal,'d this writing, 1 addrctlli id

to your highnefles, and promised a thousand ducats
to any person who ihould deliver it fealed, ib that if
any foreigners found it, the pronmicd reward might
prevail on them not to give the information to anotlher.
I then cauted a great calk to be brought to ;:c, and
wrapping up the parchment in an oiled cloth, aind
afterwards in a cake of wax, I put it into the caf:i,
and having flopt it well, I calt it into the sea. All the
men believed that it was some aL of devotion. Imagin-
ing that this might never chance to be taken up, as
the Ihips approached nearer to Spain, I made ano-
ther packet like the first, and placed it at the top of
the poop, so that if the fiip funk, the cask remain-
ing above water might be committed to the guidance
of fortune. "

NOTE XVII. p. Io.

SOME Spaniflh authors, with the meanness f nati-
onal jealousy, have endeavoured to detra:t from the
glory of Columbus, by insinuating that he was led
to the discovery of the New World, not by his own
inventive, or enterprising genius, but by information
which lie had received. According to their account,
a veflcl having been driven fiom its course by eallerly
winds, was carried before them far to the welt, and
landed on the coast of an unknown country, ifom
which it returned with difficulty ; the pilot, and th!ree ai-
lors, being the only person:; of the crew that ifurvi ved the
diltrclles which they fuffcrcd, from want of provilioni
an(l f;itigue in this long voyage. In a few days as-
ter tlleir arrival, all the four died, but the pilot
ha!ing been received into the house of Columbus, Jiih

ti;ate flirend, disclosed to him, before his dle:tth,
the fecrct of the discovery wlicl hle had. accidentally
Il"alcd, and left hlin his papers colita;inig a journal
of tlie voyage, which served as a guide to Coliim-
lu ill his unldertaking, Gomlara, as fur as 1 know, is
(lie iillf author who publiflled this flory, Ilill. c. 13.
tcwry circulltallacc is deltitute of cvidecnce to liupport

liiz it.

it. Neither the name of the vessel nor its deftinati.
on is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one
of the sea-port towns in Andalusia, and was failing
either to the Canaries, or to Madeira; others, that it
was a Bifcayner in its way to England ; others, a Por-
tuguele lhip trading on the coast of Guinea. The
name of the pilot is alike unknown, as well as that
of the port in which he landed on his return. Ac.
cording to some, it was in Portugal; according to
others, in Madeira, or the Azores. The year in which
this voyage was made is no less uncertain. Monfon's
Nav. Traats. Churchill, iii. 371. No mention is
made of this pilot, or his discoveries, by And. Ber-
naldes, or Pet. Martyr, the contemporaries of Colum-
bus. Herrera, with his ufuial judgment, panes overit
in silence. Oviedo takes notice of this report; but con-
liders it as a tale fit only to amuse the vulgar. HidR
lib. ii. c. 2. As Columbus held his course direcly
weit from the Canaries, and never varied it, some la
ter authors have supposed, that this uniformity is a
proof of his being guided by some previous infor-
mation. But they do not recollea the principles on
which he founded all his hopes of success, that by
holding a weterly course, he mull certainly arrive
at thole regions of the east described by the ancients,
His firm belief of his own fyttem led him to take
that courlc, and to pursue it without deviation.

OrHE i nations beside the Spaniards have called

in queilion Colulinlus's claim to the honour of having
di{covcrcd Amicica. Some German authors ascribe it
to Martin Ichlain, whomn they suppose to be their
countrlymanl. tBut they mention neither the year in
w licl h e mi c:! the di lcovery, nor the place firom which
he failed, nor one circumllance of tlle voyage. J".
Frid. SItuveniul., in a Din)iertation de vcro Novi Or-
Ibis Invclntoic , p[liltllcd at Francfort in the year
171 , wlarmly aflnrl, t1ic title of Bcllaill, blt witllhlt
prod ucing in conllitn.ii;ion of it, any thing that hais cvcn
the fli:;dlo\v of evicdnc. '1cre was; indtccd a Martin de
Bocniiii, a noted cofril',ilaphlr in the liftccllth centllry

0 1 wo,0li

whom Herrera mentions as a friend to Columbus,
dec. i. lib. i. c. 2. but he assures us that he was a Portu-
guefe, and born in the island of Fayal, one of the
'Azores. Ibid. and dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. Gomara
informs us, that Magellan was possessed of a terres-
trial globe, made by this Martin de Boemia, on which
he demonstrated the course which he purposed
to hold, in searching for that strait he afterwards
discovered. Hillt. c. 9. It seems probable, then,
that the Germans have been induced, merely by the
name of this artist, to suppose him a native of Bo-
hliieia, and on that supposition, have raised their ima-
ginary prctenfions.

Those of the Welfl seem not to reft on a foun-
dation much more solid. In the twelfth century, ac-
cording to Powell, a dispute having arisen among the
sons of Owen Guyneth, king of North Wales, con-
cerning the fucceflion to his crown, Madoc, one of their
number, weary of this contention, betook himself to sea
in quef of a more quiet settlement. He ileered due
well, leaving Ireland to the north, and arrived in an
nnknown country, which appeared to him so defira-
ble, that he returned to Wales, and carried thither
several of his adherents and companions. This is said
to have happened about the year 170, and after
that, he and his colony were heard of no more. But
it is to be oblfcrved, that Powell, on whose tetlimony
the authenticity of this fory refts, publiflhed his his-
tory above four centuries fiom the date of the e-
ient which he relates. Among a people so rude and
si illiterate as the Wcllh, at that period, the memory
of a tranfaltion tb remote mull have been very im-
lerfcely preerveld, and would require to be confirm-
ed by some author of greater credit, and nearer to
the ;uaa of Madoc's voyage than Powell. Later an-
tin(1aries l-ave indeed appealed to the tellimony of Me-
redit a;p Rhecs, a Welth bard, who died A. D. 1477.
lt lhe too lived at fucl a diltnnce of time fiom the
t''elt, that lhe cannot be confidered as a witness of
t""clh more credit than Powell. Betides his verferc

publilssed

published by Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. I. convey no infor.
mation, but that Madoc, diliatisficd with his domes.
ric situation, employed himself in searching the ocean
for new pofleffions. But even if we admit the au-
thenticity of Powell's flory, it does not follow that
the unknown country which Madoc discovered by
fIecring weft, in such a course as to leave Irelandto
the north, was any part of America. The skill of
the Welllh in the twelfth century was hardly equal
to such a voyage. If he made any discovery at all,
it more probably might be Madeira, or some other
of the weliern isles. The affinity of the Wellh lan-
gutage with some dialecs spoken in America, has been
mentioned as a circumllance which confirms the truth of
Madoc's voyage. But that has been observed in so few
intlances, and in some of these the affinity is so
obscure, or so fanciful, that no conclusion can be i
drawn from the casual resemblance of a small num- '
ber cf words. There is a bird, which as far as is a
yet known, is found only on the coal'ks of South Ame-
rica, from Port Delire to the Straits of Magellan. It is '
diininguifhed by the name of PENGUIN. This word ,
in the Wclfh language, signifies WHITE-HEAD. All
the authors who favour the pretensions of the Welflh
to the discovery of America, mention this as an ir-
refragable proof of the aflinity of the Wellh language
with that -)cken in that region of America. But
TMr. Pennant, who has given a fcicntiic defcripti-
on of the Penguin, observes, that all the birds of
that genus have black heads, " so that we must re-
sign every hope (adds he) founded on this hypothelis
of retrieving the Cambrian race in the New World."
Philof. TrianlhAt. vol. Iviii. p. 91. &c. Betide this, if
the Wellh, towards the close of the twelfth centu-
ry, had fettled in any part of America, fme reain:llS
of the Chrillian ldorine and rites iullfl have bee^5'
foudl among their decl-endants , whcen they v r dif-
covered about three hundred ycars poicerior to their'
migration, a pt-riod so Ihort, tlt, i:n the courfc o0

it

it, we cannot well suppose that all European ideas
and arts would be totally forgottcn.

THE prctcnfibns of the Norvegians to the disco-
very of America, seem to be better founded than those
of the Germans or Welsh. The inhabitants of Scan-
dinavia were remarkable in the middle ares for the
boldness and extent of their maritime excursions. In
8 , the Norwegians discovered, and planted a colo-
n inl Iceland. In 982, they discovered Greenland,
and elf:blifhed settlements there. From that, some of
their navigators proceeded towards the weft, and disco-
vered a country more inviting than those horrid re-
gions with which they are acquainted. According to
their representation, this country was faindy on the
C(oa3S, but in the interior parts level and covered
with wood, on which account they gave it the name
i f HELLE-LAND, and MARK-LAND, and having as-
terwards found some plants of the vine which bore
grapes, they called it WIN-LAND. The credit of
this flory refts, as far as I know, on the authority of the
SACA, or chronicle of king Olaus, composed by Snorro
Sturlonides, or STUR LUSONS, publiflled by Perinfkiold
atStockholm, A. D. 1697. As Snorro was born in the
'ear 1179, his chronicle might be compiled about two
ccntt;rcs after the event which he relates. His account
of thc navigation iand. discoveries of BIORN, and his
companion LIEF, is a very rude. confited tale, p.
104. o10. 326. It is impossible to difover fiom him,
\what part of America it was in which the Norwe-
gians landed. According to his account of the length
of the lays and nights, it mull have been as fitn
north as the fifty-eighti) degree of latitude, on some
ptrt of thc coafl of Labradore, approaching near
to tlhe entry of I-udfon's Straits. Grapes, certain-
Y, are not the produci;on of that country. 'Torfeui
l'l!)p(cs that there is an error in the text, by rec-
tit'inG of which, the place where the Norwegians
;lllld Inlly be lippofcd to be lituated in l a:titude
49'. 111t tthat is not the region of the vine il America.
Irn 01tI'uling Snorro's talc, I filoull think tlhat the

litiuantiolt

situation of Newfoundland corresponds bell with that
of the country discovered by the Norwegians. But
grapes are not the' production of that barren island.
Other conjetures are mentioned by M. Mallet, Introd.
a l'Hif, de Dannem. 175, &c. I am not sufficiently
acquainted with the literature of the north, to ex-
amine them. It seems manifeil, that if the Norwe.
gians did discover any part of America at thatpe.
riod, their attempts to plant colonies proved unfuc-
cefsful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. ill.

P ETER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gen-
tleman, who resided at that time in the court of
Spain, whose letters contain an account of the tranf-
ations of that period, in the order wherein they oc-
curred, describes the fcntiments with which he him-
self and his learned correspondents were affected, in
very friking terms. " Pra: lIatitia profiluiffe te, vixque
a lachrymis pra gaudio temperaffe, quando literas ads-
pexilti meas quibus, de antipodum orbe latenti hade-
nus, te certiorum feci, mi fuaviffime Pomponi, infi-
nuafti. Ex tuis ipfe literis colligo, quid fenferis.
Senfitli autem, tantique rem fecifti, quanti virum lfum-
ma dotrina infignitum decuit. Quis namque cibus
fublimibus pra;etari protest ingeniis, illo fuavior? quod
condimentum gratius ? A me facio conjeauram. Beari
fentio spiritus mcos, quando accitos alloquor prudentes
aliquos cx his qui ab earedcunt provincia. Implicent
animos pecuniarum cuinulis augendis miferi avari, libi-
dinibus obfcccni; noibras nos nmntes, pollquani l)eo
pleni aliquando fucrimus, contemplaudo, lhujufcemiodi
rerum notitia demulciamus. Epii. 152. . I'1"

2 0".0
Lacto.

N OT I

NOTE XIX. p. 122.

SO firmly were men of science, in that age, per-
fuaded that the countries which Columbus had disco-
vered were conneAed with the East Indies, that Ber-
naldes, the curate of Los Palacios, who seems to
have been no inconsiderable proficient in the know-
ledge of cosmography, contends that Cuba was not
an island, but a part of the continent, and united
to the dominions of the Great Khan. This he delivered
as his opinion to Columbus himself, who was his
gueRf for some time on his return from his second
voyage; and he supports it by several arguments,
moltly founded on the authority of Sir John Mande-
vile. MS. PENES ME. Antonio Gallo, who was
| ecretary to the magistracy of Genoa towards the close
of the fifteenth century, published a ihort account
of the navigations and discoveries of his countryman
Columbus, annexed to his Opufcula Hiftorica de re-
buspopuli Genuenfis; in which he informs us, fiomn
letters of Columbus which he himself had seen, that
itwas his opinion, founded upon nautical observations,
that one of the islands which he had discovered was
diltant only two hours or thirty degrees from Catti-
gara, which, in the charts of the geographers of
thatage, was laid down, upon the authority of Ptolemy,
lib. vii. c. 3. as the most cafterly place in Asia.
From this he concluded, that if some unknown con-
tinent did not obltrut the navigation, there mult be a
flort and easy access, by holding a wetlerly course,
to this extreme region of the East. Muratori Scriptori.
Rer. Italicarum, vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE XX. p. 127.

BERNALDES, the curate de los Palacios, a con.
teI'porary writer, fays, that five hundred of tllhfo
aptives were font to Spain, and bsld publickly in Sc-
VoL. I. K k k ville

ville as slaves; but that, by the change of climate, and
their inability to bear the fatigue of labour, they all
died in a flhort time.. MS. PENES ME.

N O T E XXI. p. 139.

C OLUMBUS seems to have formed some very fingu.
lar opinions concerning the countries which he had now
discovered. The violent swell and agitation of the
waters on the coast of Trinidad led him toconclude,
that this was the highest part of the terraqueous globe,
and he imagined that various circumstances concurred
in proving that the sea was here vifiblyelevated. Ha-
ving adopted this erroneous principle, the apparent
beauty of the country induced him to fall in with
a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. 102. that the
terrellrial paradise was the highest land in the earth;
and he believed that he had been so fortunate as to
discover this happy abode. Nor ought we to thinkit
firange that a person of so much sagacity thould be in-
fluenced by the opinion or reports of such a fabulous
author as Mandeville. Columbus and the other disco-
verers wvcre obliged to follow such guides as they could
find; and it appears fiom several passages in thema-
nufcript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend of Columbus,
that no inconsiderable degree of credit was given to
the tellimony of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldes
frequently quotes him, and always with refpc&.

NOTE XXII. p. 15o.

iT is remarkable, that neither Gomara, or Oviedo, til

molt ancient Spanifli hiflorians of Anmericaj nor I-Irera,,
confider IHojcda, or his companion Vcfpucci, as the lir:j
difcovercrs of the continent of America. They uniformly
ailrib this honour to Columnbus. Some have flUpplfe
that national rfentment againll Vcfpucci, for deserting
the service of Spain, and entering into that of Porttlga,

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 3

may have prompted these writers to conceal the aftions
which he performed. But Martyr and Benzoni, both
Italians, could not be warped by the fame prejudice.
Martyr was a contemporary author; he resided in the
court of Spain, and had the best opportunity to be ex-
atly informed with refpeE to all public tranfacions;
and yet, neither in his Decads, the firfi general hiflory
publilhed of the New World, nor in his Epistles,
which contain an account of all the remarkable e-
ventsof his time, does he ascribe to Vespucci the ho-
nour of having first discovered the continent. Ben-
zoni went as an adventurer to America in the year 1541,
and resided there a considerable time. He appears to
have been animated with a warm zeal for the honour
of Italy, his native country, and yet does not men-
tion the exploits and discoveries of Vespucci. Her-
rera, who compiled his general hiltory of America
from the moPt authentic records, not only follows
those early writers, but accuses Vespucci of falsify-
ing the dates of both the voyages which he made
to the New World, and of confounding the one with
the other, in order that he might arrogate to himself
the glory of having discovered the continent. Her.
dec. i. lib. iv. c. 2. He asserts, that in a judicial in-
quiry into this matter by the royal fiscal, it was proved
by the teftinony of Hojeda himself, that he touch-
cd at Hispaniola when returning to Spain from his
firll voyage ; whereas Vespucci "gave out that thce re-
turned direcly to Cadiz from the, coast of Paria, and
touched at Hispaniola only in their fccond voyage ; and
that he had finifled the voyage in five months; where-
as, according to Vcfpucci's account, he had employed
fcvcnteen months in performing it. Viaggio primo
dc Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag. fecundo, p. 45. Hcr-
rera gives a more full account of this inquest in ano-
th'lr part of his book, and to the fame efflef. Hcr.
dec. I. lib. vii. c. 5. Columbus was in Iifpaniola
wVhen -Iojcda arrived there, and had by that time
conic to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed Ho-
JC(las attellpt to excite a new infurrecdion, and, of
colciqu(iicce, his voyage muit have been potcerior to

K k k 2 that

that of the admiral. Life of Columbus, c, 84, Ac.
cording to Vespucci's account, he set out on his firftvoy,
age May loth, 1497. Viag. primo, p, 6. Atthat
time Columbus was in the court of Spain preparng
for his voyage, and seems to have enjoyed a confide.
rable degree of favour. Tie affairs of the New World
were at this juncsure under the direction of Antonio
Torres, a friend of Columbus. It is not probable,
that at that period a commission would be granted to a-
nother person, to anticipate the admiral, by underta.
king a voyage which he himself intended to perform,
Fonseca, who patronized Hojeda, and granted the li-
cence for his voyage, was not recalled to court, and
reinflated in the direction of Indian affairs, until the
death of prince John, which happened September
1497, P. Martyr, Ep. 182. several months posterior
to the time at which Vespucci pretends to have set out
upon his voyage. A life of Vespucci was published
at Florence by the Abate Bandini, A. D: 1745, 4to. It
is a work of no merit, written with little judgment
and less candour. He contends for his countryman's
title to the discovery of the continent with all the
blind zeal of national partiality, but produces no new
evidence to fipport it. We learn from him, that Vef-
pucci's account of his voyage was publifled as early as
the year 15 lo, and probably sooner. Vita di Am. Velp.
p. 52. At what time the name of AMERICA cametQ
be given to the New World, is not certainl.

N O T E XXIII. p. 192,

HE form employed on this occasion served as

a model to the Spaniards in all their subsequent con-
quells in America. It is so extraordinary in its nature,
and gives us filch an idea of the proceedings of the
Spaniards, and the principles upon which they found-
ed their right to the extendire dominions which they
acquired in the New World, that it well merits the
attention of the reader. " I Alonfo de l-ojeda, ser-
vanS of the moll high and powerful kings of Clf-

tile

tile and Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations,
their messenger and captain, notify to you and declare,
in as ample form as I am capable, that God our
Lord, who is one and eternal, created the heaven
and the earth, and one man and one woman, of
whom you and we, and all the men who have been
or shall be in the world, are descended. But as it
has come to pass, through the number of generations
during more than five thousand years, that they have
been dispersed into different parts of the world, and
are divided into various kingdoms and provinces, be-
cause one country was not able to contain them, nor
could they have found in one the means of sub-
fiftence and preservation; therefore God our Lord gave
the charge of all those people to one man, named
St. Peter, whom he confiituted the lord and head of
all the human race, that all men, in whatever place
they are born, or in whatever faith or place they are
educated, might yield obedience unto him. He hath
fubjeted the whole world to his jurifdition, and com-
manded him to eftablifl his residence in Rome, as
the moit proper place for the government of the
world. He likewise promised and gave him power to
eflablifh his authority in every other part of the world,
and to judge and govern all Christians, Moors, Jews,
Gentiles, and all other people, of whatever sea or
faith they may be. To him is given the name of
POPE, which signifies admirable, great father and
guardian, because he is the father and governor of
all men. Those wlho lived in the time of this holy
father obeyed and acknowledged him as their lord and
king, and the filperior of the universe. The fame has
been observed with recpe& to them who, since his
time, have been cliofen to the pontificate. Thus it now
continues, and will continue to the end of the world.

"ON e of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath
slmade a grant of thele islands, and of the Terra Firlma
of the ocean sea, to the Catholic kings of Callile,
Don Ferdinand and Donna llabella of glorious memo-
ry, andl their lilcceciblos, our sovereigns, with all they
contain as is more fully cxplrcecd in certain deeds pas-

fed

fed upon that occasion, which you may fee, if you
desire it. Thus his majesty is king 'and lord of these
islands, and of the Terra Firma, in virtue of this
donation; and, as king and lord aforesaid, most of
the illands to which his title hath been notified, have
recognized his majeftv, and now yield obedience and
subjection to him as their lord, voluntarily and without
resistance; and inflantly, as soon as they received infor-
mation, they obeyed the religious men sent by the
king to preach to them, and to inftrut them in
our holy faith; and all these, of their own fiee-will,
without any recompence or gratuity, became Chriflians,
and continue to be so; and his majesty having received
them graciously under his protecion, has command-
ed that they ihould be treated in the fame manner ashis
other fubjets and vassals. You are bound and obliged
to aft in the fame manner. Therefore I now entreat
and require you to confider attentively what I have de-
clared to you; and'that you may more perfectly com-
prehend it, that you take such time as is reasonable,
in order that you may acknowledge the Church as
the superior and guide of the universe, and likewise
the holy father called the Pope, in his own right, and
his majeity by his appointment, as king and fove-
reign lord of there islands, and of the Terra Firma;
and that you consent that the aforesaid holy fathers
fliall declare and preach to you the docrines above-
mentioned. If you do this, you ad well, and per-
form that to which you were bound and obliged; and
his majesty, and I in his name, will receive you with
love and kindness, and will leave you, your wives and
children, fi-e and exempt from fervitudc, and in the
enjoyment of all you pofl'es, in the fame manner as tlhe
inhabitants of the islands. Betides this, his majesty will
bestow upon you many privileges, exemptions, alnd rc
wards. But if you will not comply, or nmalicioufly dcly
to obey my injunction, then, with the help of God, i
will enter your country by force, I will carry on war a-
gainll you with the utmolt violence, I will subjed you0
to the yoke of obedience to the church and the king,'
will take your wives and children, and will m;lkc thelln
\ '' f~lavcs,

laves, and fell or dispose of them according to his ma-
jefty's pleasure; I will seize your goods, and do you all
the mifchiefin my power, as rebellious subje&s, who will
not acknowledge or submit to their lawful sovereign.
And I protest, that all the bloodshed and calamities
which shall follow are to be imputed to you, and not to
his majesty, or to me, or the gentlemen who forve under
ime; and as I have now made this declaration and re-
quiiition unto you, I require the notary here present to
grant me a certificate of this, subscribed in proper form."
IHerrera, dec. 1. lib. vii. c. 14.

N 0 T E XXIV. p, 205.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, observes, that
of the hundred and ninety men whom he took with him,
there were never above eighty fit for service at one time.
So much did they susser from hunger, fatigue, and sick-
ness. Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. I6. P. Mart. decad.
p. 226.

NOTE XXV. p. 217.

FONSECA, bishop of Palencia, the principal di-
reor of American affairs, had eight hundred Indians in
property; the commendator Lopc de Conchillos, his
chief afibciate in that department, eleven hundred ; and
other favourites had different numbers. They sent over-
seers to the islands, and hired out those slaves to the
plalnters. Herr. dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

NOT E XXVI. p. 239.

T HIOUGH America is more plentifully supplied
w'th water than the other regions of the globe, there is
n0 river or helcam of water in Yucatan. This peninsula
]'ojitats fi'om the continent a hlundred lcagucs, but,

where

where broadest, does not extend above twenty-five
leagues. It is a flat plain, without mountains. The
inhabitants are supplied with water from pits, and wher.
ever they dig them, find it in abundance. It is proba-
ble, from all those circumstances, that this country was
formerly covered by the Tea. Herrerax Defcriptio In-
dia Occidentalis, p. 14. Hiftoire Naturelle, par. M.
de Buffon, tom. I. p. 593.

N O T E XXVII. p. 249.

T HE height of the most elevated point in the Pyre.
nees is, according to M. Cassini, fix thousand fix hun-
dred and forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain
Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten thousand one
hundred and ten feet. The height of the Pike of Te-
neriffe, according to the measurement of P. Feuille,
is thirteen thousand one hundred and feventy-eight feet.
The height of Chimborazo, the most elevated point of
the Andes, is twenty thousand two hundred and eighty
feet. Voyage de D. Juan Ulloa, Observations Altron.
et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. 114. The height of that part of
Chimborazo which is covered perpetually with snow, is
two thousand four hundred feet. Prevot. Hillft. Gener.
des Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

N O T E XXVIII. p. 249.

A S a particular description makes a stronger impref-
sion than general assertions, I shall give one of Rio de la
Plata by an eye-witncfs. P. Cattaneo, a Modenefeje-
suit, landed at Buenos Ayres in 1749, and thus repre-
sents what he felt when fitch new objeAs were firt pre-
sented to his view. " While I resided in Europe, and
read in books of history or geography that the mouth of
the river De la Plata was an hundred and fifty miles in
breadth, 1 confidered it as an exaggeration, becaufc in
this heinifphere we have no example offuch vail rivers.
When 1 approached its mouth, I had the molt vehement

defi'e

dcfirc to afccrtain the truth with my own eyes, and I
have found the matter to be exactly as it was represented.
'lhis I deduce particularly from one circumstance:
\When we took our departure from Monte-Video, a fort
situated more than a hundred miles fiom the mouth of
the river, and where its breadth is considerably diminish-
ed, we failed a complete day before we discovered the
land on the oppolite bank of the river; and when we
vcrc in the middle of the channel, we could not discern
land on either fide, and saw nothing but the fley and wa-
ter, as if we had been in some great ocean. Indeed, we
flioild have taken it to be sea, if the frefl water of the
river, which was turbid like the Po, had not satisfied us
that it was a river. Moreover, at Buenos Ayres, ano-
ther hundred miles up thc river, and where it is Itill
much narrower, one cannot discern the opposite coast,
which is indeed very low and flat; but one cannot per-
ceivethe houses or the tops of the itceples in the Portu-
guefe settlement at Colonia on the other fide of the ri-
ver." Letteraprima, publilhed by Muratori, II Chris-
tianefimo Felic6, &c. i. p. 257.

NOTE XXIX. p. 252.

N EWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and Ca-
nada, are the countries which lie in the fame parallel of
latitude with the kingdom of France ; and in all of them
the water of the rivers is fi'ozen during winter to thz
thickness of several feet ; the earth is covered with fnicv
asdeep ; almotl all the birds ly, during that tcafon,
fiom a climate where they could not'live. llhe country
of the lflimaux, part of Labrador, and the countries on
the lilth ofIlludlon's Bay, are in the lfame parallel with
Great BIritaill ; and yet in all these tile cold is to iltcnrfe,
thilt even the indultry of Europeans has not attempted
cltivation.
VOL. 1. I 1 1 N 0 T

N O T E XXX. p. 254.

A COSTA is the firll philosopher, as far as I know,
who endeavoured to account for the different degrees of
heat in the old and new continents, by the agency of the
winds which blow in each. Hill. Moral. &-c. lib. ii. &
iii. M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not only
improved it by new observations, but has employed his
amazing pourers of delicriptive eloquence in embelliling
and placing it in the molt ltriking light. Some remarks
may be added, which tend to illustrate more fully a
docdtine of much irnportance in every inquiry ccncern-
ing the temperature of various climates.

WVi;EN a cCld wind blows over land, it must inits

paflage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means
of this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it
ccntinue to blow in the fame direction, it will come, by
dcgrco, to pass cver a surface already cooled, and w.il
fn'Fcr no longer any abatement of its ovn keennecs.
Thus. as it advances over a large traI of land, it bringi
on all the fcvcritv ofintcnfe trolt.

t.!:' the fainc wind blow over an extensive and deep

fc.i ; the lfuprfliciAlL wtcr mull be immediately cooled to
a certain degree, ald t'.e wind proportionally warmcd
B ut the upcriicial and colder water becoming fpecifical-
ly lhevier tilan the warner water belowv it, delcends;
wh1at i, warmler supplies its place, which, as it comes to
be cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air whlch
p.afis over i;, or to diiiinili its cold. This changeof
the fuplcricial water, and fuccetlivc afent of that wthich
is 'warmer, and colnflcequnet ucccflive abatement of cold-
ncfs in the air, is aided by the agitation caifed in the fca
by the mechanical acion of the wind, and also by the
motion o I the t'idel. This will go on, and the rigour of
the wi,1id will conti t le to (1illiitliifi unItil the whole water
is so far coo!led, that the w.ltel on the surface is no longer
removed fioml the actioa of the wind, fall cnough 1t

hiimdcr

hinder it from being arrested by froit. Whenever the
surface fi-eezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the
water from below, and it goes on with undiminilhed
cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the severity
of winter frosts in extensive continents; their mildness
in frall islands ; and the superior rigour of winter in
those parts of North America with which we are belt
acauainted. In the north-wefl parts of Europe, the fe-
verity of winter is mitigated by the well winds, whioh
usually blow in the months of November, December,
and part of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over
land, it heats the surface, which mull therefore cease to
abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blow-
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water
from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat of
its own heat.

BUT the great power of the lea to mitigate the heat
ofthe wind or air paflling over it, proceeds from the fol-
lowing circumltance, that on account of the transparency
of the sea, its surface cannot be heated to a great degree
hb the fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubjelted to their
inluence, very soon acquires great heat. When, there-
fore, the wind blows over a torrid continent, it is soon
railcd to a heat almost intolerable; but during its pas-
fagc over an extensive ocean, it is gradually cooled ; so
tlhat on its arrival at the farthest folre, it is again fit for
rcfprir;tion.

'Illosr principles will account for the sultry heats of

;llce continelnts in the torrid zone ; for the mild cli-
"'lte of ifinand il the fame latitude ; and for the fupe-
ri" wa rInmt11 illn lfulnrll which large continents, situated
'i ttemprcate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy, whei
CO"'pil:' with that ofi tlnds. "lThe heat of a climate
(l'e'tils not only 1upon tile imnime(diate cnfidl of the fun's
't;', but on their continuled( operation, on the cfict

L. 1 1 which

which they have formerly produced, and which remains
for some time in the ground. This is the reason why
the day is warmeil about two in the afternoon, the fum-
mer warmell about the middle of July, and the winter
coldeR abotrt the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the

sun-beams from heating the ground, are a great cause of
the temperate climate of the equatorial parts. The
ground, not being heated, cannot heat the air ; and the
leaves, which receive the rays intercepted from the
ground, have not a mass of matter fuficient to absorb
heat enough for this purpose. Besides, it is a known
fad&, that the vegetative power of a plant occasions a
perlpiration from the leaves in proportion to the heat
to which they are exposed ; and, friom the nature of eva-
poration, this perspiration produces a cold in the leaf
proportional to the perspiration. Thus the effe ofthe
Jeaf in heating the air in ccnt:ctt with it, is prodigious
ly diminifled. For those observations, which throw
much additional light on this curious subject, I am in-
debted to my ingenious friend, Mr. Robifon, professor
es natural philoiophy in the university of Edinburgh.

N O T E XXXI. p. 255,

J HE climate of Bi ilil has been dcfcribed by twD
eminent naturalifis, Pito and M:irgr;.vc, who obfcrved
it with a philosophical accuracy, which, we desiderate in i
the accounts of many other provinces in America.
Both represent it as temperate and mild,.when compaIr
ed with the climate of Africa. They acliibc this clielii
to the rcfrcefling wind which blows contilllllly flr'o te
fia. The' air is not only cool, but chilly through tlie
night, in so muclh tht; the native les kidlfireevery c-
vcinilnt in their huts. P'ii) de Medicina Brafilicnfi, lib
i.p. I,.&c. M;igralvius tiltor. Reruin Natural. lli'a
hilii:, libviii. c. 3.

pc . N.

Nic4 . N hof, who rcfic(l

iong' in l ralil, conisirm' their defcril tion. Chuircll'is
Collcelion, vol.ii. z6. G ilinill;, whio rciidcdinainYl

year

years in the country, upon the river Orinoco, gives a
similar description of the temperature of the climate
there. Hist. de l'Orenoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna
felt a very considerable degree of cold in the countries
on the banks of the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. p.
56. M. Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne,
gives a similar account of the temperature of that cli-
mate, and ascribes it to the fame cause. Voyage dela
France, Exquinox, p. 330. Nothing can be more dif-
ferent from these descriptions than that of the burning
heat of tne African coast given by M. Adanfon. Voyage
to Senegal, pafim.

THE most obvious and probable cause of this superior
degree of cold, towards the southern extremity of Ame-
rica, seems to be the form of the continent there. Its
breadth gradually decreases as it stretches from St. An-
tonio founthwards, and from the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimensions are much contracted.
On the eall and weft fides, it is washed by the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans. From its southern point it is pro-
brble that an open sea firetches to the Antartic pole. In
whichever ofthefe directions the wind blows, it is cool-
ed before it approaches the Magellanic regions, by pass-
iRg over a vaR body of water, nor is the land there of
flch extent that it can recover any considerable degree
of heat in its progress over it. These circumlances
concur in rendering the temperature of the air in this
dillrift of America, more similar to that of an insular,
thain to that of a continental climate, and hinder it fiom
;iqlliring the famc degree offummer heat, with places
in Europe and Asia, in a corresponding northern lati-
tkdc. The north wind is the only one that reaches this
p:rt (;f A\mcrica, after blowing over a great continent.
Blt inim ;In attentive survey of its position, this will be
('rtiiid to ]IivC a tendency, rather to dimiilhl than aug-
:l'ii t ihe dc-ree of heat. IThe futhlin extrelmity of
.iit'ric;l i.; ltolerIly tlh termcination of the immcnle
ii'l oftlhe And es, wih iclh letches nearly in a direC line
,1111 inl nti) to fotutli, through the whole extent of the
cru ltilcot. 'IThe imoJl ful try regions inl Southl-America,
G"l;ii, rafil, P1araguay, atud 'I'LCLln1an, lie ianly de-

grees

grees to the eafl of the Magellanic regions. The level
country of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situ.
ated considerably to the weft of them. The north wind
then, thoulgh it blows over land, does not bring to thile
southern extremity of America, an increase of heat col.
leated in its passage over torrid regions, but before it ar-
rives there, it muil have swept along the summits of the
Andes, and come impregnated with the cold of that fro,
een region.

N O T E XXXII. p. 256.

W VO French frigates were sent upon a voyageur

discovery in the year 1739. In latitude 44. south, tey,
began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In latitude
48°, they met with islands of floating ice. Hiltoire des
Navigations aux Terres Australes, tom. ii, 256, &c. Di.
Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59°. Id. tom. i. p
4,7. Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Patago-
nia, latitude 5 ° 33' south, on the fifteenth of December,
which is midfummner in that part of the globe, thetwen-
ty-firl of December being the longeli day there, com-
nar-s the climate to that of England in the middle of
winter. \VoyVa es by Hawkevworth, i. 25. Mr. B;nls
havi;. I.ineld ;n ''cri-n 1dc Ftuc^o in the Bay of Good
Succcbl, latitutde 5) , on ti:e lixtecnth of Jana;:rl)'
vwhich correlponds to the month of July in our leifnuf
phere, two of his attendants died in one night of ex-
treme cc(ld, and all the party were in the moll iiinulnent
danger of pcrillin g. Id. ii . i, :2. By the fourteenth
of March, correfpcnd ing to Septeimber in our liheil-
phere, winter was ft't in with rigour, a;nd the nouliliin
were covered witll fnoi . Ibid. 72.

N O T E XXXIII. p. 25R.

M ,, CONDAMIN\t I.d ib. one (f the l:t-'fl and i
'accura te olhfcrtxc, of the illltrior Stlte of South1-A iM'ni
;:a. " fLter deiciulin 1frcinl the Andes (fays he) o(,l

l),clulol'

le!h!ls a vail and uniform profpec' of water and verdure,
anJ nothinlg more. One treads upon the earth, but
dioc- not sec it ; as it is so entirely covered with luxuriant
pl.ant,, werds, and shrubs, that it would require a con-
tierable degree of labour to clear it, for the space of a
;,r)t. Reiatioil abregc d'un Voyage, &c. p. 48, One

I f tle iing ularities in the foreils is a fort of osiers, or

tithi, called nEJ ucos by the Spaniards, and LIANES by
tle l'renh, and NInBEES by the Indians, which are
ufiialy cmployed as ropes in America. This plant
t t.:it ahout the tr-es which it nmets with, and rising a-
ltir tleir hi?:cll branches, its tendrils descend perpen-
(tiicu::riy, iirike into the ground, take root, rife up a-

aiut! ai,;thier tree, and thus mount and descend alter-

n,:tcv. Gther tendrils are carried obliquely by the
Iini, or ;iine accident, and form a confusion of inter-
v.o-'n cnrdage, which refenmbles the rigging of a flip.

lancri'ft, N.t. Hiit. of Guiana, 99. Thele withs are
c.tcn as thick as the arm of a man. lb. p. 7-. M.
Eout!!cr's account of the foreils in Peru perfec'ly re-
Icniilc) this description. Voyage an Peru, p. 16. Ovie-
do gives a linailar description of the foretls in other parts
r .ierica. Hilt. lib. ix. p. 144-. D. The country of
ith C lGXo is so much overflowed, that they are obliged
to rcfide on the finnmit of tome rising ground during
sl;me part of the year, and have no communication with
their countrymen at any di!tance. Lettres Edifiant's,
in!. x. p. 1j7. Garcia gives a full and just delcripti-
(i1 of th! rivers, lakes, woods, and marlhes in those
cuuntrics of America which lie between the tropics.
O:iln deic los Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. § 4, 5. The incrc-
tliblc hli:r!ill; s to whichl Golncale Pizarro wvas cxpofCd
,111 ttcln ti!l.; to march illto ltiC coiutry to tie call of
ithe Anl ic, gives a very Ihlliing idea of that part of A-
""ric.I in its orliinal uinculltivtld 1lat. (Gicil. dc la
\1':'?;, Royi.. Connment. of Pertu, plrt ii. book iii. c.
2N
-5.

N O T'

N O T E XXXIV. p. 260.

TjHE animals of America seem not always to have
been of a size inferior, to those in other quarters of the
globe. Near the banks of the Ohio, a considerable
number of bones of an immense magnitude have been
found. The place where this discovery has been made
lies about one hundred and ninety miles below thejunc-
tion of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four
miles diflant from the banks of the latter, on the fide of
the marsh called the Great Salt Lick. The bones liein
vast quantities about five or fix feet underground, and
the stratum is visible in the bank on the edge ofthe
Lick. JOURNAL OF COLONEL GEORGE CROGLAN,
MS. PENES , E. This spot. seems to be accurately laid
down by Evans in his map. These bones must have
belonged to animals of enormous bulk, and naturalits
being acquainted with no living creature of such size,
were at firll inclined to think that they were mineral
flublances. Upon receiving a greater number offpeci-
mnens firom various parts of the earth, and after infpest-
ing them more narrowly, they are now allowed to be the
bones of an animal. As the elephant is the largeltlknown
quadruped, and the tusks which were found nearly re-
fembled, both in form and quality, the tusks of an ele-
phant, it was concluded that the carcases deporfted on
the Ohio were of that fpccics. But Dr. Hunter, one of
the pcrfons of our age belt qualified to decide with re-
fpct to this point. 1h;ving accurately examined several
parcels oftufks, and grinders, and jaw-bones, sent from
the Ohio to London, gives it as his opinion, that they
did not belong to an clephant, but to some huge carni'
vorous animal of an unknown fpecis. llhil. Tranlfa.
vol. Iviii. p. 31-. Bones of the fame kind, and as re-
markable for their size, have been found near tl!
nouths of the great rivers, Oby, Jenifeia, and Lena, ill
Sibel-ia.- S TI ALI:. It NII It(;, DI scUlS'T. 01 NOR'I
AND E A S PART I. S () 1U ROPE ANI) ASIA, p. 4O2' z,
1Th eleph;at fcems to be confined in his range to tila

torrid

torrid zone, and never multiplies beyond it. In such
cold regions as those bordering on the frozen Tea, he
could not live. The existence of such large animals in
America might open a wide field for conjeAure. The
more we contemplate the face of nature, and confider
the variety of her produ&cions, the more we must be fa-
tisfied that aftonilhing changes have been made in the
terraqueous globe by convulsions and revolutions, of
which no account is preserved in history.

N O T E XXXV. p. 261.

;i HIS degeneracy of the domestic European animals
in America ought to be imputed partly to each of these
causes. In the Spanifi settlements, which are situated
either within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering
upon it, the increase of heat, and diversity of food, pre-
vent leep and horned catfle from attaining the fame
size asin Europe. They seldom become so fat, and
their flelh is not so juicy, or of si. h delicate flavour. In
North-America, where the climate is more favourable,
and similar to that of Europe, the quality of the grafles
which spring up naturally in their pasture grounds is not
good. Mitchell, p. 151. Agriculture is ltill so much
in its infancy, that artificial food for cattle is.not raified
in any quantity. During a winter, long in many pro-
vinces, and rigorous in all, no proper care is taken of
their cattle. The general treatment of their horses and
horned cattle is injudicious and harih in all the English
colonies. These circumlances contribute more, per-
h]aps, than any thing peculiar in the quality of the cli-
mate, to the degeneracy of breed in the horses, cows,
and fliccp, in most of its provinces.

N O T E XXXVI. p. 261.

IN the year 1518, theifland of Hifpaiuiola was aRiAcd.
with a dreadful visitation of those dellruslive inf'els, tho
particulars of which Herrera defcribcs, and mentions a
VOL. I. _ m in fitnlgku-

finlglar inflance of the superstition of the Spanilh plan.
ters. After trying various methods of exterminating
the ants, they resolved to implore proteEion of the
fiints, but as the calamity was new, they were at a loss
to find out the iaint who could give them the most effec-
tual aid. They call lots in order to discover thepatron
whom they hlould invoke. The lots decided in favour
of St. Saturninus. They celebrated his festival with
great solemnity, and immediately, adds the historian, the
calamity began 'to abate. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c,
5.p. l. 107.

N O T E XXXVII. p. 263.

T HE author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les
Americains supposes this difference in heat to be equal
to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from
the equator in the old continent, is as warm as one fitua
ted eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i. p.. I.
Dr. Mitchell, after okfervations carried on during thir-
ty years, contends that the difference is equal to foi-
teen or fifteen degrees of latitude. Present State, &c.
p. 257.

N 0 T E XXXVIII. p. 263.

JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the lheal of
St. John's river in lkal Florida, observed a fioft so in-
tcnle, th:tt in one night, the ground was frozen an inch
tlhick upon the banks of the river. The limes, citrols,
a;nd lbananl trees, at St. A utlulline were dellroyed. llcr-
tra;in's Jo)iii:l, p. .

20. her illianlces ofthe.extrlolidi

ni;ry operaltios of cold in tile foutheorn provincesof
'Noril-l-Amn ri T are colleced by D)r. Mitclhell. Irefcnlt
S1;ilc, p. 206, &ce. February 7th, 1747,' the fiolft at
C lia;tlrl(cl owni ws so iitenife, that a person having c;irct
two tu;ir lt littles of liot water to bed, in the mornlng
they! were split to pieces, andl the water solid lulmps of
icc. In ;a kitchen where there was a lirc, the water ill a

jar,

jar, in which there was a large live eel, was frozen to
the bottom. Almost all the orange and olive trees were
deltroyed. Description of South-Carolina, 8vo. Lolid.
1761.

N O T E XXXIX. p, 264.

A Remarkable infance of this occurs in Dutch Gui-
ana, a country every where level, and so low, that dur-
ing the rainy seasons, it is usually covered with water
near two feet in height. This renders the foil so rich,
that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is a
firatum of perfec manure, and as such has been tranf-
ported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Effequebo,
thirty crops of ratoon canes have been raised fuccejfive-
lv, whereas in Weft-Indian islands more than two is ne-
ver expefed. The expedients by which the planters
endeavour to diminish this excessive fertility of foil are
various. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. o1, &c.

N 0 T E XL. p. 274.

JM ULLER fcems to have believed, without fifficient
evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tomr. i. p.
Il, &c. and the Imperial Academy of St. Petcrlburgh
gixe some countenance to it, by the manner in which

cI CI UKOTSKOI-NOSS is laid down in their charts.

But I am assurcd, from undoubted authority, that no
Rufflian vcflcl has ever failed round that cape, and as the
cfiuntry of 'T's c 1i UT K is not filubjct to the R ullian en-
I're, it is very imperfecly known.

N O T E XLI. p. 276.

W TI RE this the place for entering into a long and
"ilnricate geographical ditlqliiition, many curious obfer-
valions mligllt arifi from comparing the accounts of the

M m 1n 1n 2 two

two Ruflian voyages, and the charts of their refpeaive
navigations. One remark is applicable to both, We
cannot rely With absolute certainty on the pofitionwhich
they afiign to several of the places which theyvifited.
The weather was so extremely foggy, that they seldom
saw the fun or stars, and the position of the islands and
supposed continents was commonly determined byrec-
koning, not by obfcrvation. Beering and Tfchirikow
proceeded much farther towards the east than Krenitzin.
The land diicovered by Beering, which he imagined to
be part of the American continent, is in the 236th de.
gree of longitude from the firll meridian in the isle of
Ferro, and in 58S 28' of latitude. Tfchirikowcame
upon the fame coast in longit. 241°, lat. 56°. Muller,
i. 248, 249. The former mull have advanced 6ode-
grees from the port of Petropawlowfka, from which he
took his departure, and the latter 65 degrees. But
from the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it appears that he
did not fail farther towards the east than the 28othde-
gree, and only 3Z degrees from Petropawlowfka. In
1741, Beering and Tfchirikow, both in going and re-
turning, held a course which was mostly to the south of
that chain of islands which they discovered, and ob-
serving the mountainous and rugged aspet of the head-
lands which they descricd towards the north, they sup-
posed them to be promontorics belonging to some part
of the American continent, which, as they fancied,
flrctched as far south is the latitude 56. In this manner
they are laid c,.wU in the chart publifled by Muller,
and likcwife in a manuficript chart drawn by a mate of
Beering's 1hip, communicated to me by Mr. Professor
Robifon. But in 1769, Krenitzin, after wintering in
the island Alaxa, ltood lo far towards the north in his re-
turn, that his coilfe lay through the middle of what
they had supposed to be a continent, which he found to
be an open sea, and that theyl had miflaken rocky inls
for the head-lands of a continent. It is probable, tlla
the countries discovered in 1741, towards the cal, do
not belong to the American continent, but are only a
continuation of the chain of ilands. Flrom the extrcnil
fuillmer cold of all thole ifcs, one is led to colnjeaRtl
that no large continent lies very near to theml. ll

llnulber

number of volcanos in this region of the globe is remark-
able. There are several in Kamfchatka, and not one of
the islands, great or small, as far as the Ruffian naviga-
tion extends, is without them. Many are aEually burn-
ing, and the mountains in all bear marks of having been
once in a state of eruption. Were I disposed to admit
such conjectures as have found place in other inquiries
concerning the peopling of America, I might suppose
that this part of the earth, having suffered violent con-
vulfions from earthquakes and volcanos, an isthmus,
which may have formerly united Asia to America, has
been broken, and formed into a cluster ofiflands by the
flock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian navi-
gators were attempting to make discoveries in the north-
weft of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting the
fame design from another quarter. In 1769, two small
vessels failed from Loretto in California to explore the
coasts of the country to the north of that peninsula.
They advanced no farther than the port of Monte-Rey
in latitude 36. But, in several fucceflive expeditions
fitted out from the port of St. Bias in New Galicia, the
Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 58. GA-
ZETA DE MADRID, March 19, and May 14, 1776. But
as the journals of those voyages have not yet been pub,
lifhed, I cannot compare their progress with that of the
Ruffians, or flew how near the navigators of the two na-
tions have approached to each other. It is to be hoped,
that the enlightened minister, who has now the diredion
of American affairs in Spain, will not withhold this in-
formation from the public.

N O T E XLII. p. 290.

I1 FW travellers have had fitch opportunity of obferv-
i'g the natives of America, in its various dilhrits, as
Don Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately published by him,
ltc tlhus (dfcribes the charatll riflical features of the race:

a very finall tbrolhcd, covered with hair towards its

cx tremitica

extremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; little
eyes ; a thin nose, small and bending towards the upper
lip ; the countenance broad ; the ears large ; the hairve-
ry black, lank, and coarse; the limbs well turned, the
feet small, the body ofjuft proportion; -and altogether
smooth and free from hair, until old age, when they ac-
quire ftme beard, but never on the cheeks." Noticias
Americanas, &c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier Pinto, who
resided several years in a part of America which Ulloa
never visited, gives a sketch of the general afpecofthe
Indians there. "They are all of a copper colour, wfth
some diversity of shade, not in proportion to their diltance
from the equator, but according to the degree of elevati-
on of the territory which they inhabit. Those who live
in a high country are fairer than those In the marshy low
lands on the coast. Their face is round, farther remov-
ed, perhaps, than that of any people from an oval shape.
Their forehead is small, the extremity of their ears far
from the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, theireyes
black, or of a chefnut colour, finall, but capable of dif-
cerning objeEts at a great distance. Their haiir is always
thick and sleek. and without any tendency to curl. They
have no hair on any part of their body but the head. At
the firll aspet, a southern American appears to be mild
and innocent, but on a more attentive view, one disco-
vers in his countenance bomething wild, diltruitful, and
fullen." MS. Pr N IS ME. The two portraits, drawn
by hands very different from those of common travellers,
have a near resemblance.

N O T E XLIII. p. 290.

A MAZING accounts arc given of the persevering
speed of the Americans. Adair relates the adventllrcs
of a Chikkafaih warrior, who run through woods and o-
ver mountailis, three' hundred computed miles in a day
and ahlalf and two nights. lill. of Amer. Ind(. 396.

NOTE

N O T E XLIV. p. 294.

Go D N L E J E U N E, who resided fifteen years a-

mong the Indians'of Peru and Quito, and, twenty years in
the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a con-
ftant intercourse with the Galibis, and other tribes on
the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour ofconltitution a-
mong the Americans is exacly in proportion to their ha-
bits cf labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such as
those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of A-
mazons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be compared
forfirength with thbfe in cold countries; and yet, fays
he, boats daily set outfrom Para, a Portugueie settlement
on the river Amazons, to ascend that river against the
r:ipility of the tream, and with the fame crew they pro-
ceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues dif-
tant. No crew of white people, or even of negroes,
would be found equal to a task of such perfeveringfa-
tigue, as the Portuguefe.have experienced, and yet the
Indians, being accustomed to this labour from their in-
fhncy, perform it. MS. PENES ME.

NO T E XLV. p. 300.

jD ON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of
1'eru. nd Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and fe-
'r.nl of the provinces bordering on the Mlexican G ulph,
w hile employed in the fame service with the French ina-
ihcm,tticians during the fpacc often years, and who as-
tervaris had an opportunity of viewing the North-Ame-
iicnlls,: allets, " that if we have fecn one American, we

aiyiy be said to have feen.them all, their colour and inake
n;r lo nearly the fame." Notic. Americanas, p. 308. A
clcre early oblerver, Pcdro de Cicca de Lcon, one of the

conIluerors of PerCu, who had likewise travcrcld many
1rovinces of America, aflirms, that the people, men and
\t'"ltn, although there is fich a multitude of tribes or
"laions as to be almost innumerable, and fulch divcrfity

of

extremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; little
eyes ; a thin nose, fmiall and bending towards the upper
lip ; the countenance broad ; the ears large ; the hairve-
ry black, lank, and coarse; the limbs well turned, the
feet small, the body ofjuft proportion; and altogether
smooth and free from hair, until old age, when they ac-
quire tfme beard, but never on the cheeks." Noticias
Amnericanas, &c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier Pinto, who
resided several years in a part of America which Ulloa
never visited, gives a sketch of the general afpectofthe
Indians there. "They are all of a copper colour, wfth
some diversity of hade, not in proportion to their distance
from the equatcr, but according to the degree of elevati-
on of the territory which they inhabit. Those who live
in a high country are fairer than those In the marshy low
lands on the coall. Their face is round, farther remov-
ed, perhaps, than that of any people from an oval shape.
Their forehead is frnall, the extremity of their ears far
from the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, theireyes
black, or of a chefnut colour, small, but capable of dif-
cerning objets at a great diltance. Their hair is always
thick and fleck, and without any tendency to curl. They
have no hair on any part of their body but the head. At
the firit aspet, a southern American appears to be mild
and innocent, but on a more attentive view, one disco-
vers in his countenance something wild, diltruftful, and
fullen." MS. PENE.S ME. The two portraits, drawn
by hands very different from those of common travellers,
have a near resemblance.

N O T E XLIII. p. 290.

A MAZING accounts are given of the persevering
speed of the Americans. Adair relates the adventllrcs
of a Chikkafah warrior, who run through woolds and o-
ver mountains, three hundred computed miles in a lay
and a half and two nights. Hilt. of Amcr. Ind. 396.

N O 'I E

N O T E XLIV. p. 294.

M Oe GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen yearsa-
mong the Indians'of Peru and Quito, and, twenty years in
the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a con-
tlant intercourse with the Galibis, and other tribes on
the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour ofconrtitution a-
iong the Americans is exa&ly in proportion to their ha-
bits cflabour. The Indians, in warm climates, such as
those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of A-
mazons, and the river Orinoco, are.not to be compared
for ilrength with thbfe in cold countries; and yet, fays
he, boats daily set out from Para, a Portuguese settlement
on the river Amazons, to ascend that river againfl the
rapidity of the stream, and. with the fame crew theypro-
ceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues dif-
tant. No crew of white people, or even of negroes,
would be found equal to a talk offuch perfeveringfa-
tigue, as the Portuguese .have experienced, and yet the
Indians, being accustomed to this labour from their in-
fincy, perform it. MIS. PENES ME.

N OTE XLV. p. 300oo.

JDON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of
Pl'cu nd Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and fe-
Vrcrl of the provinces bordering on the Mexican Gulph,
w'i\le employed in the fame service with the French ma-
lhcm.lticians during the space often years, and who as-
tcKrva'rd had an opportunity of viewing the North-Ame-
icn;lls, llrts, " that if we have fecn one American, we
malvy le faidi to ha.ve Ifen.them all, their colour and make
Mtc iio nearly the fame." Notic. Amcericanas, p. 308. A

)Itre. early oblerver, Pedro de Cicca de Leon, one of the
Co!nluerors of Peru, who had likewise trav'CfIed many
provinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and
\'o'""tl, altlhough there is filch a multitude of tribes or
"ilions as to be almolt innumerable, and such diversity

of

of climates, appear nevertheless like the children of one
father and mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i. c. 19,
There is, no doubt, a certain combination of features, ,
and peculiarity of afpe&, which forms what may be called
a European or Asiatic countenance. There muftlike-
wife be one that may be denominated American, corn-
mon to the whole race. This may be supposed to strike
the traveller at first fight, while the various lhades, which
ditiinguifh people of different regions, escape his obfer-
vation. But when persons who had resided so longa.
mong the Americans concur in bearing testimony to the
similarity of their appearance in every climate, we may
conclude that it is more remarkable than that of any o
ther race. See likewise Garcia Origen de los Indies, p,
54. 242. TorquemadaMonarch. Indiana, ii. 571.

N O TE XLVI. p. 301.

MI * LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, thatinthe
interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that some
persons resembling the white people of Darien have been
found; but that the breed did not continue, and their
children became like other Americans. This race, how-
ever, is very imperfectly known. MS. PENES ME.

N O T E XLVII. p. 304.

T HE testimonies of different travellers, concerning
the Patagonians, have been collected and stated with a
considerable degree of accuracy by the author of Re-
cherches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. z81, &c. iii. ;81,
&c. Since the publication of his work, several naviga-
tors have visited the Magellanic regions, and, like thir
predecessors, differ very widely in their accounts of its ill
habitants. By Commodore Byron and his crew, who
failed through the Straits in 1764, the common fi'e of
the Patagonians was eltimated to be eight feet, alnd mi-
ny of them much taller. Phil. Tranfat. vol. Ivii. \.
78. By Captainh Wallis and Carterot, who alillI

nloafuvoi

measured them in 1766, they were found to be from fix
feet to fix feet five and seven inches in height. Phil. Tranf.
vol. lx. p. 22. These seem to have been the very people
whose size had been so much over-rated in the year 1764;
for several of them had beads and red baize of the fame
kind with what had been put aboard Captain Wallis's
Ihip, and he naturallyconcluded that they had got these
from Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In 1767 they were a-
gain measured by M. Bougainville, whose account a-
grees nearly with that of Captain Wallis. Voy. z1).
To these I shall add a testimony of great weight. In
the year 1762, Don Bernardo Ibagnez de Echavarri ac-
companied the Marquis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ayres,
and resided there several years. He is a very intelligent
author, and his reputation for veracity unimpeached a-
mong his countrymen. In speaking of the country to-
wards the southern extremity of America, "By what
Indians," fays he, " is it pofcfilcd ? Not certainly by
the fabulous Patagonians, who are fuppoled to occupy
this diltrit. I have from many eye-witnesses, who have
lived among those Indians, and traded much with them,
a true and accurate description of their persons. They
areof the fame stature with Spaniarl;-d. I never fawv cne
who rose in height two VA AS alnd two or three iilhes,"
i. e. about 80 or 81. 332 inches Engliih, if Echavarri
makes his computation according to the VA R A of Madrid.
This agrees nearly with the meafturcment of Captain
Wallis. Reyno Jefuitico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who re-
ided as a miflionary forty years in the southern parts of
America, fays, that " the Pat:lgonian., or Pucelches, are
alargca-bodied people ; but I never heard of that igain-
tic race which others hIave mentioned, tlhough I have fcte
persons of ail the difierent tribes of louthcrn Indians."
hlitrod. p. 26.

N 0 ' XrVIi . 3. 50.

AN'ToN 1 I0 'iA,.t r ,7 Ri11,i i;t R, n learned and ingce
lio0s physician, pultlitlcd at diifltrltalionl in thel yvet.
'76, in which lie endeavours to prove, that tlhi difeaei
Vol,, I. 'N n ws

was not introduced from America, but took its rife in
Europe, and was brought on by an epidemical and ma-
lilnant diolrder. Did I chuef to enter into a difquiiiti-
ca on this fiubjec, which I ihould not have mentioned,
if it hid not been intimately connected with this part of
mJy inquiries, it would not be difficult to point out some
millakes witll respect to the fats upon which he founds,
aj well as some !er ors in the consequences which he draws
froml them. Tl'ne rapid communication of this disease
fi-om Spain over Europe, seems to resemble the progress
of an epidemic, r:ther than that of a disease tranfinitted

y, infeLtion. The firll mention of it is in the year
14-93, and before the year 1497 it had made its appear-
a.ice in moil countries of Europe, with such alarming
f)imptomss as rendered it necefiary for the civil magiikate
to interpole, in order to check its career.

N O T E XLIX. p. 311.

I-iE people of Otaheitelhave no denomination for

anv numiler nbo two lunildred, which is fuflicient for
thelir i;t in flatios . \'o1g(es, by -liawkcfworth, ii. 28.

N O T E I. p. 317.

1 S tlhe ic; \\l hich 1 Ilhave given of rude nations is ex-
t, ..(:l\ !i ltI.i'c*in flrolll thlat xelil)itcd by very refpclSblec
' LiL io,'., i ;1: le );'

i er t',o prod lce some of the many

a ti ll iii'' on \vhi I) I s)i id ny description Tle man-
ncri' of tlie r;Fa\ .c t ilics ill America have never been i
viecwedl 1>! pc rfonls ni)ire c.ipablc ofrobfcIrving them witlI
t(iirccln.lll'lt, tll.tl the P' il(,foI()phers employed by FraInce
;:r(l Si r:in, in tihe

I .cir 1735, to determiinlc the figlur of

tlie e ti,,. 1VI. Boiilner, Antonio d'Ulloa, anlld )
(;"1'..'r i anin, reiided long aImong' the nativet. of the l:l ;
civilicd prnvinccsi in l'cru. M. de la Coll dailnie hI,:111
not onl y this opportnit y for oblfrviltinl, t, i, ills
vo a'ci. d(lovn the Ma;Ir lnon, le had access toilifpet the
fla;c of tll vXllariouis nations feated oni its banls, in its ;

.colr' I

course across the continent of South America. There is
a wonderful resemblance in their reprelentation of the
charater of the Americans. " They are all extremely
indolent," iays M. Bouguer, "they are lfupid, thei'
pals whole days fitting in the fame place, without mov-
ing, or speaking a single word. It is noteafy to describe
thedegree of their indifference for wealth, and all its
advantages. One does not well know what motive to
propose to them, when one would persuade them to per-
form any service. It is vain to offer them money; they
answer, that they are not hungry. " Voyage aut Perou,
p. 102. If one conliders them as men, the narrowneli
of their underltanding seems to be incompatible with
the excellence of the foul. Their imbecillity is so vili
ble, that one can hardly form an idea of them different
from what one has of the brutes. Nothing dillurbs the
tranquility of their fouls, equally insensible to difaiters
and toprofperity. Though half naked, they are as con-
tented as a monarch in his niot splendid array. Riches
do not attract them in the smallest degree, and the au-
thority or dignities to which they may aspire, are so little
the objects of their ambition, that an Indian will re-
ceive with the fame indifference the office of a judge
(Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of the for-
mer and appointed to the latter. Nothing can move or
change them. Intereil has no power over them, and they
ofien refuse to perform a finall service, though certain
of a great recompence. Fear makes no imprefflon upon
thell, and refp)e as little. Their di lFofition is (b fin-
giilar, that there is no method ofinllnenciiag thicl, no
means of rouzing them from that indifierence, which is
proof againlt all the endeavours of the wifell perlons;
no )(pedient that can induce them to abandon that groil;
iignoraLnce, o lay alide that careless negligence, which
ticilcncrt the prudence and difalppoint the care of fuich
a;1 r aLttentive to their welfare. Voyage de Ulloa, tom.
i.33g, 336. Of tholie tingular qualities lie produces
I":miy c\traolrliI;Ly inIlance;, p. 336--347. "l nenli-
h't!y,"' fliys M. de la Condlam1ine, " is the basis of the
Alm leca;n charaelr. I leave others to determine, wlie-
tilr tllis Ihould be dignified with the name of apathy, or
'!il'ractcd witlh that of llupidity. It arises, without

N i n z doubt,

doubt, from the small number of their ideas, which do
not extend beyond their wants. Gluttons even to vora.
city, when they have wherewvithal to satisfy their appe-
ttec. ''emperate, when neceflity obliges them, to filch a
de-ree that they can endure want without seeming to
de;ire any thing, Piu;illaninlous andcowardly to excess,
unlic when thcy are renderedl defpcrate by drunkenness,
Ave-fc to labour, indier-cnt to every motive of glory,
honou.r, or gratitude ; occupied entirely by the objet
thi:t is present, an.l al.vays determined by it alone, with-
out any solicitude about futurity ; incapable of foresight
or of redeStion ; abandoning themselves, when under no
relraint, to a puerile joy, which they express by friiking
about, and immoderate fits of laughter ; without obje&t
or design, they pass their life without thinking, and grow
old without advancing beyond childhood, of which they
retain all the defeSts. If this dcicription were applica-
ble only to the Indians in some provinces of Peru, who
are slaves in every reltpe- but the name, one might be-
lieve, that this dcgree of degeneracy was occasioned by
the servile dependence to which they are reduced ; the
example of the modern Greeks being proof how far ser-
vitude may degrade the hum:n species. But the Indians
in the inifl]ons of the Jlefits, and the savages who still
cnjov unimpaired liberty, being as limited in theirfa-
cuitics, lnt to tl'v :is Iltipidl as the other, one cannot ob-
icrve. \\ ih!ou t liumiiiariol, Litha;t lman, when abandoned
t,) iili) c

i at.ure, lnd denrived of tle advantages result-

ingr froin c.l uction and I;'cietv, dill'ers but little from
t ie bruLe c.'Ct;)ii." VaO/ .L.: (iC

dc la Liv. de Amaz. 5z,

,3 M. (.1. C.aaonval)'.l, :a; inteilige:tlandiphilolbphlical
oblvcrl, whlo vilited l\'litilico ill 1751, and rcefided
ti're li: ! years, gives t e fIlloving dciclription of the
(..raibl)s. "' It is not hle red.. colour of their complexion,
it: is not thi: li.lularily of tfliir

l f.:lutre'i, which conii-

tatc'i the chief diilcllre i)cb Iwen them and lus. It is
their cx cvitc li ienpli ci; i t i: : lc litmited degreeof tliir
sac. lti 'i. h'le'!ir reason ii not more enlighltenid or
jnore provident t.iian tihe i. iliil.t of brutes. 'I'he reason
of the illi groif(s pealni.i;, that of thl nlegroe brought

pll) i lli e p:' Ie of Africa ii') l renmote froin intercoIfre
\yitl EIlOlrc1,i.Lis, sis rfCh! t' .Lt \vc li2ovcr ;IppcCil ralCes of

illntlligcnce,

intelligence, which, though unfolded, is capable of in-
crease. But of this the understanding of Caraibs seems
to be hardly susceptible. If found philosophy and reli-
gion did not afford us their light, if we were to decide
according to the firl impression which the view of that
people makes upon the mind, we should be disposed to
believe that they do not belong to the fame species with
us. Their supid eyes are the true mirrour of their fouls;
it appears to be without functions. Their indolence is
ex.remni; they have never the least solicitude about the
moment which is to succeed that which is present. "Voy-
age a la Martinique, p. 44,45, 51. M. de la Borde,
Tertrc, and Rochefort, confirm this description. " The
charatleriliics of the Californians," fays P. Venegas, "as
well as of all the'other Indians, are finpidity and insen-
fibility ; want of knowledge and reflecion ; inconstancy,
impetuosity, and blindness of appetite; an exceliive
sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and fatigue; an ex-
celfive love of pleasure and amiufement of every kind,
however trifling or brutal ; pusillanimity ; and, in fine,
a moil wretched want cf every thing which constitutes
the real man, and renders him rational, inventive, trac-
table, and afeful to himself and focicty. Itis not easy
for Europeans, who never were out of their own country,
to conceive an adequate idea ofthofe people : for, even
in the lca'! frequented corners of the globe, there is not
a natioTl so llupid, offiuch contra.'td ideas, and so weak
b)thin bolly and mind, as the unhappy Californians,
1 hli under(LniiinLr comprehends little more than what
th'ey fyi ; ahlltralt ideas, and much less a chain of reason-
iag, beingl far beyond their power ; so that they scarce
c;cr inlprove tleilr n'rl ideas, and thele are in general
;illc, or, at le:il inadlequate. It is in vain to reprcfent
t1 them! any fltlrn e advantares which will refuiltto them
f,"n ll (li ,; or lab!t:lining from thils or that particular im-

lte.liatcly prcit:it; the relation of Imeais and ends being

K)'01ntd thc ilretch of their faculties. Nor have they the
I':1 nlotion of pit riling Iuch intentions as will procure
tl(ic'if!ves rfoie fiuturle god, or

' !;tlar t them ;li:tlnil fil-

lttl' evils. 'I'lheir will is proportionalto to teir faculties,
lint all tleir palions move in a very nrrow s(phere. Am-
liiton they have 1noie, adll arLe e dciirous of being

racuntled,

accounted fitong than valiant. The objects of ambiti-
on with us, honour, fame, reputation, titles, posts, and
diftincions of superiority, are unknown among them; so
that this powerful spring of ation, the cause of so much
seeming good and real evil in the world, has no power
here. This disposition of mind, as it gives them up to
an amazing languor and laflitude, their lives fleeting a-
way in a perpetual inactivity and detefiation of labour,
so it likewise induces them to be attracted by the first ob-
jet which their own fancy, or the persuasion of another,
place before them ; and at the fame time renders them as
prone to alter their refoiutions with the fame facility,
They lack with indilference upon any kindness done
them ; nor is even the bare remembrance of it to be ex-
pected from them. In a word, the unhappy mortals may
be compared to children, in whom the developement of
reason is not completed. They may indeed be called a
nation who never arrive at manhood." Hist. of Cali-
sorn. Engl. Tranfl. i. 6+, 67. Mr. Ellis gives a similar
account of the want of foresight and inconsiderate dif-
pofitionofthe people adjacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage,
p. 194, 195.

THEI incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the dirTerent provinces of Africa
are obsfrved tobe more capable of improving by inliruc-
tion. They acquire the knowledge of fevcral particulars
which the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence the
negroes, though ilaves, value themselves as a superior
order of beings, and look down upon the Americans
with contempt, as void of capacity and of rational dif-
ccrnment. UlloaNotic. Americ. 322, 323.

N 0 T E 1,1. p. 322.

I IAVE obhfcrved, p. 297. that, for the fame rcafo",
tlrhy never arttenpt to rear clilhdren who are feble, di-
torted, or dctfti ive in their m-akce. So d: cplIy were both
there ideas imprinted in the inini:; of tlic Amlcricians,
tllat the Peruviian;, a cixiliizcd people, w\lcn coIlpat'i

witll

with the barbarous tribes whose manners! am describing,
retained tlem ; and even their intercourse with the Spa-
nialrds has not been able to root them out. When twins
are born in any family, it is still confidered as an ominous
event, and thz parents have recourse to rigorous a&s of
mortification, in order to avert the calamities with which
they are threatened. When a child is born with any
dcformity, tlhe will not, if they can poflibly avoid it,
bring it to be btptized, and it is with difficulty they can
be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la Idolat.
de Peru, p. 32, 33.

N O T E LII. p. 325.

HE number of the filh in the rivers of South Ane-

rica is 10 extraordinary, as to merit particular notice.
' I the Maragnon,' fatys P. Acugna, " fiih are so plen-
tiul, that, without any art, they may take them with
their hands." p 138. " In the Orinoco," fays P. Gu-
milla, " betides an infinite variety of otherfifh, tortoises
or turte! abound in fiuch numbers, that I cannot find
wvords to express it. I doubt not but that such as read
my accoiunt will accuse me of exaggeration : but I can as-
firml, that it is as difficult to count them, as to count the
finis on the bankls of that river. One may j udge of their
number by tl-e amazing consumption of them ; for all the
n:tti)ns contiguous to the river, and even many who are
at; diltIlnce, flock thither at the lCafonl of breeding, and
ii" onllv finld fiiltenance during that time, but carry off
'. !I ljuaiteics both of the turtles and of their c;gs, &c.''
Ililt. di' l'Ocrnoqic, ii. c. 22. p. (9. M. de la Conda-
"li!ic coilrlls their accounts, p. 159.

N O T E LIII .

p. 3.

ISO cdefrribes two of there plants, the CtIIrt IUAl' ,:

ad tlie GC UAJ AN A-'l'

l MB. It is relarkble, that

tl}Oll: li evy hl.lve tliis litil c1 ctfl c upon si fies, they arc f i
Li; il'on l>being nloxious to the lilln;tn specieSs, they are

u used

used in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88.
Bancroft mentions another, the HIARREE, a small quan-
tity of which is sufficient to inebriate all the fiih to a
confiderablc distance, bo that in a few minutes they float
motionless on the surface of the water, and are taken
with ease. Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. o16.

N O T E LIV. p. 328.

R E^MARKABIE instances occur of the calamitieswhich
rude nations susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez Cabeca de
Vaca, one of the most gallant andvirtuous of the Spanilh
adventurers, resided almool nine years among the savages
of Florida. They were unacquainted with every species
of agriculture. Their fubfiltence was poor andprecari-
ous. " They live'chiefly," fays he, " upon roots of
different plants, which they procure with great difficul-
ty, wandering from place to place in search of them.
Sometimes they kill some game, sometimes they catch
filh, but in such small quantities, that their hunger is so
extreme as compels them to eat lpiders, the eggs of ants,
worms, lizards, serpents, a kind of untuous earth, and I
am persuaded, that if in this country there were any
Rones, they would swallow thcre. They preserve the
bones offifhcs and serpents, which they grind into pow-
der, and eat. The only season when they do not futer
much from famine, is when a certain fruit, which he calls
TU NAS, is ripe. They are sometimes obliged to travel
far from their usual place of residence, in order to find
them." Naufragias, c. xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. In ano-
ther place, he observes that they are frequently reduced
topafs two or three days without food, c. xxiv. p. z7.

N 0 T

' E LV. p. 33o.

M Fit M I N \.l': iv'n all Lccalratt dfcript lion )
the two species of' ):!i(io, illh ;i accotin t of its C1'
ture, to which he haiS ;tIded(.! fi1e xpcriImennt in order
to afccrtain the poilbnonus .lualities of the juicet cxtlat;

ed from that species which he calls the bitter cafrava.
Among the Spaniards it is known by the name ofYucA
BRAVA. Defcr. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE LVI. p. 330.

T|IIE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well
I as in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in-
digenous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the island of Hispaniola, in the year 1516, by father
Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it from
the Canary islands, whither the original flips had been
brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii. c. I.
But the opinion of Acofta and other naturalists, who
t reckon it an American plant, seems to be better founded.
Acota Hist. Nat. lib. iv. z2 . It was cultivated by rude
tribes in America, who had little intercourse with the
Spaniards, and who were dStitute of that ingenuity
which disposes men to borrow what is useful from foreign
nations. Gumil. iii. 186. Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE LVII. . 331.

I T is remarkable, that Acota, one of the mnft accu-
rate and bell informed writers concerning the Weil In-
dies, affirms, that maize, though cultivated in the con-
tinent, \vas not known in the illands, the inhabitants of
which had none but cafl(lda bread. Hill. Nat. lib. iv. c.
16. But P. M:rtyr, in the firll book of his firll Decad,
which was written in the year 1403, upo; tihe -rtulrn of
Co!uiiul)us fromi his firl- voyage, expreisly mentions
maize as a plant which the iflallders cultivated, and of
which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise aflerts,
Illat they were acquainted with the culture of maize.
1illor. Gencr. cap. c28. Ovieo dfcribes nlmize with-
o"t :ly iltilllation of its )bcin; a plant that

t was not lia-
tu'l to li rfpaniola. Lib. vii. c. I.

\l 0* Ooo NOTE

NOTE LVIII. p.337.

N EEW HOLLAND, a country which formerly was
only known, has lately been viiited by intelligent obferv-
ers. It lies in a region of the globe where it must enjoy
a verv favourable clinmte, as it firetches from the loth
to thie 3Sth degree of northern latitude. It is of great
extent, and from its tfluare formn mull be much more
than eqnuil to aii Europe. The people who inhabitthe
v::inous parts of it appear to be of ole race. They are
evidently ruder than molt of the Americans, and have
made :lill lets progrcfs in improvement and the arts of
life. There is not the lea,. appearance of cultivation in
any part of this xalt region. The inhabitants are ex-
tremely few, so that the country appears almost desolate.
'1 heir tribes are ilili more inconsiderable than those of
A nmc'ic. They depend for ftbfiltencc, aimoft entirely,
on ;illiin'. They do not iettle in one place, but roam
about in queit of food. Both iexes go flark-naked.
Their habitations, utensils, &c. are more simple and rude
than those of the Americans. Voyages, by Hawkef-
worth, iii. 6z2, t

:. 'ThI, perhl:.p, is the country where

m.in hia been difcoveecd in t':e eariielt- iage of his pro-
grefs, and it exhibit. at miserable fpecinen of his condi i-
on and powers in that uncultivated liqte. If this country
ilh::il be more ftlly explored by future navigators, the
co11pa li,);in of the liln:lers of its inthabitants with thole
o5 tsihe .\:ni ricanS will prove an inltrli,-tive article ill the
liiicir'. of the hilniall species.

N () T E , IX. p. 337.

, (; A 1i I 1. i ,1 i 1. ' 'r1,

Lvwho traveClled frcom his ltli-

1 1.,,, i tt Illlin i,; to M aI-clillinmikinaic, tlhusdefcril"'
t!h ftc ,of the couiltry : "We have marched twelve

(.I;. w; I 0l:;t ;n1c

t ing : a ;>lecI hunl' an rCe itt, iire. S(mlile-

tll-f W\ fill ot'iiJi y 's in vall I(meadows, ofwllichll'
ci1iid ,,t I' ii! l, b ,iiu idri es, through whlich
i llere I 0'

, (

ed many brooks and rivers, but without any path to con-
duct us. Sometimes we were obliged to opein a p:t Tage
acrois thick forelts, through bu.hes, :n underwood lilled
with briars and thorns. Sometimes we had to p:!ss
through deep marih;, in which we fink up to the mid-
dle. After being fatigued through the day, we had the
earth for our bed, or a few leaves, exposed to the wind,
the rain, and all the injuries of the air. Lettr. Edifiantes,
ii. 360. Dr. Brickell, in an excuriion from Nirrth Ca-
rolina towards the mountains, A. D. 1730, travelled sis-
teen days without meeting with a human crcacure. N it;
Hilt. of North Carolina, 3S9. Diegode Ordas, in at-
templting to make a fettleinelt in South Amnerica, A. D.
1532, marched fifty days through a country without one
inhabitant. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 1l.

N O T E LX. p. 338.

i STRONGLY fufpef that a community of goods, and
an undivided itore, are known only among the rudef
tribes of hunters ; and that as soon as any species of agri-
culture or regular induitry is knowp, the idea of an ex-
clufive right of property to the fruits of them is introduc-
ed. I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which
I have received concerning the ltate of property among
the Indians in very different regions of America. " The
idea of the natives of Brasil concerning property is, that
if any person cultivate a i fied,e lone

o ougi.t to tnjoy

the produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend to
it. If an individual or a family go a-hunting or fillsing,
what is caught belongs to the individual or to the fIaii-
ly, and they communicate no part of it to any but to their
Caziqule, or to such of their kindred as happce. to be in-
dipofeld. If any person in the village conie to their lhut,
lie m y lit down fieely, and cat without asking liberty.
B1ut this is the conlequence of their general principle of
holpitality ; for I never observed any partition of the in-
crealf of their fields, or the produce of the chace, which
I could confider as the rcfult of any idea concerning a
community of goods. On the contrary, they arc so much

O o o z attached

attached to what they deem to be their property, that it
would be extremely dangerous to encroach upon it. As
far as I h:tve ie-nr, or can learn, there is not one tribe of
Indians in South America, among whom that community
osgoods which has been so highly extolled is known.
T'rl circuimul: nce in the g,")verinment of the Jesuits,
inoti irkrome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the com-
miniity of goods which they introduced. This was re-
pugnant to their original ideas. They were acquainted
wish the rights of private exclnfive property, and they
submitted with impntience to regilations which detroy-
ed themn." M. Ie Cihevai de Pilnto, MS. PENES ME.
Aaaia po!Tfeiion (,fas a mi!lionlary who resided several
years among the In lians of the Five Nations) gives a
light to the loil, but whenever a poTecfibr fees fit to quit
it, another has as good right to take it as he who left it.
This law, or cultom, rcl)fpe not only the particular spot
on which he erefs his houle, but also his planting
irround. If a man has prepared a particular spot of
ground, en which he dtiigns in future to build orplant,
no ma.n has a riglt to incommnnode him, much lets to the
fruit of his labolrs, unil it appears that he voluntarily
gives up his views. But I never heard of any formal
conveyance fr-on one Indian to anotler in their natural
tlate. The limits ofevery c.anton is circumf:ribe d; that
is, they are allowed to hunt as far ats such a river on this
h:nd, and fiich a mountain on the other. This area is
occupied and improved by individuals and their families.
Individuals, 110no tlhe c')1 1: nity, have the ife and profit
of their own I:ti ris, 0or lU.-CC, inl lhunting. MS. of
Mr. Gideon l [;wley, PENES ME.

N 0 T E LXI. p. 339.

It IIS dilic reiuce of temper between the Americans

and negroes s so rl;lrkL.die, that it is a proverbial f;y-
iHw iln the l'renicli illalnds, " Reg-:ader un fuvage de
tr:avcrs, c'cl Ic I :battrc ; Ic. ba:ttrc, c'cll l tuer ; battre un
ugre, c'el' c nourriir." Tcr'rt:rii. ,.90.

N OTE

N O T E LXII. p. 340.

T HE description of the political lRate of the people
of Cinaloa, perfetly resembles that of the inhabitants
of North America, " They have neither laws nor kings
(fays a miiionary who refided'long among them), to pu-
niih any crime. .Nor is there, among them, any species
ofauthority, or political government, to restrain them
in any part of their condut. It is true, that they ac-
knowledge certain Caziques, who are heads of their fa-
milies or villages, but their authority appears chicty in
war, and the expeditions againlt their enemies. Th.; au-
thority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right,
b:. by t ;eir valour in war, or by the power and nul-ber
of their families and relations. Sometimes they ove
their pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying tieir
own exploits." Rib-ia Hillor. de las Triumph. &c. p.
ii. The itate. of the CliquItos in S)uth America is
nsarly ile fame. " They have no regular form of g-
verntnent, er civil life, but in matters of public concern
they lilten to the advice of their old men, and usually
fiilow it. Tie digaity of Cazique is not hereditary,
but conferred according to merit, as the reward of va-
1our in war. The union among them is imperfec. Their
focicty refcmbles a republic withtout any head, in which
every man is maletcr of himself, and, upon the leat dif-
gful, feparatcs from those with whom he seemed to be
conneced(l. alacion Hiltorical de las Milliones de los
Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernandez, p. 3z, 33.
Thus, under very dil(crent climates, when nations are
in ;t linilar slate of society, their inltitutions and civil go-
rcrnment afn'nine the faime form.

N 0 ' E LXIII. p. 352.

1 -l.x vi k;nown the Indians (iays a person well ac-

?':tiinted with their mode of life) to go a thousand miles
1lt thle puirpofe of revenge, in pathlcls woods, over hills

and

and mountains, through huge cane swamps, expofedto
the etremities of heat and cold, the vicifitude of sea-
sons, to hunger and thirit. Such is their over-boiling
revengeful temper, that they utterly contemn all those
tlingl a:s imnaginary trifles, if they are so happy as to get
the scalp of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the craving
gholls ,f their decea!ed relations." Adair's Hilt. of
Amer. 1ndluan, p. 150.

N O T E LXIV. p. 353.

IN the account of the great war between the Algon-
quins ;and Iroquois, the aichievements ofPifkaret, a fa-
mous chiei'of the Algonquins, performed mostly by him-
self alone, or with one or two companions, make a capi-
tal figure. De la Pot!eri, i. z97, &Cc. Coiden's Hilt. of
Five Nationj, 2z, &c.

NOTE LXV. p. 355.

'h HE life of an unfortunate leader is often in dan-
ger, and he is always degraded from the rank which he
hid ac.l.iLircd by iis former exploits. Adair, p. 38S.

N OT E LXVI. p. 355.

A S the ideas of the North Americans with refpclt
to the mode of carrying on war, are generally known; 1
have fouditled nmy obvations chicfly upon the teilimony
of the anlthor: wh.lo lcf,:ribe theml. Bt th me

f nmllxill,

took place aniong other nations. A judiciols inifflionry
has given a view of the military operations of tth pelopl'
in (;;l an Ch.aco, in South .'\ncrica, perlfely /liailal t(
tlhof of thle lloqu(ois. " ' llrh ae lmulch alddlitedl t1
war (fitys he), which they carry (n firc(ucntly alin"lg
themnfelves, but perpetualll y :tganll the Spaniards. Bnt
they Inay rather he called thivs thi han lollicrs, ftr the?.

, 1Cv'crl

nercr make head against the Spaniards, nnlefs when they
c.n afflult them by ilealth, or have guarded againIt any
mirchance by tfpies, who may be called indefatigable;
thilv will watch the settlements of the Spaniards for one,
tvo, or three years, observing by nigh't every thing that
p;,ffs with the utmost solicitude, whether they may ex-
pect relitance or not, and until they are perfe'ctly secure
of the event, they will not venture upon an attack; so
that when they do give the alauit, tlhey are certain of
success, and free from all danger. There spies, in order
thar rilty,; m:ty not be observed, will creep on all-fours
like cats in cile night ; but if they are discovered, make
their escape with much dexterity. But, although they
never chuse to face the Spaniirds, if they be surrounded
in any place, whence they cannot escape, they will fight
with desperate valour, and Itll their lives very dear."
Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE LXVII. p. 36.

JLERY, who was an eye-witness of the proceedings
cf thle Tr;ix N AMnos, a Brafillan tribe, in a war againit
a powerfil nation of their enemies, d'efribes their cou-
mle and ferocity in very ilriking terms. Ego cum Gallo
ahro, p.iulo curiofius, mingno nothro periculo (si enim ab
hllilxi:4 capti aut leti flifiemus, devorationi fileinemus
di(voti) birb.iros nolltosin militiam cuntes cornitari volui.
Iii, nunmero .ooo capita, cum hottibus ad littu; decerta-
!nit, tanta icrocitlte, ut vel rabidos & furiosos quofque
iil)nreiut. Cum't prilm lun holles conlpexere, in magnos
It.luc (.li tos uiulatu: perruperunt. I;ec ge ns adeo sera
c:I & trlcl lcnta, ut tn:l!titicr d um virium vel tantillui
relt 'lt, con tinI) d; irnliceut, flugalque n u1quali capcilant.
('Q tl at ii:ltiurl illis in'ililtll efllb reOr. 'rTelor interea

,i clifnl ,

i(uuii s

itulel, tuul

pi l tln equitlin copias in-

l'Cllte, i acie inll uI lal s hic conliecxi, tan ta ilntuiltun
v'il"liltc vidlntlis pcdlitum legionilt usanis ll llc lIgenibus,

i

'l /ii rtuin

t )u ;:trt iln.tus i1lis percutln'un fuiilc. Le,ry
llit. Na.v i^t. illn Bril. ap de lbry, iii. 207, zi8, zo9.

N 0 T E

N OTE LXVIII. p. 357.

T HE Americans, like other fierce nations, original-
ly cut off the heads of the enemies whom they flew in war,
and carried them away as trophies. But, as they found
these cumbersome in their retreat, which they always
make very rapidly, and often through a vail extentof
country, they became satisfied with tearing off their
fcaips. This custom, though molt prevalent in North
America, was not unknown among the southern tribes,
Lozano, p. 79.

N O T E LXIX. p. 361.

HE terms of the war-fong seem to be dictated by

the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war to re-
venge the death of my brothers ; I ihall kill; I shall ex-
terminate ; I mhall burn my enemies; I shall bring away
slaves; I shall devour their heart, dry their flesh, drink
their blood; I /hall tear off their scalps, and make cups
of their skulls." Boffu's Travels through Louisiana,
vol. i. p. oz. I am informed, by persons on whose tef-
timony I can rely, that as the number of people in the
Indian tribes has decreased so much, almost none of their
prisoners are put to death. It is confidered as better po-
licy to spare and to adopt them. Those dreadful scenes
which I have described occur now so rarely, that mission-
aries and traders who have rcfided long among the In-
dians, never were witnefles to them.

N O T E LXX. p. 361.

A LL, the travellers who have visited the molt uncivi-
lized of the American tribes, a',ree in this. It is con-
firmed by two remarkable circtin llances, which occui'cld
in thecoilluelt of difl'icint provinces. In the expedition

of

of Narvaez into Florida in the year 1528, the Spaniards
were reduced to such extreme diflrefs by famine, that in
order to preserve their own lives, they eat such of their
companions as happened to die. This appeared so
Ihocking to the natives, who were accustomed to devour
theirprifoners, that it filled them with horror and indig-
nation against the Spaniards. Torquemada Monarch.
Ind. ii. p. 584. Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca
de Vaca, c. xiv. p. 15. During the siege of Mexico,
though the Mexicans devoured with greediness the Spa-
niards and Tlafcalans, whom they took prisoners, the
utmost rigour of the famine which they suffered could not
induce them to touch the dead bodies of their own
countrymen. Bern. Diaz del Castillo Conquift. de la
N. Efpagna, p. 156.

N O T E LXXI. p. 363.

M[ANY singular circumfiances concerning the treat-
ment of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are con.
tained in the narrative of Stadius, a German Officer, in
the service of the Portuguese, published in the year 1556.
He was taken prisoner by the TOUPINAMBOS, and re-
mained in captivity nine years. He was often present
at those horrid festivals which he describes, and was de-
tlined himfelfto the fame cruel fate with other prisoners.
But he saved his life by extraordinary efforts of courage
and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. De Lery,
who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his expedition
toBrafil, in the year 1556, and who resided a good time
in that country, agrees with Stadius in every circumliance
of importance. He was fiequently an eye-witnefl of
the manner in which the Bralilians trc.ted their prison-
er. De Bry, iii. 21o. Several rliking particulars
omitted by them, arc mentioned by a Portuguese au-
thor. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 129,., &c.
VOL. 1. pp N 0 1 li

N O T E LXXII. p. 366.

T HOUGH I have followed that opinion concerning
tlhe apathy of tile Americans, which appeared to me
most rational, and supported by the authority of the
most refpedable authors, other theories have been form-
ed with regard to it, by writers of great eminence. D.
Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of
the skin and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that
they are les fenlible of pain than the reft of mankind.
He produces several proofs of this, from the manner in
which they endure the molt cruel chirurgical operations,
&c. Noticias Americanas, p. 313, 314. The fameob-
servation has been made hy surgeons in Brasil. An In-
dian, thev lay, never complains under pain, and will
be;l the amputation of a leg or arm without uttering a
fingie groan. MIS. penes me.

N O T E LXXIII. p. 367.

-

HTS is an idea natural to all rude nations. A-

mong the Romans, in the early periods of their com-
moniw\ealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner, " tim de-
ceffirll videtur cum captus ct." Digelt. lib. xlix. tit.
i . c. 18. and afterwards when the progress of refine-
ment rendered them more indulsent with refipet to this
article, they were obliged to employ two fitions of law
to fccure the prcpcrtv, and permit the return of a cap-
tive, the one by the Lex Cornelia, and tile other by the
Jus loilliliinii, I-reinec. Ilein. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand.
ii. p. 2). . Aniongg the negroes the fame ideas prevail.
No rann m was ever accepted for a priloner. As soon
a;, one i. t(ken in war;, he is reputed to be dead ; and he
is I, in cfie lto his country and his faunily. Voy. du
Clieval. tde' IIMarchais, i. p. 369.

N o Ti

N O T E LXXIV. p. 368.

T HE people of Chili, the mofl gallant and high-
spirited of all the Americans, are the only exception to
this observation. They attack their enemies in the open
field; their troops are ranged in regular order ; their
battalions advance to the charge not only with courage,
but with discipline. The North Americans, though
many of them have fubilituted the European fire-arms in
place of their own bows and arrows, still adhere to their
ancient maxims of war, and carry it on according to their
own peculiar system. But the Chilefe nearly resemble
the warlike nations of Europe and Asia in their military
operations. Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church's Coll.
iii. p. , Lozano's Hilt. Parag.'i. I44, I45.

NOTE LXXV. p. 371.

H ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In
Yucutan, the men are so solicitous about theirdrefs, that
they carry about with them mirrors, probably made of
Alone, like those of the Mexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8.
in which they delight to view themselves ; but the women
never use these. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He takes notice,
that among the fierce tribe of the PANCHES, in the new
kingdom of Granada, none but ditinguilhed warriors
were permitted either to pierce their lips, and to wear
green ltones in them, or to adorn their heads with plumes
of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In some provinces
of Peru, though that empire had made considerable pro-
grefs in civilization, the slate of women was little im-
proved. All the toil of cultivation and domestic work
was devolved upon them, and they were not permitted to
wear bracelets, or other ornaments, with which the men
were fond of decking themselves, Zarale Hilt. de Poru,
i.p. 1', 16.

Ppp 2 NOTE

N O T E LXXVI. p. 371.

I Have ventured to call this mode of anointingand
painting their bodies, the D R ESS of the Americans. This
is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never stir a-
broad if they are not completely anointed ; they excuse
themselves when in this Iituation, by faying, that they
cannot appear because they are naked. Gumilla Hilt.
de l'Orenoque, i. 191.

N O TE LXXVII. p. 372.

:SOME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf
of California, seem to be among the rudest people of A-
merica united in the social state. They neither cultivate
nor sow; they have no houses in which they reside.
Those in the inland country fubfill by hunting; those on
the sea-coast chiefly by filhing. Both depend upon the
spontaneous prod ucions of the earth, fruits, plants, and
roots of various kinds. In the rainy season, as they have
no habitations to afford them flelter, they gather bun-
dles of reeds, or fhrong grass, and binding them together
at one end, they open them at the other, and fitting them
to their heads, they are covered as with a large cap,
which like a pent-house throws off the rain, and will
keep them dry for several hours. During the warm
feafbn, they form a fled with the branches of trees,
which protects them from the sultry rays of the fun.
When exposed to cold they make large fires, round
which they dleep in the open air. 1-ifloria de los trium-
sos de nueftra fanta fee entre gentes las mas b;rbaras,
&c. porP. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE

N O T E LXXVIII. p. 373.

T HESE houses resemble barns. We have meafur-
edfome which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and
twenty paces broad. Above a hundred persons reside in
some of them. Wilson's Account of Guiana, Purch.
Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. 1291. The Indian houses,
fays M. Barrere, have a most wretched appearance, and
are a striking image of the rudeness of early times.
Their huts are commonly built on some rising ground,
or on the banks of a river, huddled sometimes together,
sometimes itraggling, and always without any order.
Their aspe&t is melancholy and disagreeable. One fees
nothing but what is hideous ard savage. The unculti-
vated fields have no gaiety. The silence which reigns
there, unless when interrupted by the disagreeable notes
of birds, or cries of wild beasts, is extremely dismal.
Relat. de la France Equin. p. 146.

N O T E LXXIX. p. 375.

SOME tribes in South America can fend their arrows
to a great diltance, and with considerable force, without
the ;id of the bow. They make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which is called
aSAIBACAN iE. In it they lodge a finall arrow, with
some unfpun cotton wound about its great end; this
confines the air, so that they can blow it with alloniffling
rapidity, and a lfur aim, to the diflance of above a
hundred paces. These fliall arrows are always poison-
etl. Fermin. Defer. dc Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hill.
ofGuiana, p. 281, &c. The Sarbacane is much used
by the Ealt Indians.

N O T E LXXX. p. A75.

I Might producc man y in lances of this, but flall satis-
fy Ilylelfwitli one, taken fiom the lfkiinaux. "' Their

greatell'

greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is fliewn in the itruc-
ture of their bows, made commonly of three pieces of
wood, each making part of the fame arch, very nicely
and exactly joined together. 'fhey are commonly of
firor larch; and as this wants strength and elalticity,
they supply both by bracing the baclc of the bow, with
a kind of thread, or line, made of the sinews of their
deer, and the bow-firing of the fame materials. To
make them draw more ftifiy, they dip them into water,
which causes both the back of the bow and the firing to
contrat, and consequently gives it the greater force;
and as they pracife from their youth, they shoot with
very great dexterity." Voyage to Hludfon's Bay,
p. 138.

N O T E LXXXI. p. 376.

N ECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of
mankind in their inventions. There is, however, such
inequality in some parts of their progress, and fume na-
tions get so far the 'tart of others in circumifances nearly
fiiilar, that we mufl ascribe this to some events in their
llory, or to fomer peculiarity in their situation with which
we are unacquainted. The people in the iflandofOta-
heitc, lately discovercd in the South Sea, far excel molt
of tie Amlericans il the knowledge and practice of the
arts of ingenuity, and yet they had not invented any me-
thod of boiling water, and having no veflel that would
bear the fire, they had no more idea that water could be
made hot, than that it could be made solid. Voyages
by I awkefwvorth, i. '66. 4814.

N 0 T E LXXXII. p. 376.

O NFE of these boats, which could carry nine men,
weighed onily sixty pounds. (;oliol Relat. des Voy. a
la Virgin Rcc. de Voy. au Nord. tomn. v. p. 4.03.

N 0'' r

N O T E LXXXIII. p. 378.

f Remarkable proof of this is produced by UlIoa.
In waving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse
cloaths, which they are accustomed to manufadure,
their induitry has discovered no more expeditious me-
thod, than to take up thread after thread, and after
counting and forting them each time, to pass the woof
between them, lo that in finiihing a small piece of these
ii:fs, they frequently spend more than two years.
Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame delcription
of the Indians of Guiana, p. 255. According to Adair,
the ingenuity and dispatch of the North American In-
dians are not greater, p. 422. From one of the engrav-
ings of the Mexican paintings in Purchas, vol. iii. p.
11o6. I think it probable that the people of Mexico
were unacquainted with any better or more expeditious
mode of weaving. A loom was an invention beyond
the ingenuity of the molt improved Americans. In all
their works they advance so slowly, that one of their ar-
tills is two months at a tobacco-pipe with his knife, be-
fore he finihes it. Ibid. p. 423.

N O T E LXXXIV. p. 330.

1 1E article of religion in P. Lafitau's Mocurs des
Saluva;gc, kxtendb to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

N O T LXXXV p. 381.

i lislve referred the reader to feverlil of the authors
who dclcribe the Inoll uncivilized nations in America.
rl'lir tclliioniiv is uiiiiiln'. That of P., Ribas con-
Cellinlg tile people of C'inaloa, coincidies wvih tle relt.
"J wis Cetremely attentive (fiys he), during the cyears
I lcldcd amlong !theml,, to aJiccrtaiul whether lhL) werc to

be

be confidered as idolators; and it may be affirmed with
the most perses exacnefs, that though among some of
them there may be traces of idolatry, yet others have
not the least knowledge of God, or even of any false dei-
ty, nor pay any formal adoration to the Supreme Being,
who exercises dominion over the world ; nor have they
any conception of the providence of a creator or gover-
nor, from whom they expect in the next life the reward
of their good, or the punishment of their evil deeds.
Neither do they publicly join in any a& of divine wor-
Ihip." Ribas Triumphos, &c. p. 16.

N O T E LXXXVI. p. 382.

T HE people of Brasil were so much affrighted by
thunder, which is frequent and dreadful in their c, un-
try, as well as in other parts of the torrid zone, that it
was not only the object of religious reverence; but the
moftexpreffive name in their language for the Deity,
was ToUPAN, the fame by which they distinguished
thunder. Pifo de Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff.
Church-Coll. ii. p. 132.

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 389.

B Y the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness,
gives of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez,
it appears, that the feelings of the pcrlons who fuff'red
on tlat occalion were very different. Some solicitcd the
honour with cagerncfs; others l.tbourcd. to avoid their
doom, and fevcral saved their lives by flying to the
wtoods. As the Indian Eiralmins give an intoxicating
draught to the women, who are to be burnttogethler
with the bodies of their huiib;l:d., which renders them
insensible of their approaching f ite, the Natchcs ob-
liged their vicims to flvallow lcvcral large pills of to-
bacco, which produce a fiiiil;tr cl'ect. Mcnc. dc Loult
i. Z27.

N o0 T I

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 395.

O N some occasions, particularly in dances intiituted
for the recovery ofperf.ins who are indisposcd, they are
extremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie Hilt.
&c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. p. 319. But the na-
ture of their dances is commonly such as I havo dcfcribed.

N O T E LXXXIX. p. 397.

jI HE OT'1HO MACOAS, atribefeated on the banks of
the Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,
whichi they call YuPA. It is formed of the feeds of an
uniklrwvn plant, reduced to powder, and certain shells
burnt ani pulverized. The effets of this when drawn
up into the nofirils are so violent, that they reiemble
madness rather than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

N O T E XC. p. 399.

T HOUGH this observation holds true among the
greater part of the southern tribes; there are some in
which the intemperance of the women is as excelfive as
thit of men. Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of G uial, p. 275.

NOTE XCI. p. 404.

.EVEN in the most intelligent writers concerningthe
mninners of the Americans, one meets with inconfillent
;and inexplicable circumlanccs. P. Charlevoix, who,
in confcqucncc of the controvcrfy between his order and
that of the Franciscans, with irefpct to the talents and
abilities of the North Americans, is disposed torepre-
sent both their intelleclual and moral qualities in the
llollt favourable light, aflcrts, that they arc cngaged in
Vol . 1. Qcq q continual

continual negociations with their neighbours, and con.
duc these with the moit refined address. At the fame
time, he adds, ' that it becomes their envoys or pleni.
potentiaries to exert their abilities and eloquence, for if
the terms which they offer are not accepted of, they had
need to Rand on their guard. It frequently happens,
that ablow with a hatchet is the only return given to
their propositions. He is not out of danger even if he
is so fortunate as to avoid the stroke, he may expet to
be pursued, and if taken, to be burnt." Hist. N. Fr.
iii. 251. Men capable of such ads of violence, seem to
be unacquainted with the first principles upon which the
intercourse between nations is founded; and infteadof
the perpetual negociations which Charlevoix mentions,
it seems impossible that there thould be any correfpon-
dence whatever among them,

NOTE XCII, p. 405,

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,
4' Gaudentmuneribus; fed nec data imputant, necac.
ccptis obligantur." C. 21. An author who had a good
opportunity ofobferving the principle which leads fa-
vages neither to express gratitude for favours which
they had received, nor to expet any return for such as
they bellowed; thus explains their ideas: " If, fay
they, you give me this, itis because you have no need of
it yourself ; and as for me, I never part with that which
I think necessary to me." Memoir fur les Galibis; Hit.'
des plantes de la Guianc Francoise par M. Aublet,
tom. ii. p. I 1o.

N O T E XCIll. p. 417,

A IND. B l R N A L, D , the contemporary and friend of
Colunibus, hath prcferved some circumtlanccs concerns
ing the br:avory oftlic Caribbecs, which are not menti.
oned by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other hil0o'
;ians of that period. whose works have been publiiJlct

A Caribbcia

A Caribbean canoe, with four men, two women, and a
boy, fell in unexpectedly with the fleet of Columbus in
his second voyage, as it was fleering through their if-
lands. At sirs, they were itruck almost stupid with
aftonilhment at such a strange fpe&acle, and hardly mov-
ed from the spot for above an hour. A Spanihf bark,
with twenty-five men, advanced towards them, and the
fleet gradually surrounded them, so as to cut off their
communication with the mhore. " When they saw that
it was impossible to escape (fays the hitforian), they feiz-
ed their arms with undaunted resolution, and began the
attack. I use the expression, ,with undaunted re/olution,
for they were few, and beheld a vast number ready to
assault them. They wounded several of the Spaniards,
although they had targets, as well as other defensive ar-
mour; and even after their canoe was overset, it was
with no little difficulty and danger, that part of them
were taken, as they continued to defend themselves, and
to use their bows with great dexterity while swimming
in the sea." Hilt. deD. Fern. y D. Yfab. MSS. c. 19.

N O T E XCIV. p. 417.

A Probable conjeEture may be formed with refpe&
tothe cause of the diftinaion in charaAer between the
Caribbees and the inhabitants of the larger islands. The
former appear manifeRly to be a separate race. Their
language is totally different firom that of their neigh-
bours in the large islands. They themselves have a tra-
dition, that their ancestors came originally from some
part of the continent, and having conquered and exter-
Iminated the anticnt inhabitants, took pofliflion of their
lalnds, and of their women, Rochefort, 384. Tertre,
360. IHence they call themselves BANAREE, which
Signifies a man come firom beyond sea. Lahat. vi. 131.
Accordingly, the Caribbees fill use two dillint lan-
guages, one peculiar to the men, and the other to the
women. Tcrtrc, 361. T'he language of the men has
"otling common with that lpoken in the large islands.
I'hcl ialcl of the women conlidcrably refcmbles it.

(Q] q 2 Labat.

Labat. 129. This strongly confirms the tradition which
I have mentioned. The Caribbees themselves imagine,
that they were a colony from the G A L I B i S, a powerful
nation, of Guiana, in South America. Tertre, 361,
Rochefort, 348. Butas their fierce manners approach
nearer to those of the people in the northern continent,
than to those of the natives of South America; and as
their language has likewise some affinity to that spoken
in Florida, their origin should be deduced rather fiom
the former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &c. Her-
rera, Dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, tliey dill ob-
serve their ancient pracice ofdeftroying all the males,
and preserving the women either for servitude or for
breeding.

EEF 1
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

*" . .
-
