THE

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. II.

1 1 i Vidlill 13 1 FREYEITE!
RTxwos Gern sinvo

00

THE
HIS TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HIS'TORXIO

GRAPHER to his MAJESTI for SCOTLAND.

VOL. II.

L O N D ON:

Printed by W. and W. STR A H A N,
For W. STRAHAN; T. CA DELL, in the Strand; and J. BALFOUOR

at Edinburgh. M DCC LXIX.

I-

4 V ~~ /7 ( /7 ó-,',i/ I' ~~~1' ,sj(/

X] 107 V1. ' b; ·

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK I.

- ST :t *
. ._.

T H E
H IS TO R Y

OF THE .*;
1Z RLESE V. was boh at Chent on ta twenty,' BOOK I.

O F ' E .

,, .. . .
fourth day of February, in the year one thoufaiid fie, B"irh"

-

, Birth of

hundrdd. His father, Philip the Handsome, Archduke Charles V.

of Austria, was the son of the Emperor Maximilian, and of'
Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold, the last prince of the'
lioufe of Burgundy. His mother, Joanna, was the second
daughter of Ferdinand and Ifabela, king and queert of Cafile
and Aragon.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened the way'for Ilia doni.

. ion, and the
this young prince to the inheritance of more extensive domi- event by

which he ac-
VOL. II. B1 Ions, quired them.

Boox I. nions, than any European monarch, since Charles the Great,

--,-- had possessed. Each of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or

provinces, towards which their profped of succession was
extremely remote. The rich possessions of Mary of Burgundy
were defiined for another family, ihe having been contracted by
her father to the only son of Lewis XI. of France; but that
capricious monarch, indulging his hatred to her family, chose
rather to firip her of part of her territories by force, than to
secure the whole by marriage; and by this mifcondu, fatal to
his posterity, threw all the Netherlands and Franche Comte into
the hands of a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II. of
Cartile, far from having any profped of that noble inheritance
which he transmitted to her grandson, passed the early part of
her life in obscurity and indigence; but the Castilians, exafpe-
rated against her brother Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious
prince, publickly charged him with impotence, and his queen
with adultery; and, upon his demise, rejecting Joanna, whom
the king had uniformly, and even on his death-bed, owned to
be his lawful daughter, and whom an assembly of the states had
acknowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they obliged her
to retire into Portugal, and placed Isabella on the throne of
Castile. Ferdinand owed the crown of Aragon to the unex-
peed death of his elder brother, and acquired the kingdoms of
Naples and Sicily by violating the faith of treaties, and difre-
garding the ties of blood. To all there kingdoms, Christopher
Columbus, by an effort of genius and of intrepidity, the boldest
and most ficcclsfuil that is recorded in the annals of mankind,
addlcd a new world, the wealth of which was one considerable
Iburce of the power and grandeur of the Spanish monarchs.

Ph;!l,> nd Do N Jo H N, the only son of Ferdinand and Isabella, and their
3o:m,.~.li t-is
ftither an eklc daughter, the quec n of Portugal, being cut off in the
mother, viiato
b5it~w. fowr

flower of youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and her BOOK I.
pofierity. But as her husband, the Archduke, was a stranger to '----
the Spaniards, it was thought expedient to invite him into
Spain, that by residing among them, he might accustom him-
self to their laws and manners; and it was expeced that the
Cortes, or assembly of Rates, whose authority was then so great
in Spain, that no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless it
received their fanaion, would acknowledge his right offuccef-
sion, together with that of the Infanta, his wife. Philip and
Joanna, palling through France in their way to Spain, were 150z;
entertained in that kingdom with the utmost magnificence.
The Archduke did homage to Lewis XII. for the earldom of
Slanders, and took his feat as a peer of the realm in the parlia-
ment of Paris. They were received in Spain with every mark
of honour that the parental affection of Ferdinand and Isabella,
or the refpe6 of their subje&s, could devise; and their title to
the crown was soon after acknowledged by the Cortes of both
kingdoms.

BUT amidst these outward appearances of fatisfadion and joy, Ferdinand

jealous of

some secret uneasiness preyed upon the mind of each of these Philip's
princes. The flately and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish power.
court, was so burdensome to Philip, a prince young, gay, affable,
fond of society and of pleasure, that he soon began to cxprefs a
desire of returning to his native country, the manners of which
were more suited to his temper. Ferdinand, observing the declin-
ing health of his queen, with whose life his right to the govcrn-
ment of Castile muff ccafce, cafily forcfaw, that a prince of
Philip's lifpofition, and who already difcovcred an extreme
innpaticnce to reign, would never conent to his retaining any
degree of authority in that kingdomi; and the profpcdl of this

1B diminution

BOOK I. diminution of his power, awakened the jealousy of that ambi-

tious monarch.

Jabella's fol- ISABELLA beheld, with the fentimcnts natural to a mother,
licicude, with
refpeh to him the indifference and neglect with which the Archduke treated
and her
daughter. her daughter, who was deflitute of all those beauties of perfoi,

and all those accomplishments of mind, which fix the affetions
of an husband. Her understanding, always weak, was often
disordered. She doated on Philip with such an excess of childish
and impertinent fondness, as excited disgust rather than affetion.
Her jealousy, for which her husband's behaviour gave her too
much cause, was proportioned to her love, and often broke out
in the most extravagant actions. Isabella, though sensible of
her defects, could not help pitying her condition, which was
soon rendered altogether deplorable, by the archduke's abrupt
resolution of setting out in the middle of winter for Slanders,
and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella intreated him not to aban-
don his wife to grief and melancholy, which might prove fatal
to her, as he was near the time of her delivery. Joanna con-
jured him to put off his journey for three days only, that he
might have the pleasure of celebrating the festival of Chriimas
in his company. Ferdinand, after representing the imprudence
of his leaving Spain, before he had time to become acquainted.
with the genius, or to gain the affections of the people who.
were one day to be his fulbjets, besought him, at least, not to pass
through France, with which kingdom lie was then at open war.
l'hilip, without regarding either the diCtates of humanity, or
the maxims of prudence, persisted in his purpose, and on the
twcnty-fccond of December set out for the Low Countries, by the
way of France a.

l Petri Martyris Anglerii Epiftolx, 2so. 2S3.

9 EROI

FRoM the moment of his departure,. Joanna funk into a deep BOOK I.
and fullen melancholyb, and while the was in that situation bore -

Disorder of
Ferdinand her second son, for whom the power of his brother Joanna's

mind.

Charles afterwards procured the kingdoms of Hungary and Birth ofFer-
Bohemnia,. and to whom he at last transmitted the Imperial dinandafter-

wards Em-

sceptre. Joanna/was the only person in Spain who discovered peror.
ao joy at the birth of this prince. Insensible to that, as well as
to every other pleasure, he was wholly occupied with. the
thoughts of returning to her husband; nor did the, in any degree,
recover tranquillity of mind, till the arrived at Brussels next
year . 1 504.

PH1ILIP, in palling through France, had an interview with

Lewis XII. and signed a treaty with him, by which he hoped
that all the differences between France and Spain would be finally
terminated. But Ferdinand, whose affairs, at that time, were
extremely prosperous in Italy, where the superior genius of
Gonfalvo de Cordova, the great captain, triumphed on every
occasion over the arms of France, did not pay the least regard
to what his fon-in-law had concluded, and carried on hostilities
with greater ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken any part in Denth of

the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet, till the death either of
Ferdinand or of Isabella fliould cpcn the way to one of their
thrones. The latter of there events was not far diflant. The
untimely death of her children had made a deep impreflion
on the mind of Isabella, and as he could derive but little con-
iolation for the lofles file had fflained either from her daughter
Joanna, whoe infirmities daily increaicld, or from her fon-in-

t, Id. Epinf. 255.
C Mariaa, lib. 27. c. 1I, 14. Flechier Vie dc Ximcn. i. i91.

law,,

BOOK I. law, who no longer preserved even the appearance of a decent re-

-i' sped towards that unhappy princess, her spirits and health began

gradually to decline, and after languishing ome months, he
died at Medina del Campo on the twenty-fixth of November,
one thousand five hundred and four. She was no less eminent
for virtue, than for wisdom; and whether we confider her
behaviour as a queen, as a wife, or as a mother, he is jufily
entitled to the high encomiums bestowed on her by the Spanil
hitforians .

er will, ap. A FEW weeks before her death, she made her last will, and

pointing Ser-
dinand regent being sensible of Joanna's incapacity to assume the reins of govern-
of Cailc. ment into her own hands, and having no inclination to commit

them to Philip, with whose conduct he was extremely difatisfied,
ihe appointed Ferdinand regent or administrator of the affairs
of Castile till her grandson Charles attained the age of twenty;
she bequeathed to him likewise one half of the revenues that
hould arise from the Indies, together with the grand mafterftips
of the three military orders; dignities, that rendered those who
possessed them almost independent, and which Isabella had, for
that reason, annexed to the crown . But before she signed a deed
so favourable to Ferdinand, she obliged him to swear that he
would not, by a second marriage, or by any other means, endea-
vour to deprive Joanna or her poflerity of their right of fucceflion
to any of his kingdoms '.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdinand resigned

the title of king of Castile, and commanded Joanna and Philip
to be publickly proclaimed the sovereigns of that kingdom. But,

4 P. Mart. Ep. 279. e P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. His. lib. 28. c. . Ferreras
IIif. Gener. d' Efpagne, tom. viii. 263. f Mar. Hilt. lib. 28. c. 14.

I at

at the fame time, he assumed the chara&er of Regent, in confe- BooK I.
quence of Isabella's testament, and not long after he prevailed -

Ferdinand ac-

on the Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right to that office. knowledged
This, however, he did not procure without difficulty, nor with- the Cortes
out discovering such symptoms of alienation and disgust among s505.
the Caffilians as filled him with great uneasiness. The union TheCailaa

diflatisfied.

of Castile and Aragon, for almost thirty years, had not so
entirely extirpated the ancient and hereditary enmity which
subsisted between the natives of these kingdoms, that the Cafti-
lian pride could submit, without murmuring, to the government
of a king of Aragon. Ferdinand's own character, with which
the Castilians were well acquainted, was far from rendering his
authority desirable. Suspicious, discerning, evere and parsi-
monious, he was accustomed to observe the most minute ations of
his fubjeds with a jealous attention, and to reward their highest:
services with little liberality; and they were now deprived of
Isabella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her Castilian
fubjeds, often tempered his austerity, or rendered it tolerable.
The maxims of his government were especially odious to the
Grandees; for that artful prince, sensible of the dangerous
privileges conferred upon them by the Feudal inffitutions, had
endeavoured, by extending the royal jurifdidion, by protecing
their injured vaflals, by increasing the immunities of cities, and
by other measures equally prudent, to curb their exorbitant power .
From all these causes, a fbrmidable party among the Castilians
united againf Ferdinanl, and though those who composed it, had
not hitherto taken any publick flep in opposition to him, he
plainly aw that upon the least encouragement from their new
king they would procced to the most violent extremities.

a Marian. lib, 28. c. z2,

Not

Boox I. NoR was there less agitation in the Netherlands upon receiving

.--' ' the accounts of Isabella's death, and of Ferdinand's having

Philip endea-
voor to ob- affnmed the government of Cafrile. Philip was not of a term-
verntenof per tamely to ftifer himself to be supplanted by the unnatural
Caflile. ambition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infirmities, ad the

nonage of Charles rendered them incapable of government, he,
as a husband, was the proper guardian of his wife, and as a
father, the natural tutor of his son. Nor was it sufficient to
oppose to these just rights, and to the inclination of the people
of Castile, the authority of a testament, the genuineness of
which was perhaps doubtful, and its contents certainly iniqui-
tous. A keener edge was added to Philip's resentment, and
new vigour infused into his councils by the arrival of Don John
Manuel. He was Ferdinand's ambassador at the Imperial court,
but upon the firfi notice of Isabella's death repaired to Brussels,
flattering himself that in the court of a young and liberal prince,
he might attain to power and honours which he could never hope
for in the service of an old and frugal master. He had early
paid court to Philip during his cefidenc( in Spain, with such
assiduity as entirely gained his confidcncc; and having been
trained to bufincfs under Ferdinand, could oppose his fihcencs
with equal abilities, and with arts not inferior to those for
which that monarch was diftinguifhcdh.

lic requires BY his advice, ambassadors were dispatchcd to require Fcrdi-
lrdinanltoh nand to retire into Aragon, and to rcfign the government of
rclign the
regcncy. Caflile to those persons whom Philip flould cntruft with it till

his arrival in that kingdom. Such of the Castilian nobles
as had discovercd any diflatisfadion with Ferdinand's adllnii-
itration, were encouraged by every method to oppose it. At the

k Zurita Analca de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 12.

fallc

fame time a treaty was concluded with Lewis XII. by which BOOK I.
Philip flattered himself that he had secured the friendlhip and '
afliftance of that monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts ofaddrefs and

policy, in order to retain the power of which he had got pof-
session. By means of Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he
entered into a private negociation with Joanna, and prevailed on
that weak princess to confirm, by her authority, his right to the
regency. But this intrigue did not escape the penetrating eye
of Don John Manuel; Joanna's letter of consent was inter-
cepted; Conchillos was thrown into a dungeon; and she herself
confined to an apartment in the palace, and all her Spanish
domefticks secluded from her prefencet.

THE mortification which the discovery of this scheme occa- Ferdinand

abandoned

sioned to Ferdinand, was much increased by his observing the by the Cali.
progress that Philip's emiflaries made in Caffile. Some of thean nobles
nobles retired to their castles; others to the towns in which they
had influence; they formed themselves into confederacies, and
began to assemble their vasals. Ferdinand's court was almost
totally deserted; not a person of diftincion but Ximenes, arch-
biihop of Toledo, the duke of Alva, and the marquis of Denia,
remaining there; while the houses of Philip's ambassadors were
daily crowded with those of the highest rank.

EXASPE R A T ED at this universal defedion, and piqued, per- Ferdilnand

rcfolves to
haps, at feeing all his fchemcs defeated by a younger politician, marry, in or-

der to ex-

Ferdinand resolved, in defiance of the law of nature, and of cluIe, hi
decency, to deprive his daughter and her poflerity of the crown daughlterf.m

the thro:Je.

i P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Anales vi. p. ii.
VOL I. II. C of

Boo K I. of Cafile, rather than renounce the regency of that kingdom.

-'~ His plan for accomplishing this was no less bold, than the inten-

tion itself was wicked. He demanded in marriage Joanna, tie
supposed daughter of Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegiti-
macy, Isabella's right to the crown of Castile was founded; and
by reviving the claim of this princcfs, in opposition to which lie
himself had formerly led armies, and fought battles, he hoped
once more to get possession of the throne of that kingdom. But
Emanuel, King of Portugal, in whose dominions Joanna resided,
being married to one of Ferdinand's daughters by Isabella,
refused his content to that unnatural match; and the unhappy
princess herself, having loft, by being long immured in a con-
vent, all relish for the objecs of ambition, discovered no less
aversion to itk.

l.mnrie a THIE refources,,however, of Ferdinand's ambition, were not
liiere ',f the
FIcach King. exhaulted. Upon meeting with a repulse in Portugal, he turned

towards France, and fought in marriage Germaine de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of Mary, the filler of
Lewis XII. The war which that monarch had carried on against
Ferdinand in Naples, had been o unfortunate, that he liflened
with joy to a proposal, which filrnifed him with an honourable
pretence of concluding peace: And though no prince was ever
more remarkable than Ferdinand for making all his paflions
bend to the max'ins of interest, or become fubfervicnt to the
purpofcs of ambition, yet so vehement was his resentment against
his Ioll-in-law, that in order to be revenged-of him, by detach-
ing Lewis from his intcrcet, and in order to gain a chance of
excluding him from his hereditary throne of Aragon, and the
dominions annexed to it, lh was rcady once more to divide Spain

Sandov. 1 lft. of Civil Wars in Caflilo. Lend. 16SS. p. 5. Zurita Analcs tie Ara-

ton, tonm vi. p.
I. 13.

7 1-llto

into separate kingdoms, though the union of these was'the great BOOK L
glory of his reign, and had been the chief object of his ambi- -
tion ; he consented to retfore the Neapolitan nobles of the French
fation to their poffeflions and honours; and Submitted to the
ridicule of marrying, in.anl advanced.age, a.princefs of eighteen'.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived Philip of his

only ally, and threatened him with the loss of so many king-
doms, gave a dreadful alarm to him, and convinced Don John
Manuel that there was now a necessity of taking other measures
with regard to the affairs of Spain m. He accordingly inftruded
the Flemish ambassadors in the court of Spain, to testify the
strong dcfire which their matter had of terminating all diffe-
rences between him and.Ferdinand in an amicable manner, and
his willingness to content to any conditions that would re-eflablifl
the friendlhip which ought to subsist between a father and a son-
in-law. Ferdinand, though he had made and broken more A treaty be
treaties than any prince of any age, was apt to confide so far in tCen Fedi

rnand and

the sincerity of other men, as to be always extremely .fond of a Philip..
negociation. He listened with eagerness to these declarations,
and soon concluded a treaty at Salamanca; in which it was ftipu- Nov. 4
lated, that the government of Catilc 'flould be carried on in the
joint names of Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that the
revenues of the crown, and the right of confcrring offices, flould
be flarcd between Ferdinand and Philip by an equal division ".

NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's thoughts 1506.

than to obfcrve tliis treaty. I-lis sole intention in proposing it Philip and
vwas to amue Ferdinand, and to prevent him from taking any iil for S aiin

I P. Mart. Ep. 290. 292. Mariana lib. 28. c. 6, 17. I' P. hart. Ep. 293.
' Zurita Anales de Aragon, vi. 19. 1'. Mart. Ep. 293, 294.

C 2 incatrlrC

.9

BooK I. measures for obftruting his voyage into Spain. It had that

effect. Ferdinand, sagacious as he was, did not for some
time fufpeEt his design; and though when he perceived it, he
prevailed on the king of France not only to remonstrate against.
the archduke's journey, but to threaten hostilities if he under-
took it; though he solicited the duke of Gueldres to attack his
fon-in-law's dominions in the Low Countries, Philip and his,
consort nevertheless set fail with a numerous fleet, and a good
body of land forces. They were obliged by a violent tempest to
take hetter in England, where Henry VII. in compliance with
Ferdinand's solicitations, detained them upwards of three
months ; at last they were permitted to depart, and after a
Apri: z2. more prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at Corunna in

Galicia, nor durll Ferdinand attempt, as he had once intended, to
oppose their landing by force of arms.

The nobility THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged hitherto to con-
of Castile
declare for ceal or to dissemble their sentiments, now declared openly in

favour of Philip. From every corner of the kingdom, persons
of the highest rank, with numerous retinues of their vassals,
repaired to their new king. The treaty of Salamanca was uni-
verfally condemned, and all agreed to exclude from the govern-
mcnt of Castile a prince, who by consenting to disjoin Aragon
and Naples from that crown, discovered so little concern for its
true interests. Ferdinand, mean while, abandoned by almost
all the Castilians, disconcerted by their revolt and uncertain
whether he should peaceably rlinquiflh his power, or take arms
in order to maintain it, earnestly follicited an interview with his
fon-in-law, who by advice of Manucl fludioufly avoided it.

F Ferrer. -lilt. viii. 285.

Convi nced

Convinced at last, by feeing the number and zeal of Philip's BOOK I.
adherents daily increase, that it was vain to think of resisting -J

June 7.
such a torrent, he contented by a treaty, to resign the regency of Ferdinand re-

signs the re-

Caffile into the hands of Philip, to retire into his hereditary gency of
dominions of Aragon, and to reft satisfied with the masterships Cafslle, and
of the military orders, and that hare of the revenue of the Aragon.
Indies, which Isabella had bequeathed to him. Though an inter-
view between the princes was no longer necessary, it was agreed
to on both fides from motives of decency. Philip repaired to
the place appointed with a splendid retinue of the Castilian nobles,
and a confrderable body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared
without any pomp, attended by a few followers, mounted on
mules, and unarmed. On that occasion don John Manuel had
the pleasure of displaying before the monarch whom he had
deserted, the extensive influence he had acquired over his new
master: While Ferdinand suffered in presence of his former
subjects the two mofl cruel mortifications which an artful and
ambitious prince can feel; being at once over-reaehedin eondiid,
and. stripped of power P.

NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and hoping that July.

some favourable accident would oon open the-way for his return
into Castile, lie took care to protefl, though with great secrecy,
that the treaty concluded with his fon-in-law, being extorted by
force, ought to be deemed void of all obligation .

PHIL I P took poffeflion of his new authority with a youthful Philip and
joy. The unhappy Joanna, fromn whom he derived it, remained knowledged

a1 king and
during all these contefis, undlcr the dominion of a deep melan- qucen by tic

Cortes,

P Zurita Analesde Arag. vi. 6i. Mar. lib. 28. c. 9i, 2. P. Mart. cp. 304, 305,,c.
i Zurita Anales d Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrcr. lift. viii. 2g0.

choly;

JtOOK I. choly; fhc was seldom allowed to appear in publick; her father,
.---v though he had often dcfired it, was refused access to her; and

Philip's chief objcc -was to prevail on the Cortes to declare her
incapable of government, that an undivided power might be
lodged in his hands, till his son should attain to full age. But
such was the partial attachment of the Castilians to their native
[u-incefs, that though Manuel had the address to gain some mem-
Ibrs of the Cortes assembled at Valladolid, and others were
willing to gratify their new sovereign in his first request, the
great body of the representatives refused their consent to a decla-
ration which they thought so injurious to the blood of their
monarchs '. They were unanimous, however, in acknowledg-
ing Joanna and Philip, queen and king of Castile, and their son
Charles prince of Asturias.
Death of TH I s was almost the only memorable event during Philip's

adminiflation. A fever, occasioned by a debauch, put an end to
Sept 2. hi; life in the twenty-eighth year of his age, not having enjoyed

the regal dignity which he had been so eager to obtain full three
months '.

The (lfordcr THIE whole royal authority in Castile ought of course to have
innd in- devolved upon Joanna. But the hock occasioned by a ditafter
crcat. fb unexpected as the death of her husband compleated the dif-

order of her understanding, and her incapacity for government.
During all the time of Philip's ickncfs, no intreaty could pre-
vail on her, though in the sixth month of her pregnancy, to
leave him for a moment. When he expired, however, the did
not fled one tear, or utter a single groal. Her grief was filcnt
' Zurita Analec de Arag. vi. p. 7. ' Marian, lib. 28. . 23.

and

and fettled. She continued to watch the dead body with the fame Bo00o I1
tenderness and attention as if it had been alive ', and though at
last he allowed it to be buried, he oon removed it from the
tomb to her own apartment. There it was laid upon a bed of
state, in a splendid dress; and having heard from some monk a
legendary tale of a king who revived after he had been dead
fourteen years, lhe kept her eyes almost constantly fixed on the
body, waiting for the happy moment of its return to life. Nor
was this capricious affection for her dead husband less tintured
with jealousy, than that which he had born to him while alive.
She did not permit any of her female attendants to approach
the bed on which his corpse was laid; he would not susser any
woman who did not belong to her family to enter the apart-
ment; and rather than grant that privilege to a midwife, tho'
a very aged one had been chosen of purpose, she bore the prin-
cess Catharine without any other assistance than that of her own
domeflics .-

A woM AN in such a ltate of mind was little capable of go- She is inca -

pable of go--

verning a great kingdom; and Joanna, who made it her sole vernmezt.
employment to bewail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
husband, would have thought her attention to public affairs an
impious neglec of those duties which she owed to him. But
though he declined assuming the administration herself, yet, by
a flrange caprice of jcaloufy, he rfufed to commit it to any
other person; and -no intreaty of her fidjcdts could perfuale her
to name a regent, or even to sign such papers as were necefary
for the execution ofjuRice, and the fccurity of the kingdom.
t P. Mart. Ep. 316.

Mar. lifl. lib. 29. c, 3 & 5. P. Mart. Fp. 3 8, 32t, 3a8, 332.

'1'j. i:

BooK I. THi death of Phijip threw the Catilians into the greatest per-

Mians pleiity. It was necessary to appoint a regent, both on account

Maximilian b
the Emperor of Joannals frenzy, and the infancy of her son; and as there was
and Ferdinand
competikors not ang the nobles, any person so eminently difinguifhed as to

'rgcy. -be called by the pubtick voice to that high ofice, all naturally

turned their eyes either to Ferdinand, or to the Emperor Maxirri-
lian The former claimed that dignity as adninifirator for his
daughter, and by virtue of the testament of Isabella; the latter
thought himself the legal guardian of his grandson, whom, on
account of his mother's infirmity, he already confidered as king
of Castile. Those who had lately compelled Ferdinand to resign
the government of the kingdom, trembled at the thoughts of his
being reflored fb soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to fnrgive, uad who tn those defeds
with which they were already acquainted, aded that resentment
which the rebrance of their behaviour, and refle&ion upon
his own disgrace, mull naturally have excited. Though none of
thefc objecions held against Maximilian, he was a firanger to
the laws and manners of Catile, and deftittte of troops and
money to support his pretensions, nor could his claim be admit-
ted without a public declaration of Joanna's incapacity for
government, an indignity, to which, notwithflanding the noto-
riety of her diltemper, the delicacy of the Castilians would never
consent.

DON JOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of the nobles,

who conidlercd themselves as most obnoxious to Ferdinand's
(diipleafurc, declared for Maximilian, and offered to Itlpport his
claim with all their interest. Maximilian, always enterprizing
and decisive in council, though fccble and dilatory in c.cxcution,
eagerly embraccd the offer. But a scrics of incffedual nego-

4 ciations

ciations was the only consequence of this tranfation. The BooK I.
Emperor, as usual, aflerted his rights in a high firain, promised --
a great deal, and performed nothing X

A FE\ days before the death of Philip, Ferdinand had set out Ferdinand ah

for Naples, that, by his own pretence, he might put an end, with sent o, a
the greater decency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain, kingdom of
whose important services, and cautious conduct, did not screen Na.
him from the suspicions of his jealous master. Though an
account of his fon-in-law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in
the territories of Genoa, he was so follicitous to discover the
secret intrigues which he supposed the great captain to have been
carrying on, and to establish his own authority on a firm foun-
dation in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him from the
supreme command there, that rather than discontinue his voyage,
he chose to leave Castile in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque,
by this delay, his obtaining pofieflion of the government of that
kingdom .

NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent conduct of his

adherents, could have prevented the bad effects of this absence.
At the head of there was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who, Acquires the
though he had been raised to that dignity by Isabella, contrary re ency of
to the inclination of Ferdinand, and though he could have no through the

influence of

expeaation of enjoying much power under his jealous admii- c.,enoal
nitration, was nevertheless so difinterefled, as to prefer the welfare Xinlenel
of his country before his own grandeur, and to declare, that
Castile could never be so happily governed as by a prince, whom
long experience rendered thoroughly acquainted with its true
intercft. His zeal to bring ovcr his countrylmcn to this opinion,
induced him to lay aside Ibmcwhat of his usual auftcrity and

x Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 93.
7 Zurita Analcs de Arag. vi. p. 85.
-VOL. II. D) laughtilncf,,

Boo I. haughtiness. lie condescended, on this occasion, to court the
'-- -' difaffeted nobles, and employed address, as well as arguments,

15o7.

to persuade them. Ferdinand fcconded his endeavours with
great art; and by concessions to some of the grandees, by pro-
miscs to others, and by letters full of complaisance to all, he
gained many of his most violent opponents z. And though many

Aug. 2. cabals were formed, and some commotions excited, yet when

'rd nn re.
tu;ili Li1'ltol Ferdinand, after having fettlcd the affairs of Naples, arrived in

Caflile, he entered upon the adminiflration without opofition.
The prudence with which he exercised his authority in that
king:dom, e:lualled the good fortune by which he had recovered

is rri..,nt it. IBy a moderate, but ficady adminifiration, free from partiality

h .I:11.itra-
tio1. and from refentmcnt, he entirely reconciled the Caflilians to his

person, and fccured to them, during te remainder of his life,
as much domeflic tranquillity, as was confifient with the genius
of the feudal govcrnmcnt, which still tflbfiied among them in
full vigour .

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in his hereditary

kingdoms, the only obligation which the archduke Charles owed
to the wife regency of his grandfiather; he had the fatisfadion,
during that period, of feeing very important acquisitions added
to the dominions over which he was to reign. On the coafi of

("nquefi of B;1rbary, Oran, and other conquefls of no finall value, were
( a'n'1 annexcd to the crown of Castile by cardinal Ximencs, wlio, witl

^ a fpiit very uncommon in a monk, led in pcrfon a numerous

army against the Moors of that country; and, with a gcncrofity
and magnificence flill nmore lingular, (ldfrayedl the whole cxpcnce
As the expedition out of his own revenucs'. Wlille in iFuropc,
lFrdinand, under prctences 1)oth frivolous and unjulf, and bry
artifices the most fl amcful and treacherous, expelled Jon

Z7 lrta A;lcs ec Arag. vi. p. 87. )4.. io9. ' Maiana, lib. 29. c. o.
Mariana, lib. 2. c. 1.8

8 d'Albert

d'Albert, the lawful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre; Boo x .
and seizing on that kingdom, extended the limits of the Spanish '- f

Acqiufjti. II of

monarchy from the Pyrenees on the one hand, to the frontiers of Savarle.
Portugal on the other'.

IT was not, however, the desire of aggrandizing the Archduke, Fcrdcnand' ia-

which influenced Fcrdinand'in this, or in any other of his actions. ,rls of i,
He was more apt to confider that young prince as a rival, who Chille.
might one day wrest out of his hands the government of Castile,
than as a grandson, for whose behoof he was entruflcd with the
adminiitration. This jealousy soon begot aversion, and even
hatred, the symptoms of which he was at no pains to conceal.
Hence proceeded his immoderate joy when his young queen was ;.
delivered of a son, whose life would have deprived Charles of
the crowns of Aragon, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon
the untimely death of that prince, he discovered, for the fame
reason, an excessive solicitude to have other children. This
impatience of his hastened, in all probability, the accession of
Charles to the crown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure
a blefling, of which, from his advanced age, and the intempe-
rance of his youth, he could have little profpet, had recourse to
his physicians, and by their prescription took one of those potions, Is
which are filppofed to add vigour to the confitution, though
they more frequently prove fatal to it. This was its ceffe on
a frame so feeble and cxhauftcd as that of Ferdinand; and
though he survived a violent disorder which it at first occasioned,
it brought on such an habitual languor and dejcaion of mind,
as rendered him averse from any fcrious attention to public
affairs, and fond of frivolous amusements, on which lie had not
hitherto bellowed much time''. Though lie now deflaired of
having any ton of his own, his jcaloufy of the Archduke did

c Mar. lib. 30. c. Ir, 12. 19. 24. d Zmuita Analcs de Ar.g. vi. 3 7.
P. Mart. Fp. 531. Argcnfola Analcs de Arragon, lib. i. p. 4.

D nol)t

BOOK L not abate, nor could he help viewing him with that aversion,.

which princes often bear to their successors. In order to gratify

,5. this unnatural passion, he made a will, appointing prince Ferdi-

Endcavours nand, who having been born and educated in Spain, was much
to exclude
him from te beloved by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his kingdoms, till
diom, by aki the arrival of the archduke his brother; and by the fame deed
will in fivour he fettled upon him the grand-mafterfhip of the three military

orders. The former of these grants might have put it in his
power to have disputed the throne with his brother; the latter
would, in any event, have rendered him almost independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous love of power,

which was so remarkable through his whole life. Unwilling to
resign it, even at the approach of death, he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his distemper, or to
forget it; and though his strength declined every day, none of
his attendants durst mention his condition; nor would he admit
his father confessor, who thought such silence criminal and
unchritfian, into his pretence. At last the danger became so,
imminent, that it could be no longer concealed. Ferdinand
received the intimation with a decent fortitude; and touched,
perhaps, with compunction at the injustice he had done his
grandson, or influenced by the honest rcmonftrances of Carvajal,
Zapata and Vargas, his most ancient and faithful counsellors,
who reprcfcntcd to him that by invcfting prince Ferdinand with
the regency, he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by bcelowing on him the grand mastership of the
military orders, would irip the crown of its noblest ornament
and chief flrength, he confcnted to alter his will in botli thece

I pl'rrualed particulars. By a new deed lie left Charles the sole heir of all
t, .tirci that

,l, his dominions, and allotted to prince Ferdinand, instead of that

throne of which he thought hiimfclf almoit tccurc, an incon-

fidcrabkc

fiderable establishment of fifty thousands ducats a year'. He BOOK I.
died a few hours after signing this will, on the twenty-third day
of January, one thousand five hundred and sixteen.

CIARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance descended by his Educaton of

death, was near the full age of sixteen. He had hitherto re-
fided in the Low Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret
of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the fifler of
Edward IV. of England, and widow of Charles the Bold, two
princesses of great virtue and abilities, had the care of forming
his early youth. Upon the death of his father, Philip, the
Flemings committed the government of the Low Countries to
his grandfather, the Emperor Maximilian, with the name rather
than the authority of regent '. Maximilian made choice of
William de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend the education
of the young prince his grandson g. That nobleman possessed, in
an eminent degree, the talents which fitted him for such an
important office, and discharged the duties of it with great
fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht ated as preceptor.

This

e Mar. Hill. lib. 30. c. ult. Zrita Anales de Arag. vi. 401. P. Mart. Ep. 565,
566. Argenfola Anales de Arag. lib. . p. I r.

f Pontius IIeuteru, Rerum Aufiriacarum, lib. xv. Lov. 1649. lib. 7. c. 2. p. iS5.
S The French historians, upon the authority of M. de Bellay, Mem. p. i i. have un-

animouly aftlrted that Philip, by his laif will, having appointed the King of France to
have the direction of his on's education, Louis XII. with a difintcreltednefs, suitable ta
the confidence reposcd in him, named Chievres for that office. Even the president IIenaut
has adopted this opinion. Abregc: Chron. A. D. 1 07. Varillas, in his usual manncr,
pretends to have seen Philip's tcl!ament. Pract. de I'education dcs Pinces, p. 16. lut
the Spanish, German and Flemish hiflorians concur in contradicting this aenrtion of the
French authors. It appears from Ilcuterus, a contemporary Flemini hillorian of great
authoity, that Louis XII. by confinting to the marriage of Germaine de Fuix with Ser-
dinand, had lonl much of that confidence which Philip once p!aced in him; that thi, dif-
g si was increased by the Fiench King's giving in marriage to the count of Anioulcnic
his eldcef daughter, whom he had formerly betrothed to Chailes, Ileutcr. Rer. Aflr. lil). v,
1 1; That the French a fliort time before hilip's de.;th, had violated the peace, whi(h

lbfirlltc

BOOK I. This preferment, which opened his way to the highefl dignities
u.-- - v an Ecclefiaflic can attain, he owed not to his birth, for that was

extremely mean; nor to his interest, for he was a firanger to
the arts of a court; but to the opinion which his countrymen
entertained of his learning. He was indeed no inconsiderable
proficient in those frivolous sciences which, during several centu-
ries, assumed the name of Philosophy, and published a com-
mentary, which was highly esteemed, upon The Master of the
Sentence.r, a famous treatifeof Petrus Lombardus, and confidered
at that time, as the fandard system of metaphysical theology.
But whatever admiration there procured him in an illiterate age,
it was soon found that a man accustomed to the retirement of a
college, unacquainted with the world, and without any tinture
of taste or elegance, was by no means qualified for rendering
science agreeable to a young prince. Charles, accordingly,
difcovcrcd an early aversion to learning, and an excessive fond-
ncfs for those violent and martial exercifcs, to excel in which
was at that time, the chief pride, and almost the only study of

fjbfirted be:ween them and the Flemings, and Philip had complained of this injury, and
was ready to resent it. Ileuter. ibid. All these circumstances render it improbable that
I'liip, who made his will a few days before he died, I-Iuter. p. 152, should commit the
education of his on to Louis XI. In confirmation of there plausible conjectures, positive
teflimony can be adduced. It appears from Ileuterus, that Philip, when he set out for
Spain, had cntrufled Chievres both with the care of his son's education, and wit'i the
government of his dominions in the Low Countries. Ileuter. lib. vii. p. 153. That an
-ittempt was made, soon after Philip's death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed
Jcgcnt, drint the minority of his grandson, but that being oppoftd, Chievres seems to
have continued to difihargc both the offices which Philip had committed to him, Hcut.
ibid. i 53, 5. That in the beginning of the year 1508, the l'lemings invited Maximi-
lian to accept of the regency, to which he conrented, and appointed his daughter Mar-
garet, together with a council of Flemings, to exercise the supreme authority, when he
himself fliould, at any time, be absent. He likcevife named Chicvics as governor, and
Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son, Ileut. ibid. 55, 157. Wlhat Heutcrus re-
latcs ith refipca to this matter is confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani, apud Analeca
Cafp. Burmanni de Adriano, cap. o; by Barlandu, Chronic. rabant. ibid. p. 25; and
by Ilarzus Annal. B;ab. vol. ii. 20, &c.

pcrfons

persons of rank. Chievres encouraged this taste, either from a BOOK I.
desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence, or from too flight an
opinion of the advantage of literary accomplishments g. He
inftruded him, however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him fludy the history not only of his own king-
doms, but of those with which they were connected; he accuf-
tomed him, from the time of his assuming the government of
Slanders in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, to
attend to business; he persuaded him to peruse all papers relating The fire
to public affairs; to be present at the deliberations of his privy- p-,,:ngs of

his charate-:.

counsellors, and to propose to them himself those matters, con-
cerning which he required their opinion h. From such an
education, Charles contrated habits of gravity and recolledion
which scarce suited his time of life. The firfi openings of his
genius did not indicate that superiority which its maturer age
displayed . He did not discover in his youth that impe-
tuofity of spirit which commonly uflers in an active and enter-
prizing manhood. Nor did his early obsequiousness to Chievres,
and his other favourites, promise that capacious and decilive
judgment, which afterwards diredecd the affairs of one half of
Europe. But his fubjeets, dazzled with the external accomplish-
ments of a graceful figulre nl manly nddrlf£, ndl viewing his
characer with that partiality which is always Ihown to princes
during their youth, cntertained sanguine hopes of his adding;
lustre to those crowns which dcfccndcd to lhim by the dcathl of
Ferdinand.

THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from the view whlich I s'" *,1;; i;

rcuit-rcs ;iL vi-
have given of their political conflitution, were, at tllat timei, in a gioLs :lIni-

niilratiuii .

g Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus, Hilt. Germ. ii. 67. '. 1 licu r. Rer.
Auar. lib. 7. c. 3. p. 157.

h Mcmoires e Bcllay, 8vo. I'ar. 1573. P) . . 1. lcuter. lib. viii. c . . 94.
'P. Martyr, Ep. 569, 655.

littlatsiol

J3ooK I. situation, which required an adminisiration, no less vigorous
~ .---than prudent. The feudal inflitutions, which had been intro-

duced into all its different provinces by the Goths, the Suevi,
and the Vandals, subsisted in great force. The nobles, who
were powerful and warlike, had long possesed all the exorbitant
privileges, which these institutions veiled in their order. The
cities in Spain were more numerous and more considerable, than
the genius of feudal government, naturally an enemy to com-
*mercc, and to regular police, seemed to admit. The personal
l;ghlts, and political influence, which the inhabitants of these
cities had acquired, were extensive. The royal prerogative cir-
cunmfcribed by the privileges of the nobility, and by the preten-
sions of the people, was confined within very narrow limits.
Under such a form of government, the principles of discord were
many; the bond of union was extremely feeble; and Spain felt
not only all the inconveniencies occasioned by the defecs in the
feudal system, but was exposed to disorders arising from the
peculiarities in its own constitution.

DURING the long adminiflration of Ferdinand, no internal

commotion, it is true, had arisen in Spain. His superior abili-
ties enabled him to rcftrain the.turbulence of the nobles, and to
moderate the jcaloufy of the commons; and by the wisdom of
Iis domefRic government, by the sagacity with which he con-
duded his foreign operations, and by the high opinion that
his ubljeds entertained of both, he preserved among them a
degree of tranquillity, greater than was natural to a conflitution,
in which the feeds of discord and disorder were so copiously
mingled. But, by the death of Ferdinand, these refiraints were
at once withdrawn; and facdion and discontent, from being long
repressed, were ready to break out with fiercer animosity.

7 IN

IN order to prevent these evils, Ferdinand had in his last will BooK I.
taken a most prudent precaution, by appointing cardinal i.'d'

Ferdina d had
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, to be sole regent of Cafiile, till appoiFted car-

dir-al Xitneces

the arrival of his grandson in Spain. The singular character of R-ge,t.
this man, and the extraordinary qualities which marked him out
for that office, at fich a juncturc, merit a particular description.
He was descended of an honourable, not of a wealthy family; his r;eand
and the circumstances of his parents, as well as his own inclina-
tions, having determined him to enter into the church, he early
obtained benefices of great value, and which placed him in the
way of the highcft preferment. All these, however, he renounced
at once; and after undergoing a very severe noviciate, assumed
the habit of St. Francis in a monastery of Obfcrvantine friars, one
of the most rigid orders in the Romilf Church. There he soon
became eminent for his uncommon austerity of manners, and
for those excesses of superstitious devotion, which are the proper
charaderiftics of the monaflic life. But notwithflanding these
extravagancies, to which weak and enthusiastic minds alone are
usually prone, his understanding, naturally penetrating and
dccilive, rctained its full vigour, and acquired him such great
authority among his own order, as raised him to be their pro-
vincial. His reputation for fandity, soon procured him the
office of father confefTor to the queen Isabella, which he accepted
with the utmost reludance. He preserved in a court the fame
austerity of manners, which had diitinguifhed him in the cloister.
-Ie continued to make all his journics on foot; he fubfilcld only
upon alms; his a(s of mortification were as severe as ever; and
Ihis pennances as rigorous. Isabella, pleased with her choice, con-
firred on him, not long after, the Archbiflloprick of Tolcdo,
wlhich, next to the Papacy, is the richelt dignity in the church
of Rome. This honour he declined with a firmness, which
nothing but the authoritative injuncdion of tlh Pope was able to

VO L. 11. .E overco1me.

BOOK I. overcome. Nor did this height of promotion change his man-

- J-- ners. Though obliged to display in public that magnificence

which became his flation, he himself retained his monaitic
severity. Under his pontifical robes he constantly wore the
coarse frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he used to patch
with his own hands. He at no time used linen; but was com-
monly clad in hair-cloth. He slept always in his habit, most
frequently on the ground, or on boards, rarely in a bed. He
did not taste any of the delicacies which appeared at his table, but
satisfied himself with that simple diet which the rule of his order
prefcribedk. Notwithifanding these peculiarities, o opposite to
the manners of the world, he possessed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his station, and by
the high opinion which Ferdinand and Isabella entertained of
him, to take a principal fharc in the administration, than he dif-
played talents for business, which rendered the fame of his wis-
dom equal to that of his fandity. Bold and original in all his
plans, hlis political condud flowed from his real characer, and
partook both of its virtues and its defects. His extensive genius
fuggefed to him fchelncs, vafi and magnificent. Conscious of
the integrity of his intentions, he pursued these witli unremit-
ting and undaunted frmncfs. Accustomed from his early youth
to mortify his own paflions, lie ilcwved little indulgence towards
those of other mcn. Taught by his fyfltc of religion to check
even lis mofl innocent lcfilres, he was the enemy of every tling
to which he could affix the name of elegance and llcafilrc ; and,
though frece from any fuilicion of cruelty, lie liicovercd in all
his commerce with the world a fcvcre inflexibility of linmd, and
aultcrity of cllaraCtcr, )cctlal'ir t tile onallic protcflion, and
whlicl caln Icarce lc conceived il a country whecrc that is uin-
known.
k [liloire de l'ad liniuilration du Card. inl'!. par Mich. Baudir, 4to. 63' . 1 ;.

SL1 :1I

SucH was the man to whom Ferdinand committed the regency BOOK I.

ofCaftile, and though lie was then near fourscore, and perfectly card
acquainted with the labour and difficulty of the office, his natu- Adrian ap-

poi n ted regent

ral intrepidity of mind, and zeal for the public good, prompted by Chailes.
him to accept of it without hesitation: And though Adrian of
Utrecht, who had been sent into Spain a few months before the
death of Ferdinand, produced full powers from the archduke to
afiume the name and authority of regent upon the demise of his
grandfather; such was the aversion of the Spaniards to the
government of a firanger, and so unequal the abilities of the two
competitors, that Adrian's claim would at once have been rejeCt-
ed, if Ximenes himself, from complaisance to his new master,
had nut cuiilteted u acknowledge him as regent, and to carry on Ximenes bh.

tains the folc

the government in conjunction with him. By this, however, diredion of
Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal; and Ximenes, affairs
though he treated him with great decency, and even respect,
retained the whole power in his own hands'.

TIE Cardinal's firfl care was to observe the motions of the His precau.

tions againt
Infant Don Ferdinand, who having been flattered with so near a the infint

Don Ferdi-

profpea of the supreme power, bore the disappointment of his nand.
hopes with greater impatience than could have been expected of
a prince so young. Ximlncs, under pretence of providing more
cffcdlially for his safety, removed him from Guadalupe, the
place in which lie lad been educated, to Madrid, where he fixed
the residence of the court. There he was under the cardinal's
own eye, and llis conducl, with that of his domellics, were
watcllcd witli tlic itrioft attention .

TJIE firif intelligence lhe received from tlle Low (ountries,
gave greater dillfuict to the Cardinal, and convinced hilnm how

I (;onicius de reb. elt. Xincnii, p. 15. fol. Comrl. 1569.
' Miniana Contin. Mari.lnc, lib. . c. . Baudicr, Hill. dc Ximcne,, p. il3.

1; difficult

BOOK I. difficult a talk it would be to conduC the affairs of a young

a--. prince, under the influence of counsellors unacquainted with the

ch:rlshs as- laws and manners of Spain. No sooner did the account of Ser-
/uniics the title
of King. dinand's death reach Brussels, than Charles, by the advice of his

Flemish ministers, resolved to assume the title of King. By the
laws of Spain, the sole right to the crowns both of Castile and of
Aragon, belonged to Joanna; and though her infirmities dif-
qualified her from governing, this incapacity had not been
declared by any public a of the Cortes of either kingdom; so
that the Spaniards confidered this resolution, not only as a direa
violation of their privileges, but as an unnatural usurpation in a
son on the prerogatives of a mother, towards whom, in her pre-
sent unhappy situation, he manifefled a lefT delicate regard than
her fubjeds had always expressed". The Flemish court, how-
ever, prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor to address
letters to Charles as king of Castile; the former of whom, it
was pretended, had a right, as head of the church; and the lat-
ter, as head of the empire, to confer this title; and inftrudions
were sent to Xilnencs, to prevail on the Spaniards to acknow-
ledge it. Ximencs, though he had earnestly remonfirated against
tihe mcafure, as equally unpopular and unnecessary, resolved to
exert all his authority and credit in carrying it into execution,
;ind immediately assemblcd such of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charlcs required was laid before them; and when,
inftcad of complying with his demands, they began to murmur
;tgainfl fitch an unprecedented encroachment on their privileges,
and to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their oath of alle-
giance to her, Ximcncs aflily itcrpofld, and with that firm and

R 'cogni,! (dccifivc tone which was natural to himn, told them, that they were
thrsiu¶gh e
i.(l( jiccf nIot now called to deliberate, but to obey; that their lbvereig

did not apply to them for advice, Lbut cxplced lubm)ifion ; and
Apiil 13. "this day, added lie, Cllarlcs shall be proclained King of Callile

"P. Mart. I'p. 568.

in

in Madrid, and the reft of the cities will follow its example." BOOK I.
On the spot he gave orders for that purpose°; and notwithftand-
ing the novelty of the pradice, and the secret discontents of many
persons of diftindion, Charles's title was universally recognized.
In Aragon, where the privileges of the subjed were more exten-
five, and the abilities and authority of the archbishop of Sara-
goffa, whom Ferdinand had appointed regent, were far inferior
to those of Ximenes, the fame obfequiouniefs to the will of
Charles did not appear, nor was he acknowledged there under
any other character but that of Prince, till his arrival in Spain P

XIMENES, though possessed only of delegated power, which, His schemes

for extending

from his advanced age, he could not expe&t long to enjoy, the preroga-
assumed, together with the character of regent, all the ideas tive.
natural to a monarch, and adopted schemes for extending the
regal authority, which he pursucd with as much intrepidity and
ardour, as if he himself had been to reap the advantages result-
ing from their success. The exorbitant privileges of the Cafti-
lian nobles, circumscribed the prerogative of the prince within
very narrow limits. These the cardinal confidered as so many
1unjuR extortions from the crown, and determined to reduce them.
Dangerous as the attempt was, there were circumflances in his
situation which promised him greater success than any king of
C:(filc could have expced. Ills ftricd and prudent oeconomy
of his archiepiicopal revenues, furnifllhd him with more ready
money, than the crown could ;at any time command; the fandity
of hiis Inannrs, his charity and munificence, rendered him the
idol of the peoplec; and the nobles themselves, not fufpccting any
dal;gcr firoml him, t(li not olbf)rvc his motions with the faime
jcalous .it(!ntioll, as they would have watched those of one of
thllir monlarchs.

Goictius, p. 152, &c, Budicr Ilill. de Ximcn. p. 121.
P'. MI\Lrt. lep. 572.

I.M E-

BOOK I. IMMEDIATELY upon his accession to the regency, several of
B '-- ' the nobles, fancying that the reins of government would of con-
By depressing
the nobiity. sequence be somewhat relaxed, began to assemble their vassals,

and to prosecute, by force of arms, animofities and pretensions
which the authority of Ferdinand had obliged them to dissemble,
or to relinquish. But Ximenes, who had taken into pay a good
body of troops, opposed and defeated all their designs with unex-
pe&ed vigour and facility; and though he did not treat the
authors of these disorders with any cruelty, he forced them to
adcs of fubmiflion, extremely mortifying to the haughty spirit of
Castilian grandees.

boy of troog BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were confined to individuals,
depending on and every aa of rigour was juRtified by the appearance of necef-
the crown.

fity, founded on th.. forms ofjuftice, and tempered with a mix-
ture of lenity, there was scarce room for jealousy or complaint.
It was not so with his next measure, which, by striking at a pri-
vilege essential to the nobles, gave a general alarm to the whole
order. By the feudal constitution, the military power was
lodged in the hands of the nobles, and men of an inferior condi-
tion were called into the field only as their vassals, and to follow
their banners. A king with scanty revenues, and a limited pre-
rogative, depended on these potent barons in all his operations.
It was with their forces he attacked his enemies, and with them
lie defended his own kingdom; and while at the head of troops
attached only to their own lords, and accullolmed to obey no
othcr conmnands, his authority was precarious, and his efforts
feeble. rom tlhis flatc Ximcnes resolved to deliver the crown;
and as mercenary tandlillng armies were unknown undler the fu-
d;l government, and would have b)cel odious to a martial and
generous peoplel, lie iflLlued a rocliiamlation, conmll ndin g every
city in Caflile to enroll a certain nunllbr of its; I)urgefTcs, in
order that they might be trained to tle tufi of arms on Sundays

and

and holidays; he engaged to provide officers to command them BOOK IT
at the publick expence; and as an encouragement to the private -
men, promised them an exemption from all taxes and impositions.
The frequent incursions of the Moors from Africa, and the necef-
fity of having some force ready to oppose them, furnished a plau-
fible pretence for this innovation. The object really in view
was to secure the king a body of troops independent of his barons,
and which might serve to counterbalance their powers. The
nobles were not ignorant of his intention, and saw how effec-
tually the scheme he had adopted would accomplish his end; but
as a measure which had the pious appearance of resisting the pro-
grefs of the Infidels was extremely popular, and as any oppofi-
tion to it arising from their order alone, would have been impu-
ted wholly to interested motives, they endeavoured to excite the
cities themselves to refute obedience, and to remonfirate against
the proclamation, as inconsistent with their charters and privi-
leges. In consequence of their instigations, Burgos, Valladolid,
and several other cities, rose in open mutiny. Some of the
grandees declared themselves their protecors. Violent remon-
firances were presented to the King. His Flemish counsellors
were alarmed. Ximenes alone continied firm and undaunted;
and partly by terror, partly by intreaty; by force in tome in-
flances, and by forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the
rcfradory cities to complyr. During his adminifiration, he con-
tinued to cxccute his plan with vigour, but loon after his death
it was entirely dropt.

I-I s ficcefs in this fclecmc for rcdilcing the exorbitant power By recallinl,

of the nobility, encouragcd him to attempc t a diminution of tlheir llI or f
pofcfiliolls, which were no lcfs exorbitant. During the contells nl,"lrbh to

the nobilty

q Miniana Continuatio Mariana fol. Hag. 1733. p. 3,
'. MRl.. lp. 5 6, &c. (;omctiu., . i6o,.&c.

9' an(

BOOK'. and disorders inseparable from the feudal government, the no-

-bles, ever attentive to their own interest, and taking advantage
of the weakness and distress of their monarchs, had seized some
parts ofthe royal demesnes, obtained grants of others, and gradual-
ly wreted almost the whole out of the hands of the prince, and an-
nexed them to their own estates. The rights, by which most of the
·grandees held these lands, were extremely defective; it was from
some successful usurpation, which the crown had been too feeble to
dispute, that many derived their only titles to poflefion. An
enquiry carried back to the origin of these encroachments, which
were almost co-eval with the feudal system, was impra&icable;
and as it would have firipped every nobleman in Spain of great
part of his lands, it must have excited a general revolt. Such a
ftep was too bold, even for the enterprizing genius of Ximenes.
I-Ie confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand; and beginning
with the pensions granted during that time, refused to make any
farther payment, because all right to them expired with his life.
He then called to account those who had acquired crown lands
under the administration of that monarch, and at once resumed
whatever he had alienated. The effecs of these revocations
extended to Illaly pcrfona of great rank; for though Ferdinand
was a prince of little gencrofity, yet he and Iabella having been
raised to the throne of Castile by a powerful fation of the
nobles, they were obliged to reward the zeal of their adherents
with great liberality, and the royal dlemefres were their only
filnd for that purpose. The addition made to the revenue of
the crown by tllefe revocations, together with his own frugal
crconomy, enalled Ximenes not only to discharge all the dclts
wlich Ferdinand had left, and to remit confidtcrablc fums to
Flandlcrs, but to pay the ofliccrs of his new militia, and to cnfa-
bllifh magazincs more numerous, and better furni{hcd with artil-

4 Icsry,

le?, *t',nm &id ~trlike flres; thi 8^Sh has ever ffdreff in Bo I.
anf fortle age'. The pittdeint a fii&nteelftf jii Iaffiat i oF *-;- .
thee fums was a full apology to the people for the rigour wit
which they were exaaed.

THE nobles, alarmed at there repeated attacks, thought it Thenobres

s'~~~ ' ~oppose his

necessary to take precautions for the safety of their order. Many measures.
cabals were formed, loud complaints were uttered, and desperate
resolutions taken; but before they proceeded to extremities,
they appointed ome of their number to examine the powers in
consequence of which the Cardinal exercised ads of such high
authority. The admiral of Castile, the duke de Infantado, and
the conde de Benevento, grandees of the first rank, were en-
trusted with this commission. Ximenes received them with
cold civility, and in answer to their demand produced the
testament of Ferdinand by which he was appointed regent, to-
gether with the ratification of that deed by Charles. To both
these they objected; and he endeavoured to establish their validity.
As the conversation grew warm, he led them insensibly towards
a balcony from which they had a view of a large body of troops But without

fuccs.

under arms, and of a formidable train of artillery. " Behold,
fays he, pointing to these and raiing his voice, the powers
which I have received from his catholick majcfly. With these
I govern Castile; and with thece I will govern it, till the king
your master and mine takes poffcfflon of his kingdom'." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them, and astonishcd
their associates. To take arms against a man aware of his danger,
and prepared for his defence, was what dclfpair alone would
dictate. All thoughts of a general confederacy againlt the
Cardinal's adlniniftration were laid aside ; and cxcept from some

FIcchier Vie de Xinen. ii. 6oo. ' F icchI. ii . F rcr:as, Iill. viii. 433.
VOL. II. F flight

BOOK I. flight commotions, excited by the private resentment of par-
- ~ ticular noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered no inter-

ruption.

Thwarted by IT was not only from the opposition of the Spanilh nobility
Flemifl mini- that obtfacles arose to the execution of the Cardinal's schemes; he

ters. had a constant firuggle to maintain with the Flemih ministers,

who presuming upon their favour with the young king, aimed
at directing the affairs of Spain, as well as those of their own
country. Jealous of his great abilities, and independent spirit,
they confidered him rather as a rival who might circumscribe
their power, than as a minifler who by his prudence and vigour
was adding to the grandeur and authority of their matser.
Every complaint againfi his adminifiration was listened to with
pleasure by the courtiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary
obftrudions were thrown by their means in the way of all his
measures, and tho' they could not either with decency or safety
deprive him of the office of regent, they endeavoured to lessen his
authority by dividing it. They Ioon discovered that Adrian of
Utrecht, alreadyjoined with him in office, had neither genius nor
ipirit ffficient to give the lcaft check to his proceedings; and

An additron1l therefore Charles by their advice added to the commission of re-
number of
rieg".s ap- gcncy La Chau, a Flemih gentleman, and afterwards Amerflorf
poinltd. anoblernan of Holland; the former diftinguifhecd for his addrcis;

the latter for his firmncs. Ximnecs, though no stranger to the
nialevolent intention of the Flecmifli courtiers, received them
with all te extcrnal nmarks of iltiiidioii (lIe to the office with
wliicli tliy swre ivcflc(l; Ibut when they caine to enter upon
buiiifcs, lie abated nothing of that air ol lipcriority with which
he had treated Adrian, and ill retained the sole direc-ion of
affairs. Ther Spaniards, morc avcrfe, perhaps, than any other

people

people to the government of strangers, approved of all his efforts BOOK I.
to preserve his authority; and even the nobles, influenced by ~ ~~'

Ximenes re-

this national parflon, and forgetting their jealousies and difcon- tains lth di-
tents, chose rather to fee the supreme power in the hands of one fi,.n
of their countrymen, whom they feared, than in those of
foreigners, whom they hated.

XIMENES, though engaged in such great schemes ofdomeftic ri;s fuccecfur

war in Na-

policy, and embarrassed by the artifices and intrigues of the vare.
Flemish ministers, had the burden of two foreign wars to sup-
port. The one was in Navarre, invaded by its unfortunate
monarch, John d'Albret. The death of Ferdinand, the absence
of Charles, and the discord and difaffedtion which reigned among
the Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with a favourable
opportunity of recovering his dominions. The Cardinal's vigi-
lance, however, defeated a measure so well concerted. Fore-
feeing the danger to which that kingdom might be exposed, one
of his firt ads of adminifiration was to order thither a confide-
rable body of troops. While the king was employed with one
part of his army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en Port, Villalva,
an officer of great experience and courage, attacked the other by
l;lrprize, and cut it to pieces. The king inltantly retreated
with precipitation, and an end was put to the war'. But
as Navarre was filled at that time with towns and castles, sightly
fortified, and weakly garriloncd, which being unable to resist an
enemy, fcrved only to furnish him with places of retreat;
Ximenes, always bold and decisive in his meafurcs, ordered
every one of there to be difinantlcd, except I'ampcluna, the for-
tifications of which he proposcd to render very firong. To this
uncommon precaution Spain owes the pofliefion of Navarre,

' P. Mart. Ep. 570.

F 2 The

BOOK I. The French, since that period, have often entered, and have as

*~
'J often over-run the open country; but while they were exposed

to all the inconveniencies attending an invading army, the
Spaniards have easily drawn troops from the neighbouring pro-
vinces to oppose them; and the French, being deWftite of firong
towns to which they could retire, have been obliged to abandon
their conquest with as much rapidity as they gained it.

His opera. THE war which he carried on in Africa, against the famous.
onsinAfrica adventurer Horuc Barbarossa, who, from a private corsair, raised
less fortunate.

himself by his singular valour and address, to be king of Algiers.
and Tunis, was far from being equally successful. The ill con-
dud of the Spanish general, and the rash valour of his troops,
presented Barbarossa with an easy viory. Many perished in
the battle, more in the retreat, and the remainder returned into
Spain covered with infamy. The magnanimity, however, with
which the Cardinal bore this disgrace, the only one he expe-
rienced during his adminifiration, added new lustre to his cha-
rater '. Great composure of temper under a disappointment,
was not expeded from a man so remarkable for the eagerness.
and impatience with which he urged on the execution of all his
fchencs.

Corrlption of TH IS difailer was soon forgotten; while the condu of the
the lFlenlifhl Flcnifli court proved the cause of constant uneasiness, not only

ini llcr , [>;r-
iiCil;.lv ot to the Cardinal, but to the whole Spanish nation. All the great

Clcvr. qualities of Cllievres, the prime minister and favourite of the

young king, were fillied with an ignol)le and fordid avarice.
h'lc accclion of his nafler to the crown of Spain, opened a new

' Gomctius, lib, vi. p. 9.

9 and

and copious source for the gratification of this passion. During BooK I.
the time of Charles's residence in Slanders, the whole tribe of "
pretenders to offices or to favour retorted thither. They soon
discovered that, without the patronage of Chievres, it was vain
to hope for preferment; nor did they want sagacity to find out
the proper method of securing him. Vait fums of money were
drawn out of Spain. Every thing was venal, and disposed of to
the highest bidder. After the example of Chievres, the inferior
Flemish ministers engaged in this traffick, which became as gene-
ral and avowed, as it was infamous'. The Spaniards were filled
with rage when they beheld offices of great importance to the
welfare of their country, set to sale by firangers, unconcerned for
its honour or its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested in his whole
administration, and a tranger, from his native grandeur of
mind, to the passion of avarice, inveighed with the utmost bold-
ness against the venality of the Flemings. He rprefented to
the King in firong terms, the murmnurs and indignation which.
their behaviour excited among a free and high-lpirited people,
and besought him to set out without loss of time for Spain, that,
by his pretence, he might difipate the clouds which were gather-
ing all over the kingdom ".

CIIARLES was fully cnfiblc that lhe hald dlayed too long to Chnrlsf pcr.

f0A J(d by

take poftlffion of his dominions in Spain. Powerfil obilacles, iinee cYto
however, flood in his way. alnd detained him in the Low Coun- viJit S;al,''
tries. The war which the league of Camray had kindled in
Italy, fiill ublitfied; though, during its cnrlfe, the armies of all
the parties engaged in it, had taken (ili'( rcnt (lirctions. France
was now in alliance with Venice, vhich it had at illtconmbinedi
to destroy. Maximilian and Fcrdinand had for foimc years car-.

' Miniana, Coutin. 1. i. c. 2, " P. rd;rt. .p. ;76.

vicil

BOOK I. ried on hostilities against France, their original ally, to the valour

of whose troops the confederacy owed all its success. Together
with his kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted this war to his grand-
son ; and there was reason to expet that Maximilian, always
fond of new enterprizes, would persuade the young monarch to
enter into it with ardour. But the Flemings, who had long
poffefled an extensive commerce, which during the league of
Cambray, had grown to a great height upon the ruins of the
Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture with France; and Chievres,
sagacious to discern the true interest of his country, and not
warped on this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly declared
for maintaining peace with the French nation. Francis I.
deflitute of allies, and solicitous to secure his late conqueis in
Italy by a treaty, lillened with joy to the first overtures of accom-
modation. Chievres himself conducted the negociation in name
of Charles. Bouffcr appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis.
Each of them had presided over the education of the prince
whom he represented. They had both adopted the fame pacific
Ifftem; and were equally persuaded that the union of the two
monarchs was the happiest event for theinfelves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In fich hands the ncgociation (lid not languish.

A peace v'n- A few days after opel-ing their confcrences at Noyon, they con-
cluded with
France. clucded a treaty of con!lfeleracy and( mutual defence between the
AU. 13, two monarchs; the clic' articles in whliclh wer, that Francis

ihould give in marriage to Charles his ldcftl daughter, the prin-
cels Louifc, an infant of a year old, and as her dowry, flouild
make over to him all hiis clains and pretcnfiolns upon the king-
doin of Naples ; that in consideration of Charles's being already.
in )pofcflion of Naples, lie should till the accomplifilhent of'
marriage, pay an hundred thousand crowns a year to the Freci

king;

king; and the half of that fumn annually, as long as the princess BOOK .
had no children; that when Charles hall arrive in Spain, the
heirs of the king of Navarre may represent to him their right
to that kingdom ; and if he do not give them fatisfaaion, Francis
ihall be at liberty to assist them with all his forcesx. This
alliance not only united Charles and Francis, but obliged Maxi-
milian, who was unable alone to cope with the French and
Venetians, to enter into a treaty with those powers, which put a
final period to that bloody and tedious war which the league of
Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a few years of uni-
versal tranquillity, and was indebted for that blessing to two
princes, whose rivallhip and ambition kept it in perpetual dif-
cord and agitation during the remainder of their reigns.

B the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe paflage into The Flemings

averle to

Spain. It was not, however, the interest of his Flemish mini- Charles's vift
flers, that he fiould visit that kingdom soon. While he resided Spain.
in Slanders, the revenues of the Spanish crown were spent there,
and they engrossed, without any competitors, all the effecs of
their monarch's generosity; their country became the feat of
government, and all favours were dispensed by them. Of all
tlicf' advantagcs, they run the rifque of feeing themselves
ldeprived, froln the moment that their ovcreign entered Spain.
'T'lic Spaniards would naturally assume the diretion of their own
afitirs; tlic Low Countries would bc conlidered only as a pro-
vince of thlt mighty monarchy; and they who now diitributcd
tll fltvoulrs ()to thli prince to others, mull then be content to receive
tlli ln fomn tle hands of flrangcrs. l3ut what Chicvrcs chiefly Afrai( of

Xiniwnesi
*'l ".!cd to avoid w;as, an interview cbtwecn the king and Ximenis.

..c one hand, tllc wiloill, the integrity, and the magnani-

x Lcon:td Rccutil ds Traitcz, tom. ii. (,9.

3 miity

BOo0K I. mity of that prelate, gave him a wonderful afendant aver the

- - :minds of men; and it was extremely probable, these great quali-

ties, added to the reverence due to his age and ofice, would
command the refped of a young prince, who, capable of noble
and generous sentiments himself, would, in proportion to his.
admiration of the Cardinal's virtues, lessen his deference towards.
pcrfons of another claracer. Or, oil the other hand, ii Charles
should allow his Flemish favourites to retain all the influence over
his councils which they at present possessed, it was easy to fore-
fee that the Cardinal would remonfirate loudly againfi such an
indignity to the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights of his
country with the fame intrepidity and success, that he had aflerted
the prerogatives of the crown. For these reasons, all his Flemish
counsellors combined to retard his departure; and Charles, unfuf-
picious, from want of experience, and fond of his native coun-
try, suffered himself to be unnecessarily detained in the Nether-
lands a whole year after signing the treaty of Noyon.

I 517. THE repeated intrcaties of Ximenes, the advice of his grand-

Charles em- father Maximilian, and the impatient murmurs of his Spanish
barks for
Spain. fubjeds, prevailed on him at last to embark. He was attended

not only by Chievres, his prime minifler, but by a numerous
and fplcndid train of the Flemnifi nobles, fond of beholding the
grandeur, or of haring in the bounty of their prince. After a
Sept. 13, dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa Viciofa, in the province of

Afiurias, and was received with fich loud acclamations of joy,
as a new monarch, whose arrival was so ardently desired, had
rcafon to expce. The Spanish nobility resorted to their fove-
reign from all parts of the kingdom, and (lifp)laycd a magni-
ficence which the Flemnings were unable to emulate Y.

Y P. Mart. Ep. 599. 6oi.

XIMENE8,

XIMENES, who confidered the presence of the king as the Booc LI
greatet blessing to his dominions, was advancing towards the u-.,-.

His Flemisih
coast, as fast as the infirm slate of his health would permit, in minifiers en

deavour to
order to receive him. During his regency, and notwithstanding prevent an in.

terview with

his extreme old age, he abated, in no degree, the rigour or fre.r Ximenes.
quency of his mortifications; and to these he added such laborious
afliduity in business, as would have worn out the molt youth-
ful and vigorous constitution. Every day he employed everal
hours in devotion; he celebrated mass in person; he even allotted
some space for study. Notwithitanding these occupations he regu-
larly attended the council; he received and read all papers pre-
ented to him; he dicated letters and inftrucions; and took
under his infpe<ion all business, civil, ecclesiastical, or military.
Every moment of his time was filled up with ome serious em-
ployment. The only amusement in which he indulged himself
by way of relaxation after business, was to canvass, with a few
friars and divines, ofme intricate article in scholastic theology.
Wafted by such a course of life, the infirmities of age daily
grew upon him. On his journey, a violent disorder seized
him at Bos Equillos, attended with uncommon symptoms; which
his followers confidered as the effet of poison , but could not
agree whether the crime ought to be imputed to the hatred
of the Spaniih nobles, or to the malice of the Flcmifll courtiers.
This accident obliging him to flop short, he wrote to Charles, Charles's in.
and with his usual boldncfs advised him to dfinifs all the firan- gratude to

Aimenes.

gers in his train, wbofc numbers and credit gave offence already
to the Spaniards, and would ere long alienate the affections of
the whole people. At the fame time, he carneflly desired to
have an interview with the king, that he might inform him of.
the slate of the nation, and the temper of his fbjeds. To pre-.

rMiniana, Conitin. lib. i. c 3.
Vo I,. . c; vent

BOOK I. vent this, not only the Flemings, but the Spanish grandees,

- ^ employed all their address, and industriously kept Charles at a

distance from Aranda, the place to which the Cardinal had
removed. Through their suggestions, every measure that he
recommended was rejeCted; the utmost care was taken to
make him feel, and to point out to the whole nation, that his
power was on the decline; even in things purely trivial, such a
choice was always made, as was deemed most disagreeable to
him. Ximnenes did not lb)ar this treatment with his usual for-
titude of ipirit. Conscious of his own integrity and merit, he
expected a more grateful return from a prince, to whom he
delivered a kingdom more flourithing than it had been in any
former age, and authority more extensive and better established,
than the most illustrious of his anceflors had ever possessed. He
could not, therefore, on many occasions, refrain from giving
vent to his indignation and complaints. He lamented the fate
of his country, and foretold the calamities it would susser from
the insolence, the rapaciousness, and ignorance of strangers.
While his mind was agitated by these paflions, he received a letter
from the king, in which, after a few cold and formal expressions
of regard, he was allowed to retire to his diocese; that after a life
of fich continued labour, he might end his days in tranquillity.
his death. This message proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is

probablc, would not survive difgracc; perhaps his generous
heart could not bear the prospect of the misfortunes ready to fall
on his country. Whichsoever of tefi opinions we embrace,
Nov. 8. certain it is that he expired a few hours after reading the letter'.

The variety, the grandeur, and the success of his chcmes, during
a regency of only twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether his

v Maralllier Vie de Xiiiencs, p. 447. Gomctius lib. vii. p. o6, &c. Baudier Hit. de
Xinmn. i. 28.

sagacity

sagacity in council, his prudence in condua, or his boldners in BOOK .
execution, deserve the greatest praifi. His reputation is still '*
high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but for fanaity; and he is
the only prime minifier mentioned in hiflory, whom his contem-
poraries reverenced as a faint , and to whom the people under
his government ascribed the power of working miracles.

SooN after the death of Ximenes, Charles made his publick C s'8d

Cortes held

entry, with great pomp, into ValIadolid, whither he had fum- at Valladolid.
moned the Cortes of Castile. Though he assumed on all occa-
sions the name of king, that title had never been acknowledged
in the Cortes. The Spaniards confidering Joanna as possessed of
the ole right to the crown, and no example of a son's having
enjoyed the title of king during the life of his parents occurring
in their hifiory, the Cortes discovered all that scrupulous refped
for ancient forms, and that aversion to innovation, which are
conspicuous in popular assemblies. The presence, however, of
their prince, the address, the artifices, and the threats of his
ministers, prevailed on them at last to declare him king, in con- Declare
junaion with his mother, whole name they appointed to be Charles ig.
placed before that of her son in all publick ads; and declarcd
that, if at any future period fle flould recover the exercifc of
reason, the whole royal authority fliould return into her hands.
At the fame time, they voted a frcc gift of fix hundred thousand
ducats to be paid in three years, a fimn more considerable than
had ever been granted to any former monarcl h.

NOTWI r IHSTANDING this ofceqlioufnefs of the Cortes to )ircontentof

the will of the king, the most violent symptoms of diffatisfadion and the caunes
with his government began to break out in the kingdom. o it.

a Fechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. 76. h Miniuna, Contin. lib. i. c. 3.
P. Mart. Ep. 608. Sandov. p. 12.

G 2 Chicvrcs

BooK r. Chievres had acquired over the mind of the young monarch the

- -*J ascendant not only of a tutor, but of a parent. Charles seemed

to have no sentiments but those which his minister inspired, and
scarce uttered a word but what he put into his mouth. He was
constantly surrounded by Flemings; no person got access to him
without their permission; nor was any admitted to audience but
in their piefence. As he spoke the Spanish language very imper-
feCly, his answers were always extremely short, and often deli-
vered with hesitation. From all there circumstances, many of
the Spaniards were led to believe that he was a prince ps a flow
and narrow genius; ome pretended to discover a strong refem-
blance between him and his mother, and began to whisper that
his capacity for government would never be far superior to hers;
and though they who had the best opportunity of judging con-
cerning his character, maintained, that notwithstanding such
unpromning appearances, he possessed a large fund of knowledge
and sagacity ; yet all agreed in condemning his partiality
towards his countrymen, and his attachment to his favourites
as unreasonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for Charles,
thee favourites were unworthy of his confidence. To amass
wealth seems to have been their only aim; and as they had rea-
son to fear, that either their malter's good sense, or the indigna-
tion of the Spaniards, might soon abridge their power, they
haflencd to improve the present opportunity, and their avarice
was the more rapacious, because they expeced their authority
to be of no long duration. All honours, offices and benclices,
were either cngroffcd by the Flemings, or pullickly fold by
them. Chievics, his wife, and Sauvage, whom Charles, on the
death of Xinlcncs, had imprudently raised to be chancellor of
Cafiilc, vied with each other in all the rfinements of extortion

c Satdoval, p, 31, P. ;Mlt. Ep. 65.S

and

.and venality. Not only the Spanish historians, who, from re- BOOK I.
fentment, may be fufpe&ad of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr
Angleria, an Italian, who resided at that time in the court of
Spain, and who was under no temptation to deceive the persons
to whom his letters are addressed, give a description which is
almost incredible, of the insatiable and shameless covetousness of
the Flemings. According to Angleria's calculation, which he
asserts to be extremely moderate, they remitted into the Low
Countries, in the space of ten months, no less a fum than a mil-
lion and one hundred thousand ducats. The nomination of
William de Croy, Chievres' nephew, a young man not of cano-
nical age, to the Archbifhoprick of Toledo, exasperated the
Spaniards more than all these exa&ions. They confidered the
elevation of a stranger to the head of their church, and to the
richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as an injury, but as
an insult to the whole nation; and both clergy and laity, the
former from interest, the latter from indignation, joined in
exclaiming against it d.

CHARLES leaving Caflile thus disgusted with his adminiftra- Charles holds

the Cortes of

tion, set out for Saragossa, the capital of Aragon, that he might Arragon.
be prcfent in the Cortes of that kingdom. Onl his way thither,
he took leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom he fellt into
Germany on the pretence of viliting their granldfiaher, Maxi-
milian, in llis old age. To this prudent precauton, Charles
owed the preservation of his Spanilh ldoininions. During the
violent conmmotions which arofc there oon after this period,
the Spaniards would infallibly have offered the crown to a
prince, who was the t(irling of the whole nation; nor (lid

"Sandoval, 2-31 . P. Malt. p. 6oS, 61 , 613 .1,

6 Cz, 62, 639. Miniana,
CoItin. lib. i. c. 3. p.' ,

l'crdiland

BoxK 1. Ferdinand want ambition, or counsellors, that would hare
'-- prompted him to accept of the offer'.

The Arago- TIIE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged Charles as
nefe more n. king, nor would they allow the Cortes to be aflcmbled in his
traflal)le than
the Caflilialls. name, but in that of the Jufliza, to whom, during an inter-

regnum, this privilege belonged . The opposition Charles had
to struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon, was more violent and
obstinate than that which he had overcome in Castile; after
long delays, however, and with much dificulty, he persuaded
the members to confer on him the title of king, in conjunction
with his mother. At the fame time he bound himself by that
folcmn oath, which the Aragonefe exaaed of their king, never
to violate any of their rights or liberties. When a donative was
demanded, the members were frill more intractable; many
months clapsed before they would agree to grant Charles two
hundred thousand ducats, and that fum they appropriated so
fIrictly for paying debts of the crown, which had long been for-
gotten, that a very small part of it came into the King's hands.
'What had happened in Castile taught them caution, and deter-
mined them rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow citizens,
how obfoletc foevcr, than to furnish firangers the means of en-
richlin tlicmfclvcs with the spoils of their country g

Durn i Nc; thef proceedings of the Cortes, amlbafadlors arrived

at Saragonfli from Francis I. and the young king of Navarre,
dcmalning the rflitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
of Noyon. Blut neither Charles, nor the Catilian nobles whom
he consultcd on this occasion, difcovcrcd any inclination to part

* P. Martyr, Fp. (19. Ferreras, viii. 460. f P. Martyr, Ep. 605.
s '. Martyr, Ep. 615-634.

with

with this acquiition. A conference held soon after at Mont- BOQK I.
pelier, in order to bring this matter to an amicable issue, was
altogether fruitless; and while the French urged the injustice of
the usurpation, the Spaniards were attentive only to its impor-
tance h.

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Catalonia, where he 1519.

wafted as much time, encountered more difficulties, and gained
less money. The Flemings were now become so odious in every.
province of Spain by their exactions, that the desire of mortify-
ing them, and of disappointing their avarice, augmented the
jealousy with which a free people usually condut their delibe-
rations.

TIIE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the weight and Combination

of the Cafli-
rigour of the oppressive schemes, carried on by the Flemings, lians against

the Flemish

resolved no longer to submit with a tameness fatal to themselves, minilters.
and which rendered them the objects of scorn among the reft of
the Spaniards. Segovia, Toledo, Seville, and several other cities
of the first rank, entered into a confederacy for the defence of
their rights and privileges; and notwithstanding the ilence of
the nobility, who, on this occasion, discovercd neither the publick
spirit, nor the resolution which became their order, they laid before
tile king a full view of the fiate of the kingdom, and of the mal-
adminifiration of his favourites. The preferment of firangers.;
the exportation of the current coin; the increaie of taxes, were.
the gricvances of which they chiefly complained; and of theli
they demanded redrcfs with that oldnles, which is natural to a
free people. These rclnolnfranccs, prefinted at firll at Saragiofl,
.and renewed afterwards at Barcelona, Charles treated with great

h P. Martyr, Ep. 605, 633. 6.,o.
6 neglct.

BoOK I. neglet. The confederacy, howvcer, cf tefe cities at this junc.-

T- ture, was the beginning of that famous union among the

commons of Castile, which not longr after threw the kingdom
into such violent convulsions, hook the throne, and almost
overturned the constitution'.

SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he received the

account of an event which interested him much more than the
murmurs of the Catilians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Cata-

Deathofthe lonia. This was the death of the Emperor Maximilian; an
Emperor Maximilian. occurrence of small importance in itself, for he was a prince
January z1. conspicuous neither for his virtues, his power, nor his abilities;

but rendered by its consequences more memorable than any that
had happened during several ages. It broke that profound and
universal peace which then reigned in the Christian world; it
excited a rivalfhip between two princes, which threw all Europe
into agitation, and kindled wars more general, and of longer
duration, than had hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition of the French

king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had inspired the European princes
with new ideas concerning the Importance of the Imperial dig-
nity. The claims of the Empire upon some of the Italian fiates
were numerous; itsjurifdidion over others was extensive; and
though the former had been almost abandoned, and the latter
fcldom exerciscd, under princes of no abilities, and of little influ-
ence, it was obvious, that in the hands of an Emperor possessed
of power or genius, they would be employed as engines for
firetching his dominion over the greater part of that country.
Even Maximilian, feeble and unsteady as his condut always

1 P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 464.
.I was,

was, had availed himfelfofthe infinite pretensions of the Empire, BOOK I.
and had reaped advantage from every war and every negociation
in Italy during his reign. These considerations, added to the
dignity of the station, confessedly the first among Christian
princes, and to the rights inherent in the office, which, if exerted
with vigour, were far from being inconsiderable, rendered the
Imperial crown more than ever an object of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had discovered great Maxiilian

solicitude to preserve this dignity in the Austrian family, and to had endea-
procure the king of Spain to be chosen his successor. But he cure the im-

pc ial crown

himself having never been crowned by the Pope, a ceremony tohs grand-
deemed essential in that age, was confidered only as Emperor foll.
elec7; and though historians did not attend to that diflindion,
neither the Italian nor German chancery bestowed any other
title upon him than that of King of the Romans; and no exam-
ple occurring in history of any person's being chosen a successor
to a king of the Romans, the Germans, always tenacious of their
forms, and unwilling to confer upon Charles an office for
which their conflitution knew no name, obstinately refused to
gratify Maximilian in that point'.

B Y his death, this difficulty was at once removed, and Charles Charles and

Francis I.

openly aspired to that dignity which his grandfather had competitors
attempted, without success, to fccure for him. At the fame time, forthccmnpire.
Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the lilts against him; and the
attention of all Europe was fixed upon this competition, no less
illuflrious from the high rank of the candidates, than from the
importance of the prize for which they contended. Each of
them urged his pretensions with sanguine expecations, and with

k Guicciarlini, lib. 13. p. i . lift. Gener. d'Allemagne, par P. Barre, tom. vi;i. part r.
p. 1087. 1. Hleutcr, Rcr. Auftr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c. 2. p. 183.

VoL. II. II no

BooK I. no unproniifi ng profpe offuccefs. Charles confidered the Imperial

I crown as belonging to him of right, from its long continuance
and hopcs of in the Auflrian line; lie knew that none of the German princes

poflfefed power or influence enough to appear as his antagonifl;
he flattered himself, that no consideration would induce the
natives of Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity,
which during so many ages had been deemed peculiar to their
own nation; and least of all, that they would confer this honour
upon Francis I. the sovereign of a people whose genius, and
laws, and manners, differed so widely from those of the Germans,
that it wits scarce poiible to elabliflh any cordial union between
them; he tiflcd not a little to the efi'c& of Maximilian's nego-
ciations, which though they did not attain their end, had pre-
pared the minds of the Germans for his clcvation to the imperial
thronc; but what he relied on as his chief recommendation,
was the fortunate situation of his hereditary dominions in Ger-
many, which f1rved as a natural barrier to the Empire against the
encroachments of the Turkish power. The conquests, the abili-
ties, and the ambition of Sultan Sclim II. had spread over Europe,
at that time, a general and well founded alarm. By his vicories
over the Mlamalukes, and the extirpation of that gallant body of
ien, lie had not only added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but
had fccured to it such a degree of internal tranquillity, that he
was ready to turn against Chriflcndom the whole force of his
ars-, Vhich nlothing had hitherto bccn able to rcfil : The moss
cf'ctu.l expedienlt for flopping the progrcls of this torrent,
fcnlcd to be te clciion of an IEmperor, pofmcffed of extcnfive
territories in that country, where its firl ipreffion would bc
felt, and who, betides, could cormbat this formidablec enemy with
nll the forces of a powerful monarchy, and with all the wcalll
furnilhcld by the mines of the new world, or the commerce of
the Low Countries. Thefit were the arguments by which

8 Clharlcs

Charles publickly supported his claim; and to men of integrity BOOK I.
and reflection, they appeared to be not only plausible, but con-
vincing. He did not, however, trust the success of his cause to
these alone. Great fums of money were remitted from Spain;
all the refinements and artifice of negociation were employed;
and a considerable body of troops kept on foot by the flates of
the Circle of Suabia, was secretly taken into his pay. The venal
were gained by presents; the objections of the more scrupulous
were answered or eluded; and some feeble princes were threatened
and over-awed'.

ON the other hand, Francis supported his claim with equal of Franci..

cagerncfs, and no less confidence of its being well founded. His
emiflaries contended that it was now high time to convince the
Princes of the house of Aufiria that the Imperial crown was
clective, and not hereditary; and that other persons might aspire
to an honour which their arrogance had come to regard as the
property of their family; that it required a sovereign of mature
judgment, and of approved abilities, to hold the reins of govern-
ment in a country where such unknown opinions concerning
religion had been publifled, as had thrown the minds of men
into an uncommon agitation, which threatened the Inoft violent
effects; that a young prince, without experience, and who had
hitherto given no specimens of his genius for commaind, was
no equal match for Sclim, a monarch, grown old in tlle art of
war, and in the courfc of victory; whereas a king, who ill
his early youth had triumphed over the valour and diciplile
of the Swi's, till then reckoned invincible, would be an anta-
gonirf not unworthy of the Conqueror of the Eafn; that tile

'Guic. lib. 3 9. Seidan, Ilifl. of the Reformat. 14. Striii Corp. rill. ]Gcnrl.
ii. 971. Not. 20.

II 2 firc

BooK I. fire and impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the difci-

"L ~pline and flability of the German infantry, would form an

army so irresistible, that instead of waiting the approach of
the Ottoman forces, it might carry hoflilities into the heart
of their dominions; that the eledion of Charles would be in-
confiflent with a fundamental conflitution, by which the person
who holds the crown of Naples, is excluded from aspiring to
the Imperial dignity; that his elevation to that honour would
ioon kindle a war in Italy, on account of his prctenfions to the
dutchy of Milan, the effeds of which could not fail of reach-
ing the Lm'.iire, and might prove fatal to it". But while his
amlbanfidors enlarged upon tlhee and other topicks of the fame
kind, in all the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of thlc
prejudices cntertained aainll him as a foreigner, unacquaint-
ed with the German language or manners, endcavoured
to overcome thcfe, and to gain the favour of the princes by
immense gifts, and by infinite promises. As the expeditious.
method of transmitting money, and the decent modeof conveying
a bribe by bills of exchange was then little known, the French
ambassadors travelled with a train of horses loaded with treasure,.
an cquipage not very honourable for that prince by whom they
were employed, and infamous for those to whon they were sent ".

Views nnd TIE othcr European princes could not remain indifferent
c;^er ltatc. fpedators of a contest, the dccilion of which so nearly affected

them. Their common intcreft ought naturally to have formed.
a genral combination, in order to disappoint botl competitors,
and to prevent either of themn fron obtaining fuchl a pre-
eminence in power and dignity, as might prove dangerous to the
liberties of Europe. But the ideas with rcf)c to a proper ditfri-

n Guicc. lil). 1 . (io. Sleid. p. I6. Gcor. Sabini de cele. Car. V. lifloria apud.
Scardii Script. Rer. Gecrman. vol. ii . 4.

a Mcmoires dc Maiccli. de Flcuraiics, p. 296.

bution

bution and balance of power were so lately introduced- into the- BOOK .
system of European policy, that they were not hitherto objects - '
of sufficient attention. The passions of ome princes, the want:
of foresight in others, and tie fear of giving offence to the'
candidates, hindered such a salutary union of the powers of
Europe,. and rendered them either totally negligent of the
publick safety, or kept them from exerting themselves with.
vigour in its behalf.

TH E Svifs Cantons, though they dreaded the elevation of either Of the S,.is.

of the contending monarchs, and though they wished to have
seen ome prince whose dominions were less extensive, and whose
power was more moderate, scated on the Imperial throne, were
prompted, however, by their hatred of the French nation, to give
an open preference to the pretensions of Charles, while they
used their utmost influence to frustrate those of Francis .

THE Venetians easily difccrned, that it was the interest of Of the Vene.

their republick to have both the rivals set aside; but their jea- tians'
lousy of the house of Aufiria, whose ambition and neighbourhood
had been fatal to their grandeur, would not permit them to ad
up to their own ideas, and led them haflily to give the sanCtion
of their approbation to the claim of the French king.

IT was equally the interefi, and more in the power of HIenry or Henry

VIII. of England, to prevent either Francis or Charles from V111.
acquiring a dignity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Ienry often boalcd, that lie held tlim
balance of Europe in his hand, he had neither the ficady attel-
tion, the accurate discernment, nor the difl)aflionatc tcmper.
which that delicate function required. On this occasion it mor-
tified his vanity bt much, to fee himself excluded from that noble

E Sabinus, p. 6,

compctition

I3oo I. competitin which reflccted such honour upon the two antagonifls,

L-,"J that he took the resolution of fending an ambafiador into Ger-

many, and of declaring himself a candidate for the Imperial
throne. The ambassador, though loaded with caresses by the
German princes and the Pope's nuncio, informed his master, that
he could hope for no success in a claim which he had been so late
in preferring; and Henry, imputing his disappointment to that
circumfitancc alone, and soothcd witth this ostentatious display of
his own importance, seems to have taken no farther part in the
matter, either by contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to
promote one of them P.
Of LcoX. LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his political abilities,

than for his love of the arts, was the only prince of the age who
observcd the motions of the two contending monarchs with a
prudent attention, or who discovered a proper solicitude for the
public safety. The Imperial and Papal jurifdidion interfered in
so many inltances, the complaints of usurpation were so numer-
ous on both fides, and the territories of the church owed their
safety so entirely to the weakncfs of their neighbours, and so
little to their own force, that nothing was so formidable to the
court of Rome a' an Emperor of extcnfive power, or of enter-
prizing genius. Leo trembled at the profped of beholding the
Iipcri;il crown placed on the head of the king of Spain and of
TNaple'., anl tle inaftcr of the new world; nor was he lcis afraid
of tICci n : king of France, who was duke of Milan and lord of
(;cin)a, cxaltel to tliat dignity. -1e foretold that the election
of citlier of tlhem would bce fital to the independence of the holy
ice, to the peace of Italy, andl perhaps to the liberties of Europe.
'I'o opplli thell, however, required addrcfs and caution in pro-

P MIcmoirel (eI Flcur;ances, 314. Ilcibert, Ilit. of Icnry V1Ir.

portion

portion to the grcatncfs of their power, and their opportunities BOoK, I..
of taking revenge. Leo was defedive in neither. He secretly '" '
exhorted the German princes to place one of their own number
on the Imperial throne, which many of them were capable of
filling with honour; he put them in mind of the constitution by
which the Kings of Naples were for ever excluded from that
dignity9; he warmly exhorted the French King to persist in his
claim, not from any dcfirc that he should gain his end, but as
h1e foresaw that the Germans would be more difpofCe to favour
the king of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself, when he dif-
covered his own chance of success to be desperate, would be
flimulated by refcntment and the fIirit of rivalfhip, to concur
with all his intercft in railing some third person to the head of
the Empire; or on the other hand, if Francis ihould make unex-
pected progrcfs, he did not doubt but that Charles would be
induced by similar motives to ad the fame part; and thus by
prudence and attention, the mutual jealousy of the twro rivals
might be so dextroufly managed, as to disappoint both. But
this scheme, the only one which a prince in.Leo's situation could
adopt, though concerted with great wisdom, was executed with
little discretion. The French ambassadors in Germany fed their
master with vain hopes; the pope's nuncio, being gained by
them, altogether forgot the inftrudions he had received; and
Francis persevered so long and so obstinately in urging his own
pretensions, as rendered all Leo's meafuircs abortive'.

Sucii were the hopes of the candidates, and the views of the rhc i;,t

different princes, when the diet was opened according to form at ule i' t
Frankfort. The right of chufing an Enperor had long been

s Goldafli Conlitutioncs Imperiales. Francof. 1673. vol. i. 439.
' Guicciar. lib. 13. 6II.

vcltcd

IBOK I. -veled in fcvcn great princes, distinguished by the name of Elec-

.tors, the origin of whose office, and the nature and extent of
their powers, have already been explained. These were, at that
tinc, Albert of Brandenburgh, archbihop of Mentz; Herman
count de Wied, archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Greiffen-
klau, archbishop of Treves; Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis,
count Palatin of the Rhine; Frederick, duke of Saxony; and
Joachim I. marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithflanding the
artful arguments produced by the ambassadors of the two kings
Views of the in favour of their refpetive masters, and in spite of all their

l'cc. solicitations, intrigues, and presents, the Electors did not forget

that maxim on which the liberty of the German constitution
was thought to be founded. Among the members of the Ger-
manick body, which is a great republick composed of fiates
almost independent, the first principle of patriotism is to depress
and limit the power of the Emperor; and of this idea, so natural
under such a form of government, a German politician seldom
loses fight. No prince of considerable power, or extensive domi-
nions, had for some ages been raised to the Imperial throne; and
to this prudent precaution many of the great families in Ger-
many owed the splendor and independence which they had
acquired during that period. To elect either of the contending
monarchs, would have been a gross violation of that salutary
maxim; would have given to the Empire a matter, inflead of an
head; and would have reduced themselves from the rank of
equals, to the condition of fubjets.

Offer the F u iL of these ideas, they all turned their eyes towards Frede-
crownto Fre. rick, duke of Saxony, a prince of such eminent virtue, and abi-
derick of litics, as to be diflinguifhed by the name of the Se, and with
baxony

one voice offered him the Imperial crown. He was not dazzled

with

with that object, which monarchs so far superior to him in Boo i L
power courted with such eagerness; and after deliberating upon L-
the matter a short time, he rejected it with a magnanimity and
disinterestedness, no less singular than admirable. Nothing, he whorejeasit
observed, could be more impolitic, than an obflinate adherence to
a maxim which, though found and just in many cafes, was not
applicable to all. In times of tranquillity, said he, we wish for
an Emperor who has not power to invade our liberties; times of
danger demand one who is able to secure our safety. The
Turkish armies, led by a gallant and vicorious monarch, are
now assembling. - They are ready to pour in upon Germany
with a violence unknown in former ages. New conjunaures
call for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre must be com-
mitted to ome hand more powerful than mine, or that of any
other German prince. We possess neither dominions, nor reve-
nues, nor authority which enable us to encounter such a formi-
dable enemy. Recourse must be had in this exigency to one of
the rival monarchs. Each of them can bring into the field
forces sufficient for our defence. But as the king of Spain is of
German extraction, as he is a member and prince of the empire
by the territories which descend to him from his grandfather; as
his dominions firetch along that frontier which lies most exposed
to the enemy; his claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of
a firanger to our language, to our blood, and to our country;
and therefore I give my vote to confer on him the Imperial
crown.

Tirs opinion, dicated by such uncommon generosity, and and lefre' any

supported by arguments o plaulible, made a deep impreflion Con P""'' so1 "
the Elecdors. The king of Spain's aml)atladors, sensible of the baIdlo:s.
important service which Frederic had done their mailer, sent

VOL. II. I hin

BOOK I. him a considerable fum of money, as the first token of that

- prince's gratitude. But he who had greatncfs of mind to refuse

a crown, disdained to receive a bribe; and upon their intreating
that, at least, he would permit them to distribute part of that
fum among his courtiers, he replied, that he could not prevent
them from accepting what hould be offered, but whoever took
a tingle florin should be dismissed next morning from his
service .

Furtherdeli- No prince in Germany could now aspire to a dignity, which
berations of
the leore. Frederick had declined for reasons applicable to them -all. It

remained to make a choice between the two great competitors.
But besides the prejudice in Charles's favour arising from his
birth, and the situation of his German dominions, he owed not a
little to the abilities of the cardinal de Gurk, and the zeal of
Erard de la Mark, bishop of Liege, two of his ambassadors who
had conducted their negociations with more prudence and address,
than thofc cntrufted by the French king. The former, who
had long been the minister and favourite of Maximilian, was
well acquainted with the art of managing the Germans; and
the latter having been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by Francis,

T P. Daniel, an hiforian of confidcrable name, seems to call in question the truth of this

account of Frederick's behaviour, because it i not mentioned by Georgius Sabinus in
his H-liory of the ele&tion and coronation of Chailes V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no great firess
ought to be laid on an omiflion in a fupcrficial author, whose treatise, though dignified
with the name of hilory, contains only such an account of the ceremonial of Charles's
eletion as is usually publified in Germany on like occasions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script.
v. 2. p. . The tfimony of Erafinus, lib. 13. cpift. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 18. are
exprcfs. Seckendorf in his Commcntariut IIilloricus & Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo,
p. zi. has examined this fast with his usual industry, and has cllablifhed its truth by the
molt undoubted evidence. To there teflimonies which he has colleced, I may add the
decifivc one of cardinal Cajetan, the pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter July 5th,
1519. Epillrcs au Princes, &c. rccucllies par Rufcclli, traduits par Belforrell. Par.
1573. p. 60.

9 employed.

employed all the malicious ingenuity with which the desire of BOOK I.
revenge inspires an ambitious mind, in thwarting the measures ''
of that monarch. The Spaniih party among the Electors daily
gained ground; and even the Pope's nuncio, being convinced
that it was vain to make any farther opposition, endeavoured to
acquire some merit with the future Emperor, by offering volun-
tarily, in the name of his master, a dispensation to hold the
Imperial crown in conjundtion with that of Naples '..

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months and ten days after
the death of Maximilian, this important contest, which had held
all Europe in fufpence, was decided. Six of the Eletors had They chute
already declared for the king of Spain, and the archbishop of Charles em-
Treves, the only firm adherent to the French interefl, having at
last joined his brethren, Charles was by the unanimous voice of
the Elecoral college raised to the Imperial throne'.

BUT though the Eledors consented, from various motives,

to promote Charles to that high station, they discovered at the
fame time great jealousy of his extraordinary power, and
endeavoured, with the utmost solicitude, to provide againfi his They are ap-

prehcnlive of

encroaching on the privileges of the Germanick body. It had his power,
long lbeen the custom to demand of every new Emperor a con- cl,,,i,,i
firmation of thcfc privileges, and to require a prolnife that lie againt it.
would never violate them in any inflance. \While princes, who
were formidable neither from extent of territory, nor of genius,
poicefed the Imperial thro)n, a gcncral and verbal clngageienut
to this pri-polfe was tldeemed ;lfficicilt tfeurity. lBut lulder al
Emperor so pouwerful a Clarlcs, other precautions sfcineel lccel-

* Frcihc iiR r. German. Scriptores, vol. iii .

17 cur. Struvii Argclit. 1717. (i.;n(ncn
Ilill. of Naples, 2. 4':.

tjac. Aiu,. Thuan. Ilill. si temporls. Edit. Gulkloy, lib. 1. c. 9.

1 a,ry.

Boot- f. iry. A Cbpitdaion:or claim of rights was fonnme in which
*--v--J the prileges and!immunities of the eletors, of the princes-of

the empire, of the cities, and of every other member of the
Germanick body are enumerated. This capitulation was im-
mediately signed by Charles's ambassadors in the name of their

aaftcr, and he himkelf at his coronation confirmed it in the mo
solemn manner. Since that period, the Eledors have continued
to prescribe the fame conditions to all his fuccefors; and in
Germany the Capitulation or mutual contract between the
emperor and his subje&s, is confidered as a strong barrier against
the progress of the imperial power, and as the great charter of
their liberties to which they often appeal ".

The ele'on THE important intelligence of his election was conveyed in
notified to nine days from Frankfort to Barcelona, where Charles was frill

detained by the obflinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had
not hitherto brought to an iffuc any of the affairs that came
before it. He received the account with the joy natural to a
young and aspiring mind, on an accession of power and dignity
which raised him so far above the other princes of Europe. Then
it was that those vat profpeds which allured him during his
whole adminifiration began to open, and from this era we may
date the formation, and are able to trace the gradual progress of
a grand fyflem of enterprizing ambition, which renders the
history of his reign so worthy of attention.

ItstsRiLuron A TRIVIAL circutmfance first difcovcred the effcts of this
lM. great elevation upon the mind of Charles. In all the publick

writs which ihe iflied as king of Spain, he assumed the title of

u Pfcffel Abrreg de 1' I l l. (c Droit Publique d'Allemagne 59o. Limnei Capitulat. Imper.
i.pillrcs des Princes par Rufcelli, p. 60.

Majefly,

Majeyp and required it from his fubjets as a mark of their BOOK I.
refpet. Before that time, all the monarchs.of Europe were
satisfied with the appellation of Highness, or Grace; but the
vanity of other courts soon led them to imitate the example of
the Spanih. The epithet of Majelty is no longer a mark of
pre-eminence. The most inconsiderable monarchs in Europe
enjoy it, and the arrogance of the greater potentates has invented
no higher denomination".

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of their Tie Sra-

King to the Imperial throne with the fame fatisfaaion:which r'tid iith
he himself felt. To be deprived of the presence of their fove- t':i evet-
reign, and to be fubjeed to the government of a viceroy and
his council, a species of adminifiration often',opprefive, and
always difagrceable, were the immediate* and' necessary ccnie-
quences of this new dignity. To fee the blood bs their country-
men shed in quarrels wherein the nation'had no concern, to behold
·its treasures wafted in supporting the splendour of a foreign title,
and to be plunged in the chaos of Italian and German politics,
were efFeds of this event almost as unavoidable. From all these
considerations, they concluded, that nothing could have' hap-
pened more pernicious to the Spanish nation; and the fortitude
and publick spirit of their anccflors, who, in the Cortes of Castile,
prohibited Alfonzo the Wife from leaving the kingdom, in order
to receive the Imperial crown, were often mentioned with the
highest praise, and pronounced to be extremely worthy of imi-
tation at this juncure w.

BUT Charles, without regarding the sentiments or murmurs
of his Spaniflh ibljcds, accepted of the Imperial dignity which

u Minianz Contin. Mar. p.l3. Ferrcras. viii. 475. Memoies Hil, de la luil:o,

ton. i. . i.
, San )va, i. . Miniana, Cor.tin. p. 14.

2 the

1300K I. the count Palatine, at the head of a solemn embassy, offered him
t .~- -in the name of the Eletors; and declared his intention offetting
November.

out soon for Germany, in order to take poffefion of it. This
was the more neceflary, because, according to the forms of the
German constitution, he could not, before the ceremony of a
publick coronation, exercise any a ofjurifdiaion or authority'.

Their difcon- TH EI R certain knowledge of this resolution augmented the
ent increases. difgufi of the Spaniards; and a fullen and refracory spirit pre-

vailed among persons of all ranks. The Pope having granted
the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical benefices in Castile to
assist him in carrying on war with greater vigour againfi the
Turks, a convocation of the clergy unanimously refused to levy
that fum, upon pretence that it ought never to be exaded but
at those times when Christendom was actually invaded by the
Infidels; and though Leo, in order to support his authority,
laid the kingdom under an interdiCt, so little regard was paid to
a censure which was universally deemed unjust, that Charles
himself applied to have it taken off; and thus the Spanish
clergy, besides their merit in opposing the usurpations of the
pope, and disregarding the influence of the crown, gained the
exemption which they had claimed r.

An infurrec. THIE commotions which arofc in the kingdom of Valencia,
tion in Valen-
cia. annexed to the crown of Arragon, were more formidable, and

produced more dangerous and lafling effects. A fcditious
monk having by his fcrmons excited the citizens of Valencia,
the capital city, to take arms, and to punish certain criminals in
a tumultuary manner, the people, plcated with this exercise of
power, and with fucl a discovery of thir own importance, not
only rcfifcd to lay (down their arms, but formed thcmfelvcs into
troops and companies that they might be regularly trained to
X Sabinus. P. Barre, viii. o185. Y P. Martyr, Ep. 4)2. l;crreras viii. 473.

martial

martial exercises. To obtain some security against the oppression BOOK I.
of the grandees was the motive of this association, and proved a
powerful bond of union; for as the ariftocratical privileges and
independence were more complete in Valencia than inr any other
of the Spanish kingdoms, the nobles, being scarce accountable
for their conduct to any superior, treated the people not only as
vassals but as slaves. They were alarmed, however, at the fuc.
cess of this unexpected infurredion, as it might encourage the
people to attempt haking off the yoke; but as they could not
repress them without taking arms, it became necessary to have
recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his permission to attack
them. At the fame time the people made choice of deputies Itsprogre,.
to represent their grievances, and to implore the protection of
their sovereign. Happily for the latter, they arrived at court
when Charles was exasperated to an high degree againit the
nobles. As he was eager to visit Germany, where his presence
became every day more necessary, and as his Flemish courtiers
were till more impatient to return into their native country,
and to carry thither the spoils they had mafled in Caflile, it
was impossible for him to hold the Cortes of Valencia in person.
He had for that reason empowered the cardinal Adrian to re-
present him in that assembly, and in his name to receive their
oath of allegiance, to confirm their privileges with the usual'
folemnities, and to demand of them a free gift. But the Valen-
cian nobles, who confidered this measure as an indignity to their
country, which was no less entitled, than his other kingdoms,
to the honour of their fovcreign's presence, declared that by
the fundamental laws of the conflitution they could neither
acknowledge a person who was absent as king, nor grant him
any subsidy, and to this declaration they adhered with an
haughty and inflexible obfiinacy. Charles, piqued by their-
behaviour, decided in favour of the people, and rashly authorized
thcem to continue in arms. Their deputies returned in triumph,

rat

Boox I. 'andwereTeceivd by their fellow-citizens as thedeliverers of their

country; and the insolence of the multitude increasing with their
fuccefe, they expelled all the nobles out of the city, committed
the government to magistrates of their own eletion, and entered
into an .association diftinguiihed by the name of Germanada or
Brotherhaod, which proved the source not only of the wildest
disorders, but of the most fatal calamities in that kingdom .

The Cortes MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was agitated with no
ofCalile.fum.
moncd to less violence. No sooner was the Emperor's intention to leave
mit in Ga. Spain made known, than several cities of the first rank resolved

to remonstrate against it, and tocrave redress once more of those
grievances which they had formerly laid before him. Charles
artfully avoided admitting their deputies to audience; and
as he saw from this circumfiance, how difficult it would be at
thisjunture to restrain the mutinous spirit of the greater cities,
he summoned the Cortes of Caflile to meet at Compolfella in
Galicia. His only reason for calling that assembly, was the
hope of obtaining another donative for as his treasury had been
exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches ot his ministers
incrcafed, he could not, without rome additional aid, appear in
Germany with splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a province, and to
demand a new subsidy before the time for paying the former
was expired, were innovations of a most dangerous tendency;
and among people jealous of their liberties, and accuflomed to
fuipply the wants of their sovereigns with a very frugal hand,
excited an univcrfal alarm. The magistrates of Toledo remon-
ftrated against both thcfe measures in a very high tone; the
inhabitants of Valladolid, who cxpcdcd that the Cortes should
have been held in that city, were so enraged that they took

* P. Martyr. Fp. 65 m. Fcrreras viii. 475, 485.

arms

arms in a tuoultuary manner; and if Charles with his foreign BOOK I.
counsellors hi not fortunately made their escape during a vio- . -
lent tempest, they would have massacred all the Flemings, and
have prevented him from continuing his journey towards Com-
pofiella.

EVERY city through which they passed, petitioned against The pro.eed-

ings of thac

holding a Cgrtes in Galicia, a point with regard to which aflembly.
Charles was inflexible. But though the utmost influence had
been exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a choice of
representatives favourable to their designs, such was the temper
of the nation, that at the opening of the aftenbly, there appeared April i.
among many of the members unusual fymptQms of ill humour,
which threatened a fierce opposition to all the measures of the
court. No representatives were seret by Toledo, for the lot,
according to which, by ancient culom, the election was deter-
mined in that city, having fallen upon two persons, devoted to
the Flemish ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant them
a commission in the usual form, and in their stead made choice of
two deputies, whom they empowered to repair to Compoftella,
and to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes assembled
there. The representatives of Salamanca refused to take the The diaffec-

tion ot tne

usual oath of fidelity, unless Charles consented to change the Caflilians in-
place of meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cordova, and several crcars.
other places, declared the demand of another donative to be
unprecedented, unconstitutional, and unnecessary. All the arts,
however, which influence popular afemblies, bribes, promises,
threats, and even force, were employed in order to gain mcnm-
bers. The nobles, toothed by the refpetful 4flidpity with which
Chievres and the other Flemings payed court to thelp, or infii-
gated by a mean jealousy of that spirit of independence which
they saw rising among the commons, openly favoured the pre-

VOL. II. K tensions

Boo K . tensions of the court, or at the utmost did not oppose them; and

at last, in contempt both of the sentiments of the nation, and
of the ancient forms of the conltitution, a majority voted to
grant the donativefor which the Emperor had applied . Toge-
ther with this grant, the Cortes laid before Charles a reprefenta-
tion of those grievances whereof his people craved redress; but
he, having obtained from them all he could expet, paid no atten-
tion to this ill-timed petition, which it was no longer dangerous
to disregard b

Charles ap- As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he disclosed his
points regents
during his intention with regard to the regency of Cafile during his ablence,
abfeace, which he had hitherto kept secret, and nominated cardinal

Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Aragon he conferred
on Don John de Lanuza; that of Valencia on Donr Diego de
Mendoza Conde de Melito. The choice of the two latter was uni-
verfally acceptable; but the advancement of Adrian, though the
only Fleming who had preserved any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Castilians with new hatred against foreigners;
and even the nobles, who had so tamely suffered other inroads.
upon the constitution, felt the indignity offered to their own order
by his promotion,. and remonfirated against it as illegal.. But
Charles's desire of viiiting Germany, and the impatience of his
minitfers to leave Spain, were now so much increased, that with-
out regarding the murmurs of the Castilians, or even taking time
to provide any remedy against an infurredion in Toledo, which
at that time threatened, and afterwards produced most formidable

and nba;:ks effects, he failed from Corogna on the twenty-fecond of May;
Co ntiej s and by setting out so abruptly in quest of a new crown, he endan-

gered a more important one of which he was already in ps--
fcelion '.

. P. Martyr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, t4c. b Sandoval, 84,
1'. Martyr. I.p. 670. Sandav. 86.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK II.

THE

HISTORY
H I S T 0 R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK II.
M A N Y concurring circumifances, not only called Charles's BOOK I.

thoughts towards the affairs of Germany, but rendered '"

Charles's pre-

his presence in that country necessary. The Eletors grew impa- fence in Ger.
tient of so long an interregnum; his hereditary dominions fary.ece
were disturbed by intestine commotions; and the new opinions
concerning religion, made such rapid progress as required the
most serious consideration. But above all, the motions of the
French king drew his attention, and convinced him that it was
necefary to take meafurcs for his own defence, both with speed
and with vigour.

VW E N Clharles and Francis entered the lifts as candidates for the Rife and pro-

I Inperial dignity, they conduded their rivalllip with many profef- ieaef'll ti-
sions of regard for each other, and with repeated declarations that twveen Ch'aleIC

and l"'raci, 1.

they would not fiffer any tincture of enmity to mingle itfelfwith
this honourable emulation. " We both court the fame mistress,"
slid Francis, with his usual vivacity, "each ought to urge his

K e suit

BooK II. suit with all the address of wichh he is master; the mos fortu-

nate will prevail, and the other muff reft contented ." But
though two young and high-fpirited Princes, and each of them
animated with the hope 6f success, might be capable of forming
filch a generous resolution, it was soon found that they promised
upon a moderation too refined aid dfiihterefted for human nature.
The preference given to Charles in the fight of all Europe, mor-
tified Francis to the highest degree, and nfpired 'him with all
the passions natural to disappointed ambition. To this was
owing the perforal jealousy aid frivalfMp which subsisted between
the two monarchs during their whole reign; and the rancour
of these, added to a real opofidon of ifteret, and to fiany
unavoidable causes of discord, involved them in almost perpetual
hostilities. Charles had paid no regard to the principal article in
the treaty of Noyon,'by refufingoftener than once to do justice to
John d'Albret, the excluded monarch of Navarre, whom Francis
was bound in honour, and prompted by Interest, to reitore to his
throne. The French king had pretensions to the crown of
Naples, of which Ferdinand had deprived his predecessor by a
most unjustifiable breach of faith. The Emperor might reclaim
the dutchy of Milan as a fief of the empire, which Francis had
seized, and still kept in possession, without having received
invefliture. Charles confidered the dutchy of Burgundy as the
patrimonial domain of his ancestors wrested from them by the
unjust policy of Lewis XI. and observed with the greatest jealousy
the firit connections which Francis had formed with the duke
of Gucldres, the hereditary enemy of his family.

Their delibe- W HEP.N the sources of discord were so m'any and various, peace
,itio^whc could be of no long continuance even between princes the most
coimtmence- exempt from ambition or emulation. But as the hock between
nirnt of hodll-
lite. d Guic. lib. 3. p. S159.

two

two such nighty antagonists, could not fail of being both defie- B oK II.
rate and dangerous, they both discovered no small solicitude --"-
about its consequences, and took time not only to colled, and to
weigh their own strength, and to compare it with that of their
adversary, but to secure the friendship or affifance of the other
European powers.

THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two rivals, and saw They neg~

that he who prevailed, would become absolute mailer in Italy. So .l te
If it had been in his power to engage them in hostilities, with-
out rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing would have
been more agreeable to him than to fee them ware each other's
strength in endless quarrels. But this was impossible. Leo
foresaw that on the firfi rupture between the two monarchs, the
armies of France and Spain would take the field in the Milanese,
and while the scene of their operations was so near, and the sub-
jet for which they contended so interesting to him; he could
not long remain neuter. He was obliged therefore to adapt his
plan of conduct to his political situation. He courted and soothed
both the Emperor and king of France with equal industry and ad-
dress; and tho' warmly solicited by each of them, he assumed all
the appearainces of entire impartiality, and attempted to conceal
his real f'ntiments under that profound dissimulation which
seems to have been affeced by most of the Italian politicians in
that age.

THE view; arnd intercft of the Venetians were not different With the

Venetians.

from those o iI 'opc; nor were they lels solicitous to prevent
Italy from b , ' 1ng the feat of war, and their own republick
from being inv(.l c:d in the quarrel. But through all Lco's arti-
sices, ard nnt\viltiflcnding his high pretensions to a perfect neu-
trality, it wa . l)1( that he leaned towards the Emperor, from
whom he hadl both more to fear and more to hope than from

A1 Francis;

BOOK II. Francis; and it was equally manifest, that if it became necessary to

take a fide, the Venetians would, from motives of the fame nature,
declare for the king of France. No confiderableaffifance, how-
ever, was to be expeced from the Italian flates, who were jea-
lous to an extreme degree of the Transalpine powers, and careful
to preserve the balance between them, unless when they were
fcduccd to violate this favourite maxim of their policy, y th
ccrtain profpea of great advantage to themselves.

With BUT the chief attention both of Charles and of Francis, was
henry Vll. employed in order to gain the king of England, from whom each

of them expected ailitlance inore effetual, and afforded with less
political caution. Henry VIII. had ascended the throne of that
kingdom in one thousand five hundred and nine, with such cir-
cumllances of advantage, as promised a reign of distinguished

Thc gret felicity and splendour. The union in his person of the two
power f that
monarch. contending titles of York and Lancaster, and the alacrity and

emulation with which both factions obeyed him, not only
enabled him to exert in his domestic government a degree of
vigour and authority which none of his prcdcccflbrs could have
flafly assumed; but permitted him to take a fliare in the affairs
of the continent, from which the attention of the Englifl had
long becn diverted by their unhappy livilions. The immense
trcafurcs which his father had arnafFld, rendered him the most
wealthy prince in Europe. The peace which had fbfifled
undcr the cautious adminiffration of that monarch, was of futfi-
cient length to recruit the nation after the deflation of the civil
wars, but had not enervated its ifirit; and the English, afhamcl
of having so long rcndlcrcd their own country a cecnc ofdifcord
and bloodflicd, were cager to difiplay their valour in some fIrcign
war, and to revive the memory of the victorics gained by their
Ilis lria r. anccflrs. Henry's own temper pcrfeCtly fiitcd the state of his

kingdom, and the dipolition of his fubljcs. Ambitious, ladive,

'9 cllentcrpr-iilig

enterprizing and accomplished in all the martial exercises which BoaOK I.
in that age formed a chief part in the education of persons of
noble birth, and inspired them with an early love of war, he
longed to engage in real action, and to signalize the beginning
of his reign by some remarkable exploit. An opportunity of
this kind soon presented itself; and the victory at Guinegate,
and the successful sieges of Terouenne and Tournay, though of
little utility to England, reflected great lustre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign princes entertained of his
power and importance. So many concurring causes, added to
the happy situation of his own dominions, which secured them
from foreign invasion; and to the fortunate circumstance of his
being in possession of Calais, which served not only as a key to
France, but opened an easy passage into the Netherlands, ren-
dered the King of England the natural guardian of the liberties
of Europe, and the arbiter between the Emperor and French
monarch. Henry himself was sensible of this singular advan-
tage, and convinced, that in order to preserve the balance even,
it was his oflce to prevent either of the rivals from acquiring
fitch superiority of power as might be fatal to the other, and
Iormidable to the reft of Chriltendoin. But he was destitute of
the penetration, and flill more of the temper, which filch a
filnetion required. Influenced by caprice, by vanity, by rcfcnt-
mcnt, by affcdion, be was incapable of forming any regular and
cxtenfive fyftcin of policy, or of adhering to it with tleadincfs.
Ills mcaiurcs l'cldoi rciultcd from attcntion to the general wel-
.frc, or from a deliberate regard to llis own interest, but were
dlicated by )parionls which rendcredlhim blind to botli, and pre-
vented llis gaining that afccndant in tle afFairs of Europe, 1
ironm reaping ficl ( advantages to himlf, as a prince of greatci
ir!, though illth inferior talents, might have calily 1fcured.

Ai , r,

BOOK Ii. ALL the impolitic steps in Henry's administration must not,
Ad / his. however, be imputed to defecs in his own character; many of
And of his
mnitier car. them were owing to the violent passions and insatiable ambition

ia WOy. of his prime minister and favourite cardinal Wolfey. This man,

from one of the lowers ranks in life, had risen to an height of
power and dignity, to which no English fubjedt ever arrived;
and governed the haughty, presumptuous and untraaable spirit
of Henry with absolute authority. Great talents, and of very
different kinds, fitted him for the two opposite fations of
minister, and of favourite. His profound judgment, his un-
wearied industry, his thorough acquaintance with the state
of the kingdom, and his extcnfive knowledge of the views
and interests of foreign courts, qualified him for that uncon-
trouled direcion of affairs with which he was intrufled. The
elegance of his manners, the gaiety of his conversation, his
insinuating address, his love of magnificence, and his profici-
ency in those parts of literature of which Henry was fond,
gained him the affection and confidence of the young mon-
arch. Wolfey was far from employing this vas and almost
royal power, to promote either the true interest of the nation,
or the real grandeur of his master. Rapacious at the fame time,
and profufc, he was insatiable il dcfiring wealth. Of boundless
ambition, he aspired after new honours with an eagerness un-
abated by his former success; and being rendered presumptuous
by his uncommon elevation, and the afccndant he had gained
over a prince, who scarce brooded advice from any other person,
he difcovcred in his whole demeanour the most overbearing
haughtiness and pride. To these paflions he himfclf sacrificed
every consideration; and whoever endeavoured to obtain his
favour, or that of his master, found it neceflary to ooth and to
gratify them.

As

As all the fiates of Europe fought Henry's friendship at that BOoK f.

time; all courted his minister with incredible attention and T t-
obsequiousness, and firove by presents, by promises, or by p;id to tt.
flattery to work upon his avarice, his ambition, or his pride e. b Frirci
Francis had in the year one thousand five hundred and eighteen
employed Bonnivet, admiral of France, one of his most accom-
plifhed and artful courtiers, to gain the haughty prelate. He--
himself beflowed on him every mark of refped and confidence.
He consulted him with regard to his most important affairs, and
received his responses with implicit deference. By these arts,
together with the grant of a large pension, Francis secured
the Cardinal, who persuaded his malter to surrender Tournay to
France, to conclude a treaty of marriage between his daughter
the princess Mary and the Dauphin, and to coinent to a personal
interview with the French king'. From that time, the most
familiar intercourse subsisted between the two courts; Francis,
sensible of the great value of Wolsey's friendship, laboured to
secure the continuance of it by every possible expreflion of re-
gard, bellowing on him in all his letters the honourable appella-
tions of Father, Tutor, and Governor.

CII ARLES obfcrvcd the progress of this union with the utmost Ai.d ,y

jealousy and concern. His near relation to the king of England
gave him some title to his friendship, and lton after his acceflion
to the throne of Castile, he had attempted to ingratiate himself
with Wolfey by fettling on him a pension of three thousand livres.
His chief solicitude at present was to prevent the intended inter-
view, the cffcds of which upon two young printles, whose hearts
were no less fiifccptible of frienldfip than their manners were
calable of inspiring it, lie extremely dreaded. But after many
delays occasioned by dlificulties about the ceremonial, and by the

I ,i!,l s': I.if' of Wl'y, ,6(. Rymcr's I'o,:dc( a, .ii. 718.
f l J1)crti's lil. of! cnry VIII. y'. Ryn r, xiii. 6G [.
-V\()1 I. , anxious

BOOK II. anxious precautions of both courts for the safety of their re-
-''J fpedive sovereigns, the time and place of meeting were at last

fixed. Messengers had been sent to different courts inviting all
comers, who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and tourna-
ment, againfi the two monarchs and their knights; and both
Francis and Henry loved the splendour of these fpedacles toowell,
and were too much delighted with the graceful figure they made
on flch occasions, to forego the pleasure or glory which they
expeted from such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was
the Cardinal less fond of diiplaying his magnificence in the pre-
fence of two courts, and of discovering to the two nations the
extent of his influence over both their monarchs. Charles finding
it impossible to prevent the interview, endeavoured to disappoint
its effecs, and to pre-occupy the favour of the English mon-
arch and his minister, by an ad of complaisance fill more

Charles vifts flattering and more uncommon. Having failed from Corunna,
nland.

as has already been related, he fleered his course direcly to-
wards England, and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for
May z6ih, his own safety, landed at Dover. This unexpected visit fur-

prized the nation. Wolfey, however, was well acquainted with
the Emperor's intention. A negociation, unknown to the
hiforians of that age, had been carried on between him and the
court of Spain, this visit had been concerted, and Charles
granted the Cardinal, whom he calls his mio dcar friclnd, an
additional pcnfion of seven thousand ducats . Henry, who was
then atCantcrl)uiry, in his way to Francc, immediately dispatchcd
Wollcy to Dover, and l)cing highly pleatced with an cvent 1o

)oothing to llil vanity, Ihafincd to receive, with liitablc rcfpct,

a guellt who had placed iln hii iuch ullounded confidence.
Charlcs, to whom time was precious, flaid only four days in
.En:g!andl : But ri thlliort' liacc, lie had the addrcfs not

e R) wcr, xiii. i 4.

onlly

only to give Henry favourable impressions of his charater and gooK IL
intentions, but to detach Wolfey entirely from the interest of

Irfir t: t's
the French king. All the grandeur, wealth and power, which I -,'mci, nto

fa/: r bot:

the Cardinal possessed, did not satisfy his ambitious mind, while wih the King
there was fill one ilepl higher to which an ecclesiastic could ada v

oi:y.

ascend. The papal dignity had for some time been the object of
his wishes, and Francis, as the molt effc&ual method of fecur-
ing his friendihip, had promised to favour his prctenfions, on the
first vacancy, with all his interest. But as the Emperor's influ-
ence in the collegeof cardinals was greatly superior to the French
king's, Wolfey grasped eagerly at an offer which that artful
prince had made him of exerting it vigorously in his behalf;
and allured by this profped, which under the pontificate of
Leo, fiill in the prime of his life, was a very diflant one, he
entered with warmth into all the Emperor's schemes. No treaty,
however, was concluded at that time, between the two mon-
archs; but Henry, in return for the honour which Charles had
done him, promised to visit him in some place of the Low
Countries, immediately after taking leave of the French king.

His interview with that prince was in an open plain between June 7th.

Interview )Ce

Guifnes and Ardres, where the two kings and their attendants, tween Iienry
displayed their magnificncec with such emulation, and profiife a ld Franis,
cxpence, as procured it the name of the ierl of the 'loth of
Gold. Feats of chivalry, parties of gallantry, and filch exercifcs
and pastimes as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant,
rathcr than serious Iblfnefs, occupied both courts during cigh-
tcc days that they continled together '. Whatever iprfll ion

the

Ii The French and Enl;'ifhl hiflrrian;s dtccrie the pomp of this ii:tervie'v, and the

varions fpcchiclcs wili grL.tt miniItcIf.. One ciicumltance mcitione.l by the marechal
!c i'lcuranges, wv whas pil ( ncI, and which :ippc.i. inl:ulrir ill te prefit age, is com-
nioiily oiil:tcd. "' f;cr the lollrliamiris," .ys he, " tle rench'antl I' nlif1 wrcfllcr.r n;lale
thelir alpcirance, a wnd wic llecd in prcf nc t of' the iK ings, ;ard tlie laJic,; alnl as t!,cle were
nilny llout wrcitlcrs tllcr, it ,jlnjrldci cxc. llent ptilliinc; ut as tce Kiin; of I'i.ince had

1. 2 lneglcccd

Boox II. the engaging manners of Francis, and the liberal and unfufpi-

-*--' cious confidence with which he treated Henry, made on the

mind of that monarch, was oon effaced by Wolsey's artifices,
or by the interview which he had with the Emperor at Grave-
July 10. lines; which was conduaed by Charles with less pomp than

that near Guefnes, but with greater attention to his political
interest.

Henry's ideas THIs assiduity with which the two greatest monarchs in
of hisr on Europe paid court to Henry, appeared to him a plain acknow-

ledgement that he held the balance in his hands, and convinced
him of the justness of the motto he had chosen, " That who-
ever he favoured would certainly prevail." In this opinion he
was confirmed by an offer which Charles made of submitting
any difference that might arise between him and Francis to his
sole arbitration. Nothing could have the appearance of greater
candour and moderation, than the choice of a judge who was
reckoned the common friend of both. But as the Emperor had
now attached Wolfey entirely to his interest, no proposal could
be more insidious, nor, as appeared by the sequel, more fatal to
the French king'.

Coronation of CHAR LES, notwithflanding his partial fondness for the Nether-
the Emperor.

lands, the place of his nativity, made no long stay there; and
after receiving the homage and congratulations of his country-
men, haflened to Aix-la-Chapellc, the place appointed by the
OElober 23. golden bull for the coronation of the Emperor. Thcre, in pre-

neglecRed to bring any wrelers out of Bretagne, the Engiifh gained the prize.-After
this, the Kings of Friarce and England retired to a tent, where they drank together, and
the King of England fc'zing the King of France by the collar, said, " My brother, I mrnu
v, f.Ie w,:ci /h)Jc," an1d clidca'vourcd oce or twice to tip up his hetls; but the Kig of
r.ar.c, who i a dcxtrous wrefler, twvited himi round, and threw him on the earth with
, i','di u, violence. '1 he King of England wanted to renew t combat, Lut was pre-
,.lt (d. Aenloircs de I'lcur;.nl,(, 1 20. P'aris, 1753 . . 329.

' Il'clLit, ,7.

2 fence

fence of an assembly more numerous and splendid than had BOOK IIL
appeared on any former occasion, the crown of Charlemagne ----
was placed on his head, with all the pompous solemnity which
the Germans asset in their publick ceremonies, and which they
deem essential to the dignity of their Empire k.

ALMOST at the fame time, Solyman the Magnificent, one of Slvmnn the
the most accompliflhed, enterprizing, and victorious of the Turkish Magnificent

aft:ecds the
princes, a conifant and formidable rival to the Emperor, ascended Ottoman

throne.

the Ottoman throne. It was the peculiar glory of that period
to produce monarchs the most illustrious, that have at any one
time appeared in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis, Henry and
Solyman were each of them possessed of talents which would
have rendered any age in which they happened to flourish, con-
fpicuous. But such a constellation of great princes shed uncom--
mon lustre on the- sixteenth century. In every contest, great
power and great abilities were set in opposition; and the
efforts of valour and condud on one fide, counterbalanced by
an equal exertion of the fame qualities on the other, not only
occasioned such a variety of events as renders the history of that
period intercfing, but served to check the exorbitant progress of
any of those princes, and to prevent their attaining such pre-
eminence in power as would have been fatal to the liberty and
llappinefs of mankind..

TjiE firfl ad of the Emperor's administration was to appoint Diet calle to

a Diet of the empire to be held at Worms on the sixth of January, n,,t ,
t

Worms.

one thouland five hundred and twenty-one; and in his circu-
lar letters to the different princes, he informed them that hl had
called this aflcllbly in order to concert with them the nolf pro-

k Ilartman. M surus R:lt'o Coronat. Car. VI ap Goldafi. Polit. ImperidJ. Franc. 61 4.
si !. p 26.1.

pet

BOOK II. per measures for checking the progress of those new and dange-

rous opinions, which threatened to difiurb the peace of Germany,
and to overturn the religion of their anceflors.
Sis of the CHARLES had in view the opinions propagated by Luther and

formaton his disciples since the year one thousand five hundred and seven-

teen; and as these led to that happy reformation in religion
which rescued one part of Europe from the papal yoke, miti-
gated its rigour in the other, and produced a revolution in the
sentiments of mankind, the greatef as well as the most beneficial
that has happened since the publication of Chriflianity, the
events which at first gave birth to thele opinions, and the causes
which rendered their progress so rapid and successful, deserve to
be confidercd with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief founded on ancient

and deep-rooted prejudices, supported by power, and defended
with art and industry; to establish in its room dotrines of the
most contrary genius and tendency; and to accompliflh all this,
not by external violence or the force of arms, are operations
which historians the least prone to credulity and fuperilition,
must ascribe to that I)ivine Providence which can, with infinite
cafe, bring about events that to human ifgacity appear impoflible.
The intcrpofition of heaven in favour of the Christian religion
at its first publication, was manifcfted by miracles and prophecies
wrought and uttered in confirmation of it: And though none of
the reformers poflffed, orpretended to possess, thcfe ilpcrnatural
gifts, yet that wonderful preparation ofcircuinlances which dif-
poficd tle minds of men fior receiving their doctrines, that singular
combination of caucs which ifecurcd their ;fucccfs, and enabled
mnc deititute of powcr and of policy to triumph over tliofc wlho

cmploycd

employed both against them, may be confidered as no flight proof BooKII.
that the fame hand which planted the Christian religion, pro-
tedted the reformed faith, and reared it, from beginnings ex-
tremely feeble, to an amazing degree of strength and maturity.

IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and from a source

From incon.

very inconfidcrable, that all the mighty effeas of the Refor- fiderable b-e
mation flowed. Leo X. when raised to the papal throne, :found g
the revenues of the church exhausted by the vast projects of his
two ambitious predecessors, AlexanderVI. and Julius II; and his
own temper, naturally liberal and enterprizing, rendered him
incapable of that severe and patient economywhich the situation
of his finances required. On the contrary, his chelms for
aggrandizing the family of Medici, his love of splendour, his
taste for pleasure, and his magnificence in rewarding men of
genius, involved him daily in new expences, in order to provide
a fund for which, every device, that the fertile invention of
priests had fallen upon to drain the credulous multitude, was
tried. Among others, he had recourse to a sale of Indulgences. A, ale of in
According to the doctrine of the Romish church, all the good dulgences

publifed by

works of the Saints, over and above those which were neceflary Lco X.
towards their own justification, together with the infinite merits
of Jesus Christ, arc dcpofited in one inexhaufliblc trcafury. Tlh
keys of this were committed to St. Peter and to his fucccelbrs the
Popes, who may oper it at plealiure, and by transferring a portion
of this tilpcrabu (lant merit to any particular pcrfl)i, bfr a ifu
of lmonly, Imay colvey to him either the pardon of his own fins,
or a relcale for any one ill wllom lie is intcrclced, fronm thie paiis
o' purgatory. Suchi indulgnces were Iflil iinvented in the
eteventh century by Urban II. as a rccompence f or tllhofc w1ir

I~~1 *~~~~'wetp 1

BooK I. went in person upon the wild enterprize of conquering the Holy

L' - Land. They were afterwards granted to those who hired a

soldier for that purpose; and in process of time were bestowed on
such as gave money for accomplishing any pious work enjoined
by the pope'. Julius II. had bestowed Indulgences on all who
contributed towards building the church of St. Peter at Rome;
and as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and expenfivc
fabric, his grant was founded on the fame pretence °.

Stoon '.ie THE promulgating of these Indulgences in Germany, toge-
as t give
general o;- ther with a share in the profits ariling from the sale of them, was
ctnce.

assigned to Albert, elecor of Mentz and archbishop of Magde-
burg, who, as his chief agent for retailing them in Saxony,
employed Tetzel, a Dominican friar, of licentious morals, but
of an adive spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and popular elo-
quence. He, affilted by the monks of his order, executed the
commission with great zeal and success, but wkih little discretion
or decency; and though by magnifying exceffivtly the benefit
of their Indulgences", and by disposing of them at a very low

price

IIiflrry of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
m Palavic. Hilf. Cone. Trident. p. 4.

As the form of thece Indulgences, and the benefits which they were supposed to con-

vey arc unknown in protellant countries, and little uderllood, at piefent, in fcvcral pl.acc.
where the Roman catholic religion is eaiblifhld, I have, for the information of my eander,
tranfated the form of absolution used by Tetzel. " May our lord Jesus Chrill have
mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the metits of his molt holy pafion. And I by hs
nuthority, that of his blef'fd poftle Peter and Paul, and of the molt holy I'oip, rainted
ntnJ comm:tted to me in these parts, d abfolvc thee, firll from all cclcfialic l cenfircs in
svhatevcr manner they have I Len incIIei, t;.and tlhcn from all thy fins, tr3nfgieilions annd
exceflis, h(,w enormous soever they mniy be, evell flo,:n r(th :s are refcrvcd or the cog ,-
..incc of the holy fee, and as f;r as the keys of the holy chuich xtend, I remit to y-(u
;ill jlunilliment hich you deftrve in 'Purgatory on their account, and I rlilor: you t .tlhe
ho!y facranients of tlhe (1t Ich, to the unity of the ftithful, and to that inncenc ain
pl; iy wlhidl you pIllffflid at bL.ptilin, so tlhat wi.il you die the Zgtcs ofl | iliiilicn lt ll;ll

be

price, they carried on for some time an extensive and lucrative BOOK I.
traffick among the credulous multitude, the extravagance of their --
afrertions, and the irregularities in their conduc, came at last
to give general offence. The princes and nobles were irritated
at feeing their vassals drained of so much wealth, in order to
replenish the treasury ofa profuse pontiff. Men of piety regret-
ed the delusion of the people, who being taught to rcly for
the pardon of their fins on the Indulgences which they pur-
chased, (lid not think it incumbent on them either to abound in
faith, or to praCife holiness. Even the mofi unthinking were
shocked at the scandalous behaviour of Tetzel and his associates,
who often squandered in drunkenness, gaming, and low debau-
chery, those fums which were piously bestowed in hopes of
obtaining eternal happiness; and all began to wiih that some

be (hut, and the gates of the paradise of delight Ihall be opened, and if you shall not.d'e
at prefen', this grace fliall remain in full force when you are at the point of death. In the
name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Seckend. Comment.
lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his associates described the benefits of Indulgences, and

the neceflity of purchasing them are so extravagant, that they appear to be alrnol incre-
dible. If any man (said they) purchases letters of indulgence, his foul may rca secure with
refpcdc to its salvation. The fouls confined in purgatory, for whose redemption indulgences
are purchased, as soon as the money tinkles in the chest, instantly escape from that place of
torment, and arcend into heaven. That the efficacy of indulgences was so great, that tlh
molt heinous fins, even if one Should violate (which was impossible) the Mother of God,
would be remitted and expiated by them, and the person be freed both from punifnmcnt and
guilt. That this was the unfpcakable gift of God, in order to reconcile men to hi:nfelf.
That the cross creCted by the preachers of indulgences, was as eflicacious as the cross of
Chrill itself. Lo! the heavens are open; if you enter not now, when will you enter ?
For twelve-pence you may redeem the foul of your father out of purgatory; a:d are you so
ungrateful, that you will not lefcuc your parent from torment ? If you had but one coat,
you ought to firip yourself itllantly, :lnd f ll it, in order to puichafe such beecfits, &c.
Thlefe, and many such extravagant exprcflins, are fclefced out of Luther's wor ki by Cthemn-
nitius in his Examen Concilii'fridentini ;apuJ Hlerm. Vonder Ilardtt. Ilill. Liter. Refolbrn.
pars iv. p. 6. The fime author has published fever al of Tetzel's Difcu fcu o, c hlic prove
that these expreflions were neither singular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14.

VOL. . . M check

BOOK II. check were given to this commerce, no less detrimental to society

than deftrudive to religion.

rirt apear- SUCH was the favourable junture, and so disposed were the
ance of Lu- '
ther, ad his minds of his countrymen to liften to his discourses, when Martin
character. Luther first began to call in question the efficacy of Indulgences,

and to declaim against the vicious lives and false dotrines of
those who promulgated them. He was a native of Eifleben in
Saxony, and though born of poor parents, had received a learned
education, during the progress of which he gave many indications
of uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As his mind was
naturally susceptible of serious impressions, and tinaured .with
somewhat of that religious melancholy which delights in the soli-
tude and devotion of a monastic life, he retired into a convent of
Auguflinian friars, and without suffering the intreaties of his
parents to divert him from what he thought his duty to God, he
assumed the habit of that order. There he acquired great repu-
tation, not only for piety, but for his love of knowledge, and'
unwearied application to fludy. He had been taught the scholastic
philosophy and theology which were then in vogue by very able
matiers, and wanted not penetration to comprehend all the
niceties and diftindions with which they abound; but his under-
flanding, naturally found, and superior to every thing frivolous,
soon became disgustcd with thefi subtile an(l uninftrudivefciences,
and fought for ome more solid foundation of knowledge and of
piety in the holy icriltures. Having found a copy of the Bible,.
which lay neglcted in the library of his monalcery, he aban-
donced all other purfifits, and devoted himself to the study of it,
with filch eagcrllefs and afliduity, as afloniihed the monks, who.
were little accuflomcd to derive their theological notions from
that source. The great progrcfs which he made in this uncom-

9 mnon

mon course of study, augmented so much the fame both of his BOOK II.
san&ity and of his learning, that Frederick, Eletor of Saxony,
having founded an university at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the
place of his residence, Luther was chosen sirss to teach philo-
sophy, and afterwards theology there, and discharged both offices
in such a manner, that he was deemed the chief ornament of
that society.
WHILE Luther was at the height of his reputation and autho- He opposes

the fhle of

rity, Tetzel began to publish Indulgences in the neighbourhood indulgences.
of Wittemberg, and to ascribe to them the fame imaginary vir-
tues, which had, in other places, imposed on the credulity
of the people. As Saxony was not more enlightened than
the other provinces of Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious
success there. It was with the utmost concern, that Luther
beheld the artifices of those who fold, and the simplicity of those
who bought, Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas
and the other fchoolmen, on which the docrine of indulgences
was founded, had already loft much of their authority with him;
and the Scriptures, which he began to confider as the great ftan-
dard of theological truth, afforded no countenance to a practice,
equally fubverlive of faith and of morals. His warm and impe-
tuous temper did not fffer him long to conccal fuclh important
discoveries, or to continue a silent fpedator of the delusion of his
countrymen. From the pulpit in the great church of Wittcm-
berg he inveighed bitterly againit the irregularities and vices of
those who publifld Indulgences ; lec vcntured to examine the
doltrines which they taught, and )ointld out to the eople the
danger of relying for alvation upon any othelr means tha tiolf
appointed by God in his word. Ihle holdnefs and novelty ot
thefc o)pinions drew great attention, and bLcimg rccoinnll'ndcd hy
the authority of Luther's perlonal charactcr, and delivered with

M 2 a popular

BooK If. a popular and persuasive eloquence, they made a deep imprefflon

on his hearers. Encouraged by the favourable reception of his
dlodrines among the people, he wrote to Albert, elector of Mentz,
and archbihop of Magdeburg, to whose jurifdition that part of
Saxony was ful)jec, and remonfirated warmly against the false
(pinions and wicked lives of the preachers of Indulgences; but
lie found that prelate too deeply interefled in their success to
c:rrct their abufcs. His next attempt was to gain the suffrage

Ic !l1Yh2s of men of learning. For this purpole, he published ninety-five
&aial: them. thcfcs, containing his sentiments with regard to Indulgences.

Thefc he proposed, not as points fully established, or of undoubt-
ed certainty, but as fibljes of inquiry and disputation; he
appointed a day, on which the learned were invited to impugn
them either in person, or by writing; and subjoined to the
whole, solemn protestations of his high refpe& for the apostolic
fee, and of his implicit fubmifiion to its authority. No opponent
appeared at the time prefixed; the theses spread over Germany
with atoniIhing rapidity; they were read with the greatest
eagerness; and all admired the boldness of the man who had
ventured to call in queflion the plenitude of papal power, and
to attack the Dominicans, armed with all the terrors of inqui--
litorial authority'.

Supported by THE Friars of St. Augufline, Iuther's own order, though ad-
iusovni order.

didcd( with no less obfcquioutlfefs than the other monaflic fra-
tcrnitics to the papal fee, gave no chcck to the publication of tlhcl
uncommon opinions. Luther had b)y his piety and learning ac-'
quired extraordinary authority almonl his l)rethren; lie profeted
the ligheft regard for the authority of the Pope; his professions

a Iuthcri Opera en:c, i612. vol. i. pr;crat. 3. p. 2. 66. Ilia. of Counc. of Trent by
1. I'.ul, pr .. Scckcad. Comi. Apul. p. 16.

wcre

were at that time sincere; and as a secret enmity, excited by BOOK I.
interest and emulation, subsists among all the monastic orders in t
the Romish church, the Augustinians were highly pleated with
his invecives against the Dominicans, and hoped to fee them
exposed to the hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was his
sovereign the Eleaor of Saxony, the wisest prince at that time
in Germany, dissatisfied with this obftrudion which Luther
threw in the way of the publication of indulgences. He
secretly encouraged the attempt, and flattered himself that this
dispute among the Ecclefiafticks themselves, might give some
check to the exadions of the court of Rome, which the secular
princes had long, though without success, been. endeavouring
to oppose.

MA N Y zealous champions immediately arose to defend opinions Many endea-.

yourto con-

on which the wealth and power of the church were founded, fute him.
against Luther's attacks. In opposition to his theses, Tetzel.
published counter-thefes at Francfort on the Oder; Eccius, a cele-
brated Divine of Augsburg, endeavoured to refute his notions;
and Prierias, a Dominican friar, mailer of the sacred palace and,
Inquil tor general, wrote against him with all the virulence of a
fcholafic diputant. But he manner in which they conducted
the controversy, did little fcrvice to their cause. Luther attempt-
ed to overturn Indulgences by arguments founded in reason, or
derivcd from scripture; they produced nothing in support of
them but the sentiments of fchoolmncn, the conclusions of the
eanon law, and the decrees of Popes''. The dccifion of judges
to partial and itcrefted, did not satisfy the people, who began
to call in question the authority even of thefc venerable guides,

b F'. Paul, p. 6. Scckcnd. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8.

when

Boox II. when they found them fianding in ditea opposition to the dic-

~'--: tates of reason, and the deterf'mations of the divine law'. *

c Seckend. p. 30.
* Guicciardini has asserted two things with'regard to the firRf promulgation of indulgences;
I. That Leo bellowed a gift of the profits arising from the sale of indulgences in Saxony,
and the adjacent provinces of Germiany upori his filer Mag-dalen the wife of Francefcetto
Cibo. Gdic. lib . 3. 16. z. That ArcembbTdo, a Gedoefe eccefiaftic, Who had been
bred a merchant and Itill retained all the arts ofthat profefllbn, was appointed by her to col-
le& the money which should be raised. F. Paul has followed him in both these particulars,
and adds that the Augoflinians in Saxony had been immemorially employed in preaching
indulgences, but that Arcemboldo and his deputies, hoping to gain more by committing
this trust to the Dominicans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was
prompted at firRf to oppose Tetzel and his aflbciates, by a desire of taking revenge for this
injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. . Almof all the hifforians since their time, popilh
as well as protestant, have, without examination, admitted thee assertions to be true upon
their authority. But notwithflanding the concurring testimony of two authors so eminer.t
both for exactness and veracity, we may observe,

i. That Felix Contolori who searched the pontifical archives of purpose, could not find

this pretended grant in any of those regiflers where it mutl necessarily have been recorded.
Palav. p. 5.-z. That the profits arising from Indulgences in Saxony and the adjacent
countries, had been granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbishop of Mentz, who
had the right of nominating those who published them. Seek. p. 2. Luth. Oper. r.
praef. p. . Palav. p. 6.-3. That Arcemboldo never had concern in the publication of
Indulgences in Saxony; his diftri& was Slanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine. Seck.
p. 14. Palav. p. 6.-4. That Luther and his adherents never mention this grant of Leo's
to his fifler, though a circumstance of which they could scarce have been ignorant, and
which they would have been careful not to suppress.-5. The publication of Indulgences in
Germany was not usually committed to the Augultinians. The promulgation of them at
three different periods under Julius II. was granted to the Franciscans; the Dominicans
had been employed in the fame office a flort time before the present period. Palav. p. 46,
6. The promulgation of those Indu'gences which first excited ,uther's indignation was
entrufled to the archbishop of Mentz in conjunction with the guardian of the Franciscans;
but the latter having declined accepting of that trust, the sole right became veiled in the
archbifliop. Palav. 6. Seek. 16, 17.-7. Luther was not infligated by his superiors
among the Augufinians to attack the Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciae indulgences
because they were promulgated by them; his opposition to their opinions and vices pro-
ceeded from more laudable motives. Seck. p. ,t , 32. Lutheri Opera . p. 64.ó 6. 8.
A diploma of indulgences is publilhed by lIcim. Von der llardt, from \ihich it appcars
that the name of the guardian ofthe Fiancifcans is retained together with that of the arch-
bifhol,, although the former did not at. The limits of the country to w h their com-
millions extended, viz.. the dioccfcs of Mentz, Magdcburg, llalberlt.dlt, and te tern itorics
ofthe mar quis of Liaandcburgh, arc mentioned in that dijlloma. Ililt. L.,ciri lJComn.it.
pars iv, p. 14.

MEAN-

MEANWHILE, these novelties in Luther's dotrines which BOOK IL.

imterefted all Germany, excited little attention and no alarm in The
the court of Rome. Leo, fond of elegant and refined pleasures, of Rome at

firt i,, 1 -4·*:

intent upon great fchenes of policy, a firanger to theological Luihei.
controversies, and apt to despise them, regarded with the utmost
indifference the operations of an obscure Friar, who, in the heart
of Germany, carried on a fcholafic disputation in a barbarous
file. Little did he apprehend, or Luther himself dream, that
the effets of this quarrel would be so fatal to the papal fee. Leo
imputed the whole to monastic enmity and emulation, and
seemed inclined not to interpose in the contest, but to allow the
Augustinians and Dominicans to wrangle about the matter with
their usual animosity.

THE Solicitations, however, of Luther's adversaries, exafpe- Theprogrels

rated to an high degree by the boldness and severity with which ofpLther's
he animadverted on their writings, together with the furprizing
progress which his opinions made in different parts of Germany,
rouzed at lafi the attention of the court of Rome, and obliged
Leo to take measures for the security of the church against an
attack that appeared now too serious to be despised. For this
end, he summoned Luther to appear at Rome, within sixty days, He is rum.
before the auditor of the chamber, and the fame Prierias who moned to ap.
liad written against him, whom he empowered to examine his pear at Ro
docrincs, and to decide concerning them. He wrote, at the
fame time, to the Eleor of Saxony, befceching him not to pro-
tced a man whose heretical and profane tenets were so ihocking
to pious cars; and enjoined the Provincial of the Auguflinians
to clieck by his authority the rafhncfs of an arrogant monk,.
which brougiht disgrace upon the order of St. Auguflinc, and;
gave offence and diilurbancc to the whole church.

FROM.

BOOK II. FPROMI the strain of these letters, as well as from the nomlna-
~ --..' tion of a judge so prejudiced and partial as Prierias, Luther cafily

'1 he I'op-
eiapowrs his saw what sentence he might expet at Rome. He discovered,
I:'natc t try
il i i, Gi- for that reason, the utmost solicitude, to have his cause tried in

!n. Germany, and before a less fufpeted tribunal. The university

of Wittcmberg, anxious for the safety of a man who did so much
honour to their society, wrote to the Pope, and after employing
fevcral pretexts to excufc Luther from appearing at Rome,
intrcatcd I.eo to commit the examination of his doctrines to some
persons of learning and authority in Germany. The Eletor
rcqucfted the fame thing of the Pope's legate at the diet of
Augflburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that time, was so far
from having any intention to disclaim the papal authority, that
lie did not even entertain the smallest suspicion concerning its
divine original, had written to Leo a most submissive letter, pro-
mifing an unrefcrvcd compliance with his will, the Pope gratified
them so far as to empower his legate in Germany, cardinal
Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for fcholaflic learning, and pas-
fionatcly devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and determine the
caufc.

.utler ;p- LUTHERr , though he had good rcafon to decline a judge cho-
Vi l .jc fen among his avowed adversarics, did not hesitate about appear-

ing before Cajetan, and having obtained the Emperor's safe-
conduc, immediately repaired to Augsburg. The Cardinal
received him with decent rcfpcd, and endeavoured at first to
gain upon him by gentle trcatment: But thinking it beneatl

ihe dignity of his flation to enter into any formal difputc, lie
required him, by virtue of the apoflolic powers with which he
was cloathed, to retract the errors lie had uttered with regard to
Indulgcnces, and the nature of faith; and to abRain, for the

future,

future, from the publication of new and dangerous opinions. BOOK U.
Luther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own tenets, and con-
firmed in the belief of them by the approbation they had met
with among persons conspicuous both for their learning and
piety, was furprized at this abrupt mention of a recantation
before any endeavours were used to convince him that he was
mistaken. He had flattered himself, that in a conference con-
cerning the points in dispute, with a prelate of such diftinguifled
abilities, he would be able to remove many of those imputations
with which the ignorance or malice of his antagonists had loaded
him; but the high tone of authority which the Cardinal aflumed,
extinguished at once all hopes of this kind, and cut off every
profpe& of advantage from the interview. His native intre- His intrepid
pidity of mind, however, did not desert him. He declared, behaviour.
with the utmost firmness, that he could not, with a safe con-
science, renounce opinions which he believed to be true; nor
should any consideration ever induce him to do what would be
so base in itself, and so offensive to God. At the fame time, he
continued to express no less reverence than formerly for the
authority of the apostolic feed; he signified his willingness to
submit the whole controversy to certain universities which he
named, and promised neither to write nor to preach for the future
concerning Indulgences, provided his adversaries were likewise
enjoined to be silent with refped to them . All these offers
Cajetan disregarded or rejeted, and still insisted peremptorily on
a simple recantation, threatening him with ecclcfiaftical censures,
and forbidding him to appear again in his pretence, unless he
rcfolved instantly to comply with what lie required. This
haughty and violent manner of proceeding, as well as other cir-
cumflances, gave Luther's friends such firong reasons to fupccd,

d Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164. Ibid. p. 69.
V0o,. II. N that

BOOK II. that even the Imperial fafe-condu& would notbe able to protet

"^ him from the legate's power and resentment, that they pre.

vailed on him to withdraw secretly from Augsburg, and to return
to his own country. But before his departure, according
His appeal. to a form of which there had been some examples, he prepared

a solemn appeal, from the Pope ill-informed at that time con-
cerning his cause, to the Pope when he ihould receive more full
infornation with refped to it .

He is sup- CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, and the publi-
orted by the
EJeor off cation of his appeal, wrote to the Eledor of Saxony, complaining
Saxony. of both; and requiring him, as he regarded the peace of the

church, or the authority of its head, either to fend that seditious
monk a prisoner to Rome, or to banish him out of his territo-
ries. It was not from theological considerations that Frederick
had hitherto countenanced Luther; he seems to have been much
a stranger to controversies of that kind, and to have been little
interested in them. His protecion flowed almoit entirely, as
hath been already obfcrved, from political motives, and was
afforded with great fccrccy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's difcourfcs, nor rcad any of his books; and
though all Germany rcfounldd with his fame, he had never once
admitted him into his prcl'ncc'. Bu t upon this demand which
the Cardinal made, it blcame neccflary to throw off fomcnwhat
of his former rcfcrvc. IIc had bccn at great xlpcnce, and had
heftowed much atttention on founding a new univcrlity, an ob jct
(f c(onfidcrable impnrtancc to every German prince; and fborcl'c-
ing how fatal a lict the rcnoval of Luthcr would be to its rcpu-
;tilill 1'I , 1nu, Cdr \'ariols pretexts, and with many profelions

I' . 1. of R f .rm. p. 7. S 'ki Id. p. . LIuth. Oper. i. 163.

* . i. .z. S'

. ; i. i'i.. p. . c
' S cket u. p. 59.

2 of'

of esteem for the Cardinal, and of reverence for the Pope, BooK. I.
declined complying with either of his requests, and openly dif-
covered great concern'for Luther's safety'.

TTIE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan infifled on a voti.cs of

tile le gite's

simple recantation, gave great offence to Luther's followers in conduht.
that age, and hath since been censured as imprudent, by several
Popish writers. But it was impossible for the legate to ad an-
other part. The judges before whom Luther had been requircd
to appear at Rome, were so eager to difplay.th-ir zeal against Ills
errors, that, without waiting the expiration of the sixty days
allowed him in the citation, they had already condemned him as
an heretick k. Leo had in several of his brieves and letters, Rig-
matized him as a child of iniquity, and a man given up to a
reprobate sense. Nothing less, therefore, than .a recantation
could save the honour of the church, whose maxim it is never to
abandon the fmallefl point it has established, and which is even
precluded, by its pretensions to infallibility, from having it in its
power to do so.

LUTHER'S situation, meanwhile, was such as would have filled Luthelr' pcri-

any other person with the nmof disquieting apprehensions. Hc Icus fituatioll
could not expct that a prince so prudent and cautious as Fre-
d(erick woull, on his account, iet at defiance the thunders of the
church, and brave the papal power which had crufled some of
the nmot powerful of the German Emperors. He knew what
veneration was paid, at that time, to ccclcfiaftical decisions; what
terror ccclciaftical cenfurcs carried along with them, and how
calily these might intimidate and flla:kc a prince, who was rather

Sleid. Ilii. p. 1t. Lutlh. Opcr. i. 172; k Luth. O.er. i. 161.

N 3 his

BooK II. his prote&or from policy, than his disciple from convicion. If

he should be obliged to quit Saxony, he had no profpea of any
other asylum, and must sand exposed to whatever punishment
the rage or bigotry of his enemies could inflic. Though fen-
fible of his danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidity, or
remissness, but continued to vindicate his own conduc and opi-
nions, and to inveigh against those of his adverfarios with more
vehemence than ever'.

He appeals BUT as every flep taken by the court of Rome, particularly-
to a general
council, the irregular sentence by which he had been so precipitately de-

clared a heretick, convinced Luther that Leo would oon proceed
to the most violent measures against him, he had recourse to the
only expedient in his power, in order to prevent the effe&t of the
Papal censures. He appealed to a general council, which he affirmed
to be the representative of the catholic church, and superior in
power to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might err, as St..
Peter, the most perfec of his predecessors, had erred ..

A new bull in IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed rash conjectures..
favour of In-
dulgencs." concerning the intentions of the Romiff church. A bull, of a

date prior to his appeal, was issued by the Pope, in which he
magnifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences in terms as
extravagant as any of his predecessors had ventured, to use in
the darkct ages; and without applying such palliatives, or men-
tioning iuch conccffions as the juncure seemed to call for, he
requircd all Chriflians to affcnt to what he delivered as the doc-
trine of the Catholic church, and fulbjeed thole who flould
hold or teach any contrary opinion to the heaviest ccclcfiaflical
censures.
1Seckcnd. p. 59. n Sleid.. Iift. tz. Luth. Oper. i. 179.

9, AMONG

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which they confidered BOOK II.
as an unjustifiable effort of the Pope in order to preserve that rich Ml

Maximilian's

branch of his revenue which arose from Indulgences, produced death of ad-'
little effec. But, among the reft of his countrymen, such a clear Luthr.
decision of the sovereign Pontiff against him, and enforced by
such dreadful penalties, must have been attended with confe-
quences very fatal to his cause; if these had not been pre-
vented in a great measure by the death of the Emperor Maxi-
milian, whom both his principles and his interest prompted to
support the authority of the holy fee. In consequence of this
event, the vicariat of that part of Germany which is governed by-
the Saxon laws, was committed to the Ele(cor of Saxony; and;
under the shelter of his friendly administration, Luther not only
enjoyed tranquillity, but his opinions were suffered, during the
inter-regnum which preceded Charles's lecion, to take root in
different places, and to grow up to ome degree of strength and
firmness. Leo too, to whom the election of an Emperor was a
point more interesting than a theological controversy, which he
did not underfiand, and of which he could not foresee the confe-
quences, being extremely Solicitous not to irritate a Prince of
such considerable influence in the electoral college as Frederick,
discovered great unwillingness to pronounce the sentence of
excommunication againfl Luther, which his adversaries conti-
rually demanded with the mofl clamorous importunity..

To these political views of the Pope, as well as to his natural Suspension of

avcrfion from fcvere measures, was owing the fuifpenfion of any pcg cing,'
further proceedings againfl Luther for eightcen months. Per-
pctt;il ncgociations, however, in order to bring the matter to
onic anicable ifluce, were carried on during that fpacc. The
manner in which thele were conduCcd having given Luther
many opportunities of obfcrving the corruption of the court of
Roinm; its obflinacy in adhering to cflablilhcd errors; and its

indiffcrenc(:

I

Boo. II. indifference about truth, however clearly proposed, or strongly
ie bgins t proved, he began to utter some doubts with regard to the divine
ca'll ;r.q.lirlon original of the Papal authority. A publick disputation was held
the pa2ji au-
thori:y. upon tis important question at Leipfick, between Luther and

Eccius, one of his ncft learned and formidable antagonifis; but
it was as fruitless and indecisive as such fchllaftic combats usually
prove. Both parties boasted of having (Abtained the vidory;
both were confirmed in their own opinions; and no progress
was made towards deciding the point in controv'ersy ".

Rrfm.;icn NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doCtrines and ufur-
!anj~].1 pations of the Romish church, break out in Saxony alone; an

attack no less fierce, and occasioned by the famnc caifes, v, as lmade
upon them about this time in Switzerland. The Franciscans
being entrusted with the promulgation of Indulgen .:,s ,i that
country, executed their commiflion vwith the fame indiicrction
and rapacioufncfs, which had rendered the Dominicans to ojious
in Germany. They proceeded, nevcrthclefs, with uninterrupted
fucccfs till they arrived at Zurich. There Zuingliit, a nman not
incfrior to Luther iinfelf in zeal and intrci ii', vcntuit d to
oppoif them; and being aiilnatci with a republican lol icfs,
and free fioml those rfiraints which fubjetion to tlhe will of a
Prince impoed on the German reformer, he advanced with more
daring and rapid steps to overturn the whole fabric of tle efla-
bliflcd religion0. The appearance of flch a vigorous auxiliary,
and the progrcfs which lie made, was, at firfl mattr ol great
joy to Luither, though on the other hand, tle decrees of te uni-
vcrfitics of Colog.ie and Louvain, which pronounced hi; opiniolls
to be erroneous, alorded great caunl of triunlphl to his advcr-
saries.
" Luth. Opcr. i. 199. o Slcid. ili, 22. Sckcinl. ;().

BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther, acquired fresh vigour BooK If.

from every initance of opposition; and pushing on his inquiries Luther'sbold.
and attacks from one dotrine to another, he began to Ihake the nets, and p;o-
firmest foundations on which the wealth or power of the church
were established. Leo came at last to be convinced, that all
hopes of reclaiming him by forbearance were vain; several pre-
lates of great wisdom exclaimed no less than Luther's personal
adversaries against the Pope's unprecedented lenity in permitting
an uncorrigible heretic, who during three years had been endea-
vouring to subvert every thing sacred and venerable, ill to
remain within the bosom of the church; the dignity of the papal
fee rendered the molt vigorous proceedings necessary; the new
Emperor, it was hoped, would support its authority; nor did it
seem probable that the Elecor of Saxony would so far forget his
usual caution, as to set himself in opposition to their united
power. The college of cardinals was often assembled, in order to
prepare the sentence with due deliberation, and the most able
canons were consulted how it might be expressed with the
most unexceptionable formality. At last, on the fifteenth of June, Bull of ex.

comunica-

one thousand five hundred and twenty, the bull lb fatal to the io pub!s
church of Rome, was iued. Forty-one propolitions, cxtraacd' agai!if him.
out of Luthcr's works, are therein condemned as heretical
scandalous, and offensive to pious ears ; all persons are forbidden
to read his writings, upon pain of excommunication ; such as
had any of them in their custody, are commanded to commit
them to the flames; and he himficf, if he did not, within ixty.
days, publickly recant his errors, and burn his books, is pro-
nounced an ol)flinate heretic; is excommunicatcd, and delivered
unto Satan for the deltru ion of his flcfli; and all lccular 'rinccs
arc required, under pain of incurring the ame ccnfure to seize
his pcrloii, that lic might le punilled as his crimes dcflIrvcd '.

J l'a!avic. 27. Luth. Opcr. i. 43.
VVL. II. N 4 T! F

BOOK I. THE publication of this bull in Germany excited various
The ffe t of passions in different places. Luther's adversaries exulted, as if
ths ir G r- his party and opinions had been crushed at once by such a deci-

five blow. His followers, whose reverence for the papal au-
thority daily diminished, read Leo's anathemas with more in-
dignation than terror. In some cities, the people violently
obftruaed the promulgation of the bull; in others, those who
attempted to publish it were insulted, and the bull itself torn in
pieces, and trodden under foot .

and upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time expeded, did
Luthcr.
Nov. 7. not disconcert or intimidate Luther. After renewing his appeal

to a general council, he published remarks upon the bull of
excommunication; and being now persuaded that Leo had been
guilty both of impiety and injustice in his proceedings against
him, he boldly declared the Pope to be that man of fin, or Anti-
christ, whose appearance is foretold in the New Testament; he
declaimed against his tyranny and usurpations with greater vio-
lence than ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes to ihake off such
an ignominious yoke; and boasted of his own happiness in being
marked out as the objet of ecclcfiaflical indignation, because he
had ventured to assert the liberty of mankind. Nor did he confine
his cxpreffions of contempt for the papal power to words alone;
Leo having, in execution of the bull, appointed Luther's books
to be burnt at Rome, he, by way of retaliation, aflemblcd all the
profcffors and itudents in the univcrlity of Wittcniberg, and with
great pomp), and before a vft mllltitude of f)cdtators, carl the
volumes of the canon law, togcthcr with the bull of cxcomnilu-
nicatioi into the flames; and his example wvas imnitated in several
cities of Germany. The manner i which lie jtilict this adion

q Scektid. i1. , 6.

was

was still more provoking than. the aion itself. He colleaed BOOK II.
from the canon law some of the most extravagant propositions
with regard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the Pope's
power, and the subordination of all secular jurifdition to his
authority, and published these with a commentary, pointing out
the impiety of such tenets, and their evident tendency to sub-
vert all civil government'.

'SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, and such Stateofthe

Reforanntiol
the state of his party, when Charles arrived in Germany. No when ChaIe

arrived in

secular Prince had hitherto embraced Luther's opinions; no aGermany.
change in the eablifhed forms of worship had been introduced;
and no encroachments made upon the poffefions or jurifdiion
of the clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to ation; and
the controversy, though conducted with great heat and passion
on both fides, was still carried on with its proper weapons, with
theses, disputations, and replies. A deep impression, however,
was made upon the minds of the people; their reverence for
ancient institutions and dotrines was haken; and the materials
were already scattercd which produced the combustion that soon
fprcad over all Germany. Students crowded from every pro-
vince of the Empire to Wittemberg; and under Luther himsclf,
Melandhon, Carlotfadius, and other matters, then reckoned
eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on their return, they pro-
pagated among their countrymen, who liflened to them with
that fond attention, which truth when accompanied with novelty
naturally commands .

D)U IIN the coulr.i of tllee tranfadcions, tle court of Rome, Rcncftiong
though under the dirction of one of its ablest I'ontiffs, neither u;p o t!lheC

cotit of

r l[utll. Oper. ii. 316. S.ckcn. 9. Rone,
V)L. Il. 0 formed

BOOK II. formed its schemes with that profound sagacity, nor. executed,
*-v~-' them with that fleady perseverance, which had, long rendered it

the most perfed model of political wisdom to the. reft of Europe.
W\Ven Luther began to declaim against Indulgences, two diffe-
rent methods of treating. him lay. before the Pope; by. adopting
one of which the attempt, it is probable, might have been
cruited, and by the other it might have, been rendered innocent.
If Luther's first departure from the dotrines of the church had
instantly drawn upon him the weight of its. censures, the dread
of these might have restrained the Elector, of Saxony.from pro-
tecing him, might have deterred the people fromliflening to his
discourses, or even might have overawed Luther. himself; and his
name, like that of many good men before his. time, would now.
have been known to the world only for. his honcft but ill-timed
effort to correc the corruptions of the Romish church. Or on
the other hand, if the Pope had. early testified ome displeasure.
with the vices and excesses of those who had been employed to
publish Indulgences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses, addressed to the people; if he
had enjoined the disputants on both fides to be silent; if he had
been careful not to rifque the credit of the church by defining
articles which had hitherto been left undetermined, Luther would,
probably, have flopt short at his first difcovcrics: He would not
have been forced in felf-defence to venture upon new ground, and
the whole controvcrfy might polfibly have died away infcnfibly;
or being confined entirely to the schools, might have been carried
on with as little detriment to the peace and unity of tic lRoifh
clurclh, as that which the I;rtarcirfxins maiiit;.in with thlie Doini-
nicans, concerning tihe immaculate conception, or that between
the Jantfinifls and Jcltiits coiccrningi the operations of gracc.
But Lco, by fluiduatil be)ctween tlief ololite lyflems, and b)y
cimbracing tlem altcrnatcly, (dtefatcd te cfTfcls of both. By

5 all

an improper exertion of authority, Luther was exasperated, but BooK II.
not reitrained. By a mistaken exercise of lenity, time was given
for his opinions to spread, but no progress made towards recon-
ciling him to the church; and even the sentence of excommuni-
cation, which at another juncure might have been decisive, was
delayed so long, that it became at last scarce an objet of terror.

Sucii a series of errors in the measures of a court, seldom and upon the

condut of

chargeable with mistaking its own true interest, is not more Luther.
aflonifhing than the wisdom which appeared in Luther's condua.
Though a perfect firanger to the maxims of human prudence,
and incapable, from the impetuosity of his temper, of observing
them, he was led naturally by the method in which he made his
discoveries, to carry on his operations in a manner which con-
tributed more to their success, than if every ftep he took had
been prescribed by the most artful policy. At the time when
he set lhimfelf to oppose Tetzel, he was far from intending that
reformation, which he afterwards effected; and would have
trembled with horror at the thoughts of what at last he
gloried in accomplishing. The knowledge of truth was not
poured into his mind, all at once, by any special revelation; lie
acquired it by industry and meditation, and his progress, of con-
sequence, was gradual. The doctrines of Popery are so closely
connected, that the exposing of one error conducted himn natu-
rally to the deteCtion of others; and all the parts of that artificial
fabric were so linked together, that the pulling dowvn of one
loosened the foundation of the reR, and rendered it mnore clly
to overturn them. In confuting the extravagant tenets coIn-
cerning Ind(tilgences, he was obliged to inqu(ire into tlhe true c ul.;
of our juftilication and accptlance with God. The knowledlec

0 O of

BOOK II. of that, discovered to him by degrees the inutility of pilgrimages

L' - and pennances; the vanity of relying on the interceflion of faints;

the impiety ofworfhipping them; the abuies of auricular consef-
sion; and the imaginary exigtence of purgatory. The detetion
of so many errors, led him of course to confider the character of
the clergy who taught them; and their exorbitant wealth, the
severe injunction of celibacy, and the intolerable rigour of mo-
naflic vows appeared to him the great sources of their corruption.
From thence, it was but one ftep to call in question the divine
original of the papal power, which authorized and supported
such a fyflem of errors. As the unavoidable result of the
whole, he dicflaimed the infallibility of the Pope, the decisions of
fchoolncn, or any other human authority, and appealed to the
word of God as the only flandard of theological truth. To this
gradual progress Luther owed his success. His hearers were not
Shocked at firit by any proposition too repugnant to their ancient
prejudices, or too remote from eftablifled opinions. They were
conduted insensibly from one doErine to another. Their faith
and convition were able to keep pace with his discoveries. To
the fame cause was owing the inattention, and even indifference,
with which Leo viewed Luther's sirs proceedings. A direc or
violent attack upon the authority of the church, would have
drawn upon him at once the whole weight of its vengeance;
but as this was far from his thoughts, as lie continued long to
profcls great rcfcCt for the Pope, and made repeated offers of
filbmllnion t Ilis decisions, there fccned to

ll)c no rcafon for

.lpprchleniding that lie would prove te author of any dclperate
rcvolt; and lie was fufFcrcd to procccd tlep bIy fep, in unlcr-
mliinl the conltituition of the churchl, ill the remedy applicd at
last camc too late to produce any cefect.

Bvt'

BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause derived either from BooK If.
the nifiakes of his adversaries, or from his own good conduct, A-y

An inquiry

the sudden progress and firm establishment of his docrines, must into the
not be ascribed to these alone. The fame corruptions in the contiibuted
church of Rome which he condemned, had been attacked long tFhheprogr
before his appearance, and the fame opinions which he now pro- mation.
pagated, had been published in different places, and were -up-
ported by the fame arguments. Waldus in the twelfth century,
Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth, had
inveighed against the errors of Popery with great boldncfs, and
confuted them with more ingenuity and learning than could
have been expe~ced in those illiterate ges in which they flou-
rifhed. But all these premature attempts towards a reformation
proved abortive. Such feeble lights, incapable of dispelling the
darkness which then covered the church, were soon extinguihed;
and though the doctrines of these pious men produced some
effects, and left some traces in the country where they taught,
they were neither extensive nor considerable. I\any )powerrful
causes contributed to facilitate Luther's progress, which either
did not exif, or did not operate with full force in their clays;
and at the critical and mature juncture when he appeared, cir-
cumflances of every kind concurred in rendering each Itcp lle
took fuccel'sful.

Tl E long an(l scandalous fcliiin which divided tc c;lurc, Tl 1,

c

during the latter part of tle f(urtccntli, and the 1)c;ri ni t [ (li'!" '" ,l!lc
the itccnthl centurics, had a great flcQd in (lilliniifli';n tlle teilttly.
vencration with which the world l;had bee)n accuflloiril to view
the papal dignity. Two or three contending 1'otitils rI)lnil g
ab)out El)lope at a time; flwn1ing on the Prince:; wlioi thley
v;antld to gain; lfqueezing the countries which acknowledged

6 tiheir
1

BooK II. their authority; excommunicating their rivals, and cursing
. ~'*'Y those who adhered to them, discredited their pretensions to infal-

libility, and exposed both their persons and their office to con-
tempt. The laity, to whom all parties appealed, came to learn
that some right of private judgment belonged to them, and
acquired the exercise of it so far as to chufe, among these infallible
guides, whom they would please to follow. The proceedings
of the councils of Conflance and Basil, spread still wider this
difrefpet for the Romish fee, and by their bold exertion of
authority in deposing and elecing Popes, taught the world that
there was in the church a jurifdidion superior even to the papal
power, which they had long belicved to be fuprcme.

The pontifi- THE wound given on that occasion to the papal authority
cates of Alex-
ander VI. and was scarce healed up, when the pontificates of Alexander VI.
of JuliusI. and Julius II. both able princes, but deteltable ecclesiastics,

raised new scandal in Christendom. The profligate morals of
the former in private life; the fraud, the injustice and cruelty
of his publick administration, place him on a level with those
tyrants, whose deeds are the greatest reproach to human nature.
The latter, though a firangcr to thefc odious passions which
prompted his prcdcccffor to commit so many unnatural crimes,
was under the dominion of a restless and ungovernable ambi-
tion, which scorncd all considerations of gratitude, of decency, or
of jflicc, when they olftrudcd the execution of his schemes.
It was fcarcc poflille to be firmly persuadcd that the infallible
knowledge of a religion, whose chief precepts are purity and
humility, was dcpofited in the breafs of the inpious Alexander,
or the ovcrbearing Julius. The opinion of those who exalted
the authority of a council above that of thb Pope fprcad wonder-
fully under their potificatcs: And as the lEmperor and Frcncl

Kings,

Kings, who were alternately engaged in hostilities with these BooK II;
aaive Pontiffs, permitted and.even.encouraged their fubjeds to -~- --
expok their vices, with all the violence of inveCive, and all the
petulance of ridicule, men's ears being accustomed to these, were
not fhocked.with. the bold.or ludicrous.difcourfes of Luther and
his followers concerning the.papal dignity.

NOR were such excesses confined to the head of the church

The immoral.
alone. Many of. the dignified clergy, both secular and regular, lives of the

clergy.

being the younger sons of noble families, who had assumed the
ecclegiafical character for no other reason but that they found in
the church stations of great dignity and affluence, were accustomed
totally to neglet the duties of their office, and indulged them-
selves without reserve in all the vices to which great wealth
and idleness naturally give birth. Though the inferior clergy
were prevented by their poverty from imitating the expensive
luxury of their superiors, yet gross ignorance and low debauchery
rendered them as contemptible as the other were odious-'. The.
severe and unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were
equally subjed, occasioned such irregularities, that in several
parts of Europe the concubinage of pricfts was not only permit-
ted, but enjoined. The employing of a remedy so contrary to
the genius of the Chriflian religion, is the ftrongcfl proof that
the crimes it was intcnded to prevent were both nmerous and
flagrant. Long before the fixtcenth century, many authors of

t The corrurt slate of the church prior to the Reformation, is acknowledged by an

aitllor, who was bo.li bumlantly able to judge concerning this matter, and who was not
over forward to conses it. " For some years (ifys he) before the Lutheran and
('ilviniflic hcreties wc pullified, there was not (as contemporary authors teliify) any
fcvcrity in ccclcrfiflical judicatories, any discipline with regard to morals, any knowledge of
sacrcd literature, any reverence for divine things, there was not alinof any religion remain-
ing." Icll:;iminus Concio. xxviii. Oper. tom. vi. col. 296. edit, Colon. 1617. apud Ger-
deii Ililt. Evang. Rcnovati vol, i. p. 25.

great

4b' .

. a q.
.. ,

BOOK IT. great name and authority give such descriptions of the diiTolute

morals of the clergy, as seem almost incredible in the present
age ". The voluptuous lives of ecclefiafics occasioned great
scandal, not only because their manners were inconsistent with
their sacred character; but the laity being accustomed to fee several
of them raised from the lowest fations to the greatest affluence,
(lid not shew the fame indulgence to their excesses, as to those of
persons polTcffed of hereditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing
their condition with more envy, they censured their crimes with
greater fverity. Nothing, therefore, could be more acceptable
to Luther's hearers, than the violence with which he exclaimed
against tle immoralities of churchmen, and every person in his
audience could, from his own observation, confirm the truth of
his invecives.

The fic;liy TIHE scandal of these crimes was greatly increascd by the
ith which facility with which those who committed them, obtained par-
tlhefe immo-
r.lities Were don. In all the European kingdoms, the impotence of the civil
pardoned.

" Cen'um Gravamina. Nat German. in Fafcicul.) Rer. Expentend. & Fugiendarum,

rer rtuinum Giatium, vl. i. 361, S e innumerable palsages to tle fame purpose in
t-: ppeldix, or fconl volume, puiisihed by Edw. [lown. See a) flerm. Vcn dr
II ird, 11ill. Lit. Reform. pars iii. and te vast collections cf Walchius in his four volumes
( MiInilecuta medii a.vi. Gotting. IfS7.

'IIe a.ut'.ors I have quotcl crumierate the vices of the clergy. When they ventured

u,(n crimes, they wou!d not be scrupulous with refplct to the decorum o bliaiou-.
Afcolitin;ly their nei lct of the decent conducE suitable to their proftifion, seems to
lave git cn gre;t ,fti'nce. In order to illullrate this I iaill trankribe one p Aiigc,
lbc;:;f it i talkcn not fiom any au:hor whose proffi.d rurpfe it as to (lecribe the
inlllIpcr condut of the clergy; and wl.o from prejudice or artifice nay be fippofed to
a!'av;a c the clhargc againf them. '1 lie mpitor (harles IV. in a letter to the arch-
iblho!n of Mlcn!z, A. 1). 1359 ). cxholin hin e rcformi the disorders of the cergy, thus
cxp fli I hlinfLlf: ' I)ce Cl illi patrimnonio, ludos, hafliludia & torneamenta txercent;
li.,itu ni ilit;.rm cum pra tcxtia aureis & arge licis gellant, & calccos militares; cnmain
t Ihalh.ln n.itliunt, & nihil qutod ad vit.in & rdicinei c(clefiiftictim fplelat, ollendunr.
Militarinus fe dluntaxat & fecularibus atib)u, vita & moribus, in flua falutis difrcndium, &t

nt( ,Ial populi fcm'lalum, inmificent. (.odcx Dijilomaticus Aiccdotorum, per Val.
l;crd. (utdenul. 4to. vol. iii. p. 438.

mag;tc,

* *
i .

,,I ,.

'I w
^; »R
·

»F ^

' A:<

magifirate, under forms of government extremely irregular BOOK I.
and turbulent, made it necefary to relax the rigour of justice,
and upon payment of a certain fine or cotnpoition prescribed
by law, to remit farther punishment, even of the most atrocious
crimes. The court of Rome, always attentive to the means of
augmenting its revenues, imitated this practice, and by a pre-
pofterous accommodation of it to religious concerns, granted
its pardons to such transgressors as gave a fum of money in order
to purchase them. As the idea of a composition for crimes was
then familiar, this itrange traffick was so far from shocking
mankind, that it oon became general; and to prevent any im-
position in carrying it on, the officers of the Roman chancery
published a book, containing the precise fum to be exated for
the pardon of every particular fin. A deacon guilty of murder was
absolved for twenty crowns. A bishop or abbot might afiaflinate
for three hundred livres. Any ecclesiastic might commit unclean-
ness, though with the most aggravating circumfiances, for the
third part of that fum. Even such hocking ,crimes, as occur
seldom in human life, and perhaps exist only in the impure
imagination of a cafuifi, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perfec mode of dispensing juflice
came to be introduced into civil courts, the practice of paying a
composition for crimes went gradually into disuse; and mankind
having acquired more accurate notions concerning religion and
morality, the conditions on which the court of Rome bellowed
its pardons appeared impious, and were confidered as one great
source of ecclcfiaftical corruption x

Fafcicul. Rer. Expet. & Fug. , 355 J. G. Schelhornii Amacnit Literar. Francof.

1725. vol. ii. 369. Didion. de Bayle. Artic. Banck & 'uppius. Taxa Cancellar.
Romane, Edit. Francs. 1651. paflim.

VOL. II. p THis

BOOK II. THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy might, per-
<"^rJi haps, have been tolerated with greater indulgence, if their
The exorbi-
tant wea!th of exorbitant riches and power had not enabled them at the fame
te church, time, to oppress all other orders of men. It is the genius of

superstition, fond of whatever is pompous or grand, to set no
bounds to its liberality towards persons whom it esteems sacred,
and to think its expressions of regard defecive unless it hath
raised them to the heighth of wealth and authority. Hence
flowed the extensive revenues and jurifdiaion possessed by
the church in every country of Europe, and which were
become intolerable to the laity from whose undifcerning bounty
they were at firit derived.
particularly in TIHE burden, however, of ecclesiastical oppression had fallen-

with such peculiar weight on the Germans, as rendered them,
though naturally exempt from levity, and tenacious of their
ancient customs, more inclinable than any people in Europe
to liften to thoUs who called on them to assert their liberty.
During the long contefis between the Popes and Emperors
concerning the right of investiture, and the wars which these
occasioned, most of the considerable German ecclefiaflics joined
the papal fadion; and while engaged in rebellion against tlie
head of the Empire, they seized tie Imperial revenues, and'
iilurpcd the Imperial juriflidion within their own dioccfcs.
Upon the rc-cflal)lifhmcnt of tranquillity, they flill retained
thece ufilrpations, as if by the length of an unjufi poflcflion they
lad acquired a legal right to theln. The Emperors, too feeble
to wrclt them out of their hands, were obliged to grant thent
fiefs of theflc vast territories, and they enjoyed all the immuini-
ties and honours which belonged to feudal barons. By incans
of thcfe, many bilhops and abbots in Germany were not only

cclcliafiics,

ecclesiastics, but princes, and their characer and manners par- BOOK II.
took more of the licence, too frequent among the latter, than of
the fanaity which became the former .

THE unsettled state of government in Germany, and the fre- where the

clergy usurped

quent wars to which that country was exposed, contributed agreat part
in another manner towards aggrandizing Ecclesiastics. The of the pro-
only property during these times of anarchy which enjoyed
security from the oppression of the great, or the ravages of war,
was that which belonged to the church. This was owing, not
only to the great reverence for the sacred characer prevalent in
those ages, but to a superstitious dread of the sentence of excom-
munication, which the clergy were ready to denounce against all
who invaded their possessions. Many observing this, made a
surrender of their lands to ecclefiaflics, and consenting to hold
them in fee of the church, obtained as its vassals a degree of
safety, which without this device they were unable to procure.
By such an increase of the number of their vassals, the power of
ecclesiastics received a real and permanent augmentation; and
as lands, held in fee by the limited tenures common in those
ages, often returned to the persons on whom the fief depended,
considerable additions were made in this way to the property of
the clergy'.

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for the safety of T1le val per-

fonal mmu-
their own perions, was frill greater than that which they dif- nities of

ecclcfialtick

played in securing their possessions; and their efforts to attain it
were flill more successful. As they were consecrated to the priestly
office with much outward solemnity; were distinguished from
the reft of mankind by a peculiar dress and manner of life; and

Y F. Paul, Ilifory of Ecclesi:al. Benefices, p. 107. ' F. Paul, Ilin. of
Etclef. erncf. p. 66. Boulainvilliers, Etat de France, toin. i. 69. Lond. 1737.

P arrogated

BooK II. arrogated to their order many privileges which do not belong to

'- ' other Christians, they naturally became the objects of excessive

veneration.- As a superstitious spirit spread, they were regard-
ed as beings of a superior species to the profane laity, whom
it would be impious to try by the fame laws, or to fubje& to the
fame punishments. This exemption from civil jurifdidion,
granted at first to ecclesiastics, as a mark of refped, they soon
claimed as a point of right. This valuable immunity of the
priesthood is asserted, not only in the decrees of Popes and coun-
cils, but was confirmed in the most ample form by many of the
greatest Emperorsa. As long as the clerical character remained,
the person of an ecclesiastic was sacred; and unless he were
degraded from his office, the unhallowed hand of the civil judge
durst not touch him. But as the power of degradation was
lodged in the fpirituaI courts, the difficulty and expence of
obtaining such a sentence, too often secured offenders of absolute
impunity. Many assumed the clerical character for no other
reason, than that it might screen them from the punishment
which their adions deserved b The German nobles complained
loudly, that these anointed malefactors, as they call them ', fel-
dom suffered capitally, even for the most atrocious crimes; and
their independence on the civil magistrate is often mentioned in
their remonstrances, as a privilege equally pernicious to society,
and to the morals of the clergy.

Their en- WrIILE the clergy Afterted the privileges of their own order
croachments
on thejurir- with so much zeal, they made continual encroachments upon.
diaion of he those of the aity. All causes relative to matrimony, to tesla-

ments, to ufiry, to legitimacy of birth, s well as thoei which

·Goldafi Conflitnt. Imperial. Francof. 1673. vol. ii. 92, c7,
' ymcr's Fa:dera, vol. xiii..5 3 . Cntum Gravam. 31.

concerned

concerned ecclefiaRical revenues, were thought to be so con- Boo K II
pe&ed with religion, that they could be tried only in the fpiri- -
tual courts. Not satisfied with this ample jurifdicion, which
extended to one half of the fubjeas which give rife to litigation
among men, the clergy, with wonderful indufiry, and by a thou-
find inventions, endeavoured to draw all other causes into their
own courts d; and as they had engrossed the whole learning
known in the dark ages, the spiritual judges were commonly so
far superior in knowledge and abilities to those employed in the
secular courts, that the people at first favoured any firetch that
was made to bring their affairs under the cognizance of a judi-
cature, on the decisions of which they could rely with ftlperior
confidence. Thus the interest of the church, and the inclination
of the people, concurring to elude the jurisdiction of the lay-
magistrate, soon reduced it almost to nothing', By means of
this, vast power accrued to ecclefiaflics, and no inconsiderable
addition was made to their revenue by the fums paid in those
ages to such as administered juflice.

TIHE penalty by which the spiritual courts enforced their fen- The dreadful

effi:dt of fpi-

tences, added to them great weight and terror. The censure ritualcenfures.
of excommunication was instituted originally for preserving the
purity of the church; that obstinate offenders, whose impious
tenets or profane lives were a reproach to Christianity, might
be cut off from the society of the faithful: This, ccclefiafics did
not scruple to convert into an engine for promoting their own
power, and inflicted it on. the m6ft frivolous occasions. Who-
ever defilid any of their decisions, even concerning civil mat-
ters, immediately incurred this ireadful censure, which not
only excluded themn from all the privileges of a Christian, but

d Giannonc Hill. of Naples, book xix. § 3. C
Centum Gravam. § 9, 5, 64.

deprivell

BooK II. deprived them of their rights as men and citizens'; and the

dread of this rendered even the most fierce and turbulent fpirita
obsequious to the authority of the church.

The devices No R did the clergy neglec the proper methods ofpreferving the
ofeccefiaftics
to fcure their wealth and power which they had acquired with such indufiry
ufurp2tions. and address. The possessions of the church, being consecrated

to God, were declared to be unalienable; so that the funds of a
society which was daily gaining, and could never lose, grew to
be immense. In Germany, it was computed that the ecclesiastics
had got into their hands more than one half of the national pro-
perty . In other nations, the proportion varied; but the share
belonging to the church was every where prodigious. These
vat poflifions were not fiujet to the burdens imposed on the
lands of the laity. The German clergy were exempted by law
from all taxesh; and if, on any extraordinary emergence, Ecclc-
fiaflics were plcafed to grant any aid towards supplying the publick
exigencies, this was confidered as a free gift flowing from their
own gencrofity, which the civil magifrate had no title to
demand, far less to exat. In confcquence of this firange sole-
cifm in government, the laity in Germany had the mortification
to find tlhcmfelves loaded with cxcefive impositions, becauf
those who pouf;ILcd the grcateft property were freed from any
obligation to fpport, or to defend the ate.

The Gcrrmnn (rI

n i. oUs, ,owevcr, as the exorbitant wealth and nulme-

ecclh fi6.ics
in.rl)y f,. r us pri'! gc; of the clerical order were to the other members
Igr"^h'r. f the (;crnila;iiick odtly, tlly would have reckoned it foine miti-

gation of tlhe evil, if tlitec had l)een p)fficifcd only by cclcfialtics

f Centum Gravani. § 14. G Ccntum Gravam. § 29. h C'lltU
(iavjim. bld. Gld.fli Cofnn. Iraper. ii. 79, io3. IPlflinl lill. du Dro:t Publ. 3o, 74.

X rcfiding

residing among themselves, who would have been less apt to BOOK II.
make an improper use of their riches, or to exercise their rights
with unbecoming rigour. But the bishops of Rome having early
p't in a claim, the boldest that ever human ambition suggested,
of being supreme and infallible heads of the Christian church; they,
by their profound policy and unwearied perseverance, by their
address in availing themselves of every circumfiance which
occurred, by taking advantage of the fuperltition of some
Princes, of the necessities of others, and of the credulity of the
people, at length eablifhed their pretensions in opposition
both to the interest and common sense of mankind. Germany
was the country which these Ecclefiaflical sovereigns governed
with most absolute authority. They excommunicated and depo-
fed some of its most illustrious Emperors, and excited their iub-
jeSs, their ministers, and even their children to take arms againit
them. Amidst these contefIs, the Popes continually extended
their own immunities, and spoiled the secular Princes of their
most valuable prerogatives, and the German church felt all the
rigour of that oppression which flows from fubjedion to
foreign dominion, and foreign exadions.

TIIE right of conferring bencficcs, which the Popes usurped Nominated by

during that period of confusion, was al acquisition of reat impor- tlc iLopel
tancc, and exalted the ccclciaflical power upon the ruins of the
tcmporal. The Emperors and other princcs of Gernany had
long been n poffcfilon of this right, and it servcd to increaf Iothl
their authority and their rcvcnuc. But by wrcfling it out of
their hands, tle I'opcs were cnalblcd to fill the Empire witli thliir
own creatures ; they accftloniedl a gre: t body of every p)'ice'
fibjCaS to lcpcn(l not 1pont) liii but upon tlhe oilmia fi'r; thlc
bcflowcd the richet l blenciccs in every counitry Llpoln lranllcs,

and

BOOK I. and drained their wealth to supply the luxury of a foreiga

- - court. Even the patience of the most superstitious ages muti-

nied under such oppression ; and so loud and frequent were the
complaints and murmurs of the Germans, that the Popes, afraid
of irritating them too far, consented, contrary to their usual
pra&ice, to abate somewhat of their pretensions, and to reft
satisfied with the right of nomination to those benefices which
happened to fall vacant during fix months in the year, leaving
the disposal of the remainder to the princes and other legal
patrons'.

The expe- BUT the court of Rome easily found expedients for eluding
dients for re-
straining this an agreement which put such refiraints on its power. The
power ofhe praC ice of reserving certain benefices in every country to the
Popes ineffec-
tuaL Pope's immediate nomination, which had been long known,

and often complained of, was extended far beyond its antient
bounds. All the benefices pofcffied by Cardinals, or any of the
numerous officers in the Roman court; those held by persons
who happened to die at Rome, or within forty miles of that city
on theirjourney to or from it; those which became vacant by
translation, with many others, were included in that number;
and Julius II. and Leo stretching the matter to the utmost, often
collated to benefices where the right of reservation had not been
declared, on pretence of having mentally reserved this privilege
to themfclves. The right of reservation, however, even with
this extcnfion, had certain limits, as it could be exercised only
where the benefice was actually vacant; and therefore, in order
to render the exertion of papal power unbounded, expefiative
graces, or mandates nominating a perfbn to fiucceced to a benefice
upon the first vacancy that hlould happen: were brought into

J F. Paul, Ilii. of Eccles. Beliuf. 2-4. GolJ. Conflit. Imper. i. 408.

6 ufc.

use. By means of these, Germany was filled with persons Boo K II.
depending on the court of Rome, from which it received these - -
reversionary grants ; princes were defrauded, in a great degree,
of their prerogatives, and the rights of lay-patrons were pre-
occupied, and rendered almost entirely vain '.

THE manner-in which these extraordinary powers were exer- Venality of

cited, rendered them still more odious and intolerable. The 'icourS of
avarice and extortion of the court of Rome were become excef-
five almost to a proverb. The sale of benefices was so notorious
that no pains were taken to conceal, or to disguise it. Com-
panies of merchants openly purchased the benefices of different
diftrits in Germany from the Pope's ministers, and retailed them
at an advanced price'. Pious men beheld with deep regret
these fimoniacal trinfadions, o unworthy the ministers of a
christian church; while politicians complained of the loss sus-
tained by the exportation of so much wealth in that irreligious
trafiick.

THE furns indeed, which the court of Rome drew by its stated It drained

and legal impositions from all the countries that acknowledged other-coun
its authority, were so considerable, that it is not fItrange that they wealth.
murmured at the smallest addition made to them by unnecefary
or illicit means. Every ecclesiastical person, upon his admiflion to
his benefice, paid annats or one year's rent of his living to the Pope,
and as that tax was exated with great rigour, its amount was
prodigious. To this must be added the frequent demands made
by the Popes of free-gifts from the clergy, together with the
extraordinary levies of tenths upon eclefiafical benefices, ol

k Centum Gravam. § 21. Fafck. Rer. Expet. 8&c. 334. Gold. Conlt. Imper. i. 391.
404, 405. F. Paul, lifl. of Eccl. Bcncf. 67, 199. 'Fafcic. Rer. Exper. i. 39

VoL. . Q. pretence

BOOK II. pretence of expeditions against the Turks, seldom intended, or

carried into execution; and from the whole, the vast proportion
of the revenues of the church which flowed continually to Rome,
may be efRimated.

T're nited SucH were the dissolute manners, the exorbitant wealth, and
eff u f all . '
these causer. power, and privileges of the clergy before the reformation;

such the oppressive rigour of that dominion which the Popes had
efablifhed over the christian world; and such the sentiments
concerning them that prevailed in Germany, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century. Nor has this sketch been copied from
the controversial writers of that age, who, in the heat of
disputation, may he fufpeed of having exaggerated the errors,
or of having misrepresented the condua of that church which
they laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more authentick
evidence, upon the memorials and remonstrances of the Imperial
diets, coolly enumerating the grievances under which the Empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redress of them. Diffatisfaaion
must have risen to a great height among the people, when' these
grave assemblies expressed themselves with such acrimony; and
if they demanded the abolition of these enormities with so much
vehemence, the people, we may be aflured, uttered their senti-
ments and desires in bolder and more virulent language.

Mlen prepared To men thus prepared for flaking off the yoke, Luther addrcef-
to Crnbrace
l.tiher's cd himself with certainty of success. As they had long felt its
o)IOIoO, oweight, and born it with impatience, they listened with joy to the

first proposal for procuring deliverance. Hence proceeded the
fond and eager reception that his dodrines met with, and the rapi-
dity with which they spread over all the provinces of Germany.

And to tole- Even the impetuosity and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his con-
,rtt hi~ de. fidence in aflcrting his own opinions, and the arrogance and

I codtempt

411

contempt wherewith he treated all who differed from him, which, BOOK IL
in ages of greater moderation and refinement, have been rec-
koned defecs in the character of that reformer, did not appear
excessive to his contemporaries, whose minds were strongly agi-
tated by those interesting controversies which he carried on, and
who had themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny, and
faen the corruptions in the church against which he exclaimed.

NOR were they greatly offended at that gross scurrility with

which his polemical writings are filled, or at the low buffoonery
he sometimes introduces into his gravest discourses. No dispute
was managed in those rude timcs without a large portion of the
former, and the latter was common, even on the most solemn
occasions, and in treating the most sacred fu'jeas. So far were
either of them from doing hurt to his cause, that invetive and
ridicule had ome effect, as well as more laudable arguments, in
exposing the errors of popery, and in determining mankind to
abandon them.

BESIDES all these causes of Luther's rapid progress, arising Theeffea o
from the nature of his enterprize, and the junture at which he hfe invention

of printing
undertook it, he reaped advantage from ome foreign and adven- on the pro-

grefs of the

titious circumstances, the beneficial influence of which none of Reformation,
his forerunners in the fame course had enjoyed. Among these
may be reckoned the invention of the art of printing, about half
a century before his time. By this fortunate discovery, the faci-
lity of acquiring and of propagating knowledge, was wonder-
fllly increased, and Luther's books, which must otherwise have
made their way slowly and with uncertainty into diflant coun-
tries, spread at once all over Europe. Nor were they read only
ly the rich and the learned, who alone had access to books before

Q,2 that
*', 4"''

,BooK II. that invention; they got into the hands of the people, who, upon

this appeal to them as judges, ventured to examine and to reject
many doctrines, which they had formerly been required to
believe, without being taught to understand them.

An! of the Ti'T revival bs learning at the fame period was a circum-
revival of
iearnig. fiance extremely friendly to the Reformation. The fudy of

the ancient Greek and Roman authors, and the discovery of that
liberal and found knowledge which they contain, rouzed the
human mind from the profound lethargy in which it had been
funk during several centcrief. Mankind seem, at that period, to,
have recovered the powers of irnquiing and of thinking, facul-
ties of which they had long loft the use ; and fond of the acqui-
fition, they exercised them with great boldness upon all fubjeas.
They were not now afraid of entering an uncommon path, or-
of embracing a new opinion. Novelty appears, at this time
rather to have been a recommendation to a, dolrine; and intfead
of being startled when the daring hand of Luther drew aside,
or tore the veil which covered established errors, the genius of
the age applauded and aided the attempt. Luther, though a
firanger to elegance in taste or composition, zealously promoted-
the cultivation of ancient literature; and sensible of its being
necessary in fludying the scriptures, he himself had acquired
considerable knowledge both in the Hebrew and Greek tongues.
Melanthon, and ome other of his disciples, were eminent pro-
ficients in the polite arts; and as the fame barbarous monks
*Sv~ ~who opposed the introduction of learning into Germany, set

themfelvcs with equal fierceness against Luther's opinions, and
declared the good reception of the one to be the cfied of the pro-.
grefs which the other had made, the cause of learning and of the
Reformation came to be confidered as closely connected, and, in

every

every country, had the fame friends and the ifme enemiecs This- Boox IL.
enabled the reformers to carry on the onteft at firfl with great
iuperiority. Eruditirn industry, accuracy of feitimelnt, purity
ofcornpfition, and'eve wit and raillery, were whOtly on their:
fide, and triumphed with ease over illiterate nmonks, rhofe rude
arguments, expressed in a perplexed and barbarous file, were
found inuficient for the defence of afyflem, the errors of which,
all the art and ingenuity of its later and more learned advocates
have not been able to palliate.

THAT bold' spirit of enquiry, which the revival of learning

excited in Europe, was so favourable to the Reformation, that
Luther was aided in his progress, and mankind were prepared
to embrace his doarines, by persons who did not wiih success
to his undertaking. The greater part of the ingenious men
who applied to the fludy of ancient literature, towards the close
of the fifteenth century, and the beginning of the sixteenth,
though they had no intention, and perhaps no wish, to overtnrn.
the etablifhed fyffem of religion, had' discovered the absurdity
of many tenets and praeices authorized by the church, and
perceived the fUtility of thole arguments, by which illiterate
monks endeavoured to defend them. Their contempt of these
advocates for the received errors, led them frequently to expose
the opinions which they supported, and to ridicule their opinions
with the utmost freedom and severity. By this men were pre-
pared for the more serious attacks made upon them by Luther,
and their reverence both for the docrines and persons against
whom heinveighed, was considerably abated. This was particu-
larly the cafe in Germany. When the first attempts were made
to revive a tate for ancient learning in that country, the Eccle-
fiaftics there, who were fill more ignorant than their brethren
on the other fide of the Alps, set thelnfclves to oppfeits progress

8 with

BooK II. with more ative zeal; and the patrons of the new fludies, in

return, attacked them with greater violence. In the writings
of Reuchlia, Hutten, and the other revivers of learning in Ger-
many, the corruptions of the church of Rome are censured with
an acrimony of Ryle, little inferior to that of Luther himself'.

FROM the fame cause proceeded the frequent flritures of

Erasmus upon the errors of the church, as well as upon the
ignorance and vices of the clergy. His reputation and autho-
rity were so high in Europe at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, and his works were read with such universal admira-
tion, that the effet of there deserves to be mentioned as one of
the circumstances, which contributed most considerably towards
Luther's success. Erasmus, having been defined for the church,
and trained up in the knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature,
applied himself more to theological inquiries than any of the
revivers of learning in that age. His acute judgment and vast
erudition, enabled him to discover many errors, both in the doc-
trine and worship of the Romish church. Some of there he
confuted with great solidity of reasoning, and force of eloquence.
Others he treated as objects of ridicule, and turned agairrft them
that irrefitable torrent of popular and satirical wit, of which he
had the command. here was scarce any opinion or practice of
the Romish church which Luther endeavoured to reform, but
what had been previously animadverted upon by Erasmus,
and had afforded him subjec either of censure or of raillery.
When Luther firfl began his attack upon the church, Erasmus
Teemed to applaud his condut; he courted the friendship of
several of his disciples and patrons; and condemned the beha-

f Gerdefius Itif. Evang. renov. vol. i. p. 141, 157. Seckend. lib. i. p. 103. Vonder
Hardt. Hilt. Literar. Reform. pars ii.

viour

viour and spirit of his adversaries'. He concurred openly-with BOOK II
him in inveighing against the fchool-divines, as the teachers of '
a system equally unedifying and obscure. He joined him in
endeavouring to turn the attention of men to the ltudy of the
holy Scriptures, as the only itandard of religious truth .

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented Erasmus from

holding the fame course with Luther. The natural timidity of
his temper; his want of that force of mind which alone can
prompt a man to assume the charaaer of a reformer'; his excef-
five deference for persons in high ftltion; his dread of losing the
pcnfions and other emoluments which their liberality had confer-
red upon him; his extreme love of peace, and hopes of reform-
ing abuses gradually, and by gentle methods; all concurred in
determining him to repress and to moderate the zeal, with which
he had once been animated against the errors of the church k; and
to assume the charater of a mediator between Luther and his
opponents. But though Erasmus oon began to censure Luther
as too daring and impetuous, and was at last prevailed upon to
write against him, he mull, nevertheless, be confidered as his
forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the church. He
firit scattered the feeds, which Luther cherished and brought to
maturity. His raillery and oblique censures, prepared the way

* Seckend. lib. i. p. o4, 96.
h Vonder Hardt. I-Iilor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerdes. Hilt. Evang. Renov. i. 147.

Erasmus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this: " Luther, fays he, hba given

us many a wholesome doftrine, and many a good counseL wilf ha had not defeatCi
the effte of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written every thing In the molf
unexceptionable manner, I had no inclination to die for the fake of truth. Every man hath
not the courage equifite to make a martyr; and am afraid, that if I were put to the trial,
J hould imitate St. Peter." Epifl. Erafmi in Jortin's Life of Eram,. vol. i, p. 273.

J Jorin'o Life of Erasmus, vol. i. p. :58.

for

 *' * lw '~~£;D

..
..

... ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ "

* *
J

BooK AT. for Luther's invea&is and more dirke attacks.' In this light

- ' rafmus appeared to the zealous defenders of he' Romih church

in his own times '. In thie light he must be conrfideed by every
person corverfant in the history of that period

IN this long enumeration of the circumfiances which com-

bined in favouring the progress of Luther's opinions, or in
weakening the resistance of his adversaries, I have avoided enter-
ing into any difcufflion of the. theological doctrines of popery,
and have not attempted to hew how repugnant they are to the
spirit of Christianity, and how destitute of any foundation in
reason, in the word of God, or in the practice of the primitive
church, leaving there topics entirely to ecclesiastical historians,
to whose province they peculiarly belong. But when we add
the effect of these religious considerations to the influence of
political causes, it is obvious that the united operation of both
on the human mind, must have been sudden and irresistible.
And though, to Lther's contemporaries, who were too near
perhaps to the scene, or too deeply interested in it, to trace
causes with accuracy, or to examine them with coolness, the
rapidity with which his opinions spread appeared to be so unac-
countable, that fomc of them imputed it to a certain uncommon
and malignant position of the flars, which scattered the spirit of
giddiness and innovation over the world m, it is evident, that their
success was the natural effect of many powerful causes prepared
by peculiar providence, and happily conspiring to that end.
This attempt to investigate these causes, and to throw light on

' Vonder Hardt. Hill. Literar. Reform. pars i. p. z.
" Jovii Hiltoria, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 134

anl
4°,.

an event so singular and important, will not, perhaps, be deemed BOOK t.
an unnecessary digreffion.-I return from it to the course of
the history.

THE Diet at Worms conduted its deliberations with that flow Proceedings

of the diet at

formality peculiar to such assemblies. Much time was spent in Worms.
establishing some regulations with regard to the internal police
of the Empire. The jurifdidion of the Imperial chamber was
confirmed, and the forms of its proceeding rendered more fixed
and regular. A council of regency was appointed to assist Ser-
dinand in the government of the Empire during his brother's
absence; which, from the extent of the Emperor's dominions, and
the multiplicity of his affairs, was an event that might be frequently
expeced". The slate of religion was then taken into confide-
ration. There were not wanting ome plausible reasons which
might have induced Charles to have declared himself the protec-
tor of Luther's cause, or at least to have connived at its progress. ror's views
If he had possessed no other dominions but those which belonged with regard

to Luther,

to him in Germany, and no other crown besides the Imperial,
he might have been disposcd perhaps to favour a man, who asserted
so boldly the privileges and immunities for which the Empire
had firuggled fb long with the Popes. But the vast and dan-
gcrous fchcncs which Francis I. was forming againfl him, made
it ncccflary for him to regulate his conduct by views more exten-
live than thof which would have suited a German prince; and
it being of the utmost importance to secure the Pope's friend-
flip, this determined him to treat Luther with great severity,
as the mofl cflfceual method of soothing Leo into a concurrence

Pont. Ilcute RcrRer. Aufir. Lib. viii. c. . p. 9;. Pfcffcl Abregc Clronol. p. ;,().
VOL. II. R with

BODK II. with his measures. His eagerness to accomplish this, rendered

him not unwilling to gratify the Papal legates in Germany,
who infified that, without any delay or formal deliberation, the
di t ought to condemn a man vwhom the Pope had already
c: :ommunicated as an incorrigible heretick. Such an abrupt
mannner of proceeding, however, being deemed unprecedented
and unjufi by the members of the diet, they made a point of

ITe ;s umrn Luther's appearing in person, and declaring whether he adhered
mntd to ap-
pear. or not to those opinions, which had drawn upon him the cen-

fures of the church °. Not only the Emperor, but all the princes
through whose territories he had to pass, granted him a fafc-
March 6. condut; and Charles wrote to him at the fame time, requiring

his immediate attendance on the diet, and renewing his promises
of protection from any injury or violence . Luther did not hefi-
tate one moment about yielding obedience, and set out for Worms
attended by the herald who had brought the Emperor's letter
and fafe-condud. While on his journey, many of his friends,
whom the fate of Huss, under similar circumstances, and not-

Ilisundaunted withstanding the fame security of an Imperial fafe-condud,
fiirit. filled with follicitude, advised and intreated him not to rush

wantonly into the midit of danger. But Luther, superior to
such terrors, silenced them with this reply, " I am lawfully
called," said he, " to appear in that city, and thither will I go
in the name of the Lord, though as many devils as there are
tiles on the houses, were there combined againt me'."

TIIE reception he met with at Worms, was such as he might

lI;, reception
,a WusO,,. have reckoned a full reward of all his labours, if vanity atid

the love of applauf had been the principles by which lie was

P P. Mart. Pp.
7q2, P I.utih. Oper, ii. 411. s Luth. Oper. ii. 41z.

infllunced.

influenced. Greater crowds assembled to behold him, than had BOOK II.
appeared at the Emperor's publick entry; his apartments were
daily filled with princes and personages of the highest rank r,
and he was treated with all the refpet paid to those who possess
the power of directing the understanding and entiments of
other men; an homage, more sincere, as well as more flatter-
ing, than any which pre-eminence in birth or condition can com-
mand. At his appearance before the diet, he behaved with Themanner

of his appear-

great decency, and with equal firmness. He readily acknow- ance.
ledged an excess of vehemence and acrimony in his controver-
fial writings, but refused to retract his opinions unless he were
convinced of their falihood; or to consent to their being tried by
any other rule than the word of God. When neither threats
nor entreaties could prevail on him to depart from this refolu-
tion, ome of the ecclesiastics proposed to imitate the example
of the council of Conflance, and by punishing the author of this
pestilent heresy, who was now in their power, to deliver the
church at once from such an evil. But the members of the diet
refuing to expose the German integrity to frefli reproach by
a second violation of publick faith; and Charles being no
less unwilling to bring a slain upon the beginning of his admi-
niftration by such an ignominious acion, Luther was permitted
to depart in safety '. A few days after he left the city, a Revere April 26.
cdic was publifhled in the Emperor's name, and by authority of Er.ia againfi

him.

the diet, depriving him as an obstinate and excommunicated
criminal of all the privileges he enjoyed as a fiiljct of the Em-
pire, forbidding any prince to harbour or proted him, and
rcquiring all to concur in fiizing his person as soon as the term
ipecificd in his hfat-conldua was expired '.

r Scckend. 56. Luth. Oper. ii. 44 ' F. Paul, II;f. of Counc. p. 13.
Scckend. I60. ' Gold. Conl. Imperial. ii. 4c8.

IR 2 BUT

BOOK I. BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable effect, the exe-

;, feZEd cution of it being prevented partly by the multiplicity of occu-

and concealed pations which the commotions in Spain, and the wars in Italy
a3 Wartburg.

and the Low Countries, created to the Emperor; and partly by
a prudent precaution employed by the Eledor of Saxony,
Luther's faithful patron. As Luther, on his return from Worms,
was passing near Altenftein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen
in masks ruihed suddenly out of a wood, where the Eledor had
appointed them to lie in wait for him, and surrounding his com-
pany, carried him, after dismissing all his attendants, to Wart-
burg, a strong cafile not far distant. There the Eleor ordered
him to be supplied with every thing necessary or agreeable, but
the place of his retreat was carefully concealed, until upon a
change in the political situation of Europe, the fury of the
present storm against him began :: abate. In this solitude, where
he remained nine months, and which he frequently called his
Patmos, after the name of that island to which the apostle John
was banished, he exerted his usual vigour and industry in
defence of his doctrines, or in confutation of his adversaries,
publishing several treatises, which revived the spirit of his fol-
lowers, astonished to a great degree, and disheartened at the
sudden disappearance of their leader.

PmRrcfsof DURING lhis confinement, his opinions continued to gain
h oi iis.

ground, acquiring the aicendant in alinoft every city of Saxony.
At this time, the Augustinians of Wittcmberg, with the appro-
hation of the univcrfity, and the connivance of the IEleclor,
vcnlturcd upon the first flep towards an alteration in the cfla-
bllilcdl forms of publick worship, by aboliihing the celebration
of private maflics, and by giving te cup as well as the brcad
to the laity in admliniflring the leacramcnt of the Lord's supper.

WIIATEVER,

WHATEVER consolation the courage and success of his dif- BOOK I.

ciples, or the progress of his doctrines in his own country afford- reof th
ed Luther in his retreat, he there received information of two university of

Paris con-

events which considerably damped his joy, as they seemed to lay demning
insuperable obstacles in the way of propagating his principles them.
in the two most powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was, a
solemn decree, condemning his opinions, published by the uni-
verfity of Paris, the most ancient, and at that time the most
respectable of the learned societies in Europe. The other was,
the answer written to his book concerning the Babylonifh cap-
tivity by Henry VIII. of England. That young monarch, hav- Henry VIII.

writes againl..

ing been educated under the eye of a suspicious father, who, in them.
order to prevent his attending to business, kept him occupied in
the fludy of literature, still retained a greater love of learning,
and stronger habits of application to it, than are common among
Princes of so active a disposition, and such violent passions; and
being ambitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as well as
zealously attached to the Romish church, and highly exasperated.
against Luther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite
author, with great contempt, he did not think it enough to,
exert his royal authority in opposing the opinions of the reformer,
but resolved likewise to combat them with fiholaftic weapons.
With this view he published his treatise on the Seven Sacra-
ments, which, though forgotten at prcfent, as books of contro-
vcrfy always are, when the occasion that produced them is pafl,
is not dcflitute of polemical ingenuity and acutncis, and was
reprcficntcd by the flattery of his courtiers to be a work of filch
wond:rliil fcicnce andl learning, as exalted him no lkfs above other
aautliors in merit, than he was diftinguihcd aminong them by his
rank. The Pope, to wlom i was prefintcd with thle grcatcl
ibrnul;ity in fill confiflory, spoke of it in fillc terms, ay if it h;ad

(R.o I)'CI .

BOOK II. been ditated by immediate iipiraion; and as a teflimony of

l ~-
~ the gratitude of the church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred

on him the title of Defqener of the Faith, an appellation which
Henry soon forfeited in the opinion of those from whom he
derived it, and which is still the title of his successors, though
the avowed enemies of those opinions, by contending for which

Luther's re ly he merited that honourable diftindion. Luther, who was not
to both.

overawed either by the authority of the University, or the dig-
nity of the Monarch, soon published his animadversions on both
in a file no less vehement and severe than he would have used
in confuting his meanest antagonist. This indecent boldness,
instead of shocking his contemporaries, was confidered by them
as a new proof of his undaunted spirit; a controvcrfy managed
by disputants so illultriou, drew more general attention; and
such was the contagion of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and so powerful the evidence which
accompanied the doctrines of the reformers on their first publi-
cation, that, in spite both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers
combined against them, they daily gained converts both in France
and in England.

State of as- HOWEVER desirous the Emperor might be to put a flop to
fairs between
Charles and Luther's progress, he was often obliged, during the diet at Worms,
Francis. to turn his thoughts to matters still more interesting, and which

demanded more immediate attention. A war was ready to break
out between him and Francis in Navarre, in the Low-Countries,
and in Italy; and it required either great address to avert
the danger, or timely and wife precautions to resist it.
Every circumfiance, at that juncture, inclined Charles to prefer
the former measure. Spain was torn with intefline commotions.
In Italy, he had not hitherto secured the afiftance of any one

ally.

In the Low-Countries, his fubjeds trembled at the BOOK II.

' :;ghts of a rupture with France, the fatal effects of which on
: ir commerce they had often experienced. From these con-
!.deration, as well as from the solicitude of Chievres during his
whole admiiinifirati!n to maintain peace between the two
monarchs, proceeded the Emperor's backwardness to com-
mence hofiilities. But Francis and his ministers did not breathe
the fame pacific spirit. H-e easily foresaw that concord could
not long fubfifr, where interest, emulation, and ambition con-
spired to dissolve it; and he poleffed several advantages which
flattered him with the hopes of surprising his rival, and of over-
powering him before he could put himself in a posture of defence.
The French King's dominions, from their compact; situation,
from their fubjedion to the royal authority, from the genius of
the people, fond of war, and attached to their sovereign by every
tic of duty and affecdion, were more capable of a great or sudden
effort, than the larger but disunited territories of the Emperor,
in one part of which the people were in arms againfl his mini-
fiers, and in all his prerogative was more limited than that of
his rival.

TIE only princes, in whose power it was to have kept down, henry viir.

or to have cxtinguiihcd this flame on its sirs appearance, either faivors the
neglcLcd to exert themselves, or were ative in kindling and
spreading it. enry VIII. though he affected to assume the
name of mediator, and both parties made frequcnt appeals to
him, had laid aside the impartiality which suitcd that charater.
Wolfey, by his artifices, had ctranged him so entirely from the
French King, that le secretly fonented the difiord which lhe ought
tolave comnpofed, and waited only for some decent prctcxt to join
his arms to the Emperor's ;.

a llcibeit. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 258.

I LEO'S

BOOK II. LEO'S endeavours to excite discord between the Emperor and

'eoher Francis were more avowed, and had greater influence. Not

JLeo hefrates
between the only his duty, as the common father of Christendom, but his
rivals.

riva. interefl as an Italian potentate, called upon the Pope to aCt as

the guardian of the public tranquillity, and to avoid any measure
that might overturn the system, which after much bloodshed,
and many negociations, was now eflablifhed in Italy. Accord-
ingly Leo, who inflantly discerned the propriety of this condua,
had formed a scheme upon Charles's prorotion to the Imperial
dignity, of rendering himself the umpire between the rivals, by
soothing them alternately, while he entered into no close confe-
deracy with either; and a Pontiff less ambitious and enterprizing,
might have saved Europe from many calamities by adhering to
this plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, who was fill in the
prime of life, longed passionately to diflinguifh his pontificate
by some splendid ation. He was impatient to wash away the
infamy of having loft Parma and Placentia, the acquisition of
which refleced so much lufsre on the adminiitration of his pre-
deceffor Julius. He beheld, with the indignation natural to Ita-
lians in tat age, the dominion which the Tranlfilpinc, or as they
in imitation of the Roman arrogance dcno:l.i.tcl them, the
barbarous nations, had attained in Italy. II flattered himself,
that after affilting the one monarch to strip ilic other of his pof-
feflions in that country, he miglt find means of driving out the
vicor in his turn, and acquire the glory of restoring Italy to the
liberty and happiness it enjoyed bcfiore te invasion of Charles
VIII. when every slate was governed by its native princes, or its
own laws, and unacquainted with a foreign yoke. Extravagant
and chimcrical as this projed may feein, it was the favourite
objec of alhofi every Italian eminent for genius or entcrprize
during great part of the fixtccnth century; they vainly hoped,
that by flupcrior kill in the artificcs and rclillclcnts of negocia-

tion,

tion, they would be able to baffle the efforts of nations, ruder Boog 11L
indeed than themselves, but much more powerful and warike, SQ '-
alluring was the profpe& of this to Leo, that notwithstanding
the gentleness of his disposition, and his fondness for the p!eafures
of a refined and luxurious cafe, he hastened to disturb the peace
of Europe, and to plunge himself in a dangerous war, with an
impetuosity scarce inferior to that of the turbulent and martial
Julius .

IT was in Leo's power, however, to chufe which of the mon-

archs he would take for his confederate against the other. Both
of them courted his friendship; he wavered for some time
between them, and at first concluded an alliance with Francis,
The object of this treaty was the conquest of Naples, which
the confederates agreed to divide between them. The Pope, it
is probable, flattered himself that the brisk and active spirit of
Francis, seconded by the fame qualities in his subje&s, would
get the start of the flow and wary councils of the Emperor, and
that they might over-run with ease this detached portion of his
dominions, ill provided for defence, and always the prey of
every invader. But whether the French King, by discovering
too openly his suspicions of Leo's sincerity, disappointed these
hopes; whether the treaty was only an artifice of the Pope's, to
cover the more serious negociations he was carrying on with
Charles; whether he was enticed by the profpcd of reaping
[rc.itcr advantages from an union with that prince; or whether
lie was oothed by the zeal which Charles had manifefled for the
honour of the church in condemning Luther; certain it is, that Conclude, a
he foonI desertcd his new ally, and made overtnres of friendlhip, iattcsi
though with great secrecy, to the Emperor'. Don John Manuel,
b(;;c. . 1 . p 173. (Guic. lib. 14. . r175. Mcm. de Bclla, Par. 3. p. 4.

Vo . II. S the

' *

BoQK H. the fame man who had been the favourite of Philip, and whose

-'- address had disconcerted all. Ferdinand's schemes, having been

delivered, upon the death of that monarch, from the prison to
which he was confined, was now the Imperial ambassador at
Rome, and fully capable of improving this favourable difpofi-
tion in the Pope to his master's advantage d. To him the con-
dut of this negociation was entirely committed, and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion from a war
with France would have prompted him to retard or defeat it, an
May 8. alliance between the Pope and Emperor was quickly concluded '.

The chief articles in this treaty, which proved the foundation of
Charles's grandeur in Italy, were, that the Pope and Emperor
ihould join their forces to expel the French out of the Milanese,
the pofleffion of which hould be granted to Francis Sforza, a
son of Ludovico the Moor, and who had resided at Trent since
the time his brother Maximilian had been difpofieffed of his
dominions by the French King; that Parma and Placentia
fiould be restored to the church; that the Emperor thould
aflift the Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the annual tribute
paid by the kingdom of Naples to the Holy See should be in-
creased; that the Emperor hould take the family of Medici
under his protection; that he should grant to the Cardinal of
that name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon the arch-
bifhoprick of Toledo; and fettle lands in the kingdom of
Naples t the fame value upon Alexander the natural son of
Lorcnzo de Medici.

Death of THtF. tranfading an affair of ficlh moment without his parti-
Fiipevtc,' thf cipation, appeared to Cllicvrcs so dlcilive a proof of his having
vuriic ain los the afccndant which lie had li .nlrto maintained over the
niiniltcr.

d Jovii Vita Leoni lib. iv. p. 89. e Guic. 1. 14. A18. Mem. d Bellay, p. 24.
T)j Mont Coil s L)ilom. tom. iv. suppl. p. 96.

4 mind
I

mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on' this account added to Booc II.
the melancholy with which he was overwhelmed on taking a '-
view of the many and unavoidable calamities attending a war
againfi France, is said t have hortened his days . But though
this, perhaps, may be only the conjecture of historians, fond of
attributing evetr thing that befals illustrious personages to extra-
ordinary causes, and of ascribing even their diseases and death
to the effeCt of political passions, which oftener ditfurb the en-
joyment than they abridge the period of life, it is certain that
his death at this critical jun&ure extinguished all hopes of
avoiding a rupture with France $. This event, too, delivered
Charles from a miniiter, to whose authority he had been accuf-
tomed from his infancy to submit with such implicit deference,
as checked and depressed his genius, and retained him in a state
of pupillage, unbecoming both his years and his rank; but this
restraint being removed, the native powers of his mind were
allowed to unfold themselves, and he displayed such great talents,
both in council and in execution, as exceeded the hopes of his
contemporaries h, and command the admiration of posterity.

WHIILE the Pope and Emperor were preparing, in confe- Commence-

quence of their secret alliance, to attack Milan, hofltities corn- ies inloti
menced in another quarter. The children of John d'Albret Navarre
King of Navarre having often demanded the reflitution of
their hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noyon,
andl Charles having as often eluded their requetf upon very fii-
volous pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized by that
treaty to aift the exiled family. The junllure appeared cx-
trmencly favourable for such an enterprize. Charles was at a

i Brlcarii Comment. de rcb. Gal!ic 483. g P. Ilcuter. Rcr. Aiiflriic. lib. viii.
t. I. p. 197' . Mi1'. Ep. 735.

S (dliflance

BOOK It. distance from that part of his dominions; the troops usually

~T ~ stationed there had been called away to quell the commotions in

Spain; the Spanish malecontents warmly follicited him to invade
Navarre', in which a considerable fation was ready to declare
for the descendants of their ancient monarchs. But in order to
avoid, as much as possible, giving offence to the Emperor, or King
of England, Francis direted forces to be levied, and the war to
be carried on, not in his own flame, but in that of Henry d'Albret.
The condua of these troops was committed to Andrew de Foix,
de l'Efparre, a young nobleman, whom his near alliance to the
unfortunate King whose battles he was to fight, and what was
still more powerful, the interest of his fifler, madame de Chateau-
briand, Francis's favourite mistress, recommended to that impor-

rrogrefs of tant truf, for which he had neither talents nor experience. But
ihe e.rih. as there was no army in the field to oppose him, he became

master, in a few days, of the whole kingdom of Navarre, with-
out meeting with any obftruion but from the citadel of Pam-
peluna. The additional works to this fortress begun by Ximenes,
were ill unfinished; nor would its flight refitance have deserved
notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangcroufly wounded in its defence. During the progress of a
lingering cure, Loyoia happened to have no other amusement
than what he found in reading the lives of the faints: The effet
of tis on his mind, naturally enthufiaflic, but ambitious and
daring, was to infpirc him with fch a desire of emulating the
glory of these fabulous worthies of the lRonifh church, as led
him into the wildest and most extravagant adventures; which
terminated at lait i illituting the society of Jeitits, the most
political and belt regulated of all the monaflic orders, and from

' . Mart. Fp. 721.

which

which mankind have derived more advantages, and received BooK IL
greater hurt, than from any other of these religious fraternities. -
`

IF, upon the redution of Pampeluna, L'Efparre had been They ente

satisfied with taking proper precautions for securing his (as
conquest, the kingdom of Navarre might still have remained
annexed to the crown of France, in reality, as well as in title.
But, puihed -on by youthful ardours and encouraged by Francis,
who was too apt to be dazzled with success, he ventured to pafa'
the confines of Navarre, and to lay siege to Logrogno, a small
city in Castile. This rouzed the Castilians, who had hitherto.
belleld the rapid progress of his arms with great unconcern, and:
the dissensions in that kingdom being almost composed, both
parties exerted themselves with emulation in defence of their
country; the one that it might efface the memory.of past mif-
condut by their present zeal; the other that it might add to the
merit of having subdued the Emperor's rebellious fubjeds, that
of repulsing his foreign enemies. The sudden advance of their
troops, together with the gallant defence made by the inhabitants
of Logrogno, obriged the French general to abandon his rafli
enterprize. Tlhe Spanish army, which increased every day, TLeyarede-
harafltrng him during his retreat, he, infead of taking shelter *feated, and

driven out of

under the cannon of Pampeluna, or waiting the arrival of bome Navalrc.
troops who were marching to join him, attacked the Spaniards,
though fr ltiperior to liil in number, with great impetuolity,
Ibut with lb little condud, that his forces were totally routed, lie
hli:nfelf, together with his principal officers, was taken prifoncr,
;and Spain rccovered pofliFLon of Navarre in fuill florter time
thia the French liad sipet in the colquefi of it .

Mem. de Bcllay, p, 2. 1. . Mart Er. 7z6.

2~~~~~ Wt HILE

BOOx II. WHILE Francis endeavoured tojultify his invasion of Navarre,

bby carrying it on in the name of Henry D'Albret, he had recourse

Hoatilities be.
gun in the to an artifice much of the fame kind, in attacking another part
Low Coun-
tries. of the Emperor's territories. Robert de la Marck, lord of the

small but independent territory. of Bouillon, situated on the fron-
tiers of Luxembourg and Champagne, having abandoned
Charles's service on account of an encroachment which the
Aulic council made on his jurifdidion, and having thrown him-
self upon France for protetion, was easily persuaded, in the heat
of his resentment, to fend a herald to Worms, and to declare war
in form against the Emperor. Such extravagant insolence in a
petty prince furprized Charles, and appeared to him a certain
proof of his having received promises of powerful support froln
the French King. The justness of this conclusion soon became
evident. Robert with troops levied in France, by the King's
connivance, though seemingly in contradiction to his orders,
entered Luxembourg, and after ravaging the open country, laid
liege to Vireton. Of this Charles complained loudly, as a dirct
vi(olation of the peace subsisting between the two crowns, and
summoned Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty concluded at L9n-
(Ion in the yearone thousand five hundred and eighteen, to turn his
arms againf France as the firll aggrefl'or; and though Francis pre-
tended that he was not aniwerable for Robert's condudt, whose
army fought under his own flandards, and in his own quarrel, and
who, contrary to an exprcs prohibition, had flduccd foine ful)-
jeds oft France into liis service; Ienry pai(d so little regard to
this evalion, that the French King, rather than irritate a prince
whom lie ffill hoped to gain, colmmanded de la Marck to dil)alld
his troops'.

Mem. dc ellay, p. zz, &c. Mtm. de Flcuianges, p 33, &c.

Tl E

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was assembling an army to chaftfe BOOK IL.

Robert's insolence. Twenty thousand men under the count of .
Nassau invaded his little territories, and in a few days became
matiers of every place in them but Sedan. After making him
feel so sensibly the weight of his matier's indignation, Naffadt
advanced towards the frontiers of France; and Charles knowing
that he might presume so far on Henry's partiality in his favour,
as not to be over-awed by the fame fears which had restrained
Francis, ordered his general to besiege Moufon. The cowardice
of the garrison having obliged the governor to surrender almost
without refinance, Naflau invested Mczieres, a place at that time: Siege of
of no considerable firength, but so advantageously situated, that Mezieres by

the Impe-

by getting possession of it, the Imperial army might have pene- rialifns.
trated into the heart of Champagne, in which there was scarce
any other town capable of obfruding its progress. Happily for
France, its monarch, sensible of the importance of this fortress,
and of the danger to which it was exposed, committed the defence
of it to the chevalier Bayard, diftinguiflied among his contem-
poraries by the appellation of The Knight withoutfear, and with-
out reproach '. This man, whose prowess in combat, whose
puntilious honour and formal gallantry, bear a nearer refem-
blance, tlLin any thing recorded in hiflory, to the character
ascribed ti, tihc heroes of chivalry, poffcffcd all the talents which
form a gr :tt general. These he had many oceafions of exerting
in the dicncc of Meziercs; partly by his valour, partly by
his condlut, lie protradcd the liege to a greatlength, and in the
end ol)liged te Imperialifis to raili it, with infamy and loss . Raiftd.
I;ra:;cis at the head of a numerous army toon retook Moulon, and
entering tlle Low-Countries, made several conquefs of small
importance. In the neighbourhood of Valenciennes, througl

' Ocuvres de Brantome, tomi. vi. I, Men). (d BCllay, p. 2;, &c.

ahl.

BPooK II. an excess of caution, an error with which he cannot be often

u-'.- charged, he loft an opportunity of cutting off the whole Impe-

rial army0; and what was still of more confequence,.he disgusted
the constable Bourbon, by giving the command of the van to the
duke D'Alenqon, though this post of honour belonged .to Bour-
bon, as a prerogative of his office.

August. DUR I NG these operations in the field, a congress was held at
ColIgreCsat Calais under the mediation of Henry V11I. in order to brings
Calail, under
the mediation all differences to an amicable iflue; and if the intentions of the
of England,

mediator had corresponded in any degree to his professions, it
could scarce have failed of producing some good effed. Henry
committed the sole management of the negociation, with unli-
mited powers, to Wolfey; and this choice alone was fuflicient to
have rendered it abortive. That prelate, bent on attaining the
papal crown, the great object of his ambition, and ready to facri-
ficc every thing in order to gain the Emperor's interest, was so
little able to conceal his partiality, that if Francis'had not been
well acquainted with his haughty and vindictive temper, he
would have declined his mediation. Much time was spent in
inquiring who had begun hofilitics, which Wolfey affected to
represent as the principal point; and by throwing the blame of
that on Francis, he hoped to justify by the treaty of London,
any alliance into which his master should enter with Charles,

. any ',The conditions on which lhofilities might be terminated, came
cf;t snext to be confidered; but with regard to thcfe, the Emperor's

proposals were such as di fcovered either that he was uttcrly averse
from peace, or that he knew Wolfey would approve of whatever
flould be offered in his name. Hie demanded the refiitution of
the dutchyof Burgundy, a province, the poiefflon of which

9 P. Mart. Fp. 747. Mcm. de relay, ;;.

would

would have given him access into the heart of the kingdom; BOOK II.
and required a discharge of the homage due to the crown of
France for the counties of Slanders and Artois, which none of
his ancestors had ever refused, and which he had bound himself
by the treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms, to which an
high-fpirited prince would scarce have lillened, after the difaflers
of the most unfortunate war, Francis rejected with great
disdain; and Charles shewing no inclination to comply with the
more equal and moderate propositions of the French monarch,
that he should restore Navarre to its lawful prince, and withdraw
his troops from the siege of Tournay, the congress broke up
without any other effect, than. that which attends unsuccessful
negociations, the exasperating of the parties, whom it was
intended to reconcile P.

DURING the continuance of the congress, Wolfey, on pre- Lengue

againil France

tence that the Emperor himself would be more willing to make between the
reasonable concessions than his miniflers, made an excursion to Henpryor aV
Bruges, to meet that monarch. He was received- by Charles,
who knew his vanity, with as much refpedi and magnificence as
if he had been King of England. But instead of advancing the
treaty of peace by this interview, Wolfey, in his mailer's name,
concluded a league with the Emperor againfl Francis; in which
it was flipulated, that Charles fliould invade France on the fide
of Spain, and Henry in Picardy, cach with an army of forty
thousand men; and that, in order to fircngthen their union,
Charles hould espouse the Princels I\lary, Henry's only child,
and the apparent heir of his dominions . Henry protliccd lio
better rcafons for this mcafuire, equally unjutf and i politic, tll,l
the article in the treaty of London, y which lie pctclnded that

i' I. Mart. Ep. 739. Ilerbert. , I' v:;cr, I'ader, ii. lIcrber:.
VOL. I. T le

BOOK II. he was bound to take arms against the French King as the firfm
v-~'- aggressor; and the injury which he alledged Francis had done

him, in permitting the duke of Albany, the head of a faaion in
Scotland which opposed his interest, to return into that king-
dom. He was influenced, however, by other considerations.
The advantages which accrued to his fubjeas from maintaining
an exac neutrality, or the honour that resulted to himself from
acting as the arbiter between contending princes, appeared to.
his youthful imagination so inconsiderable, when compared with
the glory which Charles and Francis reaped from leading armies
or conquering provinces, that he determined to remain no longer
in a state of inactivity. Having once taken this resolution, his
inducements to prefer an alliance with Charles were obvious. He
had no claim upon any part of that Prince's dominions, most of
which were so situated, that he could not attack them without
great difficulty and disadvantage; whereas several maritime pro-
vinces of France had been long in the handa of the English
monarchs, whose pretensions, even to the crown of that king-
dom, were not altogether forgotten; and the possession of Calais
not only gave him easy access into some of these provinces, but
afforded him, in cafe of any disaster, a secure retreat. While
Charles attacked France upon one frontier, Henry flattered him-
self that he would find little refiflance on the other, and that
the glory of re-annexing to the crown of England the ancient
inheritance of its monarchs on the continent, was reserved for
his reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged these vain hopes, which
(led is maltcr into such mcafurcs as were motl fubifrvicnt to
his own fccret fcllchncs; and the English, whose hereditary ani-
molity against the French was apt to rekindle on every occasion,
did not difalpprovc of the martial spirit of their fovcrcign..

MEAN-

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope and Emperor pro- BooK IL

duced great effe&s in Italy, and rendered Lombardy the chief Hofi!ities in
theatre of war. There was, at that time, such contrariety be- Italy.
tween the character of the French and Italians, that the latter sub-
mitted to the government of the former with greater impatience,
than they expressed under the dominion of other foreigners. The
phlegm of the Germans and gravity of the Spaniards, suited their
jealous temper and ceremonious manners better than the French
gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and too little attentive to decorum.
Lewis XII, however, by the equity and gentleness of his admi-
niftration, and by granting the Milanese more extensive privi-
leges than they had enjoyed under their native princes, had over-
come, in a great measure, their prejudices, and reconciled them
to the French government. Francis, on recovering that dutchy,
did not imitate the example of his predecessor; and though too
generous himself to oppress his people, his confidence in his
favourites, and his negligence in examining into the condu& of
those whom he entrusted with power, emboldened them to ven-
ture upon many ads of oppression. The government of Milan The Milanefr
was committed by him to Odet de Foix, Marechal de Lautrec, le Frrec'h
another brother of Madame de Chateau-Briand, an officer of great govcrlment.
experience and reputation, but haughty, imperious, rapacious
and incapable either of liftcning to advice, or of bearing contra-
diction. His infolcnce and exadions totally alienated the
affections of the Milanese from France, drove many of the con--
llderable citiz/ens into banilhmcnt, and forced others to retire fr
their own facty. Among the last was Jerome Mcrone, vicc-
chancellor of Milan, a man whose genius for intrigue and
cnterprize diflinguifhcd li in ill a age and coulntry, wrc vio-
lent fcdions, as well as firequent revolutions, affording great
'copc for fiici talents, prodtccd or called then forth in great
tl)tu ndancc. Ile rcpaired to Francis Sforza, whose brother M.ixi-

'I' 2 inilian

Boo.K II milian he had betrayed; and fufpeaing the Pope's intention of

*'"'-' attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with the Emperor

was not yet made publick, proposed to him, in name of Sforza,
a-fcheme for furprizing several places in that dutchy by means
of the exiles, who, from hatred to the French, and from attach-
ment to their former masters, were ready for any desperate
attempt. Leo not only encouraged the attempt, but advanced
a considerable fum towards the execution of it; and when through
unforeseen accidents it failed of success in every part, he allowed
the exiles who had aflembled in a body, to retire to Reggio,
which belonged at that time to the church. The Marechal de
Foix, who commanded at Milan in absence of his brother Lautrec,
June 24. who was then in France, tempted with the hopes of catching at

once as in a fiare, all the avowed enemies of his master's govern-
ment in that country, ventured to march into the ecclesiastical
territories, and to invert Reggio. But the vigilance and good'
condut of Guicciardini the historian, governour of that place,
obliged the French general to abandon the enterprize with dif-

The Pope e- grace'. Leo, on receiving this intelligence, with which he was
¢ares againfl
Yrucis. highly pleased, as it furnished him a decent pretext for a rup-

ture with France, immediately assembled the consistory of Car-
dinals, and complaining bitterly of the hoflile intentions of the
French King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal for the
church, of wlich he had given a recent proof by his proceedings
against Luther, declared that he was constrained in felf-defence,
and as the only expedient for the fccurity of the ecclefiaflical
fate to join his arms to those of that prince. For this purpose,
he now prctclndcd to conclude a treaty with Don John Manucl,
although it had really been signcd ome months before this time ;
allil lie 1mblickly excommunicatcd Dc Foix, as an impious inva-
'Acr of St. Peter's patrimony.

Guic..hb. xiv. i13. Mem. de Bc!ly, p. 38, &c.
P L£O:

LEO had already begun preparations for war by taking into BooK IL

pay a considerable body of Swiss; but the Imperial troops ad-. warm.
vanced so slowly from Naples and Germany, that it was the Mianef-.
middle of autumn before the army took the field under the
command of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent of the Italian
generals, whole long experience and extreme caution were oppo-
fed with great propriety to the impetuosity of the French. In
the mean time, De Foix dispatched courier after courier to
inform the King of the danger which was approaching. Francis,
whose forces were either employed in the Low-Countries, or
assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who did not expet
so sudden an attack in that quarter, sent ambafladors to his allies
the Swiss, to procure from them the immediate levy of an
additional body of troops; and commanded Lautrec to repair
forthwith to his government. That general, who was well
acquainted with the great neglec of conomy in the adminifira-
tion of the King's finances, and who knew how much the troops
in the Milanese had already suffered from the want of their pay,
refused to et out, unless the fum of three hundred thousand
crowns was immediately put into his hands. But the King,
Louise of Savoy, his mother, and Semblanqay, the fuperinten-
dant of finances, having promised, even with an oath, thaton his
arri-al at Milan he should find remittances for the fum which
he demanded; upon the faith of this, he departed. Unhappily
for France, Louise, a woman deceitful, vindidivc, rapacious an.d
capable of sacrificing any thing to the gratification of her pas-
sions, but who had acquired an absolute ascendant over her son
by her maternal tendcrncfs, her care of his education, and her
great abilities, was rcfolved not to perform this promile.
Lautrec having incurred her dilfpleafure by his haughtinclis il
neglcding to pay court to her, and by the frcedom with whichl
!c talked conccrning omine of her adventures in ,;:II;!nltl., 'hci

ooK II. in order to deprive him of the honourwhich he might have gained

by a successful defence of the Milanese, seized the three hundred
thousand crowns deflined for that service, and detained them for
her own ufc.

pi'rog.r f LAUTREC, notwithflanding this cruel disappointment, found
the smpC-

i~tit. means to assemble a considerable army, though far inferior

in number to that of the confederates. He adopted the
plan of defence most suitable to his situation, avoiding a pitched
lattle with the greatest care, while he harassed the enemy con-
tinually with his light troops, beat up their quarters, intercepted
their convoys, and covered or relieved every place which they
attempted to attack. By this prudent conduct, he not only
retarded their progrcfs, but would have soon wearied out the
Pope, who had hitherto defrayed almost the whole expence of
the war, as the Emperor, whose revenues in Spain were
dissipated during the commotions in that country, and who
was obliged to support a numerous army in the Netherlands,
could not make any considerable remittances into Italy. But
an unforeseen accident disconcerted all his measures, and
occasioncd a fatal reverse in the French affairs. A body of
twelve thousand Swiss served in tleir army under the banners
of the republick, with which France was in alliance. By a law,
o less political than humane, eftablifled among the cantons, their
troops were not hired out by publick authority to both the con-
tending parties in any war. This law, the love of gain had
fomctinlcs eluded, and private persons had been allowed to cnlift
in what service they pleased, though not under the pblick
banners, but under those of their officers. 'The Cardinal of
Sion, who flill prefervlwe his intcrclt among his countrymen, and
lis enmity to France, having prevailed on them to permit a

-I- levy

levy of this kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of the BOOK I1.
confederates. The cantons, when they saw so many of their ' '
countrymen marching under hostile standards, and ready to defi oy
each other, became sensible of the infamy to which they would
be exposed, as well as the loss they might susser, and dispatched
couriers, commanding them to leave both armies, and to return
into their own country. The Cardinal of Sion, however, had
the address, by corrupting the messengers appointed to carry this
order, to prevent its being delivered to the Swiss in the service of
the confederates; but being intimated in due form to those in
the French army, they, fatigued with the length of the cam-
paign, and murmuring for want of pay, instantly yielded obe-
dience in spite of Lautrec's remonstrances and intreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed the firength

of his army, Lautrec durst no longer face the confederates;
and returning towards Milan, encamped on the banks of the
Adda, and placed his chief hopes of safety in preventing the
enemy from pafling the river; an expedient for defending a Become

mailers of

country so precarious, that there are few examples of its Milan.
being employed with success against any general of expe-
rience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna, notwithflanding
Iautrec's vigilance and ativity, paflcd the Adda with little lofG,
and obliged him to flint himself up within the walls of Milan,
which the confederates were preparing to beficge when an
unknown perlon, who never aftcrwards appeared either to boat
of this icrvice, or to claim a reward for it, came from the city
and acquainted Moronl, that if the army would advance that
night, tle Cllibclline or Imperial faction would put them in pol-
fffion of one of the gates. Colonna, though no fiicnd to rafln
enterprizes, allowed the marquis de P'eleara to advance with the
Spanifli infantry, alnd lie hinifelf followed with the rcet of hi,

troops.

BOOK Ir. troops. Aout the beginning of night, Pescara arriving at the

Roman gate in the suburbs, furprized the soldiers whom be
found there; those posted in the fortifications adjoining to it,
immediately fled; the marquis, seizing the works which they
·abandoned, antl puihing forward incessantly, though with no
less caution than vigour, became master of the city with little
bloodshed, and almost without refifance; the vicors being as
much astonished as the vanquiihed at the facility and success of
the attempt. Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Venetian
territories with the remains of his shattered army; the cities of
the Milanese following the fate of the capital, surrendered to the
confederates; Parma and Placentia were united to the ecclefi-
aftical slate, and of all their conqueifs in Lombardy, only the
town of Cremona, the castle of Milan, nd a few inconsiderable
iorts remained in the hands of the French h

Death of LEO received the accounts of this rapid succession of prosper-
Lco x. ous gents with such transports of joy, as brought on (if we may

believe the French historians) a light fever, which being
neglectd, occasioned his death on te fccond of December, while
he was still of a vigorous age, and at the height of his glory. By
this unexpeced accident, the spirit of the confederacy was
broken, and its operations'fufpondcd. The Cardinals of Sion
and Medici left the army that they might be present in the
conclave; the Swiss were recalled by their superiors; some
other mercenaries disbanded for want of pay; and only the Spa-
niards, and a fw Germans in the ;inperor's service, remained
to defend the Milanese. But Lautrec, destitute both of men and
of money, was unable to'improvc this favourable opportunity in
(c:j

b Guic. 1. xiv. 19o, &c. Mem. de Bcllay, 42, &c. Galcacii Capela de reb. gef. pro
rcitut. Fran. tfortia; Comment, ap. Scardium, vol. ii. o, &c.

the

the manner he would hare wished. The vigilance of Morone, BOOK IT.
and the good conduct of Colonna, disappointed his feeble '
attempts on the Milanese; and Guicciardini, by his address and

S2z.

valour, repulsed a bolder and more dangerous attack which he
made on Parma c.

MEANWHILE great discord prevailed in the conclave, which Adrianeleed

followed upon Leo's death, and all the arts natural to men Ppe
grown old in intrigue, when contending for a prize so valuable,
were pra&ised. Wolsey's name, notwithitanding all the Empe-
ror's magnificent promises to favour his pretensions, of which
that prelate did not fail to remind him, was scarce mentioned in
the conclave. Julio Cardinal de Medici, Leo's nephew, who was
more eminent than any other member of the sacred college for
his abilities, his wealth, and his experience in tranfaing great
affairs, had already secured fifteen voices, a number sufficient,
according to the forms of the conclave, to exclude any other
candidate, though not to carry his own election. All the
old cardinals combined against him, without being united
in favour of any other person. While these facions were
cndeavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary out each other,
Medici and his adherents voted one morning at the fcru-
tiny, which according to form was made evcry dlay, for Cardi-
nal Adrian of Utrccht, who at that time governed Spain in the
Emperor's name. This they did merely to protraCt time; but
the adverse party inflantly closing with them, to their own
ama.zemCnnt and that of all Europe, a franger to Italy, unknlwn
to the perlfns who gave their suffrages in his favour, and unac-
uainteu with the manners of the people, or the intcret of the
IHate, the government of which tliey conferred upon himi, was

' (Gui. . xiv. 24.
VOL. 1I. U tunani-

BooK II. unanimously raised to the papal throne, at ajuncure so delicate

t

v- and critical, as would have demanded all the sagacity and expe-
Jaru,, 9.

rience of one of the most able prelates in the sacred college. The
Cardinals themselves, unable to give a reason for this strange
choice, on account of which, as they marched in procession from
the conclave, they were loaded with insults and curses by the
Roman people, ascribed it to an immediate impulse of the Holy
Ghofl. It may be imputed with greater certainty to the influ-
ence of Don John Manuel, the Imperial ambassador, who by his
address and intrigues facilitated the eleCtion of a person devoted
to his master's service, from gratitude, from interest, and from.
inclination '.

War rencwed BESIDES the influence which Charles acquired byAdrian's pro-
in the
Mhilncee. motion, it threw great lullre on his adminiitration. To beflow on

his preceptor such a noble rccompence, and to place on the papal
throne a creature whom he had raised, were ads of uncommon
magnificence and power. Francis observed, with the sensibility
of a rival, the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and resolved
to exert himself with frefli vigor, in order to wrest from him his
late conquefis in Italy. The Swiss, in order to make some repara-
tion t the French King, for having so unficafonably withdrawn
their troops from lhs army, which had occasioned the loss of
the Milanefc, permittedl iin to levy ten thousand men in the
rcpublick. Together with this reinforcement, Lautrcc received
fromi the King a finall film in molney, which enabled him once
more to take the field, and aftcr fcizing b1y furprizc, or force,
fcvcral laccs ill the Mililnclc, to advance witliin a few miles of
the capital. The colfecdcratc army was iln no( col ition to

e Cc(r. rMoihriii Vit;a l;l(riani np. (Cafl). Burnimal. in Ani;lcct, de Iladlr.
p. 52. Coinclave IlaIlr. Ibitl p. 144, SC.

ou)itrLcwt

,obftrua his progress; and though the inhabitants of Milan, BooK I.
inflamed by the artifices of Morone, and by the popular decla-
mations' of a monk whom he employed, with the molf enthusiastic
zeal againfl the French government, consented to raise extraor-
dinary contributions, Colonna mufl toon have abandoned the
advantageous camp he had chosen at Bicocca, and have difiniffed
his troops for wvnt of pay, if the Swiss in the French service
had not once more extricated him out of his difficulties.

THE infolcnce and caprice of that people were often no less The French

defeated in

fatal to their friends, than their valour and discipline were for- th, bratle of
midable to their enemies. Having now served some months Elcocc'-.
without pay, of which they complained loudly, a fum defined
for their use was sent from France under a convoy of horse; but
Morone-, whose vigilant eye nothing escaped, polced a body of
troops in their way, so that those who escorted the money durn
not advance. On receiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all
patience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding around Lautrec,
threatened with one voice infantly to retire, if he did not either
advance the pay which was due, or promifc to lead them next
morning to lattle. In vain did Lautrcc rcmonftrate againfl
thelc demands, rcprcfenting to theml the impossibility of the for-
mer, and the rashness of the latter, which inufl be attended witlh
certain (ldfh'cl-iull, as tlie nemny occupied a camp naturally of
great flrcngth, and which by art they had rendered almost inac-
ceffible. TIhe Swiss, deaf to rcalon, and prfiladed that their
valour was capable of surmounting every obflaclc, renewed their
demand witli greater icrccncs, offering themfelvcs to form the
van-guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec, unable to over-
come their obflinacy, complied with their requefi, hoping, per-
haps, tlat omnc of thocf uniorfecn accidents which often

U 2 determine

BooK II. determine the fate of battles, might crown this rash enterprize

'-N with undeserved success; and convinced that the effects of a defeat

could not be more fatal than those which would certainly follow
upon the retreat of a body which composed one half of his army.
lay. Next morning the Swiss were early in the field, and marched

with the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deeply intrenched
on every fide, surrounded with artillery, and prepared to receive
them. As they advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade
1522. with great firmness, and without waiting for their own artillery,

ruffled impetuously upon the intrenchments. But after incre-
(liblc efforts of valour, seconded with great spirit by the French,
having loft their bravest officers and bel troops, and finding
that they could make no impression on the enemy's works, they
founded a retreat; leaving the field of battle, however, like men
repulsed, but not vanquished, in close array, and without receiv-
ing any moleflation from the enemy.

Driven cut of NEXT day, such as survived set out for their own country;
the lila[efc.

and Lautrec, despairing of being able to make any farther resist-
ance, retired into France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona,
and a few other places; all which, except the citadel of Cre-
mona, Colonna soon obliged to filrrender.
Lfo: Gena. GENOA, however, and its territories, remaining fulje to

France, fill gave Francis confideralle footing i Italy, and made
it cafy for hliin to execute any fclicmc for the recovery of the
Milanese. But Colonna, rendered cnterprizing by continual
filcccfs, and cxcitcd by the follicitations of the fadcion of the
Adorni, the hereditary enemies of the Fregoli, who under the
protcElion olf rance poflencd the chief authority in CGenoa,
determined to attempt the redudion of that flatc; and acconm-

p)lilhcd

plifhed it with amazing facility. He became master of Genoa BOOK I.
by an accident as unexpeced as that which hadtgiven him pof-
felffon of Milan; and almost without opposition or bloodfied,
the power of the Adorni and the authority of the Emperor were
established in Genoa'.

Suc I a cruel succession of misfortunes affeAed Francis with Henry VIIT.
deep concern, which was not a little augmented by the unex- declares war

agiinft
pe&ed arrival of an English herald, who, in the name of his France.

May 29.

sovereign, declared war in form against France. This ftep was
taken in consequence of the treaty Wolfey had concluded with
the Emperor at Brttges, and which had hitherto been kept
secret. Francis, though he had reason to be furprized with this
denunciation, after having been at fch pains to ooth Henry
and to gain his minister, received the herald with great compo-
fuire and dignity'; and without abandoning any of the schemes
he was forming againfl the Emperor, began vigorous prepara-
tions for refifling this new enemy. His treasury, however,
being exhausted by the efforts which he had already made, as
well as by the slums he expended on his pleasures, he had rc-
course to extraordinary expedients for supplying it. Several new
offices were created, and exposed to sale; the royal demesnes
were alienated; unuiial taxes were imposed; and the tomb
of St. Martin was ifripped of a rail of maflive silver, with
which Lewis XI. in one of his fits of devotion, had encircled it.
By means of tlefe expedients he was enabled to levy a confide-
rable army, and to put the frontier towns in a good posture of
defence.

e Jovii Vita Fcrdiin. Davali. p. 34. (Guic. 1. xiv. 233.
f Journal dec Lotuilc de Savoic, p. 199.

~ _

BOOK If. THE Emperor, mean while, was no less solicitous to draw as

Chl -

SiG much advantage as possible from the accession of such a powerful

Charles vifi:s
kngland. ally; and the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this time,

permitting him to set out for Spain, where his presence was
extremely necessary, he visited the court of England in his way
to that country. He proposed by this interview not only to
strengthen the bonds offi-iendihip which united him and Henry,
and to excite him to push the war againit France with vigour,
but hoped to remove any diguft or resentment Wolfey might have
conceived on account of the cruel disappointment which he had
met with in the late conclave. His success exceeded his most
sanguine expectations; and by his artful addrcfs, during a refi-
dence of fix weeks in England, he gained not only the King and
the minifler, but the nation itself. Henry, whose vanity was
sensibly flattered by such a visit, as well as by the fludied refpet
with which the Emperor treated him on every occasion, entered
warmly into all his schemes. The Cardinal, foreseeing from
Adrian's age and infirmities, a sudden vacancy in the papal fee,
dissembled or forgot his resentment; and as Charles augmented
the pcnfions which he had already fettled on him, and renewed his
promise of favouring his prctenfions to the papacy, with all his
intcrcft, lie endeavoured to merit the former, and to iccure the
accompliflinent of the latter, by frefi fcrvices. The nation,
iharing in the glory of its monarch, and pleased with the con-
fidence which the Emplcror placed in the Englifl by creating the
carl of Surrey, his higih-admliral, diicovercd no less inclination
to commcnce hofiUlitics lthan Henry himfclf.
The FgSlifl IN order to give Charles, cf(irc lhe left E ngland, a proof of

ivadciac, this general ardour, Surrcy failed with ifch forces as were ready,

and ravaged the coasts of Normandy. IIc then, made a delccnt

on

on Bretagne, where he plundered and burnt Morlaix, and some BOOK II.
other places of less consequence. After there flight erurfions,
attended with greater dishonour than damage to France, he
repaired to Calais and took the command of the principal army,
consisting of sixteen thousand men; with which having joined
the Flemish troops under the count de Buren, he advanced into
Picardy. The army which Francis had aembled, was far
inferior in number to these united bodies. But during the long with little
wars between the two nations, the French had discovered the fu
proper method of defending their country against the English.
They had been taught by their misfortunes to avoid a pitched
battle with the utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing gar-
rifons into every place capable of refifance, by watching all the
enemy's motions, by intercepting their convoys, attacking their
advanced pofis, and harassing them continually with their
numerous cavalry, to ruin them with the length of the war, or
to beat them by piece meal. This plan the duke of Vendome,
the French general in Picardy, pursued with no less prudence
than fccfs; and not only prevented Surrey from taking any
town of importance, but obliged him to retire with his army
greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of provisions, and by the
loss it had sustaincd in ieveral unficccisfiil fkirmiflcs.

Tit s ended the second campaign in a war the most gencral

that hitherto alad b)een kindled in I:1ropec; and though Francis,
1by, his nlother's ill-tinled rctfintment, by the diliiflii n insolence
of liis general, an(l lic caprice of lie nirI'Cl:nary troops- he cnm-
ployed, had( loflltis coi(l (Ifls in Italy, yet :ll tle 1powers coml)bincd
:;ra ills liim had not bleen able to make any iprcfl)flm oi l is
llereditary dominions; ad wlerever they cither intended or
attemlptcd an attack, lie ,'as well prepared to receive thein.

XV 1 I 1.E

BOOK II. WHILE the Christian princes were thus wafting each other's
_... firength, Solyman the Magnificent entered Hungary with a
Solyman's
conquest of numerous army, and investing Belgrade, which was deemed the
Rhodes.

chief barrier of that kingdom against the Turrkifh arms, soon
forced it to surrender. Encouraged by this success, he turned
his victorious arms against the island of Rhodes, the feat, at that
time, of the knights of St. John of Jerusalem. This small slate
he attacked with such a numerous army, as the lords of Asia
have been accustomed in every age to bring into the field. Two
hundred thousand men, and a fleet of four hundred fail appeared
against a town defended by a garrison consisting of five thousand
soldiers, and fix hundred knights, under the command of Villiers
de L'isle Adam, the grand master, whose wisdom and valour ren-
dered him worthy of that flation at such a dangerous juncture.
No sooner did he begin to fufpeEt the destination of Solyman's vast
armaments, than he dispatched mefengers to all the Chriflian
courts, imploring their aid againfi the common enemy. But though
every prince in that age, acknowledged Rhodes to be the great
bulwark of Christendom in the cast, and trusted to the gallantry
of its knights as the best security against the progress of the
Ottoman arms; and though Adrian, with a zeal which became
the head and father of the church, exhorted the contending
powers, to forget their private quarrels, and by uniting
their arms, to prevent the Infidels from defroying a society
which did honour to the Christian name; yet so violent and im-
placable was the animosity of both parties, that, regardlcfs of
the danger to which they exposid all Europe, and unmoved
by the intreaties of the grand matier, or the admonitions of
the Pope, they suffered Solyman, without disturbance, to carry
on his operations against Rhodes. The grand master, after incre-
dible efforts of courage, of patience, and of military condut

during

during a siege of fix months; after sustaining many assaults, BOO II.
and disputing every post with amazing obltinacy, was obliged at
last to yield o numbers, and having obtained an hlnourable capi- s
tulation from the Sultan, who admired and refpeded his virtue,
he surrendered the town, which was reduced to a heap ofrubbifh,
and deffitute of evc:;y ref;iu:ce. Charles and Francis, ashamed
of having occasioned t'ucli a loss to Christendom by their ambi-
tious contests, edeavoured to throw the blame;-of it on each
other, while all Europe, with greater justice, imputed it
equally to both. The Emperor, by way of reparation, granted
the knights of St. John the frmail island of Malta, in which they
fixed their residence, retaining, though with lefi power and
splendour, their ancient spirit, and implacable enmity to the
Infidels.

g Fontanus de Bello Rhodio ap. Scard. Script. Rer. German. Vol. ii. p. 88
P. Barre. Hilt, d'Allcm. torn. viii. 57.

VOLI. IX T TT

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK III.

THE
HI STORY

OF THE
`R E 'I G N

O F THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B O O K III.
BooK III. IIARLES, having had the fatisfadion of feeing hofti-

- x_ lities begun between Francc and England, took leave of

Civil ar in
Cllilc. -IcHnry, and arrived in Spain on tle fventccenth of June. He

found that country jul beginning to recover order and ftrcngth
after the miserics of a civil war to which it had been xpofcd
during his absence; an account of the rifi and progrcfs of which,
as it was b,)ut i;ttle conneded with the other events that hap-
pencd in lEurope, hath been rccfrvcd to this place.

Inr,,ilnion No fooncr was it known that the Cortes affemiblcd in Galicia
of ''ulco.

lad voted the Emiperor a-cc-'ift, without obtaining the rc(rcts

of

of any one grievance, than it excited universal indignation. BOOK III.
The citizens of Toledo, who confidered themselves, on account ,
of the great privileges which they enjoyed, as guardians of the
liberties of the Castilian commons, finding that no regard was paid
to the remonfirancesof their deputies against thatunconftitutional,
grant, took arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing the gates.
of the city which were fortified, attacked the al-cazar, or castle,
which they soon obliged the governour to surrender. Emboldened
by this success, they deprived of all authority every person,
whom they fufpeded of any attachment to the court, efablifihed
a popular form of government, composed of deputies from the
several parishes in the city,. and levied troops in their own:
defence. The chief leader of the people in these infurredions
was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of the commendador of
Castile, a young nobleman of a generous temper, of undaunted:
courage, and possessed of the talents as well as of the ambition
which in .timesi of civil diford raif Iiwn to power and eni-..
nence a.

TIIE resentment of the citizens of Segovia produced effects Of Segovia .

still more fatal. Tordefillas, one of their representatives in the
late Cortes, had voted for the donative; and being a bold and
haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to call together his
fellow citizens in the great church, that he might give them,
according to custom, an account of his conduct in that aflembly.
But the multitude, unable to bear his insolence, in attempting
to justify what they thought inexcusable, burst open the gates
of the church with the utmost fury, and seizing the unhappy
Tordefillas, dragged him through the streets, with a thousand

* Sandov. p. 77.

X 2 curses

BOOK III. curses and insults, towards the place of publick execution. In

vain did the dean and canons come forth in procession with the
holy sacrament, in order to appease their rage. In vain did the
monks of those monasteries by which they pasled, conjure them
on their knees to spare his life, or at least to allow him time to
confers, aad to receive absolution of his fins. Without liftcning
to the dictates either of humanity or of religion, they cried out,
" That the hangman alone could absolve such a traitor to his
country," hurried him along with greater violence, and finding
that he had expired under their hands, they hung him up with
his head downwards on the,common gibbet . The fame spirit
seized the inhabitants of Burgos, Za mora, and several other cities;
and though their representatives, taking warning from the fate
of Tordefillas, had been so wife as to save themselves by a timely
flight, they were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to the
ground, and their effeds consumed with fire; and such was the
horror the people had conceived against them as betrayers of
the publick liberty, that not one in those licentious multitudes
would touch any thing, however valuable, which had belonged
to. them'.

Measures rs AD RI AN, at that time regent of Spain, had scarce fixed the
Adrian, in
rWder ro feat of his government at Valladolid, when he was alarmed
punish thIrm .
Une 5, ithe . with an account of these infurreions. He immediately assem-

b.led the council to deliberate concerning the proper method of
fupprcfling them. The counfcllors differed in opinion; some
insisting that it was neccffary to check this audacious spirit in
;ts infancy by a fcvere execution ofjuftice; others advising to
treat with lenity a people who had some recafon to be incensed,

6 P. Matyr. Ep. 671. * Sandov. 13. P. Mart. Ep. 674.

~2 ,.~and

and not to drive them beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill- IBoK IIl.
timed rigour. The sentiments of the former being warmly sup-
ported by the archbishop of Granada, president of the council, a
person of great authority, but cholerick and impetuous, were
approved of by Adrian, whose zeal to support his mailer's autho-
rity hurried him into a measure, to which, from his natural
caution and timidity, he would otherwise have been averse. He
commanded Ronquillo, one of the King's judges, to repair
instantly to Segovia, which had set the first example of mutiny, His troops
and to proceed againfi the delinquents according to law; and regovia,
left the people hould be so outrageous as to resist his authority,
a considerable body of troops was appointed to attend him. The
Segovians, foreseeing what they might exped from a judge so
well known for his austere and unforgiving temper, took arms
with one consent, and having mustered twelve thousand men,
shut their gates against him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult,
denounced them rebels and outlaws; and his troops seizing all
the avenues to the town, hoped that it would oon be obliged to
surrender for want of provisions. The inhabitants, however,
defended themselves with vigour, and having received a confi-
derable reinforcement from Toledo, under the command of
Padilla, attacked Ronquillo, and forced him to retire, with the
loss of his baggage and military chest ".

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, whom the andat Meaina

del Cempo?

Emperor had appointed commander in chief of the forces in
Spain, to assemble an army, and to besiege the city in form.
But the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where Cardinal
Ximenes had established a vail magazine of military stores,
would not susser him to draw from it a train of battering cannon,

d Sandov. 112. P. Mart. Ep. 679. Miniana, Cuotin. p. 15.

er

BOOK III. or to detroy their countrymen with those arms which had been

- - 'prepared against the enemies of the kingdom. Fonseca, who

could not execute his orders without artillery, determined to

AU 2 seize the magazine by force, and the citizens tanding on their
Aug. I.

defence, he aflaulted the town with great briskness: But his
troops were so warmly received, that despairing of carrying
the place, he set fire to ome of the houses, in hopes that
the citizens would abandon the walls in order to save their
families and effets. Instead of that, the expedient to which he
had rccourfe served only to increase their fury, and he was
repulsed with great infamy, while the flames spreading from
street to fireet, reduced to aihes almost the whole town, one of
the most considerable at that time in Spain, and the great mart
for the manufactures of Segovia, and several other cities. As
the warehouses were then filled with goods for the approaching
fair, the lots was immense, and was felt universally; and this,
added to the impression which such a cruel action made on a
people long unaccustomed to the horrors of civil war, enraged
the Castilians almost to madness. Fonseca became the object of
general indignation, and was branded with the name of incendiary
and enemy to his country; and even the citizens of Valladolid,
whom the presence of the Cardinal had hitherto restrained,
declared that they could no longer remain inactive fpeaators of
the filffcrings of their countrymen, and taking arms with no less
fury than the other cities, they burnt Fonseca's house to the
ground, eleted new magistrates, raised soldiers, appointed officers
to commnand them, and guarded their walls with as much dili-
gence, as if an enemy had been ready to attack them.

Altla;n (lif THl E Cardinal, who though virtuous and disinterestcd, and
;lll'i 1113 capable of governing the kingdom with honour in times of tran-

quillity,

quillity, poffefled neither the courage nor sagacity necessary at Boo k III.
-such a dangerous junaure, finding himself unable to check these
outrages committed under his own eye, attempted to appease the
people, by protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his orders, and
had by his rash conduc offended him, as much as he had injured
them. This condescension, the effet of irresolution and timi-
dity, rendered the malecontents bolder and more insolent; and
the Cardinal having soon after recalled Fonseca, and dismissed
his troops, which he ould no longer afford to pay, as the trea-
fury had been drained by the rapaciousness of the Flemish mini-
fters, and received no supply from the great cities which were all
in arms, the people were left at full liberty to a without con-
troul, and scarce any shadow of power remained in his hands.

NoR were the proceedings of the commons the effects merely Th4Views

and prettn-
of popular and tumultuary rage; they aimed at obtaining redress sions of the

-tlB .mnns of

of their political grievances, and an eflablifhment of public liberty cItile.
on a secure basis, objects worthy of all the zeal they discovered
in contending for them. The feudal government in Spain, was
at that time in a slate more favourable to liberty than in any
other of the great European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly
to the number of great cities in that country, a circumstance of
which I have already taken notice, and which contributes more
than any other to mitigate the rigour of the feudal institutions,
and to introduce a more liberal and equal form of government.
The inhabitants of every city formed a great corporation witl
valuable immunities and privileges; they were delivered from a
slate offuljedion and vafllage; they were admitted to a confi-
(lral)le share in the legillature; they acquired the artsof indclufIry,
without which cities cannot fibit; they accumulated wealth,
by engaging in commerce; and being frec and independcnt them-

fclves,
*

BOOK IlL feltes, were the guardians of the publick freedom and indepen-

' dence. The genius of the internal government eftablihed in

cities, which, even in countries where despotic power prevails
most, is democratical and republican, rendered the idea of liberty
familiar and dear to them. Their representatives in the Cortes
were accustomed to check with equal spirit the encroachments
of the King, and the oppression of the nobles. They endea-
voured to extend the privileges of their own order; they
laboured to hake off the remaining encumbrances with which
the feudal tyranny had burdened them; and conscious of being
one of the most considerable orders in the Rate, were ambitious
of becoming the most powerful.

Their cmfe- TH E present junaure appeared favourable for pushing
deracy by the
name ofghe any new claim. Their sovereign was absent from his don i-
I-oly unt. nions; by the ill-condua of his ministers he had loft the

esteem and affecion of his fubjeas ; the people exasperated by
many injuries had taken arms, though without concert, almost
by general consent; they were animated with fury capable of
carrying them to the most violent extremes; the royal treasury
was exhalfted ; the kingdom deflitiite of troops; and the go-
vernment committed to a firanger, of great virtue indeed, but of
abilities unequal to such a trust. The lirit care of Padilla, and
the other popular leaders who obfcrved and determined to
improve there circumstances, was to eflablifh ome form of union
or alociation among the malecontents, that they might alt with
greater regularity and prfue one common end; and as the
different cities had been prompted to take arms by the fame
motives, and were accullolnctl to confider thcmfclves as a diflinct
body from the reft of the fubjeds, they did not find this dlilicult.
A general convention was appointed to be held at Avila. Depu-

ties

ties appeared there in name of almost all the cities entitled to Bo K III.
have representatives in the Cortes. They all bound themselves
by solemn oath, to live and die in e service of the King, and in
defence of the privileges of their order; and assuming the name
of the holy Junta or association, proceeded to deliberate concern-
ing the state of the nation, and the proper method of redressing
its grievances. The first that naturally presented itself, was the Theydifclaim

Adrian's

nomination of a foreigner to be regent; this-,they declared with authority.
one voice to be a violation of the fundamental laws of the king-
dom, and resolved to fend a deputation of their members to
Adrian, requiring him in their name to lay aside all the ensigns
of his office, and to abstain for the future from the exercise of a
jurifdidion which they had pronounced illegal k

WHILE they were pgparing to execute this bold resolution, Get pofTe(fon

of Queen

Padilla accomplished an enterprize of the greatest advantage to Joanna.
the cause. After relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly toTorde- Aug. 29.
fillas, the place where the unhappyQueenJoanna had resided since
the death of her husband, and being favoured by the inhabitants,
was admitted into the town, and became master of her person, for
the security ofwhichAdrian had neglected to take proper precau-
tions'. Padilla waited immediately upon the Queen, and accofing
her with that profound refped, which ihe exacted from the few
persons, whom ihe deigned to admit into her prefcnce, acquainted
her at large with the miserable condition of her Catlilian fubjets
under the government of her son, who being defcitute of expe-
rience himself, permitted his foreign miniflers to treat them with
such rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in defence of the
liberties of their country. The Qeen, as if he had been

' P. Mart. Ep. 6)x. I Vita dell' Impcr. Carl. V. dall Als. Ulloa.
Vcn. 1509, p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17.

VOL, II. Y awakened

BooKIll. awakened out of a lethargy, exprefled great astonishment at

what he said, and told him, that as the had never heard till that
moment, of the death of her fther, or known the- sufferings of
her people, no blame could be imputed to her, but that now she
would take care to provide a sufficient remedy; and in the mean:
time, added he, let it be your concern to do what is necessary .
for the publick welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a con-
clufion agreeable to his wilhes, mistook this lucid interval of, ea-
son for a perfect return of that faculty; and acquainting'the
Junta with' what had happened, advised them to remove to,
Tordefillas, and to hold their meetings in that place. This was.
instantly done; but though Joanna received very graciously an
address of the Junta, beseeching her to take upon her the go-
vernment of the kingdom, and in token of her compliance,,
admitted all the deputies to kifs her hai@; though he was pre-
sent at a tournament held on that occasion, and seemed highly fa-
tisfied with both there ceremonies, which were conducted with
great magnificence in order to please her, she soon relapsed into
her former melancholy and sullenness, and could never be
brought by any arguments or intreaties, to sign any one paper
necessary towards the dispatch of bufinefsm.

Carry on go- THE Junta concealing as much as possible this last circum-
vernmcnt in
her name, fiance, carried on all their deliberations in her name; and

as the Castilians, who idolized the memory of Isabella, retained
a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no sooner was it known
that she had contented to assume the reins of government than
the people expressed the molt universal and immoderate joy; and
believing her recovery to be compleat, ascribed it to a miraculous

Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686,

interpo-

interposition of heaven, in order to rescue their country from the BOOK III.
oppreflion of foreigners. The Junta, conscious of the reputa- -

and deprive

tion and power they had acquired by -eeming to a& under the Adrian of all
royal authority, were no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian power
to resign the office of regent, they detached Padilla to Valladolid
with a considerable body of troops, ordering him to seize such
members of the council as were still in that city, tt conduct
them to Tordefillas, and to bring away the eals of the king-
.dom, the publick archives anditreafury books. Padilla, who
,was received by the citizens, as the deliverer of his country,
. ~,uted his commission with great exadtnefs ; permitting Adrian
however, still to reside in Valladolid, though only as a private
person, and without any shadow of power n.

THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of these tranf- The Fmperor

...- ~~~~~~~. n~alarmed.

aations were tranfinitted while he was still in Slanders, was
sensible of his own imprudence and that of his ministers in
having despised too long the murmurs and remonstrances of the
Caffilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a kingdom the most
valuable of any he possessed, and in which lay the strength and
sinews of his power, jult ready to disown his authority, and on
the point of being plunged in all the miseries of civil war.
But though his pretence might have averted this calamity, he
could not, at that time, visit Spain without endangering the
Imperial crown, and allowing the French King full leisure to
execute his ambitious schemes. The only points now to be Ij;, meaft es
deliberated upon, were whether he should attempt to gain the with refpct
malecontents by indulgence and conceflions, or prepare directly malecontetsa.
to suppress them by force; and he resolved to make trial of the
former, while at the fame time, if that flould fail of success, he "

* Sandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

Y 2 prepared

BOOK III. prepared for the latter. For this purpose, he issued circular letters

-

-
v to all the cities of Castile, exhorting them in moftgentle terms,

and with assurances of full pardon, to lay down their arms; he
promised such cities as had continued faithful not to exaa from
them the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offered the
fame favour to those who returned to their duty; he engaged
that no office hould be conferred for the future upon any
but native Castilians. On the other hand, he wrote to the
nobles exciting them to appear with vigour in defence of the4
own rights, and those of the crown, against the exorbitant clai~f
of the commons; he appointed the high admiral, Don Sadiei
Enriquez, and the high constable of Castile, Don Inigo de Ve-
lafco, two noblemen of great abilities and influence, regents of
the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian; and he gave them
full power and inftrutions, if the obstinacy of the malecontents
ihould render it necessary, to vindicate the royal authority by
force of arms

The large re. THE concessions he was willing to make, which, at the
motnnta con-s time of his leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the people,.
cerning their came now too late to produce any effect. The Junta, relying on
grievances.

the unanimity with which the nation submitted to their authority,
elated with the success which hitherto had accompanied all their
undcrtakings, and feeing no military force colleced to defeat or
(bftruA their designs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been employed fr some time n
preparing a rcmonflrancc containing a large enumeration not
v, lt only of the grievances, of which they craved redress, but of such

4 xnew regulations as they thought neceilary for the fccurity of
. : their liberties. This remonftrancc, which is divided into many

P. Ilutei. Rr. Auftr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 88.

articlc.;

articles relating to all the different members of which the con-. BoOK II.
flitution was compoed, as well as to the various departments in
the adminiitration of government, furnishes us with more authen~
tic evidence concerning the intentions of the Junta, than can be
drawn from the teltimony of the later Spanish historians, who
lived in times when it became fashionable and even necessary to
represent the conduc of the malecontents in the worfi light, and
as flowing from the worst motives. After a long preamble con-
cerning the various calamities under which the nation groaned,
atU the errors and corruption in government to which these were
t6 be ihiputed, they take notice of the exemplary patience where-
with the people had endured them, till felf-prefervation, and the
duty which they owed to their country, had obliged them to as-
femble in order to provide in a legal manner for their own safety,
and that of the constitution: For this purpose, they demanded that
the King would be pleased to return to his Spanish dominions, and
reside there, as all their former monarchs had done; that he would
not marry but with content of the Cortes; that if he should he
obliged at any time to leave the kingdom, it shall not be lawful
to appoint any foreigner to be regent; that the present nomina-
tion of Cardinal Adrian to that office shall instantly be declared
void; that he would not, at his return, bring along with him
any Flemings or other firangers; that no foreign troops hall,
on any pretence whatcver, be introduced into the kingdom; that
none but natives lfall be capable of holding any office or benefice
cither in church or flatc; that no forcigncrrlihall be naturalized;
that free quarters hil not be granted to follicrs, nor to thofce
of the King's lhouifhold for any longer time than fix days, and
that only when the court is in a progrcfs; that all the taxes hall
be reduced to the filne flatc they were in at the death of Queccn
Ifilbella; that all alienations of the royal dencfilcs or revcnlces

tizm

~.

'BOK III. since that Queen's death Ihall be resumed; that all new offices

*^ - ' created since that period be abolished; that the subsidy granted

by the late Cortes in Galicia hall not be exaded; that in all
future Cortes each city shall fend one representative of the clergy,
one of the gentry, and one of the commons, each to be elected
by his own order; that the crown shall not influence or direc
any city with regard to the choice of its representatives; that
4 no member of the Cortes hall receive an office or pension from

the King, either for himfelfor for any of his family, under pain
of death, and confiscation of his goods; that each city or com-
munity shall pay a competent salary to its representatives for
his maintenance during his attendance on the Cortes; that the
Cortes hall assemble once in three years at least, whether fum-
moned by the King or not, and hall then enquire into the obfer-
vation of the articles now agreed upon, and deliberate concerning
publick affairs; that the rewards which have been given or pro-
mifed to any of the members of the Cortes in Galicia, shall be re-
voked; that no gold, silver, or jewels, shall, upon pain of death,
be sent out of the kingdom; that judges hall have fixed salaries
assigned them, and shall not receive any share of the fines and
forfeitures of persons condemned by them; that no grant of the
goods of persons accused shall be valid, if given before sentence
was pronounced against them; that all privileges which the
nobles have at any time obtained, to the prejudice of the com-
imons, shall be revoked; that the government of cities or towns
thall not be put into the hands of the nobles; that the lands of
the nobles fliall be iubjea to all public taxes in the fame manner
as those of the commons; that an enqiiir)e made into the con-
dud of those who have been entrusted with the management
of the royal patrimony since the accession of Fcrdinand; and if
the King do not within thirty days appoint persons properly

qualified

qualified for that service, it hall be lawful for the Cortes to BooK II.
nominate .them; that Indulgences shall not be preached or
dispersed in the kingdom until the cause of publishing them be
examined and approved of by the Cortes; that all the money
arising from the sale of Indulgences, shall be faithfully employed
in carrying on war against the Infidels; that such prelates as do,
not reside in their dioceses fix months in the year, hall forfeit
their revenues. during the time they are absent; that the eccle-
fiaftical judges and their officers shall not exa& greater fees than
those which are paid in the secular courts; that the present arch-
biliop of Toledo being a foreigner, be compelled to resign that
dignity, which shall be conferred upon a Castilian; that the
King shall ratify and hold as good service done to him and
to the kingdom all the proceedings of the Junta, and pardon
any irregularities which the cities may have committed.from an.
excess of zeal in a good cause: That he shall promise and swear
in the most solemn manner to observe all these articles, and on
no occasion attempt either to elude, or to repeal them; and that
he shall never solicit the Pope or any other prelate to grant
him a dispensation or absolution from this oath and promise P. ' *

SUCH were the chief articles presented by the Junta to their The firit of

liberty which

overeign. As the feudal inflitutions in the several kingdoms of it breathed.
Europe were originally the fame, the genius of those govern-
ments which arose from them bore a firong resemblance to each
other, and the regulations which the Castilians attempted to cfta-
blifh on this occasion, differlittle from those which other nations
laboured to procurein their firulggles with their monarchs for li-
berty. The grievances complained of, and the remedies proposed.

Sanidov. 206. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

t by

BOOK III. by the English commbns i lheir contests with the pcesof the

* 3 f Rouse of Stuart, particulFy resemble those upon which the

Junta now insisted. But e Spaniard} had already 'j1uired

*4# ~ ideas of their wn liberty an&indepenlnce, had formed bold
4 . eandlgenerous fetments concerning government, and discovered

an, *tnt ofopolitical knowledge to jrich the English did not
~1 attan till more than a century afterwards.

IT is not improbab,, however, that the spirit of reformation

atnong the Castilians, hitherto unrel:rained by authority, and
emboldcned by success, became too impetuous, and pWipted the
Junta 'T6 propose innovations which by alarming the other '
niynbers of the constitution, proved fatal to their cause. The
nob*, who inlead of obflruEing, had favourcd or connived at
t* their proceedings, while they confined their demands of redress

tS fuchlgrievances as had been occasioned by ie Kiis want of
experience, and y theoimprudence and rapacioufiifs of his

rritates the foren ministers, v* filld with indignation when qysbegan
;4 cobles, °

>* cobles to touch the privileges ofihcir order, and plainly saw that the

. -meaftrrcs of the commons tended so lcfs to brcak thc p9 er of.
. ',

' thle ariflocracy, than to limit the prerogatives of the crov;n. The
*"rw~ . rcfcntment which they had conceived on account of Adrian's

promotion to the regency, abated considerably upon the Emreror's
. raising the conflable and admiral to joint povr witim in that
office ; and as their p de and dignity wercecfs &ir y ftflring
* '' thle prince to polfs e'xtenfivc prcrogative, than by admitting

thc hiigl prcirfions of the people, they dictincd to give thcir
fovcrcign taffiancc wlid he had dclwndcd of thllm, and
began to a cmblc teir vafllilltbr that purrpofe.

The dpuities T ill Junta, mcanwhilc, expeced. with impatience thoEin-
ofi li Junta
darcet pt- peror's anfvwr to their rcmontlrance, which they had appointed

cm intl;ice. lOlne
4v . 4 *. 1J

'c » »

some of Meir number to present. The members entrusted with BooK III.
this commission set out immediaty for Germany, but having
receid at different places certain'lntelligence from court, that
they could not venture to appear there witlout endangering
their lives, they ftopt flort in their journyr, and acquainted I
the Junta of the information which had been given them'. This
excited such violent pafions as anfportcd the whole party
beyond all bounds of prudence, or of moderation. That a *
Caflilian King should deny his fubjesaccefs into his presence,
or refuse to liften to their humble petitions, was rcprefented as
an act of tyranny so unprecedented and intolerable, that nothing
now remained but with arms in their hands to drive away that
ravenous band of foreigners which encompassed the throne, who
after having devoured the wealth of the kingdom, found itne-
ceffary to prevent the cries of an injured people from reaching
the ears of their sovereign. Many infihied warmly on approving
a motion which had formerly been made, for depriving Charles,
during the life of his mother, of the rgal titles and authority Vio'ent pro.
which had been too rashly conferre4 upon him from a false sup- tPhe Juta of
position of her total inability for government. Some proposed to
provide a proper person to afiift her in the administration of pub-
lick affairs, by marrying the Queen to the Prince of Calabria,
the heir of the Aragoncfe Kings of Naples, who had been
detained i prifoii since the time that Ferdinand had difpoffcffed
his ancestors of their crown. All agreed that, as the hopes of
obtaining redrcfs and fccurity merely by lrefenting their requests
to their fovcrcig?,, had kept thcm too long in a slate of ination,
and prevented them from taking advantage ofthe unanimity
with which the nation declared in their favour, it was now
ncccffary to collct their wlole force, and to cxert thcmfelves

I Sandov. 143.
VOL. II. Z with

*<,*

*' sl'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

.

BOOK III. with vigour, in opposing this fatal combination of the ng and

7-

V '-' nqbles against their libertiea.t
Take the THEY soon toak the field with twenty thousand men. Violent

disputes arose conckning the command of this army. Padilla, the
darlitg of the people and fildiers, was the only person whom
t they thought worthy of this honour. But Don Pedro de Giron,

the eldet son of the Copde de Tiruena, a young nobleman of
the firfl order, having lately joined the commons out of pri-
vate resentment against the Emperor, the refpe& due to his
birth, together with a secret desire of disappointing Padilla, of
whose popularity many of the Junta had become jealous, pro-
cur.l him the office of general; though he oon gave them a
fatal phof that he possessed neither the experience, the abilities,
nor the steadiness which that important station require&-

The reents TIIE regents, mearwhile, appointed Riofeco as the.lace of
ad nobles rendezvous for their troops, which, though far inferior to those

of the commons in number, excelled them greatly in di'cipline
and in valour. They had drawn a confiderablc body of regular
and veteran infantry out of Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed
the chief flrength of their aminy, confined moflly of gentlemen
accufloined to the military life, and animated with the martial
spirit peculiar to their order in that age. The insanity of the
Junta was formcd cntrely of citizens and mechanics, little
.niacqluainted with the uife of arms. The finl body of cavalry
they had been *le to raifr, was composed of persons of ignolle
birth, and perfet firangcrs to the service into which they entered.
The cliaradrcof the gcnerals differed no lcfs than that of their

Pm 1. nart. Ep. 688.

1* troops.

*

troops. The royalills were commanded by the CondC de Haro, BooK III.
the conRfable's eldest son, an officer of great experience, and 'f ~
di*hfguifhed abilities. * '
*

GI RON marched with his army dircly Riofeco, and cizing rrudence

es h thatte royals toldand il success

the villages and pases around it, hopes

that the royalits Would cf he general

be obliged eithe tofurrender for want of provisions, or to fiM oth Ju .
with difadvadage before all their troops were aifembled l
he had not the abilities, nor his trolps the patience andifci-
pline ne&Wary for the execution of fu3lha scheme. The Conde
de Haro found little difficulty in conducting a considerable rein-
forcement through all his posts into the town; and Giron
despairing of being able to reAuce it, advanced fuddenl4o~

deipairinj of being able

d

Villa-panda, a place belonging to the Contable, in wih the
enemy hd their chief magazine of provisions. By this ill-
judged motion, he left Tordefillas open to the royaWls, whom
the Co' de Haro led thither in the ight, with thelutmoft December .
secrecy and dispatch; and attacking the town, in which-Giron
had left no other garrison than a regiment of prictis railed by .
the biihop of Zamora, he, by break of day forced his way into
it after a defpcrate refiiance, became mafler of the Queen's per-
son, took prisoners many members of the Junta, and recovered
the greatfcal, with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the reputation and autho-

rity which they derived from teeming to aa by the Queen's con-
maitls; filch of the nobles as had hitherto been vwvering or un-
determined in their choice, now joined the regents with all their "
forces; and al univeril conlternation fcized the partizans of
the commons, aisras mucl iMcreafed by the suspicions they
,began to entertai of Giron, w4p. they loudly accuscd of lav-

4 * Z # 'ing. 4
f* r;

4,.
kw · ,, IR»

<*(' w

BooKIIL. ing betrayed Tordefillas to thenemy; and though that charge
vi seems tloiave been dftitute of foundation, she success of the

royalifis being owing to Giron's ill-condut rather tha,.tohis k
a* treaclry, helfo entirelyloft credit with his party, that h1e t

'* resigned his commiffl , and retired to one of his castles".

. ' "'

.

Thiefnta SUCH members of the Junta as had ecaed the enemy'.(4'
fyl. to their at Tordefillas, fled to VaIladolid;d and cas would have 4

iya0

m. as ZIC~

o'. h4'
·%. ~ required long time to fiupy the places of.thofe who were pri-

fonerS, by a new eledoit they made choice among demfelves
of a small number ofbperfons twrhom they committed the
ftpreme dire&ion of affnirs. Their armyfiich grew stronger
evE day by the arrival of trbps from differeft parts of the
kig~in, maried likevife to Valladolid; and Padilla being
appointed commander in chief, the spirits of the soldiery revived,
and'ithe wholc party forgetting the late misfortune, cntigued
to cxprefs the fame ardent zeal for the liberties of theircountry,
and the fame implacable animosity against their oppressors.

Thcir expe. WHAT they flood most in need of, was money to pay their
ai1finTnoey. troops. A great part of the current coin had been carried out

of the kingda by the Flemings; the statcd taxes levied in times
,0, of peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every kind being inter-

rupted by the war, the fum which they yielded decreased daily;
and the Junta were afraid of disgusting the people by burdcn-
r 1 ~ t ing them with new inpofitions, to which, in that age, they were

''' little accuftomned. But from this difficulty they were cxtibatcl
* by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's witcz, a won;an of noble lbirth,

of great abilities, of boundlcfs ambition, and ailatcd with the
molt ardent zeal in support oftlhe cause od the Jnta. She, wth
, "M ifcellancous Trails by Dr. Mich. Gcddcs vol i. 2.78.

"U'

, ¥ , 4, a bold-
~~~~~4,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ .~

4,,#

a boldness superior to those fupeiftitious fears which ften influ- BOOK III
ence hersex, propl d to seize all the rich|ad magnificlt orna- '
ments in the cathedral of Toledo; bt left that aion by its
appearance of impiety, might offend the people, she and her ,1
retinue marched to t church in solemn preoceffion, in mourning
habits, with tears in their eyes, and beating their breasts, and I,
*# falling on their knis, implored the pardon of the faints whose *

shrines he was about foviolate. By this artifice, which fcrened
her from the impit~ion of facrileqend persuaded the people
that necffity and zeal for a good uaufe had constrained her,
though with relance, to !ture up1tis acion, she procured
a considerable sI ofioponey for the Junta . 'fie regents o .
less at a lofs'ow to maintain their:trQOps, the revenues ofte '
crown having either been dissipated by? the S1|ings, 4
seized by the commons, were obliged to take the Queen's jewels,
an-the plate belonging to the nobility, ariapply them. to that
purpose; and when these failed, they obtained a fiall fum by
tay of loan from the King ofPortugal .

TH nobility discovered great unwillingness to proceed to cxtre- F tim[l

mitics with the Junta. They were animated with no less hatred vHIl"ie"
than the commons against the FIlemigs ; they aplroved much of nobility'
fevcral articles in the rcmonflraice; they thought the junCidrc * *
favourable, not only for rcelrIg past g -vanccs, but for eln-
Icring the confhttit n imore i)crfcst ancld fc c by new rcgulationsL
tlicy wcrc afraid that while tlhe iwo ordcrs of wlich the lcgiflature *
was compofced, waltcd eachl ot hcr' ; nrengtli l)y mutual lioftililics,
the crown w9uld rile to powcr on the rU i or wea:kncfs f both, 9
and cncroachtio less on the in(tcpcnelcncc of the nolcs, than oil

* and.Lv. 8. Diet. . d Bayle, Art. Padilla. P P. Md t. 71 8.

* tie
4 *

174 TE4 REIGN OF;[THE

BOOK III, the of the commons. To this fpofition were owing

k
v- the frint overtunof peace which the itents made to the

Juhta,nd the cogiaual negociations they carried on during the

*4 .,4 progrfs of their military operations. Nor were the terms which *
9, they offered urneafonable; fr on conditicqthat the Junta would

, Hs pass from a few articles most subversive of the royal authority, or

^,, inconfifient wi* therights of the nobility, they engaged to pro-.
, ~ cure the Emperor's consent to their othqtpimands, which, if lit,

through the influence of* ounfellor ,/fhiaid refute, several of
rO ~ the nobles promised to jg with them inrder to extort it'.

0* Such divifions,.hovwexerevailtl mong the members of thi
F 40 JL, as preietied their deliberating alI Hr judging wi

] ,pudence. Seal of the tics whichiad enteredlto the dbe-
· R.r y, werillced vh that mean jealout and distrust of
,.4 each iher, wkic1 rivalfhip in commerce or in grandeur is apt

to inspire; the conble, by his influence and prongifes,;ad
prevailcd on the inhabitants of Burgos to abandon the Junta,
and other noblemen had fhaker^he hdelity of obme of the leffr
cities; no person had arisen among the commons of such superior
: tI1abilities or elevation of mind, as to acquire the direS&n of their

* affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man of popular qfities,

bu )difiruflcd for that reason by thofc of highest rank who
Op adhered to thJunta; tlepndut of Giron led the people to

vicwwith flifpicion every person of noble birth who joined
thlr party; so thahe ftrqglgt marks of irresolution, mutual

'
liftruft, and mediocrity of genius, appeared in all their proceed-
ings at this time. After many consultations hcld ,conccrning
the .erms propqdtl by the regcnts, they filtered themselves to
* I' lbe so carried away, y refenttrnt againfl the nolbil!, that rejed-

in,g all thoughts of acaommodation, they tlrcatened to firip

P. Mart. Ep. 695, 713. Gcdles' Trals, i. 261.
* Jt them

them of the crown-lands, whicl they O theit anc!t ad BooI IIL
utured, and to e-annex them to the al dimainid on
this preposterous scheme, which would at onqlhave annila
all the liberties for which they had been firugglingby rendering l . *
* the Kings of Castile bfolute and independent £ their people, *

they were so intent that they exclaimed with less vehemence
against the exadions of the foreign ministers, *n againfl the
imnmenfe power andO~alth of the nokles, and seemed to hope
that they might mal p*e with ~ es, by offering to eirich
him with their fpoilW , 4

HIJE fucQefs fcltPailla had met with in eral fmalI . Etated with

.A r

, ] ," thor success
clnters, a in redb S me inconsiderable owns, helped to i,^ m:s ccilc

nters,.~~ adird"trencounte.

picipitaWe dem into tls meafilre, filling themYSith such co- ncnt3
fidence in the valout-p0Fe*ir troops, that they hoBi for an easy
victory or the royalifls. Padilla, that his army might not
remain tidive, while uhflied with good fortune, laid siege
to Torrelobaton, a place of greater strength and ffiportance th_ *5
any he had hitherto attacked, and which was defended by a :
sufficient garrison; and thotugh the besiegcd made a desperate ,
rclitlance, and the admiral attempted to reclve thool M.irch 3,
the town by florin and gave it up to be plundcred by his foldwls.
If lie had marclcd inilantly with is vicrorious army ta Tlrde- 'C-
fillas the head quarters of the oyalills, h1 could fcarcelve
Iailcd of making an effectual inpreflion on thcir tloops, fur-.
pri'zed at thb IrfklCe; of his operations, and far from e)cinr of
fufilcilnt flnrllh to give hillml battle. IPut the klenc/ed r^T ce
inlll)-I(lence of*cy JUllta preveltedlsi takillgtinse. Incapl- (* 4
al)!c alike of carrying on war, or of mlakiig pe.c, tlhey lifcncdl
again to ovcrturcs of accommodation, and even aglreed to a hbort*
llifj)cniion of arms. This iniociatioftcrm iinatcd in nollting;

.. » s el,t 2at o
.a~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ M·l

-Cr "p

BOOK III. t pIe it was carrying on many of Padilla's soldiers, unac-

, --- qua i with the fraints of discipline, went off with thebooty

tey ad got atrorrelobaton; and others, wearied out by the
'li unusual length of the campaign, deserted r. Theconflable too had t

* leisure to aflmble his forces at Burgos, and to prepare every I
l* thing for marching, and as soon as the truce expired, he cffeded

a juncion -wli the Conde de Haro, in spite of all Padilla's efforts
to prevent it. They advanced immediately-wards Torrelobaton,
and Padilla finding the nm ber of hisstioopt so diminished that he
durfAiot risk eabattle, attempted to Xjftreato Toro, which if he
could have acoTplifhede invasion of Navarre at that jundure
bythe Frenclhnd the necessity whichthe regents mufi have ln
lnder of detacRTng men to that kingonynmight have saved hin
from danger. But Haro, sensible how fatal the confceeces wold

l nob!rs be of fuTcrg him to efcapc, march wtitb such rapidity at the
atracc the head of his cavalry, that he came up with him near Villalar, and

Atlt, without waiting for his infantry, advanced to the attack. Padilla's

2ril23,
p s3 army, fatiguedand diflleartened by their precipitant retreat, which

Aey could not diflinguifh from a flight, lhappcned at that time
to be passing over a ploughed field, on which fitch a violent rain
had fallen, that the f!diers finkalmoft to the knees at every flep,
ant remained cxpofcd to the fire of ftmic field pieces which the
royalifls had brought along witll tlicm. All thclie circumflances
so iconccrted and intimidated raw foldicrs, that witlhut facing
the enemy, or naking any refiflalncc, they fled in the titmoft
anddfe it. conflilion. Padilla excitcd himfllf witlh xtraord(inary coutrage

and alivity*t order to rally tlhem, though in var ; star rcn-
* deng them denaf both t his tlhreats and itreaties: Upon

which, finlding lattcrs irrlcricvlale, and rcfolving not to fur-
vive the (lilbracc of that day, and the ruin of his party, 1c

Sandov. 336.

* « , A ruflncd

,rufled into the thickest of the eimy; ft b'g wnd BooK IIL.
'1ifnmuntedhe was taken prisoner. His *cipal offi [hiared -~.
the fame fate; the common soldiers werelled t deptrt
. unhurt, the nobles being 'too generous to ktll men whtthrew m
' down their arms . .

TH& refentment^his'enemies did n6t fuffe adilla to jhger

along , expeatio f it houldefal. hirm ,'. xt day he
was colaemned to seis head, tough wiiut an^yiar
triTl, theiotoriety 4;the crime 4pg fpid sufficient to
1erfede tl4brmalir d a legal process. Hvas led ill tly
-execution, toget-rt i Don John Bravo, and Don Francis Padilla, their

W~'~~^ ' gheral, put

Maldonllatthe forme&gommander of the Segoaians, and the to death.
:atter of e troops TSmannca. Padilla viewethe approah
of death ith calm but daunted fortitude; and when Bravo,
-his fellow-fufferer, expressed some indignationt hearing !hi- ·
self pfoclaimed a traitor, he checked him, by observing, "( 'lt
yesterday was the time to have displayed the fpipit of gentlemen,
this day to die with the meekness of Chr ians." Being per-
mitted to write to his wife and*to the community of Tlto,
the place of his nativity, he addresscd tle former withsa [anly
and virtuous tendernes', and the latter with the exultatioi atu-
ral to onowho bdlcred himself % a martyr for the liberties of 4 s'

S:dov. 34,c. P. Mart. Ep. 72. Miniina. Contin p. 26. Iomc *

de la vida y Ichgs

del IEnpcr. Carlos .pcr

,). J . Anton. do Vcra y
Zuniga, 4to. Madr. 1627. p. 19.

Vol. 1. a Ilis

»»a~ ^~c ~ r*~ w

Boo KIII. his country . After this, he submitted quietly to his fate. Mofl

of the Spanith historians, accustomcd to ideas of government,

and

U The firain of these letters is so eloquent and high fprited'that I have tranf-
L.t:J them for the entertainment of my readers.

Te Letter of Don John Padil.a to his ifse.

SS. !' OR A,
" IF your grief did not afflic me more than my own death, I hould deem

rnyfelf peri'ccly happy. For the end of life being certain to all men, the Al-
tr.ighty confrs a ma'k of diftinguilhing favour upon that person, for whom he
appoints a cah such as mine, which though lamented by many, is nevertheless
accctable unto him. It would require more time than I now have to w ite any
thing that could afford you consolation. That my enemies will not grant me,
nor do 1 wifl to delay the reception of that crown which I hope to enjoy. You may
bewail our own loss, but not my death, which, being so honourable, ought not
to be lamented by any. My foul, for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to
you. You will receive it, as the thing in this world wl:ich you valued most. I
do not write to my father Pero Lopez, because I dare not, for though I have
shewn myself to be his son in daring to lose my life, I have not been the heir of
his good fortune. I will not attempt to fay any thing more, that I may not
tic the cxecutioner who waits for me, and that I may not excite a suspicion, that
in order to prolong my life, I lengthen out my lcttcr. My fcrvant Sofia, an eye
witness, and to whom I have communicated my most fccict thoughts, will in-
form you of what I cilnot now write ; and thus I reft, cxpcciing the infirumcnt
of your grief, and of my dcliverance."

Ilis Letter to tike City of T7oledo.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the whole world, free from

the time of the inihty Goths; to thee, who by flcdding the blood of
il.rngers, as wel) as thy own blood, haft recovered liberty for thyself, and
thy neighbouring cities, Thy legitimate son Juan de Padilla gives informa-
tion, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient victorics are to be rcfrcficd.
If fate hatli not permitted my ailiols to be placcd amon your fucccf'full and
celebrated exploits, the fault hath ben in my ill fortune not in my good will.
''his I ruclt of thee as of a mother, to accept, ince God hath givell n e

Iothiniir

and of regal power very different from those upon which he BooKIII.
aded, have been so eager to teflify their disapprobation of the
cause in which he was engaged, that they have neglected, or
have been afraid to do justice to his virtues; and by blackening
his memory, have endcavoured to deprive him of that pity,
which is seldom denied to illufirious sufferers.

THE viEtory at Villalar proved as decisive as it was compleat. PRin of the

Valladolid, the most zealous of all the associatcd citics, openepd lt't'
its gates immediately to the conquerors, and being treated with
great clemency by the Regents, Medina dcl Campo, Segovia,
and many other cities followed its example. This sudden diffo-
lution of a confederacy, formed not upon flight difgufls, or
upon trifling motives, into which the whole body of the
people had entered, and which had been allowed time to acquire
fomc degree of order and confilence by eflablifhing a regular
plan of government, is the firongcft proof of the inability of
its leaders, or of some fccrct discord reigning among the
members. Though part of the army by which they had been
subdued, was obliged, a few days after the battle, to marcl
towards Navarre, in order to check the progrcfs of the Frencl
in that kingdom, nothing could prevail on thle ticjcrcd com-

nothing more to lnre for thy f.kc, than that which I a now to rclinqtnih. I
amn more follicitnOi: ;i'(;ilt thly or(od opii)i than abo;t my) o.n ilc. J he fl i't-
ingi ; of fortunc whih never it.i ; flill, ;ir ma.i'. liut t(r; [I

fii with iolii:; ,:

coifilation, that I, tli c left of tlhy clildrcl, f if'.r d,;' : t;)r i ; .i

the ; ad tlitit

thou has liurfc.l ;it thly b ' m.tU.I. 1 Ih ;is i.iy lukc veii <'.l]u . s, Ir my w )I)»sS.
1IM.111 tonll tis will rclalc tl :lv r;n:r , 1'

mi' *1'.ilh,

(,f V.'} i: h 1 ti ll flill i. or.lt,

tlihon h I know it to lb, ni lr. A ',' 1'nl ill tc(liy vh.t '.l'; ll, y d(li . V1y
foul I rcconimcnd to thce: :; to thle pIr:ir iicl); of C'hii liiu y. ()f mv h'ly 1
f.y notliing, for it is iin t tmili. I c.,n wiitc iiotltin' II(I' on, obr at this vrry
moment, I feel the knife at my throat with : .loater drl(. ofl '.v th.it
:;l)rchni i of my ow p; ii.'' S mlov. llii. v . ii. p. 78.

A a; 2 1111os

BOOK III. mons of Castile to take arms again, and toembrace such a favour

' -'"- able opportunity of acquiring those rights and privilegesfor which

P (hila's wifr they had appeared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone, ani-
--dzfends ' o-

Ice', with tnated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who, instead of
great s~Irit.
rat fpirir. bewailing her husband with a womanish sorrow, prepared to

revenge his death, and to prosecute that cause in defence of
which he had suffered, mufl be excepted. Refpea for her sex,
or admiration of her courage and abilities, as well as sympathy
with her misfortunes, and veneration for the memory of her
husband, fccured her the fame ascendant over the people which
he had possessed. The prudence and vigour with which he
acted justified the confidence they placed in her. She wrote to
the French general in Navarre, encouraging him to invade
CafRile by the offer of powerful assistance. She endeavoured
by her letters and emifaries to revive the spirit and hopes of
other cities. She raised soldiers, and exaded a great fum from
the clergy belonging to the cathedral to defray the expence of
keeping them on foot . She employed every artifice that could
interest or inflame the populace. For this purpose he ordered
crucifixes to be used by her troops instead of colours, as if they
had been at war with infidels, and enemies of religion; he
marched through the fireets of Toledo with her son, a young
child, clad in decp mourning, scated on a mule, having a fandard
carried before him representing the manner of his father's execu-
tion . By all these means she kept the minds of the people in
fuich perpetual agitation as prevented their paffionsfrom subsiding,
an(l rendercd them insensible of the dangers to which they
were cxpolcd by (landing alone in opposition to the royal
authority. While the army was employed in Navarre, the
Regents were unable to attempt the reduion of Toledo by

P. M.Irt. ep. 727. Y Sdov. 375.

:: force;

force; and all their endeavours either to diminish Donna BOOK TIL
Maria's credit with the people, or to gain her by large promises --
and the solicitations of her brother the Marquis de Mondeiar,
proved ineffetual.' Upon the expulsion of the French out of
Navarre, part of the army returned into CafRile, and invested
Toledo. Even this made no imprefion on the intrepid and
obstinate courage of Donna Maria. She defended the town
with vigour, her troops beat the Royalifis in several allies, and
no progress was made towards reducing the place, till the
clergy, whom she had highly offended by invading their pro-
perty, having received information of the death of William de
Croy archbiffop of Toledo, whose pofeffion of that fee was
their chief grievance, and that the Emperor had named a
Castilian to succeed him, began to turn againfi her. They
persuaded the people that he had acquired such influence over
them by the force of enchantments, that she was affifled by
a familiar demon which attended her in the form of a Negro-
maid, and that by its suggestions she regulated every part of
her condut . The credulous multitude, whom their impa-
tience of a long blockade, and despair of obtaining succours
either from the cities formerly in confederacy with them, or
from the French, rendered desirous of peace, took arms against
her, and driving her out of the city surrendercd it to the Oober 26.
Royalists. She retired to the citadel, which he defended with
amazing fortitude four months longer; and when reduced to
the last extremities, she made her cfcape in difguifc, and fled to Febilo.i5S2.
Portugal, where flic had many relations a.
* P. Mart. Ep. 727.

Saadov. 375. P. Mart. Up. 754. Fcrrcr. viii. 5'3.

UrON

13B K III. UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered. Tranquillity Vwa

*1-'j. rc-efiabliilcd in Caftiie; and this bold attempt of the commons,

F,.t.'l ({' C

cf t'i ci:.i lil:' all unsuccessful infurreaions, contributed to confirm and
v.,~r.

c.xtcnd the power of the crown, which it was intended to mo-
xlerate and abridge. The Cortes fill continued to make a part
of the Castilian conflitution, and were summoned to meet when-
ever the King flood in need of money; but instead of adhering
ton air ancient and cautious form of examining and redrcfling
.pil!ic grievanccs, before they proceeded to grant any supply,
tli more courtly cuflom of voting a donative in the first place
was i;itroduced, and the Sovereign having obtained all he
wanted, never allowed thcm to enter into any scrutiny, or to
attempt any refornation injurious to his authority. The privi-
leges which the cities had enjoyed were gradually circumscribed
or aboliflcld; their commerce began from this period to decline;
and beco:ing lces wealthy and less populous, they loft that
power ad influence which they had acquired in the Cortes.
The progRi-3 W\llILE Caflile was exposcd to the calamities of civil war,

, i'on, i^r- the kingdom of Valencia was torn by intestine commotions still
/*iisLi.L. mrore violent. Tile afibciation which had been formed in the

city of Valencia in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty, and wlich was llfinguifhled by the name of the Ger-
ilanada, continued to fubiffi after the Emperor's departure from
Spain; and tie meminbers of it, upon pretext of defending the
:,)allls agalnil tle d(lccnts of tlhe Cortairs of Barlbary, and
tnder finTllioi of that pcermifllii, which Charles had rashly
grai'nted tc, rctlled to lay ldown tllir arms. lut ;as tlhe
;ricvan;elts, wi icl te Valenciatns ailledl at rcif'lfiig, pre-
ieded from tlhe arrogan aceand exalions of the nobility, rather

than

than from any unwarrantable exercise of the royal prerogative, BRooK' IIr.
their resentment turned chiefly against the former. As soon '~ --
as they were allowed the use of arms, and became conscious
of their own flrength, they grew impatient to take vengeance
of their oppressors. They drove the nobles out of most of the
cities, plundered their houses, wafted their lands, and assaulted
their castles. They then proceeded to elec thirteen persons,
cne from each company of tradesmen establishcd in Valencia,
and committed the administration of government to them, under
pretext that they would reform the laws, establish one uni-
form mode of dispensing justice without partiality, or regard to
the difiindion of ranks, and thus restore men to Ibme degree
of their original equality.

TH E nobles were obliged to take arms in feli-defene. lIo-

flilities began, and were carried on with all the rancour, with
which resentment at oppreflion inspired the one party, and the
idea of insulted dignity animated the other. As no pcrfbn of
honourable birth, or of liberal education joined the Ccrmanada,
the councils as well as troops of the confederacy were condlucdtl
by low mechanics, who acquired the confidence of an enraged
niultittlde chiefly by the fierccncfs of their zeal, and the extra-
vagance of their proceedings. Amnong ficlh men, the laws iltro-
duced in civilized nations, in order to rellrail or moderate the
violcnce of war, wcrc unknown or dcfpilel; and they colm-
mitted the wildefi as of cruelty and outrage.

'I'TE Emperor occupied with flpprefliig the iiifurrcctir )n in

Caflile, which Imore iinmediately threatened the Hibl)verli of
his power and prerogative, was unable to give mIuch attentio to

tlhe
7

BOOK III. the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of that kingdom

v-- to fight their own battles. His viceroy, the Conde de Melito,

had the supreme command of the forces which the nobles raised
among their vafrals. The Germanada carried on the war during
the years one thousand five hundred and twenty and twenty-one,
with a more persevering courage, than could have been expected
from a body so tumultuary, under the conduct of such leaders.
They defeated the nobility in several actions, which, though not
considerable, were extremely sharp. They repulsed them in
their attempts to reduce different towns. But the nobles, by
their superior skill in war, and at the head of troops more accuf-
tomed to service, gained the advantage in most of the rencoun-
ters. At length, they were joined by a body of Castilian cavalry,
which the regents dispatched towards Valencia, oon after
their victory over Padilla at Villalar, and by their assistance
they acquired such superiority, that they entirely broke and
ruined the Germanada. The leaders of the party were put to
death, almost without any formality of legal trial, and suffered
such cruel punishments, as the sense of recent injuries prompted
tile nobles to inflict. The government of Valencia was
rc-cftablifhcd in its ancient form .

tppearnncs I N Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame spirit of difaffetion
of difafei: Lon.
in Aragoi. and mutiny, which reigned in the other kingdoms of Spain,

began to appear; but by the prudent conduct of the viceroy,
Don John de Lanuza, they were so far compnfed; as to prevent
their breaking out into any open insurrection. But in the island

b Argcnlola Anales dc Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. 118. Sayas Anaks de Aragon,

cap. 5. 12. &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib, 33. & 3. palim. Fcrcr. Ilifi. d'Eflpagiic.
viii. 542- 564. &c.

of'

of Majorca, which was annexed to the crown of Aragon, the BOOK II.
fame causes that had excited the commotions in Valencia, pro- r

Formidatie

duced effecs no less violent. The people, impatient of the inrreaion in
hardships which they endured under the rigid jurifdi&ion of the Majorca.
nobility, took arms in a tumultuary manner; deposed their March 19,
viceroy; drove him out of the island; and massacred every gen-
tleman who was so unfortunate as to fall into their hands. The
obstinacy with which the people of Majorca persised in their
rebellion, was equal to the rage with which they began it. It
required no inconsiderable effort to reduce them to obedience;
and tranquillity was re-established in every part of Spain before
they could be brought to submit to their sovereign d.

WHILE the spirit of difaffedion was so general among the Causes which
Spaniards, and so many causes concurred in precipitating them preented the

union of the

into such violent measures, in order to obtain the redress of their tnalecontents
grievances, it may appear trange, that the malecontents in the
different kingdoms should have carried on their operations with-
out any mutual concert, or even any intercourse with each other.
By uniting their councils and arms, they might have acted both
with greater force, and with more effect. The appearance of a
national confederacy would have rendered it no less refpceable
among the people, than formidable to the crown; and the Empe-
ror, unable to refilt such a combination, mufl have complied with
any terms which the members of it thought fit to prefcribc.
Many thingstowever, prevented tile Spaniards from forming
theinfelves into one body, and purfiuing conmmon incafurcs. The

i' Argenfula Analcs de Aragon, c. 113. Fcrrcr. Ilrif. x\ii. 542.. Sayas Analcs
dc Aragon, cap. 7 Il, 14, 76, 8. Fcrreras lilt. d'fl.anllc, viii. 579, c. 69.

Vo.. 1. II.B b cop)le

Boo K III. people of the different kingdoms in Spain, though they were

' -' become the subjects of the fame sovereign, retained, in full force,

their national antipathy to each other. The remembrance of
their ancient rivalfliip and hostilities was still recnt, and the
sense of reciprocal injuries so intire, as to be incompatible with
their ating with confidence and concert. Each nation chose
rather to depend on its own efforts, and to maintain the struggle
alone, than to implore the aid of neighbours, whom they dif-
trustcd and hated. At the fame time, the forms of government
in the several kingdoms of Spain were so different, and the
grievances of which they complained, as well as the alterations
and amendments which they attempted to introduce, so various,
that it was not cafy to bring them to unite in any common
plan. To this disunion Charles was indebted for the preferya-
tion of his Spanifi crowns; and while each of the kingdoms
follocwed separate meaiures, all of them were obliged at last to
conform to the will of their fovcreign.

ThleF:mpc- TIE arrival of the Emperor in Spain fillcd his fubjecs who
ror'a piluicnt
an gnelos lhad been in arms agaimnl him with deep apprchenfions; from

wbc1 tie n

which lie soon delivered tm by an at of clemency, no
ma!ccoiitci.t-. les prudent than glcrous-. After a rebellion so general,

fcairce tvwenty )peClfns, :.lii!,i ri I nlly criminals obnoxious to
the law, l;tad bcc1n pl)illlicd( ci)tally in C(afile. Tliougli frongly
iflicitcd by is couctil, lCharles recfl'lcd to llcd any more blood
by the alsii of thlie xccutioitc; and tbllllcliAhd gcit ncral par-

0). 28. dlon, ex :tiltiu t)o ll crimes cinlittc e lince t
ie commencIIClemint

of tlim inlirrcdlil firon which only fo-rfcwre wCIre xcepted.
'.veln till; lie f(eiCns to li;ive ni: (l, ratler \witl al il iltentilo( t
intimidate uicrs, tian itroin ;ali iiclinaitioi to fc;i/,e thellc; for
\lvhlc an oicious courtier oli'red to inlfoi) lilll xvrc one of

tlhe

the most considerable among them was concealed, he avoided it BOOK III.
by a good-natured pleasantry; " Go," fays he, " I have now no
reason to be afraid of that man, but he has ome cause to keep at
a difance from me, and you would be better employed il telling
him that I am here, than in acquainting me with the place of his
retreat'." By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as by
his care to avoid every thing which had disgusted the Castilians
during his former residence among them; by his address in
assuming their manners, in speaking their language, and in com-
plying with all their humours and customs, he acquired an
ascendant over them which scarce any of their native monarchs
had ever attained, and brought them to support him in all his
entcrprizes with a zeal and valour to which he owed much of
his success and grandeur .

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian set out Adrian sets

for Italy to take possession of his new dignity. But though the ou for Rme,
Roman people longed extremely for his arrival, they could not, reception
on his first appearance, conceal their furprize and disappointment.
After being accutlomed to the princely magnificence of Julius,
and the elegant iplendour of Leo, they bcleeld with contempt an
old man of an humble deportment, of aufcere manners, an
cnemy to pomp, dcflitute of talte in the arts, and unadorned
with any of the external accompliflhmcnts which the vlgar
cxpcQ in those raised to eminent ftatiolns . Nor did his politi-
cal views and maxims seem lcfs range and aonifluing to the
pontifical minilecrs. I-Ic acknowledged and bewailed the cor-

e Sndov. 377,&c. Vida dcl. Empcr. Carlos por Don Juan Anton.de Vcra y
Zuniga. p. 30. ' UIloa Vita de Cailo V. p. 85.

c Gui. . 1.5. 238. Jovii Vita Adrimni, 117. BSclkltr. Epitr. des Princ. 4.

13 b ruptions

BOOK III. ruptions which abounded in the church, as well as in the court

of Romc, and prepared to reform both; he discovered no inten-
tion of aggrandizing his family; he even scrupled at retaining
such territories as some of his predecessors had acquired by
violence or fraud, rather than by any legal title, ad for that
reason he invetfed Francesco Maria de Rovere anew n the
dutchy of Urbino, of which Leo had stripped him, and furren-
dered to the duke of Ferrara several places wrested from him by
the church . To men little habituated to fee princes regulate their
conduCt by the maxims of morality and the principles of juflice,
these ations of the new Pope appeared' inconteftible proofs of
his weaknef3 and inexperience; and Adrian, who was a perfect
firanger to the complex and intricate system of Italian politics,
and who could place no confidence in persons whofl subtilty and
refinements in business suited so ill with his natural simplicity
and candour, being often embarrassed and'irrefolute in his deli-
berations, the opinion of his incapacity daily increased, until both
his person and government became objeEts of ridicule among his.
fubjds '..

?I endeta- ADRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor, endeavoured to
Yours to re-
Ire peace in aflfme the impartiality which. became the common father of
LUrope. Christendom, and laboured to reconcile the contending princes,

that they might unite in a league against Solyman, whose con-
quest of Rhodes rendered him more formidable than ever to
Europe". But this was an undertaking- far beyond his abilities.
To examine fuich a variety of pretensions, to adjust such a num-
ber of interfering interefis, to extinguish the passions which
ambition, emulation, and mutual injuries had kindled, to bring

b Guic. lib. 15. 240. Jov. Vita Adr. I18. P. Mart. Ep. 774.
Rufcelli Lcttere de Princ. vol. i. 87, 96, Il0. k Bellefor. Epitr. p. 8b.

so

fl many hostile powers to pursue the fame scheme with unani- BOOK III.
mity and vigour, required not only uprightness of intentions, -
but a great superiority both of understanding and address.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of peace than the

Pope. The Imperial army under Colonna was frill kept on
foot, but as the Emperor's revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in
the Low-Countries, were either exhausted, or applied to some.
other purpose, it depended entirely for pay and subsistence on the
Italians. A great part of it was quartered in the ecclesiastical'
slate, and monthly contributions were levied upon the Floren-
tines, the Milanese, the Genoese, and Lucchefe, by the viceroy
of Naples; and though: all exclaimed against such oppression, and'
were impatient to..be delivered from it, the dread of worse con-
sequences from the rage of the army, or the resentment of the
Emperor, obliged them to.fubmit'..

So much regard, however, was paid to the Pope's exhortations, r 53.

A new lague,

and to a bull which he issued requiring all Christian princes. to agina tahe
conlent to a truce for three years, that the Imperial,.the French, French King,
and English. ambassadors at Rome were empowered to treat of
that matter; but while they wafted their time in fruitless nego-
ciations, their masters continued their preparations for war. The
Venetians, who had hitherto adhered. with great firmness to
their alliance with Francis, being now convinced that his affairs in
Italy were in a desperate situation, entered into aleague against him
with the Emperor; to. which Adrian, at the infligationof his coun- June 28,
tryman and friend Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, who
persuaded him that the only obflacles to peace arose from the

Guic. 1. 15. 238.

ambition

BooK III. ambition of the French King, soon after acceded. The other

Italian flates followed their example; and Francis was left, with-
out a single ally, to refif the efforts of so many enemies whose
armies threatened, and whose territories encompafled, his domi-
ni(ns on every fide .

Frnncis' vi. ThlE dread of this powerful confcderacy, it was thought,
orous nica-
fures in orpo- would liave obliged Francis to keep wholly on the defensive, or

at Iciaf have prevented his entertaining any thoughts of march-
in,, into Italy. But it was the charadcer of that prince, too apt
to b)cnce remiss, and even negligent on ordinary occaions, to
rcu'zc rt the approach of danger, and not only to encounter it
with iirit and intrepidity, qualities which never forsook him,
but to provide againif it with diligence and industry. Before his
enemies were ready to execute any of their schemes, Francis had
afimlnbled a numerous army. His authority over his own sub-
jcchs was far greater than that which Charles or Henry poleffied
over theirs. They depended on their parliaments for money,
which was tlfually granted them in finall futms, very flo-ly, and
wvith muchl rclutancc. The taxes he could impose were more
confidcrable, and levied with greater ditfatch ; so that on this,
as wcll as on other occasions, his army was in the field while
they were devising ways and means for raising theirs. Senfille
of this advantage, Francis liopcd to dicfoncert all the Emperor's
feltcllcs by marching in pcrfin into the Milhief ; and tlis b1ol
mcalurlc, tlhe more ifrmidabllc, I,)cau, uncxpcc(ld, could fcarc
Sn,)ren'c.l l]av failed of producing that flct. The vanguard of his

'cr ,,ftl, arm,1)y 1had already reached Lyons, and he limfclf was laftcn-

conili.le itg a ' ft. it with te ficcond division of his troops, when the ditf
JoIl b, ) '~ '
con( I)ii;cy.

mGuic. 1. 15. 241, 248.
6 covcry

covery of a domestic conspiracy which threatened the ruin of the BOOK III..
kingdom, obliged him to stop ihort, and to alter his measures.

THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles duke of His charaaer

Bourbon, lord high constable, whose noble birth, vast fortune,
and high office, raised him to be: the most powerful fubje in
France, as his great talents, equally suited to the field or the'
council, and his signal services to the crown rendered him the
most illustrious and deserving. The near resemblance between
the King and him in many of their qualities, both being fond of
war, and ambitious to excel in aive and manly exercises, as well
as their equality in age, and their proximity of blood, ought natu-
rally to have secured im a considerable lfare in that Monarch's
fav)ur. But unhappilyLouife, the King's mother, had contraAcd The calf'es of
a violent avcrfion to the houfi of Bourbon, for no better rcafon '3 difaffec
chan because Anne of Bretagne, the Q(e2n of Lewis the Twelfth,
with whom fle lived in perpetual enmity, discovercd a peculiar
attachment to that branch of the royal family; and fie had taught
lcr son, who was tooftifceptibic of any impression iih gave i n,
tu view all the conflablc's actions with a mcan and un1l)comiil: jca-
]oufy. His dil]inguifllcd merit at the battle of \Marigl:tio lhad not
benC fufriciclltly rewarclde; ic Ilad been rccalled i'rom tlc II rv.rn-
mllet of Milan upon ve\ry rivolous prtenctC, ;iit.l Idit (1 ietwiti
a cold rcc'ption, vJlichi his p1rudenIt conlduCI i tlit: (t tiil;!it
flatlion did not dlcferv; tle lp:yllcnt of his p)lliolls 11:1A llcc
futlilled \vwitllhut any good ciule; and durilng tlie ('clili.;tl of
one tIl')Hlifnd five ulilillred and twenty-oine, the Kl, i,, ;i; Il;
alic;laly !)eei related, Ih d

l;atl 'lonted llin n

i )reftCnce of' t1' \'.. Iit
;riiny, by iving tle comlmland of tlhe vanl to tlhe d (,tl' \ l, ii-

Co,l

BooK 'III. con. The conflable, at first, bore these indignities with greater

v- '
· moderation than could have been expe&ed from an high-fpirited

Prince, conscious of what was due to his rank, and to his services.
'Such a multiplicity of injuries, however, exhausted his patience;
and inspiring him with thoughts of revenge, he retired from
court, and began to hold a secret correspondence with ome of
the;Emperor's ministers.

ABoUT that time the dutchess of Bourbon happened to die

without leaving any children; and Louise, of a disposition no
less amorous than vinditive, and flill susceptible of the tender
paflions at the age of forty-fix, began to view the Constable, a
Prince as amiable as he was accomplished, with other eyes; and
notwithfianding the great disparity of their years, she formed
the scheme of marrying him. Bourbon, who might have
expected every thing to which an ambitious mind can aspire,
from the doting fondness of a woman who governed her son and
the kingdom, being incapable either of imitating the Queen in
her sudden transition from hatred to love, or of dissembling so
meanly as to pretend affeclon for one who had persecuted him
so long with unprovoked malice, not only rcjected the match,
blut cmbittered his refusal by fomc evere raillery on Louise's
person and chara-cr. She finding herself not only contemned,
but insulted, her disappointed love turned into hatred, and since
ihc could not marry, fth resolved to ruin Bourbon.

Son this purpolc she consulted with the chancellor du Prat, a

Inn I, lwho by a )basl prostitution of great talents and of filperior
l.1ill in his profcffiot, had rifcn to that high office. By his
;,(i,'icc a law-fitit was commenced against the Conflable, for the

7 whole

whole estate belonging to the house of Bourbon. Part of it was 13B K II,
claimed in. the King's name, as having fallen to the crown; part 53
in that of Louise, as the nearest heir in blood of the deceased
Dutchess. Both these claims were equally destitute of any
foundation in justice; but Louise, by her follicitations and autho-
rity, and Du Prat by employing all the artifices and chicanery
of law, prevailed on the judges to order the estate to be fequeftred.
This unjust decision drove the Conflable to despair, and to mea- t-ls secret ne.

gociations

fures which despair alone could have dicated. He renewed his with the
intrigues in the Imperial court, and flattering himself that the Emnperor,
injuries he had fiffered would justify his having recourse to any
means in order to obtain revenge, he offered to transfer his alle-
giance from his natural Sovereign to the Emperor, and to assist
him in the conquest of France. Charles, as well as the King of
England, to whom the secret was communicated", expeting
prodigious advantages from his revolt, were ready to receive him
with open arms, and spared neither promises nor allurements
that might help to confirm him in his resolution. The Emperor
offered him in marriage his sifter Eleanor, the widow of the
King of Portugal, with a vail portion. He was included as a
principal in the treaty between Charles and Henry. The coun-
ties of Provence and Dauphine were to be fettled on him, with
the title of King. The Emperor engaged to enter France by the
Pyrenees, and Henry, fipported by the Flemings, to invade
Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans, levied at their com-
mion charge, were to penetrate into Burgundy, and to at in
concert with Bourbon, who undertook to raitei fix thousand men
among his friends and vaflals in the heart of the kingdom. The
cxccution of this deep-laid and dangerous plot was fifpenlded,

Rymcr's Fdcr. xiii. 79{.
VOL. II. .' C c until

Boo III. until the King should cross the Alps with the only army capabkl

of defending his dominions; and as he was far advanced in his
march for that purpose, France flood on the brink of deftrution .
Dnicvered. I-I PPILY for that kingdom, a negotiation which had now

been carrying on for feveial months, though conduced with
the most profound fccrecy and communicated only to a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape the observation of
the reft of the conflable's numerous retainers, rendered more
inquisitive by finding that they were diftrufled. Two of these
gave the King some intimation of a mysterious correspondence
between their master and the Comte de Roeux a Flemish noble-
man of great confidence with the Emperor. Francis, who could not
bring hiinfelf to fufpe& that the first prince of the blood would
be o base as to betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulins, where the Constable was in bed, feigning
ildifpofition that he might not be obliged to accompany the King
into Italy, and acquainted him of the intelligence which he had
received. Bourbon, with great solemnity and the most imposing
affctation of ingenuity and candour, asserted his own innocence;
and as his health, he said, was now more confirmed, he promised
to join the army within a few days. Francis, openand candid
himfilf, and too apt to be deceived by the appearance of those
virtues in others, gave such credit to what he said, that he
refused to arrest him, although adviscd to take that precaution by
iis wifcfi counsellors, and as if the danger had bcen over, he
September. continued lhis march towards Lyons. The Constable set out soon

t . after, seemingly with an intention to follow him; but turning

iudklenly to the left he crosscd t Rhone, and after infinite

T.hu i Ilifi. lib. i. c. o. Heutcr, ] , Aultr. lib. viii. c. 18. p. 207.

fatigues
*

fatigues and perils escaped all the parties which the King, fen- BOr III.
fible too late of his credulity, sent out to intercept him, and -
reached Italy in safety P.

FRANCIS took every poflible precaution to prevent the bad

effects of the irreparable error he had committed. He put gar-
rifons in all the places of strength in the Constable's territories.
He seized all the gentlemen whom he could fufpec of being
his aflociates, and as he had not hitherto discovered the whole
extent of the conspirator's schemes, nor knew how far the in-
section had spread among his subje&s, he was afraid that his
absence might encourage them to make some desperate attempt,
and for that reason relinquished his intention of leading his
army in person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on the Milanese; French invade

but appointed admiral Bonnivet to take the supreme command theMilane¢.
in his stead, and to march into that country with an army thirty
thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this preferment to his
abilities as a general; for of all the talents requisite to form a great
commander, he pofrefied only personal courage, the lowest and the
molt common. But he was the most accompliihed gentleman
in the French court, of agreeable manners, an insinuating addreis,
and a sprightly conversation; and Francis, who lived in great
familiarity with his courtiers, was so charmed with tlhee quali-
ties that he honoured him, on all occasions, with the molt patlal
and diflinguiihing marks of his favour. lIc was, befidcs, the
impllacable enemy of Bourbon; and as the King scarce knew
P Mcm. de Bcllay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherchcs de la France, p. 481.

C hoill

I3OOK III. whom to trust at that juncture, he thought the chief command

"'' could be lodged no where so safely as in his hands.

1523.

lh-ir i con- COLONNA, who was entrufled with the defence of the Mi-
duit.

lanefe, his own conquest, was in no condition to resist such a for-
midable army. He had scarce money sufficient to pay his troops,
reduced to a small number by sickness or desertion, and had, for
that reason, been obliged to neglect every precaution necessary
for the security of the country. The only plan he formed was
to defend the passage of the river Teffino against the French; and
as if he had forgotten how easily he himself had disconcerted a
similar scheme formed by Lautrec, he promised with great
confidence on its being effectual. But in spite of all his caution,
it succeeded no better with him than with Lautrec. Bonnivet
passed the river without loss, at a ford which had been neglected,
and the Imperialifis retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the
town as soon as the French hould appear before it. By an
unaccountable negligence which Guiccardini imputes to infa-
tuation , Bonnivet did not advance for three or four days, ant
loft the opportunity with which his good fortune presented him.
The citizens recovered from their contfernation: Colonna still
acive, at the age of fourscore, and MoronS, whose enmity to
France was indcfatigallec, were employed night and day in
repairing the fortifications, in amafing provisions, in collecting
troops from every quarter; and by the time the French ap-
proached, had put the city in a condition to tland a siege. Bon-
nivet, after some fruitlcfs attempts on the town, which harraflcd
his own troops more than the enemy, was obliged, by the incle-
mency of the caion, to retire into winter-quarters.

Guic.lib. 15. 254.

DURINC

DURING these tranfadions, Pope Adrian died; an event so BOOK III

much to the fatisfadion of the Roman people, whose hatred or
contempt of him augmented every day, that the night after his Death of

Adrian VI.

decease, they adorned the door of his chief physician's house with
garlands, adding this inscription, TO THE DELIVERER OF
HIS COUNTRY'. The Cardinal de Medici inflantly renewed
his pretensions to the Papal dignity, and entered the conclave
with high expectations on his own part, and a general opinion
of the people that they would be successful. But though sup-
ported by the Imperial faction, possessed of great personal inte-
reft, and capable of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in those assemblies, the obflinacy and intrigues of
his rivals protracted the conclave to the unusual length of fifty
days. The address and perseverance of the Cardinal, fur- Ele&on of

Clemen; VII.

mounted at last every obstacle. He was raised to the head of Nov. 8.
the church, and assumed the government of it by the name of
Clement VII. The choice was universally approved of. High
expectations were conceived of a Pope, whose great talents, and
long experience in business, seemed to qualify him no less for
defending the spiritual interests of the church, exposed to immi-
nent danger by the progrefsof Luther's opinions, than for condud-
ing its political operations with the prudence requisite at such a dif-
ficult jundure; and who, eftides there advantages, rendered the
ccclefiaftical state more refpedable, by having in his hands the go-
vernment of Florence, and the wealth of the family of Medici ".

CARDINAL WOLSEY, not disheartened by the dilappoint- Wolrmrydl-

mcnt of his ambitious views at the former elcdion, lha and filled
entertained more sanguine hopes of ticcefs on this occasion. wIih rClllt-

Jovii Vit. Adr. 127. . Guic. 1,,5. 2613.

I, Ilcnllry

BOOK III. Henry wrote to the Emperor, reminding him of his engage-

ments to second the pretensions of his minister. Wolfey
betirred himself with activity suitable to the importance of the
prize for which he contended, and inftruded his agents at Rome
to spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain his end.
But Charles had either amused him with vain hopes which he
never intended to gratify, or he judged it impolitic to oppose
a candidate who had such a profped of succeeding as Medici;
or perhaps the cardinals durst not venture to provoke the people
of Rome, while their indignation against Adrian's memory
was fill fresh, by placing another Ultra-montane in the papal
throne. Wolfey, after all his expectations and endea-
vours, had the mortification to fee a Pope elected, of such
an age, and of so vigorous a constitution, that he could not
comfort himself much with the chance of surviving him.
Wolfey, by this second proof, was fully convinced of the
Emperor's insincerity, and it excited in him all the resent-
ment which an haughty mind feels on being at once difap-
pointed, and deceived; and though Clement endeavoured to
sooth his vindictive nature by granting him a commifion to
be legate in England during life, with such ample powers as
vefled in him almost the whole papal jurifdidion in that king-
dom, the injury he had received entirely dissolvcd the tie which
had united him to Charles, and from that moment he medi-
tated revenge. It was necessary, however, to conceal his
intention from his maftcr, and to suspend the execution of it,
until bly a dextrous inprovement of the incidents which might
occur, he should be alle gradually to alienate the King's assec-
tions fiom the Emperor. For this rcafon, he vas so far from
cxprceling any uncafinefs on account of the repulie he had

.' 5 met

met with, that he abounded on every occasion, private as well BooK III.
as publick, in declarations of his high fatisfadion with Cle- - "
ment's promotion'.

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled with great since- Henry's ope-

rations in

rity whatever he was bound to perform by the league against France.
France, though more slowly than he could have wished. His
thoughtless profusion, and total neglec of oeconomy reduced
him often to great sTraits for money. The operations of war
were now carried on in Europe in a manner very different
from that which had long prevailed. Instead of armies suddenly
assembled, which under diflinEt chieftains followed their prince
into the field for a hort space, and served at their own cost;
troops were now levied at great charge, and received regularly
considerable pay. Inflead of impatience on both fides to bring
every quarrel to the iffuc of a battle, which commonly decided
the fate of open and defenceless countries, and allowed the barons
together with their vassals to return to their ordinary occupations;
towns were fortified with great art, and defended with much
obflinacy; war, from a very simple, became a very intricate
science; and campaigns grew of course to be more tedious, and
less decisive. The expence which these alterations in the mili-
tary fyflern neceflarily created, appeared intolerable to nations
hitherto unaccuflomcd to the burden of heavy taxes. Hence
proceeded the fi-ugal, and even parsimonious spirit of the
Elnglifli parliaments in that age, which Henry, with all
his authority, was fcldorn able to overcome. Tle commons,
having refuscd at this time to grant him the supplics he
demanded, lie had rccourfc to the ample and almost unlimited

, Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 294, &c. IIrber¢

- prerogative,

BooK III. prerogative, which the Kings of England, then, pofleffed, and
"-"- by a violent and unusual exertion of it, raised the money he

1523.
Septemb. zo. wanted. This, however, wafted so much time, that it was

late in the season before his army, under the duke of Suffolk,
could take the field. Being joined by a considerable body of
Flemings, Suffolk marched into Picardy, and Francis from his
extravagant eagerness to recover the Milanese, having left that
frontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far as the banks of
the river Oyfe, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that
capital with conifernation. But the arrival of some troops
detached by the King, who was fill at Lyons; the active
gallantry of the French officers, who allowed the allies no
respite night or day; the rigour of a most unnatural season,
together with scarcity of provisions, compelled Suffolk to retire;
November. and La Tremoiille, who commanded in those parts, had the

glory of having, with an handful of men, checked the progress
of a formidable army, and of having driven them with ignominy
out of the French territories .

And thofa of T EEmperor's attempts upon Burgundy and Guienne were
the Germans
nnd Spani- not more fortunate, though in both these provinces Francis.was
ards. equally ill prepared to resist them. The conduct and valour

of his generals supplied his want of forcfight; the Germans who
made an irruption into one of these provinces, and the Spaniards
who attacked the other, were repulsed with great disgrace.

.ndof the TIIus ended the year 52', during which Francis's good
campaign. fortune and success had been fich as gave all Europe an high

idea of his power and refourccs. lie had ldiovcrcd and difcon-

rJ ,~ Herbert. Mem. de Bcllay, 73, &c.

*'" certcd

certed a dangerous conspiracy, the author of which he had Boox III.
driven into exile, almost without an attendant; he had rendered ^

15z3.

abortive all the schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
againit him; he had proteced his dominions when attacked
on three different fides; and though his army in the Milanese
had not made such progress as might have been expected from
its superiority to the enemy in number, he had recovered and
frill kept poffelTion of one half of that dutchy.

THE ensuing year opened with events more diiaftrous to ,24.

Sentiments of

France. Fontarabia was loft by the cowardice or treachery of the new pope.
its governor. In Italy, the allies resolved on an early and February 27
vigorous effort in order to dispossess Bonnivet of that part of
the Milanese which lies beyond the Tefino; Clement, who,
under the pontificates both of Leo and Adrian, had discovered
an implacable enmity to France, began now to view the power
which the Emperor was daily acquiring in Italy, with so much
jealousy, that he refused to accede, as his predecessors had
done, to the league against Francis, and forgetting private
passions and animofities, laboured with the zeal which became
his character, to bring about a reconciliation among the con-
tending parties. But all his endeavours were ineffecual; a
numerous army, to which each of the allies furnished their my ready t
contingent of troops, was assembled at Milan by the beginning eakethe field
of March. Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, took the command of
it upon Colonna's death, though the chief diretion of military
operations was committed to Bourbon, and the marquis de
Pescara; the latter, the ablest and most enterprising of the
Imperial generals; the former inspired by his resentment with
new activity and invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with

VOL. II. D d the

BOOK III. the chara&ers of the French commanders, the genius of their

1,4. troops, and tle strength as well as weakness of their.armies,

as to be of infinite service to tie party which he joined. But
all these advantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's
inability to raise money sufficient for executing the various and

Petaided by extensive plans which he had formed. When his troops were
th tcps. commanded to march, they mutinied against their leaders,

demanding the pay which was due to then for some months;
and disregarding both the menaces and intreaties of their officers,
threatened to pillage the city of Milan if they did not instantly
receive fatisfadion. Out of this difficulty the generals of the
allies were extricated by Morone, who, prevailing on his coun-
trymen, over whom his influence was prodigious, to advance
the fum that was requisite, the army took the field x.

The French BONNIVET was destitute of troops to oppose this army,
labldon l te and still more of the talents that could render him an equal
iilanf. match for its leaders. After various movements and encounters,

dcfcribed with great accuracy by the contemporary hiftoriars,
a detail of which, at this diltance of time, would be equally
unintcrefting and ninfirudive, he was forced to abandon the
firong camp in which he had entrenched himself at Biagrafla.
Soon after, partly by his own mifcondudt, partly by the ativity
of the enemy, who harafed and ruined his army by continual
skirmishes, while they carefully declined a battle which he
often offered them; and partly by the caprice of Goco Swiss,
who refuied to join his army though within a day's march of
it; he was reduced to the neceflity of attempting a retreat into
France through the valley of Aofl. Just as lie arrived on the

Guic. 1. xv. 267. Capella, 190.

banks

banks of the Seflia,. and began to pass that river, Bourbon and BOOK III.
Pescara appeared with the vanguard of the allies, and attacked '-t
his rear with great fury. At the beginning of the charge,
Bonnivet, while exerting himsef with much valour, was
wounded so dangerously as obliged him to quit the field; and
the conduct of the rear was committed to the chevalier Bayard, r et!. oftle
who, though so much a firanger to the arts of a court that he cb']cv:l: r';y-

ard, and ruir

never rose to the chief command, was always called, in times of tl Frcnch
of real danger, to the pofls of greatefi difficulty and importance. r '
He put himself at the head of the men at arms, and animating
them by his prefcnce and example to sustain the whole shock
of the enemy's troops, he gained time for the reft of his coun-
trymen to make good their retrcat. But in this service he
received a wound which he immediately perceived to be mortal,
and being unable to continue any longer on horfcback, lhe
ordered one of his attendants to place him under a tree, with
his face towards the enemy; then fixing his eyes on the
guard of his sword, which lie held up instead of a crof£,
he addressed his prayers to God, and in this poflure, lwhich
became his character both as a soldier and as a Chrifian, he
calmly waited the approach of death. Bourlbon, who led the
foremost of the cnemies troops, found him in this situation,
an(l cxp-rcied regret and pity at tihe fight. " Pit) not me,"
cried the high-fl)iritcd chevalier, " I die as a man of' honour
" ought, in the difrclarge of my duty: They indeed arc oljcts
"of pity, who fight againf tllcir King, their country, and
"their oath." 'he marquis id P'cl:ara, pafling 1t)on after,
ma nifefled llis admuiration of Ilayard'. virtiues, and hIis )r-row
0or llis fall, with thec gcnerofity of a gallant encmy; and fiild-
Jin that lie could not b)c removed witl li facty fiom that io(t,

1 d ordered

B xoK TI. ordered a tent to be pitched there, and appointed proper persons

5 2z4. to attend himI He died, notwithstanding their care, as his

ancestors for several generations had done, i the field of battle.
Pescara ordered his body to be embalmed, and sent to his rela-
tions; and fich was the esped paid to military merit in that
age, that the duke of Savoy commanded it to be received with
royal honours in all the cities of his-dominions; in Dauphine,
Bayard's native country, the people of all ranks came out in
a solemn procession to meet it Y.

BONN IVET led back the shattered remains of his army into

France; and in one short campaign, Francis was stripped of all
he had poflefTed in Italy, and left without one ally in that
country.

Progreft of WHILE the war kindled by the emulation of Charles and
the reforma-
tion in Ge- Francis spread over so many countries of Europe, Germany
m ny enjoyed a profound tranquillity, extremely favourable to the

reformation, which continued to make progress daily. During
Luther's confinement in his retreat at Wartburg, Carloftadius,
one of his disciples, animated with the fame zeal, but pofleffed
of less prudence and moderation than his matier, began to pro-
pagate wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly among the lower
people. Encouraged by his exhortations, they rose in several
villages of Saxony, broke into the churches with tumultuary
violence, and threw down and deflroyed the images with which
they were adorned. Thefi irregular and outrageous proceed-
ings were so repugnant to all the Eletor's cautious maxims,

y Btlefor. Epitr. p. 73. Mem. de Illlay, 75. Ocuv. de Brant. tom. vi.
1o8, &c. I'afquicr Rcchcrchcs, p. 526.

that

that if they had not received a timely check, they could scarce BoocIIt
have failed of alienating from the reformers that prince, jealous ---
to a great degree of his own authority, and afraid of giving
offence to. the Emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opi-
nions. Luther,:fenfible of the danger, immediately quitted his
retreat, without waiting for Frederick's.permiflion, and returned
to Wittemberg. Happily for the reformation, the veneration March 6,.
for his person and authority were still so great, that his appear- I 2z
ance alone suppressed that spirit of extravagance which began
to seize his party. Carloftadius and his fanatical followers firuck
dumb by his rebukes, declared that they heard the voice of an
angel, not of a man

BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun to translate Luther trans

lates the

the Bible into the German tongue, an undertaking of no less tible.
difficulty than importance, of which he was extremely fond,
and for which he was well qualified: He had a competent
knowledge in the original languages; a thorough acquaintance
with the stile and sentiments of the inspired writers; and tho'
his compositions in Latin were rude and barbarous, he was
reckoned a great master of the purity of his mother tongue, and
could exprefshimfelf with all the elegance of which it is capable.
By his own assiduous application, together with the afiance
of Mclancthon and feveraI other of his disciples, he finished
part of the New Teflament this year; and the publication of it
proved more fatal to the church of Rome, than that of all his
own works. It was read with wonderful avidity and atten-
tion by persons of every rank. They were aflonified at dif-
covering how contrary the precepts of the Author of our
religion are, to the inventions ofthofe who pretended to be his

Slcid. Hilt. 5. Sckcnd. 9.

vicegcrents;

130oXKII. vicegerents; and having now in their hand the rule of faith,

,---' they thought themselves qualified by applying it to judge of

35 24.

the eftabliihed opinions, and to pronounce when they were
conformable to the standard, and when they departed from it.
The great advantages arising from Luther's translation of the
Bible, encouraged the advocates for reformation, in the
,other countries of Europe, to imitate his example, and to
-ublifh versions of the Scriptures in their refpetive lan-

guxages.

everal citi-s ABOUT this time, Nurcmbergh, Francfort, Hamburgh, and
(s i ,' the fcveral other cities in Cermany of the first rank openly embraced
Acof the
'vpi:hci.urc. the reformed religion, and by the authority of their magifirates

abolished the mass, and the other fuperflitious rites of Popery a.
The Eledor of Brandenburgh, the Dukes of Brunswick and
Luncnburgh, and Prince of Anhalt, became avowed patrons of
Luther's opinions, and countenanced the preaching of them
among their fubjeds.

Meafiires em- TIIE court of Rome beheld this growing defeEtion with great
'1,Yyed by concern; and Adrian's first care after his arrival in Italy, had
Ard ilaii n
ordcr tocheck been to deliberate with the Cardinals, concerniing the proper
the pr tprcls
of the Refor- means of putting a flop to it. This Pope was profoundly

skillcd in fcholaflic theology, andt having been early taken notice
of on that account, he flill retained such an excefive admiration of
tlic cicnce to which he owed his reputation and uccefs in life,
that lie confidcred Luther's invcdives against the fchoolmcn, par-
ticularly Thomas Aquinas, as little lcfs than blafl)leniy. All the
tenets of that dodor appeared to him so clear and irrcfragablc,

a SckcnJd. 241. Chytrei Contin. Krantzii, 203.

that

tiat he supposed every person who called in question or con- BOOK IIlL
tradided them, to be either blinded by ignorance, or to be acting 15z4.
in opposition to the convition of his own mind: Of course, no
Pope was ever more bigotted or inflexible with regard to points-
of dodrine than Adrian; he not only maintained them as
Leo had done, because they were ancient, or because it was dan-
gerous for the church to allow of innovations, but he adhered to
them with the zeal of a theologian, and with the tenaciotlfnefs
of a disputant. At the fame time his own manners being
extremely simple, and uninfeded with any of the vices which
reigned in the court of Rome, he was as sensible of its corrup-
tions as the reformers themselves, and viewed them with no less.
indignation. The brief he addressed to the Diet of the Empire
assembled at Nuremberg, and the inftrudions he gave Cheregato November.
the nuncio whom he sent hither, were framed agreeably to these
views. On the one hand, he condemned. Luther's opinions
with more asperity and rancour of exprefion than Leo had ever.
used; he severely censured the Princes of Germany for suffering
him to spread his pernicious tenets, by their neglecting to execute
the edit of the Diet at Worms, and required them, if Luther did
not intfantly retract his errors, to defiroy him with fire as a
gangrened and incurable member, in like manner as Dathan and
Abiram had been cut off by Moses, Annanias and Sapplira by
the apofllcs, and John Huss and Jerom of Prague by their
ancestors' . On the other hand, he, with great candour, and in
the most explicit terms, acknowledged the corruptions of the
Roman court to be the source from which had flowed all the
evils that the church now felt or dreaded; he promiscd to exert.
all his authority towards reforming thice abufcs, with as much

b, Fafcic. Rcr. Expet. & 'ugicnd. 342.

7 Jif patch

BOOK IlI. dispatch as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders would

-124 admit; and he requested of them to give him their advice with

regard to the most effecual means offuppreffing that new heresy
which had sprung up among them'.

Diet of Nu. THE members of the Diet, after praising the Pope's pious and
pemberg POal laudable intentions, excused themselves for not executing the
council as the edia of Worms, by alleging that the prodigious increase of
proper re-
medy. Luther's followers, as well as the aversion to the court of Rome

among their other fubjeds on account of its innumerable exac-
tions, rendered such an attempt not only dangerous, but im-
poflible. They affirmed that the grievances of Germany, which
did not arise from imaginary injuries, but from impositions no
less real than intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a
catalogue of them which they intended to lay before him, called
now for some new and efficacious remedy; and in their opi-
nion, the only remedy adequate to the disease, or which afforded
them any hopes of feeing the church restored to soundness and
vigour, was a general council. Such a council, therefore, they
advised him, after obtaining the Emperor's content, to assemble
without delay, in one of the great cities of Germany, that all
who had right to be present might deliberate with freedom, and
propose their opinions with such boldness, as the dangerous
situation of religion at this jundure required d.

Artifices of THE nuncio, more artful than his master, and better acquainted
the nuncio to
1udeU it. with the political views and interests of the Roman court,

was startled at the proposition of a council; and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an assembly might prove at a time when

' Fafic. Rer. Expet. & Fugicnd. p. 34$. ' Ibid. p. 346.

many

many openly denied the papal authority, and the reverense and BOOK III.
fubmiflion yielded to it visibly decined among all Foor that reafoa
he employed his utmost address, iorder to prevailon themembers
of theDiet to proceed themselves with greater severity against the
Lutheran heresy, and to relinquish their proposal concerning a
general council to be held in Germany. They, perceiving the
nuncio to be more follicitous about the interests of the Roman
court, than the tranquillity of the Empire, or purity of the
':church, remained inflexible, and cohtinued to prepare the cata.
logue of their grievances to be presented to the Popee. The
nuncio, that he might not be the bearer of a remonstrance so
disagreeable to hs court, left Nurembergh abruptly, without
taking leave of the Diet '

THE secular Prirnes accordingly, for the ecclesiastics, although TheDiet pre.
they gave no opposition, did not think it decent to join with sent a lift of

-//- a n hundred

them, drew up the lift (so famous in the German annals) of an grievances td
hundred grievances which the Empire imputed to the iniquitous the Pope.
dominion of the papal fee. This lift contained grievances much
of the fame nature with that prepared under the reign of
Maximilian. It would be tedious to enumerate each of
them; they complained of the fums exaced for difpertftions,
absolutions, and indulgences; of the expence arising from the
law-suits carried to Rome; of the innumerable buses occatfoned
by reservations, commendams, and annates; of the exemption
from civil jurifdition which the clergy had obtained; of the
arts by which they brought all secular caufs under the cog.
nifance of tht cclefiaftical judges; of the indecent and profli-
gate lives which not a few of the clergy led; and of various
other particulars, many,of which have already been mentioned
anlong the cirolmfilanccs which contributed to the favourable

e Fafcic..Rcr. Expct. & Fluicnd. 34g. ' Ibid. 376.
VoL. II. E c rcccptiO

BooOK III. reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's dotrines. In the

"-24'' end they concluded, that if the holy fee did not speedily deliver

them from those intolerable burdens, they had determined to
endure them no longer, and would employ the power and autho-
rity with which God had entrusted them, in order to procure
relief .

The reces of INSTE AD of such severities againfl Luther and his followers
the );cr.
Mlarch 6, as the nuncio had recommended, the recess or edid of the Diet.

5 23. contained only a general injunction to all ranks of men to wait

with patience for the determinations of the council which was
to be assembled, and in the mean time not to publish any new
opinions contrary to the established doctrines of the church;
together with an admonition to ill preachers to abilain from mat-
ters of controversy in their discourses to the people, and to con-
fine themselves to the plain and instructive truths of religion .

Ths D:et of THE reformers derived great advantage from the tranfadions
tgrthe'rt- of this Diet, as they afforded them the fullest and most authentic
matiol. evidence that gross corruptions prevailed in the court of Rome,

and that the Empire was loaded by the clergy with insupportable
burdens. With regard to the former, they had now the telti-
mony of the Pope himfclf that their invedives and accusations
were not malicious or ill-founded. As to the latter, the repre-
fcntatives of the Gcrmanick body, in an affcmbnly where the pa-
trons of the new opinions were far from being the most numerous
or powerful, had pointed out as the chief grievances of the Em-
pire, thlofe very practices of the Romifl church against which
Luther and his disciples were accuflomed to declaim. According-
ly in all their controversial writings after this period, they often

s Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 354. h Ibid. 348.

appealed

appealed to Adrian's declaration, and to the hundred grievances, BOOK IIl.
in confirmation of whatever they advanced concerning the dif- 5"
solute manners, or insatiable ambition and rapaciousness of the
papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's conduc was confidered as a proof of the Adrian'scon-
molt childifs simplicity and imprudence. Men trained up amidst dut censurcd

at Rome.

the artifices and corruptions of the papal court, and accustomed
to judge of acions not by what wasjuft, but by what was useful,
were aonifhed at a Pontiff, who, departing from the wife
maxims of his pIedeceffors, acknowledged diborders which he
ought to have concealed; and forgetting his own dignity, ask d
advice of those, to whom he was entitled to prescribe. By such
an excess of impolitic sincerity, they were asi-aid that instead of
reclaiming, he would render the enemies of the church more
prefuimptuous, and instead of extinguishing heresy, would
weaken the foundations of the papal power, or flop the chief
sources from which wealth flowed into the church '. For this
reason they industriously opposed all his schemes of reformation,
and by throwing objections and difficulties in his way, endea-
vonred to retard or to defeat the execution of them. Adrian,
amazed on the one hand, at the obstinacy of the Luthcrans,
difgufled, on the other, with the manners and maxims of the
Italians, and finding himself unable to correct either the one
or the other, often lamented his own situation, and often looked
back with pleasure on that period of his life when he was only
dean of Louvain, a more humble hut happier flation, in which
little was expected from him, and there was nothing to fruf-
trate his good intentions .

'F. Paul, Hist. of Counc. p. 28. Pallavic. Hilt. 5.
Jovii Vit. Adr. p. 118.

E 2 C LEFMENT

BOOX HIL CLEMENT VII. hi& fcceflor, excelled Adrian as much in

,2 the arts of government, as he was inferior to him in purity of

Cleamrnt'sa life, or uprightness of intention. He was animated not only
measures a-
gainfiLuther, with the avcrfion which all Popes naturally bear to a council,
and his dread
of a general but having gained his own elecion by means very uncanonical,
Council. he was afraid of an aflembly that might fubjeft it to a scrutiny

which it could not fland. He determined, therefore, to elude
by every possible means the demands of the Germans, both with
refpee to the calling of a council, and reforming abuses in the
papal court, which the rahnefs and incapacity of his predecessor
had brought upon him. For this purpose, he made choice of
cardinal Campeggio, an artful man, often entrufied by the
Popes with negotiations of importance, as his nuncio to the
diet of the Empire assembled again at Nuremberg.

Feb. 1-24. CA : PE GIO, without taking any notice of what had passed
The rnegcci- in the last meeting, exhorted the diet in a long discourse, to
ations of his
nuncio in a execute the edi& of Worms with vigour, as the only effecual
second diet at
Nuremlcrg, means of suppressing Luther's dodrines. The diet, in return,

desired to know the Pope's intentions concerning the council,
and the redress of the hundred grievances. The former, the
nuncio endcavoured to elude by general and unmeaning decla-
rations of the Pope's resolution to pursue such measures as
would be for the greatefi good of the church. With regard
to the latter, as the catalogue of grievances did not reach
Rome till after Adrian's death, and of consequence had not
heen regularly laid before the present Pope, Campeggio took
.tdvantage of this circumfance to decline making any definitive
anfwcr to them in Clement's name; though, at the fame time,
lie obfcrved that their catalogue of grievances contained many
particulars extrcmely indecent and undutiful, and that tc

publifling

publishing it by their own authority was highly difrefpedful BOOK III.
to the Roman fee. In the end, he renewed his demand of their 5z4 ,

'524,

proceeding with rigour against Luther and his adherents; but attended with
though an ambassador from the Emperor, who was at that
time very solicitous to gain the Pope, warmly seconded the
Nuncio, with many professions of his master's zeal for the
honour and dignity of the papal fee, the recess of the diet was Apri 18.
conceived in terms of almost the fame import with the former,
without enjoining any additional severity against Luther and
his party'.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order to amuse

and sooth the people, published certain articles for the amend-
ment of some disorders and abuses which prevailed among the
inferior clergy; but this partial reformation, which fell so far short
of the expecations of the Lutherans, and of the demands of the
Diet, gave no satisfaction, and produced little effie. The nun-
cio, with a tender hand, lopped a few branches; the Germans
aimed a deeper blow, and by firiking at the root wished to exter-
minate the evil .

' Seckend. 286. Sleid. Hi. 66. " Seckend. 292.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IV.

H I S T 0 R Y

O-F THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPERO R CHARLES V.

B O O K IV.

,BOOK I. T ^H E expulsion of the French, both out of the Milanese,
_BOK _. and the rpublick of Genoa, was confidcred by the Ita-

, 24- lians, as the conclusion of the war between Charles and Francis;

Views of tihe
Italian ates and as they began immediately to be apprchenfive of the Empe-
with refpedt
to Charles ror, lhlen they saw no power remaining in Italy capable either
and IFranis. to controul or oplofe him, they longed ardently for the rc-efca-

bliflunent of peace. Having procured the rcftoration of Sforza
to his paternal dominions, which had been their chief motive for
entering into confederacy with Charles, they plainly difcovcred

t their

their intention to contribute no longer towards inzreafing the BooK IV
Emperor's superiority over his rival, which was already the ob- 57'

1524.

jed of their jealousy. The Pope especially, whose natural timi-
dity increased his suspicions of Charles's designs, endeavoured by
his ambassadors and remonfirances to inspire him with modera-
tion, and incline him to peacer

BUT the Emperor, intoxicated with fuceefs, and urged on by Chals re-

solves to in-

his own ambition, no less than by Bourbon's desire of revenge, vade Frane.
contemned Clement's admonitions, and declared his resolution of
ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to invade Provence, a
part of his rival's dominions where he least dreaded an attack,
and was least prepared to resist it. His moit experienced mini-
fters dissuaded him from undertaking such an enterprize with a
feeble army, and an exhaufled treasury: But he relied so much
on having obtained the concurrence of the King of England,
and on the hopes which Bourbon, with the confidence and cre-
dulity natural to exiles, entertained of being joined by a nume-
rous body of his partisans as soon as the Imperial troops hould
enter France, that he persisted obstinately in the measure. Henry
undertook tofurnifh an hundred thousand ducats towards defray-
ing the expence of the expedition during the first month, andl
had it in his choice either to continue the payment of that rum
monthly, or to invade Picardy before the end of July with a pow-
erful army. The Emperor engaged to attack Guienne at the
fame time with a considerable body of men, and if these cnter-
prizes proved fuccefsfill, they agreed, that Bourbon, beides the
territories he had loft, hould be put in pofleflion of Provence,
with the title of King, and should do homage to Henry as the
lawful King of France, for his new dominions. Of all the parts

.

216 T ITHErlEIGN OF THE
BOOK IV. of this extensive but extrwvagant proje&, the invasion of Pro.

,5 5. vence was the only one which was executed. For although

Bourbon, with a fcrtpulous delicacy, altogether unexpeed after
the part he hid ated, positively refused to acknowledge Henry's
title to the crown of France, and thereby absolved him from any
obligation to promote the enterprise, Charles's eagerness to carry
his own plan into execution did not in any degree abate. The
army he employed for that purpose amounted only to eighteen
thousand men; the supreme command of which was given to the
Marquis de Pescara, with inftrutions to pay the greatest deference

The Impe- to Bourbon's advice in all his operations. Pescara patsed the Alps
rialifts enter
Provence, without opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to Mar-
Augu"l ' feilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to march towards Lyons#

in the neighbourhood of which city his territories were situated,
and where of course his influence was tnoft extensive But the
Emperor was so delrous to get possession of a port, which would,
at all times, secure him easy access into France, that by his
authority he over-ruled the Constable's opinion, and directed
Pescara to make the reduaion of Marseilles his chief obje a.

Pfudent mea; FRANC is, who foresaw, but was unable to prevent this
?ures of
Francls. attempt, took the oft proper precautions to defeat it. He laid

waftc the adjacent country, in order to ender it more difficult for
the enemy to subsist their army; he razed the fburbs of the
city; ftrengtheted its fortifications, and threw into it a nume-
tous garrison under the command of brave and experienced
officers. To these, nine thousand of the citizens, whom their
dread of the Spanili yoke inspired with contempt of dan-
ger, joined themftlves; by their united courage and inlufiry,

Gtlic, 1. I5. 273, &c. Mem. de Bellay, p. 80.

I eall

b~~~~~~~~~~~~*

all the efforts of Pescara's military skill, and of Bourbon's adi- Boo K IV.
vity and revenge, were rendered abortive. Francis, meanwhile, 'T
had leisure to aflemble a powerful army under the walls of
Avignon, and no sooner began to advance towards Marseilles,
than the Imperial troops, exhausted by the fatigues of a siege forcedi tls
which had lasted forty days, weakened by diseases, and almost retreat.
destitute of provisions, retired with precipitation towards Italy . ept. 9.

IF during these operations of the army in Provence, either

Charles or Henry had attacked France in the manner which
they had projected, that kingdom must have been exposed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as on many other
eccafions, the Emperor found that the extent of his revenues was
not adequate to the greatness of his power, or the ardour of his
ambition, and the want of money obliged him, though with much
relucance, to circumscribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexe-
cuted. Henry, difgufled at Bourbon's refuting to recognize his
right to the crown of France; alarmed at the motions of the
Scots, whom the follicitations of the French King had persuaded
to march towards the borders of England; and no longer incited
by his miniter, who was become extremely cool with regard to
all the Emperor's interests; took no measures to support an enter-
prize, of which, as of all new undertakings, he had been at first
excessively fond'.

IF the King of France had been satisfied with having delivered Franc; elated

his fulljeds from this formidable invasion, and having hewn all with his
Europe the facility with which the internal strength of his domi-
nions enabled him to refifl the impreflion of a foreign enemy,

i Guic. 1. 15. 277. Ulloa Vita dell. Carlo V. p. 93.
c iddes's Life of Wolfcy. Append. No. 70, 71, 72.
Vo L. II. F f even

BOOK IV. even when seconded by the abilities and powerful efforts of

a rebellious fubbJed, the campaign, notwithstanding the loss
of the Milanese, would have been far from ending ingloriously.
But Francis, animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enterprizing rather
than considerate; and too apt to be elated with success; was
fond of every undertaling that seemed bold and adventurous.
Such an undertaking, the situation of his affairs at that junaure,

Reoflvcs to naturally presented to his view. He had under his command one
invade the
Milar cfe. of the most powerful and best appointed armies France had ever

brolugllt into the field, which he could not think of disbanding
without having employed it in any service. The Imperial troops
had been obliged to retire almost ruined by hard duty, and dif-
heartened with ill success; the Milanese had been left altogether
without defence; it was not impossible to reach that country
before Pescara, with his flattered forces, could arrive there; or
if fear should add speed to their retreat, they were in no condi-
tion to make head against his fresh and numerous troops; and
Milan would now, as in former instances, submit without resist-
ance to a bold invader. These considerations, which were not
destitute of plausibility, appeared to his sanguine temper to be of
the utmost weight. In vain did his wisest ministers and gene-
rals represent to him the danger of taking the field at a season
so far advanced, with an army conpofed chiefly of Swiss and
Germans, to whose caprices he would be fubjct in all his opera-
tions, and on whose fidelity his fafcty must absolutely depend. In
vain did Louise of Savoy advance by hafy journies towards Pro-
vence, that she might exert all her authority in dissuading her
Con from fiuch a raih nterprize. Francis disregarded the remon-
firanccs of his ful)jeds; and that lie might save himifclf the pain

4 of

of an interview with his mother, whose counsels he had deter- BooK IV.
mined to rejet, he began his march before her arrival; appoint-
ing her, however, by way of atonement for that neglect, to be
regent of the kingdom during his absence. Bonnivet, by his Appoints his

mother regent

persuasions, conntributed not a little to confirm Francis in this during his
resolution. That favourite who strongly resembled his master bfe
in all the defective parts of his character, was led by his natural
impetuosity, warmly to approve of such an enterprize; and being
prompted besides by his impatience to revisit a Milanese lady, of
whom he had been deeply enamoured during his late expedition,
he is said, by his flattering descriptions of her beauty and accom-
plifhments, to have inspired Francis, who was extremely fufcep-
tible of such pafions, with an equal desire of feeing herd.

THE French passed the Alps at Mount Cenis; and as their Operationsi n

success depended on dispatch, they advanced with the greatest
diligence. Pescara, who had been obliged to take a longer and
more difficult rout by Monaco and Final, was oon informed of
their intention; and being sensible that nothing but the presence
of his troops could save the Milanese, marched with filch rapi-
dity, that he reached Alva on the fame day that the French army
arrived at Vercelli. Francis, incfruded by Bonnivct's error in
the former campaign, advanced dircólly toward Milan, where
the unexpeed approach of an enemy ti) powerful, occasioncd
such confternttion and disorder, that although Pescara entered
the city with some of his bell troops, he found that the defence
of it could not be undertaken with any probability of i'ucccfs;
and having thrown a garrifoi into the citadel, retired through
one gate, while the recnch were admitted at another'.

O )euv. de Brant. tomr vi. i.5 .
' Mem. do Btllay, p. 81. (Gic. 1. 15. 2J8.

1' f , T' '
rE S

BOOK IV. THESE brisk motions of the French Monarch disconcerted al

<''' the schemes of defence which the Imperialists had formed.

1524.

Embarrling Never, indeed, did generals attempt to oppose a formidable inva-
late o the sion under such circumstances of disadvantage. Though Charles
Imperialills.

possessed dominions more extensive than any other Prince in,
Europe, and had, at this time, no other army but that which
was employed in Lombardy, which did not amount to sixteer
thousand men, his prerogative in all his different flates was so
limited, and his fubjeds, without whose content he could raise
no taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden themselves
with new or extraordinary impositions, that even this small
body of troops was in want of pay, of ammunition, of provi-
sions, and of cloathing. In such a situation, it required all the
wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pescara, and the implacable
resentment of Bourbon, to preserve them from finking under de-
fpair, and to inspire them with resolution to attempt, or sagacity
to discover what was essential to their safety. To the efforts of
their genius, and the aCivity of their zeal, the Emperor was
more indebted for the preservation of his Italian dominions than
to his own power. Lannoy, by mortgaging the revenues of
Naples, procured some money, which was immediately applied
towards providing the army with whatever was most necessary'.
Pescara, beloved and almost adored by the Spanish troops,:
exhorted them to shew the world; by their engaging to serve the
Emperor, in that dangerous exigency,. without making any
immediate demand of pay, that they were animated with
Sentiments of honour very different from those of mercenary
soldiers, to which proposition, that gallant body of men with an

Guic. 1. 15. 28o.

t ' unexampled

unexampled generosity gave their content . Bourbon having BOOK IV.
raised a considerable fum, by pawning his jewels, et out for

152s.

Germany, where his influence was great, that by his presence
he might haften the levying of troops for the Imperial service i.

FRA NCIS, bya fatal error, allowed the Emperor's generals time Francis be-

fiegs Pavia,.

to derive advantage from all these operations. Inflead of pursuing
the enemy, who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable post,
which Pescara had resolved to abandon on his approach, he,
in compliance with the opinion of Bonnivet, though contrary
to that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia on the Tefino; Olober z8S
a town, indeed, of great importance, the pofNeffion of which
would have opened to him all the fertile country lying on the
banks of that river. But the fortifications of the place were
itrong; it was dangerous to undertake a difficult siege, at so
late a season; and the Imperial generals, sensible of its confe-
quence, had thrown into the town a garrison compoed of fix
thousand veterans, under the command of Antonio de Leyva, an
officer of high rank; of great experience; of a patient but
enterprizing courage; fertile in resources; ambitious of diftin-
guifhing himself; and capable, for that reason, as well as from
his having been-long accustomed both to obey and to command,
of suffering or performing any thing in order to procure fucccfs.

FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obflinacy equal to the rlt vigorouO

rafhncfs with which he had undertaken it. During three
months, every thing known to the engineers of that age, or

* Jovii Vit. Davali. lib. v. p. 386. Sandov. vol. i. 621. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V.
v. p. 94, &c. Vida dell Emper. Carlos V. per Vcra y Zuniga. p. 36.

A Mcm. de Bellay, . 83.

that

BooK IV. that could be effected by the valour of his troops, was attempted

C"V' in order to reduce the place; while Lannoy and Pescara, unable
J524 to obftrud his operations, were obliged to remain in such an

ignominious slate of inacion, that a Pasquinade was published
at Rome, offering a reward to any person who could find the
Imperial army, loft in the month of October in the mountains
between France and Lombardy, and which had not been heard
of since that time '.

The town LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties under which
Vallantly de. his countrymen laboured, and the impossibility of their facing,

fded. in the field, such a powerful army as furnned the siege of Pavia,

placed his only hopes of safety in his own vigilance and valour.
The efforts of both were extraordinary, and in proportion to
the importance of the place, with the defence of which he was
entrufied. He interrupted the approaches of the French by fre-
quent and furious sallies. Behind the breaches which their
artillery made, he ereced new works, that appeared to be scarce
inferior in strength to the original fortifications. He repulsed
the besiegers in all their assaults; and by his own example,
brought not only the garrison, but the inhabitants to bear the
moil intolerable fatigues, and to encounter the greatest dangers
without murmuring. The rigour of the season conipired
with his endeavours in retarding the progress of the French.
Francis attempting to become master of the town, by diverting
the course of the Tcfino, which is its defence on one ide, a
fuddcn inundation of the river deflroyed, in one day, the labour
of many wvccks, and iwcjlt away all the lmollund which his
army had raised with infinite toil, as well as at great expenc k.

i Sandov. i. 608. k Guic. 1. j5. 2to. Uoa Vita di Carlo V. p. 95.

No'2\VI 'I-

NOTWITHSTANDING the flow progress of the besiegers, and BooK IV.
the glory which Leyva acquired by his gallant defence, it was 2

I;z4.

not doubted but that the town would at last be obliged to fur- The Pope
render. The Pope, who already confidered the French arms treaty of
as fupcrior in Italy, became impatient to disengage himself from neutrality
his connections with the Emperor, of whose designs he was
extremely jealous; and to enter into terms of friendship with
Francis. As Clement's timid and cautious temper rendered him
incapable of followving the bold plan which Leo had formed of
delivering Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he returned to
the more obvious and pradcicable scheme of employing the
povwer of the one to balance and to rclrain that of the other.
For this reaf,,n, he did not difcemble his fatisfadion at feeing
the French King recover Milan, as he hoped that the dread of
such a neighbour wve;!. bc fonm check upon the Emperor's
ambition, which no , .;cer in Italy was now able to controul.
He laboured hard to !.r;ng al:m: a peace that would secure
Francis in possession of 1!i: new conquests; and as Charles, who
was always inflexible in tll prosecution of his schemes, rejeEted
the propolition with dfdain, and with bitter exclamations
against the Pope, by whose perfiafions, while Cardinal de
Medici, he had been induced to invade the Milanese, Clement
immediately concluded a treaty of neutrality with the King of
France, in which the republick of Florence was included '.

FIRA NCIS having by this tranfadion, deprived the Emperor of Francis in-

vades Naples.

his two most powerful allies, and at the fame time having secured
a pafage for his own troops through their territories, formed a
scheme of attacking the kingdom of Naples, hoping either to

' Guic . .
. 82. 285.

over-runt

BOOK IV. over-run thatcountry, which was left altogether without defence,

or that at least such an unexpeced invasion would oblige the
1j24.

viceroy to recal part of the Imperial army out of the Milanese.
For this purpose he ordered fix thousand men to march under
the command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But Pescara fore-
feeing that the effea of this diversion would depend entirely
upon the operations of the armies in the Milanese, persuaded
Lannoy to disregard Albany's motions , and to bend his whole
force against the King himself; so that Francis not only weak-
ened his army very unseasonably by this great detachment; but
incurred the reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerical and
extravagant projects.

Efforts of MEANWHILE the garrison of Pavia was reduced to extre-
Pescara and
Bourbon. mity; their ammunition and provisions began to fail; the Ger-

mans, of whom it was chiefly composed, having received no pay
for seven months , threatened to deliver the town into the
enemy's hands, and could scarce be restrained from mutiny by
all Leyva's address and authority. The Imperial generals, who
were no firangers to his situation, saw the necessity of march-
ing without loss of time to his relief. This they had now in
their power: Twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and
activity of Bourbon taught to move with unusual rapidity, had
entered Lombardy under his command, and rendered the Impe-
rial army nearly equal to that of the French, greatly diminished
by the abfcnce of the body under Albany, as well as by the
fatigues of the ficgc, and the rigour of the season. But the
more their troops incrcafed in number, the more sensibly did
they feel the diftrcfs arising from want of money. Far from

Guic. 1. 15. 285. Go!d. Polit. Imperial. 875.

having

having funds for paying a powerful army, they had scarce what BOOK IV.
was sufficient for defraying the charges of conducting their s;
artillery, and of carrying their ammunition and provisions. The
abilities of the generals, however, supplied every defed. By their
own example, as well as by magnificent promises in name of the
Emperor, they prevailed on the troops of all the different nations
which composed their army, to take the field without pay;
they engaged to lead them diretly towards the enemy; and
flattered them with the certain profped of vitory, which would
at once enrich them with such royal spoils as would be an ample
reward for all their services. The soldiers, sensible that by
quitting the army, they would forfeit the vast arrears due to
them, and eager to get possession of the promised treasures,
demanded a battle with all the impatience of adventurers who
fight only for plunder .

THE Imperial generals, without suffering the ardour of their They march

to attack the

troops to cool, advanced immediately towards the French camp. French,
On the first intelligence of their approach, Francis called a coun- February 3-
cil of war, to deliberate what course he ought to take. All his
officers ofgreateft experience were unanimous in advising him to
retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy who courted it from
despair. Tile leaders of the Imperialifis, they obfcrved, would
either be obliged in a few weeks to disband an army, which they
were unable to pay, and which they kept together only by the
hope of pillage, or the soldiers enraged at the non-performance
of the promiles to which they had truflcd, would rife in foine
furious mutiny which would allow them to think of nothing but
their own safety: That, meanwhile, lie might ncamp in bmne

,, Eryci Pcutcani His. Cifalpina ap. Graevii Thef. Antiquit. Ital. iii. p.
1170, J179.

VOL. II. Gg flrong

BOOK IV. frong post, and waitiog in safety the arrival of freff troops from

L^. France and Switzerland, might, before the end of spring, take

possession of all the Milanefc, without danger, or bloodshed.
But in opposition to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was to
give counsels fatal to France during the whole campaign, repre-
sented the ignominy it would reflec on their sovereign if he
should abandon a siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn
his back before an enemy to whom he was fiill superior in num-
ber; and insisted on the necessity of fighting the Imperialists rather
than relinquish an undertaking, on the success of which the King's
future fame depended. Unfortunately, Francis's notions of honour
were delicate to an excess that bordered on what was romantick.
Having often said that he would take Pavia, or perish in the
attempt, he thought himself bound not to depart from that refo-
lution; and rather than expose himself to the slightest imputation,
he chose to forego all the advantages which were the certain
consequences of a retreat, and determined to wait for the Impe-
rialifls before the walls of Pavia".
ra'!e c:f Tii F Imperial gencrals found the French so strongly entrenched,

a. that notwitlflanding the powerful motives which urged them on,

they hcfitated long before they ventured to attack them; but at
last tlhe nccelitis of the bcficged, and the murmurs of their own
soldiers obliged them to put every thing to hazard. Never did
Ftbiuary z2.. trniics engage with greater ardour, or wi.li an higher opinion

of the ilportance of te l)attle they wcre going to fight;
lnever wvcr troops more fliongly animatcd with iemulation,
jiational antipathy, mutual rcftclntmil nt, altll the paions whlich
inliirc obfiinatc bravery. ()On tle e hand, a gallant young

G (uic. . 1 5. 291.

Monarch

Monarch, seconded by a generous nobility, and followed by sub- Boo K IV.
jets to whose natural impetuosity, indignation at the opposition
they had encourtred, added new force, contended for vitory
and honour. On the other fide, troops more completely difci-
plined, and conducted by generals of greater abilities, fought
from necessity, with courage heightened by despair. The
Imperialists, however, were unable to resist the first efforts of
the French valour, and their firmest battalions began to give
way. But the fortune of the day was quickly changed. The
Swiss in the service of France, unmindful of the reputation of
their country for fidelity and martial glory, abandoned their pofl
in a cowardly manner. Leyva, with his garrison, sallied out and
attacked the rear of the French during the heat of the aion
with such fury as threw it into confusion; and Pescara falling on
their cavalry, with the Imperial horse, among whom he had pru-
dently intermingled a considerable number of Spanish foot,
armed with the heavy muskets then in ufc, broke this formi-
dable body by an unufulal method of attack against which they
were wholly unprovided. The rout became universal; and
rcfinance ceased in almnofl every part, but where the King was
in person, who fought now, not for fame or vitory, but for The French
safety. Though wounded in fcviral placcs, and thrown from army routed.
his horl' whliclh wv;s killcd under liin, Francis dcfended iminfeif
on foot with an heroic coilrnlTW. Many of Ins bravcf oicers
,gathcring round him, and cdlcavouring to slave llis life at the
cxpencc of their own, fell at his feet. Aolng thcfc was Bon-
nivct, the author of tlis great calamity, who alone died unla-
lmcntcd. The King cxhallltcd witl fatiguc, and scarce capable
of farther rcliftance, was left alloft alone, cx)polcd to the firy
of fonce Spanihi foldics, firangers to his rank, and enraged at

(: g 2 his

BooK IV. his obstinacy. At that moment came up Pomperant, a

v'5 - French gentleman, who had entered together with Bourbon
15Z5

into the Emperor's service, and placing himself by the fide of the
Monarch against whom he had rebelled, assisted in prote&ing
him from the violence of the soldiers; at the fame time beseech-
ing him to surrender to Bourbon, who was not far distant. Immi-
nent as the danger was which now surrounded Francis, he
rejecEed with indignation the thoughts of an ation which would
have afforded such matter of triumph to his traiterous subjea;
and calling for Lannoy, who happened likewise to be near at
Francis taken hand, gave up his sword to him; which he, kneeling to kifs the

pone. King's hand, received with profound refpea; and taking his

own sword from his fide, presented it to him, faying, That it
did not become so great a Monarch to remain disarmed in the
pretence of one of the Emperor's fubjeds .

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of the moit fatal

France had ever seen. Among these were many noblemen of
the highest difindion, who chose rather to perish than to turn
their backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken prisoners,
of whom the most illufirious was Henry D'Albret, the unfor.
tunate king of Navarre. A finall body of the rear guard made
its escape under the command of the duke Alenfon; the feeble
garrison of Milan on the firfl news of the defeat, retired without
being pursued, by another road; and in two weeks after the
battle, not a Frcnchman remained in Italy.

0 Guic. 1. 15. 292. Ocuv. de Brant. vi. 355. Mem. de Bcllay, p. 90.

Sandov, Hill. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 805. 810. Rufcelli Lcttcre de Prin-
cipi ii. p. 70. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 98.

LANNOY,

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all the outward BOOK IV.
marks of honour due to his rank and charater, guarded him

1525.

with the utmost attention. He was follicitous, not orly to pre-
vent any possibility of his escaping, but afraid that'his own
troops might seize his person, and detain it as the best security
for the payment of their arrears. In order to provide againfi
both these dangers, he conducted Francis, the day after the battle,
to the firong castle of Pizzichitone near Cremona, committing
him to the cuflody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of the
Spanish infantry, an officer of great bravery, and of frit
honour, but remarkable for that severe and scrupulous vigilance
which such a truit required.

MEANWHILE Francis, who formed a judgment of the

Emperor's dispositions by his own, was extremely desirous hat
Charles should be informed of his situation, fondly hoping that
from his generosity or sympathy, he would obtain speedy relief.
The Imperial generals were no less impatient to give their fove-
reign an early account of the decisive vitory which they had
gained, and to receive his inflrutions with regard to their future
condud. As the most certain and expeditious method of con-
veying intelligence to Spain, at that season of the year, was
by land, Francis gave tlh Commcncador Pennalofa, who was
charged with Lannoy's difpatchcs, a paflport to travel through
France.

C AR L ES reccived the account of this signal and unexpected El.; c,( this

i;ccefs that lad crowned his arms, with a moderation, which vitotry',(l
if it had been real, would have dlone him more honour than the March 'o.
greatcft victory. Without uttering one word cxprcflive of cxul-

t* tation,

BoOK IV. tation, or of intemperate joy, lie retired' immediately into his

chapel, and having spent an hour in offering up his thanksgivings
1525.

to heaven, returned to the prefence-chamber, which by that time
was filled with grandees and foreign ambassadors, assembled in
order to congratulate him: He accepted of their compliments
with a modest deportment; he lamented the misfortune of the
captive King, as a iriking example of the fad reverse of fortune,
to which the most powecrful Monarchs are fubje; he sorbad any
publick rejoicings, as indecent in a war carried on among
Chriflians, refcrving them until he fliould obtain a viEtory equally
illustrious over the Infidels; and fecmcd to take pleasure in the
advantage he had gained, only as it would prove the occasion of
reforing peace to Christendom P.

'rhe 'clemes CHARLES, however, had already begun to form fchemcs in his
he began to
form. own mind, which little suited such external appearances. Ambi-

tion, not generosity, was the ruling paiTion in his mind; and
the vicory at Pavia opened such new and unbounded profpcts
of gratifying it, as allured him with irrefiflibc force: But it
being no cafy matter to execute the vafl dclirns which lhe medi-
tated, he thouh)t it neccflrly, whlile proper mcaiurcs were
taking for thlat t)purpoic, i tho e

t greatcfl In'cra1tilo, l;p; )-

iunder that veil to conceal his real intetions from the other
l'rinces of lEurope.

The enrral MI A N W I11 I. I'Ir:lInc was filled with ce ilftcrnation. TI'h,
io 1rnIce. r i: li iminft f l d

la carly tranlihittcd an a;cc()tllt of tllc ro;l ;it
in France. h

Pavia in a letter to li;s mnother 'I'livercd by lc'nni;lofi, whlicll
contained only thcc wordls, "' Madam, all is loll, except our

r Sandov. Ilit. i. ('51. Ulloa Viti. ll Carlo V. . 1lo.

' lio()1101l1.

"honour." Those who survived, when they arrived from Italy, BOOK IV.
brought such a melancholy detail of particulars as made all ranks -'''

152;.

of men sensibly feel the greatness and extent of the calamity.
France, without its sovereign, without money in her treasury,
without an army, without officers to command it, and encom-
passed on all fides by a vidtorious and aive enemy, seemed to
be on the very brink of deftrudion. But on that occasion the The prudent
great abilities of Louise the regent saved the kingdom, which the condue of

the 1cg nt.

violence of her passions had more than once exposed to the
greatest danger. Instead of giving herself up to such lamenta-
tions as were natural to a woman so remarkable for her maternal
tenderness, he discovered all the foresight, and exerted all the
adtivity of a consummate politician. She assembled the nobles at
Lions, and animated them by example no less than by her words
with such zeal in defence of their country as its present situation
required. She collected the remains of the army which had
ifrved in Italy, ransomcd the prisoners, paid their arrears, and
put them in a condition to take the field. She levied new troops,
provided for the security of the frontiers, and railed fums fuffi-
cicnt for defraying there extraordinary cxpences. HeIr chief care,
however, was to appcafe the rcfentmcnt, or to gain the fiiend-
lhip of the King of 1Engllal; and fiomn tiat quarter, the firlt
ray of comiort broke in upoll tie French affairs.

'lTlro :(; I-lcnry, i entcring into alliances with Charles or .eRs cf ilhe

Itr:l:lcis, tlldmll fllowcd aly regular or concerted plan of policy, ,',ay Vt
l)lt v.'as illlucncdc(l chiefly by the caprice of temporary pallion, n./ v'I.
filC1 Icl ;i1ii nctC'; o(ft(en halpplined as recalled his attention towards
lt;it (equal I)laiKC of' powe'r whlich it was ccflhtry to l kcl) 1)bc-
Tiwci thle two contendiing plottltates, thep )rcfrvation ofwhlichi lie

2t alw\a'ay

BOOK IV. always boaflcd to be his peculiar office. He had expeaed that

his union with the Emperor might afford him an opportunity of
recovering some part of those territories in France which had
belonged to his anceflors, and for the fake of such an acquisition
he did not scruple to give his assistance towards raising Charles to
a confidcrablc pre-eminence above Francis. He had never dreamt,
however, of any event so deciive and so fatal as the victory at
Pavia, which seemed not only to have broken, but to have
annihilated the power of one of the rivals; so that the profped of
the fuddcn and entire revolution which this would occasion in
the political fyftcm, filled hlim with the most disquieting appre-
henfions. He saw all Europe in danger of being over-run by
an ambitious prince, to whose power there now remained no
countcrpoife; and though he himself might at first be admitted,
in quality of an ally, to some lfiare in the spoils of the captive
monarch, it was eaty to discern that witi regard to the manner
of making the partition, as well as his security for keeping pof-
session of what flould be allotted him, he mufi absolutely de-
pend upon the will of a confederate, to whose forces his own
bore no proportion. He was sensible that if Charles were per-
mitted to add any considerable part of France to the vas
dominions of which he was already mafler, his neighbourhood
would be much more formidable to England than that of the
ancient French Kings; while, at tle ame time, the proper
balance on the continent, to which England owed both its Iafcty
and importance, would be entirely loft. Concern for the itua-
tion of the unhappy monarch co-operated with thef political
confidcrations; his gallant behaviour in the battle of Pavia had
excited an high degree of admiration, which never fails of aug-
menting ftmpathy; and Ienry, naturally susceptible of generous

fcntiments,

sentiments, was fond of appearing as the deliverer of a van- Boos IV.
quifhed enemy from a state of captivity. The passions of the j-

$

English minister secondcd the inclinations of the Monarch.
Wolfey, who had not forgot the disappointment of his hopes in
two successive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly to the Em-
peror, thought this a proper opportunity of taking revenge; and
Louise, courting the friendship of England with such flattering
submissions as were no less agreeable to the King than to the
Cardinal, Henry gave her secret afluranccs that he would not
lend his aid towards opprefing France, in its present helpiefs
slate, and obliged her to promise that he wold not consent to
dismember the kingdom even in order to procure her son's
liberty .

BUT as Henry's connetions with the Emperor made it necef-

fary to ac in such a manner, as to save appearances, he ordered
publick rejoicings to be made in his dominions for the success
of the Imperial arms; and as if he had been eager to seize the
present opportunity of ruining the French monarchy, he ent
ambassadors to Madrid, to congratulate with Charles upon
his vicory; to put him in mind, that he, as his ally, engaged
in one common cause, was entitled to partake in the fruits
of it; and to require that in compliance with the terms of
their confederacy, he would invade Guienne with a power-
ful army in order to give him poflcfffion of that province.
At the fame time, he offered to fend the princess Mary into
Spain or the Low Countries, that ille might be educated under
the Emperor's direcion until the conclusion of the marriage
agreed on between them; and in rcturn for that mark of his
confidence he infifled that IFrancis fliould be delivered to hin,

q Mcm. de Bcllay, 94. Guic. 1. 6. 318. H crcrt.
VoL. II. 1 11 in

BooK IV. in consequence of that article in the treaty of Bruges, whereby

eath of the contracting parties was bound to surrender all ufur-
pers to him whose rights they had invaded. It was impossible
that Henry could expea that the Emperor would liften to these
extravagant demands, which it was neither his interest, nor in
his power to grant. They appear evidently to have been made
with no other intention than to furnish him with a decent pre-
text for entering into such engagements with France as the
jundure required'.

On the Italian IT was among the Italian flates, that the victory at Pavia occa-
powers. sioned the greatest alarm and terror. That balance of power on

which they relied for their security, and which it had been the
constant objea of all their negociations and refinements to main-
tain, was destroyed in a moment. They were exposed by their
situation to feel the first effects of the uncontrouled authority Charles
had acquired. They observed many symptoms of a boundless am-r
bition in that young prince, and were sensible that as Emperor, or
King of Naples, he could either form dangerous pretensions upon
each of their territories, or invade them with great advantage.
They deliberated, therefore, with much follicitude concerning
the means ofraifing such a force as might obftrud his progress .
But their consultations, conduced with little union, and executed
with less vigour, had'no effec. Clement, inftead'of pursuing the
measures which he had concerted with the Venetians for securing
the liberty of Italy, was so intimidated by Lannoy's threats, or
April i. overcome by his promises, that he entered into a separate treaty,

binding himself to advance a considerable fum in return for

r Herbert, p. 64. ' Guic. 1. 6. 300. RufcelliLcttere
de Princ. ii. 74, 76, &c. Thuani Hil. lib. i. c. il.

certain

certain emoluments which he was to receive. The money was BooK IV.
instantly paid; Charles afterwards refused to ratify the treaty;
and the Pope remained exppfed at once to infamy and to ridicule;
to the former, because he had deserted the publick cause for his
private interest; to the latter, because he had been a loser by
that unworthy action ',

How dishonourable soever the artifice might be which was Mutiny in the

employed in order to defraud the Pope of this fum, it came very IrmPral
Seasonably into the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to
extricate himself out of an imminent danger. Soon after the
defeat of-the French army, the German troops which had
defended Pavia with such meritorious courage and perseverance,
growing insolent upon the fame they had acquired, and impa-
tient of relying any longer on fruitless promises with which
they had been so often amused, rendered themselves masters of
the town, with a resolution to keep poffefiion of it as a security
for the payment of their arrears; and the reft of the army disco-
vered a much stronger inclination to aflift, than topunifh the muti-
neers. By dividing among them the money exaced from the Pope,
Lannoy quieted the tumultuous Germans; but though this satis-
fled theirprefent demands, he had so little profpe& of beingable to
pay them or his other forces regularly for tire future, and was under
such continual apprehensions of their seizing the person of the cap-
tive King, that not long after, he was obliged to dismiss all the
Germans and Italians in the Imperial service ". Thus, from a cir-
cumftance that now appears very singular, but arising naturally
from the contfitution of most European governments in the
sixteenth century, while Charles was fufpeed by all his neigh-

' Guic. 1. 16. 305. Mauroceni Hiflor. Vcnet. ap. Iflorichi delle core
Vcnez. V. 131, 36. " Guic. 1. 16. p. 302.

.H h 2 bours

Boox IV. bours of aiming at universal monarchy, and while he was really

""-' forming vast projects of this kind, his revenues were so limited,
5525.

that he could not keep on foot his victorious army, though it
did not exceed twenty-four thousand men.

The Empr. DURING these tranfadions, Charles, whose pretensions to
ior's dehbera-
tions con- moderation and difinterefiednefs were soon forgotten, deliberated
cernig the with the utmost solicitude, how he might derive the greatest
manner of w
improving his advantages from the misfortune of his adversary. Some of his
victory.

counsellors advised him to treat Francis with the magnanimity
that became a victorious Prince, and instead of taking advan-
tage of his situation to impose rigorous conditions, to dismiss him
on such equal terms, as would bind him for ever to his interest
by the ties of gratitude and affeCtion, more forcible as well as
more permanent than any which could be formed by extorted
oaths and involuntary stipulations. Such an exertion of genero-
fity is not, perhaps, to be expeted in the conduCt of political affairs,
and it was far too refined for that Prince to whom it was propoSed.
The more obvious, but less splendid scheme of endeavouring to
make the utmost of Francis's calamity, had a greater number in
the council to recommend it, and suited better with the Empe-
ror's genius. But though Charles adopted this plan, he did not
execute it in a proper manner. Instead of making one great
effort to penetrate into France with all the forces of Spain and
the Low-Countries; intlead of crufling the Italian fates before
they recovered from the consternation which the success of his
arms had occatioed; lie had recourse to the artifices of intrigue
and ncgociation. Tllis procedelcd partly from necefity, partly
from the natural lilpofition of his mind. The situation of his
Iinances at that timne rendered it cxtremely difficult to carry on
any cxtraordinary armament; and he himfclf having never

appeared
4

appeared at the head of his armies, the comninand of BOOK IV.
which he had hitherto committed to his generals, was averse --
from bold and martial counsels, and trusted more to the arts
with which he was acquainted. He laid, besides, too much
ftrcfs upon the victory of Pavia, as if by that event the flrength
of France had been annihilated, its resources exhaufled, and the
kingdom itself, no less than the person of its Monarch; had been
fubjeded to his power.

FULL of'this opinion, he determined to set the highest price The li>trouo

term, he pro-'
upon Francis's freedom, and having appointed the Count de poses to

Francis.

Roeux to visit the captive King in his name, he instructed him to
propose the following articles, as the conditions on which he
would grant him his liberty; that he should restore Burgundy to
the Emperor, from whose ancestors it had been unjustly wreffcd,
that he hould surrender Provence and Dauphin', that they
might be ereced into an independant kingdom for the Conflable
Bourbon; that he Ihould make full fatisfadion to the King of
England for all his claims; and finally, renounce the preten-
sions of France to Naples, Milan, or any other territory in Italy.
When Francis, who had hitherto flattered himself that he hould
be treated by the Emperor with the generosity becoming one
great Prince towards another, heard these rigorous conditions,
he was l; transported with indignation, that drawing his dagger
hafsily, he cried out, "'Twere bctter that a King should die thus."
Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence, laid hold on his hand; but
though he soon recovered greater composure, he flill dtl,:ared in
t!he nim)ii folcn il nncr, that he would rather remain a prifoncr
liir;ll; life, than purchac liberty by such ignominious conccf-
sions x

A Mem. de Bclay, 94. Ferreras Hilt. ix. 43.

HrS·

loK IV. TH s mortifying discovery of the Emperor's intentions,
^^r-- greatly augmented Francis's chagrin and impatience under his
Francis confinement, and muff have driven him to absolute despair, if he
ried prifor.er had not laid hold of the only thing which could still administer
to Spall to him any-comfort. He persuaded himself, that the conditions

which Roeux had proposed, did not flow originally from Charles
himself, but were didated by the rigorous policy of his Spanifl
council, and that therefore he might hope in one personal inter-
view with him, to do more towards hastening his own deli-
verance, than could be effeted by long negociations passing
through the subordinate hands,of his ministers. Relying on
this supposition, which proceeded from too favourable an opi-
nion of the Emperor's chaaaer, he offered to visit him in Spain,
and was willing to be carried thither as a fpedacle to that
haughty nation. Lannoy employed all his address to confirm
him in these sentiments; and concerted with him in secret the
manner of executing this resolution. Francis was so eager
on a scheme Which seemed to open Some profpet of liberty,
that he furniihed the gallies necessary for the voyage, Charles
being at that time unable to set any fleet to sea. The viceroy,
without communicating his intentions either to Bourbon or
.Pescara, conduced his prisoner towards Genoa, under. pretence
of transporting him by sea to Naples; though soon after they
set ifail, he ordered the pilots to steer directly for Spain; but the
wind happening to carry them near the French coast, the
unfortunate Monarch had a full profpet of his own dominions,
towards which he cast many a sorrowful and desiring look.
They laqided, however, in a few days at Barcelona, and soon
after, Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's command, in the
Augul 4. Alcazar of Madrid, under the care of the vigilant Alarcon, who

guarded him with as much circumfpction as ever Y.

Merm. de Bcllay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. 1. 6.323.

A FE\V

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid, and when he BOOK IV.

began to be sensible of his having relied without foundation on .
the Emperor's generosity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty with Henry VIIT.
the Regent of France, which afforded him some hope of co^",nudeha
liberty from another quarter. Henry's extravagant demands France,in

order to pro-,

had been received at Madrid with that neglec which they cure his
deserved, and which he probably expeted. Charles, intoxicated rleae.
with prosperity, no longer courted him in that respectful and
submissive manner which pleated his haughty temper. Wolfey,
no less haughty than his nafter, was highly irritated at the
Emperor's discontinuing his wonted caresses and professions of
friendship to him. These flight offences, added to the weighty
considerations formerly mentioned, induced Henry to enter into
a defensive alliance with Louise, in which all the differences
between him. and her son were adjusted; at the fame time he.
engaged that he would employ his bell offices in order to pro-
cure the deliverance of his new ally from a state of captivity z

WHIL E the open defectin of such a powerful confederate Morone's in-

trigues, in or-

affeCted Charles with deep concern, a secret conspiracy was car- der to over-
rying on in Italy, which threatened him with consequences still trU'n the Em-

peror's power

more fatal. The restless and intriguing genius of Morone, in Italy.
chancellor of Milan, gave rife to this. His revenge had been
amply gratified by the expullion of the French out of Italy, and
his vanity no less toothed by the re-establishment of Sforza, to
whose interels he had attached himself, in the dutchy of Milan.
The delays however, and evalions of the Imperial court in
granting forza the investiture of his new-acquired territories
had long alarmed Moronei; these were repeated so often, and
with such apparent artifice, as became a fill proof to his fiufpi-

Herbert. Fildc's Life of Wolfcy, 337.

4 cious

BOOK IV. cious mind that the Emperor intended to;ftrip his mailer of that

-~- rich country which he had conquered in his name. Though

5 Charles, in order to quiet the Pope and Venetians, no less jea-

lous.s his designs than Morone, gave Sforza, at last, the invefti-
ture which had been so long d( fired, the charter was clogged with
so many rcfervations, and fubjeed him to such grievous bur-
dens, as rendered the duke of Milan a dependant on the Emperor,
rather than a vassal of the Empire, and afforded him scarce any
other security for his possessions, than the good plcafure of an
ambitious superior. Such an accession of power as would have
accrued from the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of
Naples, was confidered by Morone as fatal to the liberties of Italy
no less than to his own power and importance. Full of this idea, he
began to revolve in his mind the poflibility of rescuing Italy
from the yoke of foreigners, the darling scheme, as has been
already observed, of the Italian politicians in that age, and
which it was the great object of their ambition to accomplish.
If to the glory of having been the chief infirument in driving
the French out of Milan, he could add that of delivering Naples
from the dominion of the Spaniards, he thought that nothing
would b)e wanting to complcat his fame. His fertile genius
soon fuggcfled to him a projec for that purpose; a difficult,
indeed, and 'laring one, but for that very reason, more agreeable
to his bold and enterprizing temper.

His neI'ocia- IOURBON an(t Pescara were equally enraged at Lannoy's
,tnar wit carrying the French King into Spain without their knowledge.

The former, being afraid that the two Monarchs might, in his
abfcncc, conclude some treaty in which his intcrefis would be
entirely tacrificcd, haftcned to Madrid, in order to guard( against
that danger. The latter, on whom the command of the army

i3,^~~ ~~I0noW

now devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; but in every BooK 1V.
company, he gave vent to his indignation againfi the viceroy in
expressions full of rancour and contempt; he accused him in a
letter to the Emperor of cowardice in the time of danger, and
of insolence after a viaory, towards the obtaining of which he
had contributed nothing either by his valour or his conduct; nor
did he abfain from bitter complaints against the Emperor him-
self, who had nut discovered, as he imagined, a sufficient sense
of his merit, nor bestowed any adequate reward on his services.
It was on this disgust of Pescara, that Morone founded his
whole system. He knew the boundless ambition of his nature,
the vast extent of his abilities in peace as well as war, and the
intrepidity of his mind capable alike of undertaking and of
executing the most desperate designs. The cantonment of the
Spanish troops on the frontier of the Milanese, gave occasion to
many interviews between him and Morone, in which the latter
took care frequently to turn the conversation to the tranfadions
subsequent to the battle of Pavia, afubjet upon which the mar-
quis always entered willingly and with passion; and Morone ob-
serving his resentment to be uniform and violent, artfully point-
ed out and aggravated every circumfiance that could incrcafe its
fury. He painted in the strongest colours the Emperor's want of
diScernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to him,
and in allowing that prcfumptuous Fleming to difofe of the
captive King without consulting the man to whose bravery and
wisdom Charlcs was indebted for the glory of laving him in
his power. Having warmed him by such discourses, he then
began to infimnate that now was the time to be avenged for
there insults, and to acquire immortal renown as the delivcrcr
of his country from the opprcllion of strangers; that the flates

VOL. II. 1 i of

BOOK IV. of Italy, weary of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of

,Ss^s barbarians, were at last ready to combine in order to vindicate

their own independence; that their eyes were fixed on him
as the only leader whose genius and good fortune could ensure
the happy success of that noble enterprize; that the attempt was
no less pracicable than glorious, it being in his power so to dif-
perse the Spanish infantry, the only body of the Emperor's
troops in Italy, through the villages of the Milanese, that, in
one night, they might be destroyed by the people, who, having
fuffcred much from their exactions and insolence, would gladly
undertake this service; that he might then, without opposition,
take poffflion of the throne of Naples, the elevation detfined for
him, and a reward not unworthy the restorer of liberty to Italy;
that the Pope, of whom that kingdom held, and whose pre-
deceffors had disposcd of it on many former occasions, would'
willingly grant him the right of investiture; that the Venetians,
the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to whom he had communi-
cated the fchcme, together with the French would be the guaran-
tees of his right; that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer
the government of one of their countrymen, whom they loved
and admired, to that odious dominion of firangers, to which
they had been so long ftl)jceted; and that the Emperor, atto-
nifhcd at a blow so unexpected, would find that he had neither-
troops nor money to rcfift such a powerful confederacy .

1'PISCARA, amazed at the boldncfs and extent of the scheme,
liflened attentively to Moronc, but with the countenance of a

b Guic. 1. xvi. 325. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv. de Brantome, iv.

171. Rufcclli Lettcre de Princ. ii. 9i. Thuani Hifi. lib. i. c. ii. P. Heutcr.
Rer. Auftr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 207.

t aman

aan loft in profound and anxious thought. On the one hand, BOOK IV.
the infamy of betraying his sovereign under whom he bore such ,525.
high command, deterred him from the attempt; on the other, Betrayed and

taken pri-
the profped of obtaining a crown allured him to venture upon it. soner by

Petcara.

After continuring a hort space in suspense, the leait commend-
able motives, as is usual after such deliberations, prevailed, and
ambition triumphed over honour, In order, however, to throw
a colour of decency on his conduc, he infifed that some learned
casuists flhould give their opinion, " Whether it was lawful
for a subjed to take arms against his immediate sovereign,
in obedience to the Lord Paramount of whom the kingdom
itself was held." Such a resolution of the cafe, as he expected,
was soon obtained from the divines and civilians both of Rome
-and Milan; the negociation went forward; and measures seemed
to be taking with great spirit for the speedy execution of the
design.

MEANWH I LE Pescara, either shocked at the treachery of the

ation which he was going to commit, or dcfpairing of its fuc-
cess, began to entertain thoughts of abandoning the engagements
ihe hal come under. The indisposition of Sforza, who happened
at that time to be taken ill of a diitenpcr whicll was thought
mortal, confirmed this resolution, and determined hilm to make
known the whole conspiracy to the Emnpcror, deeming it more
prudent to exped the dutchy of Milan irom him as the reward
of this difeovery, than to aim at a kingdom to be purclafed by
a rcries of crimes. This resolution, however, proved the source
,f actions fcarcc less criminal and ignominious. Tlhe Emperor,
who liad already received fll infornation concerning the con-
fpiracy froin other hlands, fcemcd to be highly pleafied with

1 i 2 Pcfcara's

BOOK IV. Pescara's fieIity, and commanded him to continue his intrigues

- 1 for ome time with the Pope and Sforza, both that he might

discover their intentions more fully, and be able to convic them
of the crime with greater certainty. Pescara, conscious of guilt,
as well as fenfiblc how suspicious his long silence must have ap-
peared at Madrid, durst not decline that dishonourable office; and
to his eternal disgrace, was obliged to aa the meanest of all parts,
that of seducing with a purpose to betray. Confidering the
abilities of the persons with whom he had to deal, the part
was scarce less difficult, than base; but he aed, it with such
address, as to deceive even the penetrating eye of Morone, who
relying with full confidence on his sincerity, visited him at
Novara in order to put the last hand to their machinations.
Pescara received him in an apartment where Antonio de Leyva
was placed behind the tapestry, that he might overhear and
bear witness to their conversation; as Morone was returning
homewards, that officer suddenly appeared, and to his astonish-
ment arrested him prisoner in the Emperor's name. He was con-
duaed tothe castle of Pavia; and Pescara, who had so lately been
his accomplice, had now the aflurance to interrogate him as his
judge. At the fame time, the Emperor declared Sforza to have
forfeited all right to the dutchy of Milan, by his engaging in
a conspiracy against the sovereign of whom he held; Pescara,
by his command, seized on every place in the Milanese, except
the castles of Cremona and' Milan, which the unfortunate duke
attempting to defend, were clofcly blockaded by the Imperial
troops .

Gut. i . xvi. 329. Jovii Ililt. 319. Capella, lib. v. p. 200.

BVr

BuT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, instead of tripping BOOK IV.

the Emperor of what he already possessed in Italy, contributed to 52. -
extend his dominions in that country, it hewed him the necef- The rigorous

trtatment of

fity of coming to some agreement with the French King, unless Francis in
he would draw on himself a confederacy of all Europe, which Spai.
the progress of his arms, and his boundless and undisguised
ambition, filled with. general alarm. He had not hitherto
treated Francis with the generosity which that monarch ex-
peded, and scarce with the decency due to his flation. Instead of
displaying the sentiments becoming a great Prince, he seems to
have ated with the mercenary art of a corsair, who by the rigo-
rous usage of his prisoners, endeavours to draw from them an
high price for their ransom. The captive King was confined in
an old castle, under a keeper whose formal austerity of manners
rendered' his vigilance fill more disgustful. He was allowed
no exercise but that of ridingon a mule, surrounded with armed
guards on horseback. Charles, on pretence of its being necef-
fary to attend the Cortes assembled in Toledo, had gone to reside
in that city, and suffered several weeks to elapse without visiting
Francis, though he follicited an interview with the most pressing
and fubmiflive importunity. So many indignities made a
deep impression on an high-fpiritcd Prince; he began to lose
all relish for his usual amusements; his natural gaiety of temper Endangers his

litb.

forsook him; and after languilhing for fomte time, he was seizcd
with a dangerous fever, during the violence of which he com-
plained conitantly of the iunxpccdcd adll ulnprincely rigourwith
Wlhieh lc had been treated, often exclaiming, that now the
Emperor would have the fatisfadion of his (lying in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face. The physicians,
at last, dcfpaired of his life, and iniborcd the Emperor that they

: saw

BoOJK IV. saw no hope of his recovery, unless he were gratified with

jzS. regard to that point on which he seemed to be so itrongly bent.

Charles, follicitous to preserve a life, with which all his profpeas
of farther advantage from the vicory at Pavia must have termi-
nated, immediately consulted his ministers concerning the course
to be taken. In vain did the chancellor Gattinara, the most
able among them, represent to him the indecency of his visiting
Francis, if he did not intend to set him at liberty immediately
upon equal terms; in vain did he point out the infamy to which
he would be exposed, if motives of avarice or ambition should
prevail on him to give the captive Monarch this mark of atten-
tion and sympathy, for which humanity and generosity had
pleaded so long without effec. The Emperor, less delicate, or
less follicitous about reputation than his minister, set out for

Sept. z8. Madrid to visit his prisoner. The interview was short; Francis
T fts finper being too weak to bear a long conversation. Charles accosted him

in terms full of affection and refped,-and gave him such promises
of speedy deliverance and princely treatment, as would have
reflected the greatest honour upon him, if they had flowed from
another source. Francis graspcd at them with the eagerness
natural in his situation; and cheared with this gleam of lhope
began to revive from that moment, and soon recovered his wonted
health ".

The conllable HE had soon the mortification to find, that his confidence
Bourbon ar- in the Emperor was not better founded than formerly.
rives at Ma-
drid. Charles returned infiantly to Toledo; all ncgociations were

carried on by his miniftcrs; and Francis was kept in as firid

d Guic. 1. XVi. 339. Sandov. His. i. 665.

cuflotly

custody as ever. A new indignity, and that very galling, was BOOK IV;
added to all these he had already suffered. Bourbon arriving in L

15z5·

Spain about this time, Charles, who had so long refused to visit
the King, received his rebellious fubjedt with the most fludied
refped. He met him without the gates of Toledo, embraced Nov. i
him with the greatest affedion, and placing him on his left hand,
conducted him to his apartment. These marks of honour to
him, were so many insults to the unfortunate Monarch; which
he felt in a very sensible manner. It afforded him some confo-
lation, however, to observe that the sentiments of the Spaniards
differed widely from those of their sovereign. That generous
people detested Bourbon's crime; and notwithstanding his great
talents and important services, they hunned all intercourfewith
him to such a degree, that Charles having desired the marquis
de Villena to permit Bourbon to reside in his palace while the
court remained in Toledo, he politely replied, " That he could
not refuf e'gratifying the Emperor in that request;" but added
with a Castilian dignity of mind, " that he must not be furprized
if the moment the Conitable departed, he should burn to the
ground a house, which having been polluted by the presence of a
traitor, became an unfit habitation for a man of honour'.'

THE Emperor himself, nevcrthelcfs, seemed to haveit much at App inted
heart to reward Bourbon's services in a signal manner. Iut as gener" of the

m nperinl army

Bourbon insisted, in the first place, on thc accomplihmeut of his ill ialy.
promise of giving him in marriage his filer Eleanora, Qucen
dowager of Portugal, the honour of which alliance had been olne
of his chief inducements to rebel againfl his lawful fovcrcig;n; as.
-Francis, in order to prevcnt ftclh a dangcrous union, had offercd,

O Guic. I. xvi. 335.f

l.o,,.

BOOK IV. before he left Italy, to marry that Princess; and as Eleanora

herself discovered an inclination ratherto match with a powerful
Monarch, than with his exiled subjed; all there interfering cir-
cumftances created great embaraffment to Charles, and left him
scarce any hope of extricating himself with decency. But the
December. death of Pescara, who at the age of thirty-fix, left behind him

the reputation of being one of the greatest generals and ablest
politicians of that century, happened opportunely at this juncture
for his relief. By that event, the command of the army in Italy
became vacant, and Charles, always fertile in resources, per-
fuaded Bourbon, who was in no condition to dispute his will,
to accept the office of general in chief there, together with a grant
of the dutchy of Milan forfeited by Sforza, and in return for
these to relinquish all hopes of marrying the Queen of Portugal'.

Negociations TH E chief obstacle that stood in the way of Francis's liberty
for procuring
Francis's was the Emperor's infilting f peremptorily on the restitution of
liberty. Burgundy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis often declared

that he would never content to dismember his kingdom; and
that even if he fliould so far forget the duties of a Monarch as
to come to such a resolution, the fundamental laws of the king-
dom would prevent its taking effect. On his part, he was wil-
ling to make an absolute cession to the Emperor of all his pre-
tensions in Italy and the Low-Countries; he promifid to reflore
Bourbon all his lands which had been confiscated; he renewed his
proposal of marrying the Emperor's filler, the Queen dowager
of Portugal; and engaged to pay a great rum by way of ransom
for his own person. But all mutual eftcem and confidence be-
twecn the two monarchs were now entirely loft; there appeared,

Sandov. Hist. i. 676. Ocuv. dc Brant. iv. 249-

on the one hand, a rapacious ambition labouring to avail itself BOOK IV.
-of every favourable circumstance; on the other, suspicion anid 2
resentment, standing perpetually on their guard; so that the
profped of bringing their negociations to an issue, seemed to be
far distant. The dutchess of Alencon, the French King's fiter,
whom Charles permitted to visit her brother in his confinement,
employed all her address, in order to procure his liberty on more
reafonablc terms: Henry of England interposed his good offices Fiancis i

derpair e-

to the fame purpose; but both with so little success, that Francis dolvc t re-
in despair took suddenly the resolution of resigning his crown h
with all its rights and prerogatives to his son the Dauphin,
determining rather to end his days in prison, than to purchase
his freedom by concefions unworthy of a King. The deed
for this purpose he signed with legal formality at Madrid,
empowering his sifter to carry it into France that it might be
registered in all the parliaments of the kingdom; and at the
fame time intimating his intention to the Emperor, he desired
him to name the place of his confinement, and to aflign him a
proper number of attendants during the remainder of his days .

Ti IS resolution of the French King had great eflfea; Charles Chae,,

began to be fenfiblc, that by pufling rigour to cxcefs, lie might al.irmd.
defeat his own measures, and instead of the vait advantages lie
hoped to draw fiom ransoming a powerful Monarch, he might
at last find in his hands a Prince without dominions or revenues.
About the fane time, one of the King of Navarre's doncftics
happened by an extraordinary exertion of fidelity, courage and
address, to procure his mafler an opportunity of cfcaping fiom
the prison in whicl he had been confined ever since the battle of

c This paper is publiflld in Memoircs IIifloriqucs, &c. par M. 1' Abbc
Ilaynail , tom. ii. p. 151.

VOL. II. K k Pavia.

BOOK IV. Pavia. This convinced the Emperor, that the most vigilant atten-

j~'. tion of his officers might be eluded by the ingenuity or boldness

of Francis, or his attendants, and one unlucky hour might
dcprive him of all the advantages which he had been so follicitous
to oltain. By these considerations, he was induced to abate some-
wiat of his former demands. On the other hand, Francis's im-
patience under confinement daily increased; and having received
certain intelligence of a powerful league forming against his rival
in Italy, lie grew more compliant with regard to concessions,
trufling, that if he could once obtain his liberty, he would soon
be in a condition to resume whatever he had yielded.

126.

Tr,:., y,( As these were the views and sentiments of the two Monarchs,
Mdi jd.

the treaty which procured Francis his liberty was signed at Madrid
on the fourteenth of January, one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix. The article with regard to Burgundy, which had
hitherto created the greatest difficulty, was compromised, Francis
engaging to restore that dutchy with all its dependencies in full
lovereignty to the Emperor; and Charles consenting that this
refitution fliould not be made till the King was set at liberty;
in order to fecurc the performance of this, as well as the other
conditions in the treaty, Francis agreed that at the fame instant
lie himfelfwas relcafcd, he would deliver as hoifages to the Em-
peror, his eldcft son the Dauphin, his fccond son tlhe duke of
Orleans, or in lieu of the latter, twelve of his principal nobi-
lity, t l namced by Charles. The other articles fwcllcd to a
great numbler, and tho' not of such importance, were extremely
rigorous. Among tlicfc tle most rmarkable werc, that Francis
fliotuld renounce all his prctenfions in Italy; that lhe should
ldiclailn any title which he had to tle fovcrcignty of Slanders
and Artois; that within fix weeks after his rclcafc, he flould

8 rclltore

restore to Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods, moveable BOOK IV.
and immoveable, and make them full reparation for the damages 5 Z
they had sustained by the confiscation of them; that he should
use his interest with Henry D'Albret to relinquish his preten-
sions to the crown of Navarre, and ihould not for the future
assist him in any attempt to recover it; that there fnould be efta-
blifhed between the Emperor and Francis a league of perpetual
friendship and confederacy, with a promise of mutual assistance
in every cafe of necessity. That in corroboration of this union,
Francis should marry the Emperor's fifler, the Queen Dowager of
Portugal; that Francis should caufeall the articles of this treaty
to be ratified by the States, and registered in the Parliaments of
his kingdom; that upon the Emperor's receiving this ratifica-
tion, the hostages should be set at liberty; but in their place, the
duke of Angouleme, the King's third son, hould be delivered to
Charles, that in order to manifest, as well as to strengthen the
amity between the two Monarchs, he might be educated at the
Imperial court; and that if Francis did not, within the time
limited, fulfil the stipulations in the treaty, he hould promise,
upon his honour and oath, to return into Spain, and to furrendcr
himself again a prisoner to the Emperor h.

BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that lie had not only Sentiments of

that age with

effectually humbled his rival, but that he had taken such pre- icfpet to it.
cautions as would for ever prevent his rc-attaining any
formidable degree of power. The opinion, which the wiicft
politicians formed concerning it, was very different; they could
not pcrfuade thcmfelves that Francis, after obtaining his liberty,
would execute these articles againfl which lie had struggled to

h Rccueil des Trait. tom. ii. 112. Ulloa Vita dell Cailo V. p. 102, &c.

K k long,

BooK IV. long, and to which even amidst the horrors of captivity he had

--- 'consented with such relucance. Ambition and resentment, they

knew, would conspire in prompting him to violate the hard con-
ditions to which he had' been conltrained to submit; nor would,
arguments and casuistry be wanting to represent that which was
so manifestly advantageous, to be necessary and just. If one
part of Francis's conduct had been, known, at that time, this
opinion might have been founded, not in conjeture, but in cer-

'rarcs fecre:- tainty. A few hours before he signed the treaty, he affembledi
)' proteis
a.iiri, the such of his counsellors as were then in Madrid, and having
vaaidity of it.

exaded from them a solemn oath of secrecy, he made a long'
enumeration in their. presence of all the dishonourable arts, as:
well as uiipriiicly rigour, which the Emperor had employed in
order to cnfnare or intimidate him. For that reason, he took
a formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his consent to the
treaty Ihould be confidered as an involuntary deed, and be deemed'
null and void'. By this disingenuous artifice, for which even
the treatment he had met with was no apolbgy, Francis endea-
voured to satisfy his honour and conscience in signing the treaty,
and to provide at the fame time a pretext on which to break it..

MEANWHILE, great were the outward demonstrations of

love and confidence between the two Monarchs; they appeared
often together in publick; they frequently had long conferences.
in private; they travelled in the fame litter, and joined in the
,amne amufcments. But amidst these signs of peace and friend-
filp, the Emperor fill harboured suspicion in his mind. Though,
the ceremonies of the marriage between Francis and the Queen
of Portugal were performed oon after the conclusion of the
treaty, Charles would not permit him to consummate it until

Recucil dcs Trait. tom. ii. p. 107.

the

the return of the ratification from France. Even then Francis BooxK IV.
was not allowed to be at full liberty; his guards were fiill con- 6
tinued; and while he was carefled as a brother-in-law, he was
still watched like a prisoner; and it was obvious to attentive
observers, that an union, in the very beginning of which there
might be discerned such symptoms ofjealoufy and distrust, could
not be cordial, or of long continuance k

ABOUT a month after the signing of the treaty, the Regent's Ratnied i

ratification of it was brought from France; and that wife Prin- France.
cess, preferring, on this occasion, the publick good to domeflick
affection, informed her Ion, that instead of the twelve noblemen
named in the treaty, fie had sent the duke of Orleans along
with his brother the Dauphin to the frontier, as the kingdom
could susser nothing by the absence of a child, but must be left
almost incapable of defence, if deprived of its ablest statesmen, and.
moll experienced generals, whom Charles had artfully included
in his nomination. At last Francis took leave of the Emperor, Francis set at
whose suspicion of the King's sincerity increasing, as the time liberty.
of putting it to the proof approached, he endeavoured to bind
him fill faflter by exacting new promises, which after those lihe
had already made, the French Monarch. was not flow to grant.
-Ie set out from Madrid, a place which the remembrance of
many afflicting circumfianccs rendered peculiarly odious to
hiln, with the joy natural on such an occasion, and began the
long-wifhed-for journey towards his own dominions. He was
escorted by a body of horse under the command of Alarcon, who,
as the King drew near the fiontiers of France, guarded him
with more scrupulous cxadncfs than ever. When lie arrived
at the river Andayc, which fcparatcs the two kingdoms, Lautrcc.

k Guic. . 5. 353 j
T^ appeared

'BOOK IV. appeared on the opposite bank with a guard of horse equal in

^61 number to Alarcon's. An empty bark was moored in the middle

of the stream; the attendants drew up in order on the opposite
banks; at the fame instant, Lannoy with eight gentlemen put
off from the Spanish, and Lautrec with the fame number from
the French fide of the river; the former had the King in his
boat; the latter, the Dauphin and duke of Orleans; they met
in the empty vessel; the exchange was made in a moment;
Francis, after a short embrace to his children, leaped into Lau-
trec's boat, and reached the French shore. He mounted that
instant a Turkish horse, waved his hand over his head, and with
a joyful voice crying aloud several times, " I am yet a King,"
galloped full speed to St. John de Luz, and from thence to
Bayonne. This event, no less impatiently desired by the
French nation than by their Monarch, happened on the eigh-
teenth of March, a year and twenty-two days after the fatal
battle of Pavia'.

The Empe- SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of Francis, and permitted
ror's marriage
wi'h lfibella him to begin his journey towards his own dominions, he set out
of Portugal. for Seville, in order to solemnize his marriage with Isabella, the

daughter of Emanuel, the late King of Portugal, and the sifter
of John II. who had succeeded him in the throne of that king-
dom. Iabella was a princess of uncommon beauty and accom-
plifnments; and as the Cortes both in Castile and Aragon had
warmly solicited their overeign to marry, the choice of a wife
so nearly allied to the royal blood of both kingdoms, was
extremely acceptable to his fubjeds. The Portuguese, fond of
this new connecion with the first Monarch in Christendom,
grantcd him an extraordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting

Sandov. Hifi. i. 735. Guic, 1. 6. 355.

to

to nine hundred thousand crowns, a fum, which, in the Book IV.
situation of his affairs at that jundure, was of no small confe- '

1526.

quence to the Emperor. The marriage was celebrated with that Ma cii 12
splendour and gaiety, which became a great and youthful Prince.
Charles lived with Isabella in perfed harmony, and treated her
on all occasions with much diftindion and regard m

DURING there tranfadions, Charles could scarce give any A of

attention to the affairs of Germany, though it was torn in pieces Germany.
by commotions, which threatened the most dangerous confe-
quences. The feudal institutions still subsistcd almost unimpaired
in the Empire. The property of lands was vfted in the Princes,
and free-barons. Their vassals held of them by the frideft and rieva ce of
molt limited tenures; while the great body of the people was kept the peasants.
in a state but little removed from absolute servitude. In some places
of Germany, people of the lowest class were so entirely in the power
of their maifers, as to be subjed to personal and domeflic slavery,
the most rigorous form of that wretched slate. In other provinces,
particularly in Bohemia and Lusatia, the peasants were bound
to remain on the lands to which they belonged, and making part
of the etate, were transferred like any other property from one
hand to another. Even in Suabia, and the countries on the
banks of the Rhine, where their condition was molt tolerable,
the peasants not only paid the full rent of their farnis to the
landlord; but if they chore either to change the place of their
abode, or to follow a new profcllion, they were obligedto pur-
chak this privilege at a certain price. Betides this, all grants of
lands to peasants expired at their death, without dcclcnding to
their poftcrity. Upon that event, the landlord had a right to the

Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 106. Belcarius Corn. Rer. Gallic. p. 565.
Spalatuus ap. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Gern. ii. o8i.

belt

Boox IV. best of their cattle, and of their furniture; and their heirs, in

7Tó' order to obtain a renewal of the grant, were obliged to pay

large fums by way of fine. These exaaions, though grievous,
were born with patience, because they were customary and
ancient: But when the progress of elegance and luxury, as well
as the changes introduced into the art of war came to increase
the expence of government, and made it necessary for Princes to
levy occasional or fiated taxes on their fubjeds, such impositions
being new, appeared intolerable; and in Germany, these duties
being laid chiefly upon beer, wine, and other necessaries of
life, affected the common people in the most sensible manner.
The addition of such a load to their former burdens, drove them
to despair. It was to the valour inspired by resentment against
impositions of this kind, that the Swiss owed the acquisition of
their liberty in the fourteenth century. The fame cause had
excited the peasants in several other provinces of Germany to
rebel against their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and though these infur-
redions were not attended with like success, they could not
however be quelled without much difficulty and bloodshed".

Their infur. liY these checks, the spirit of the peasants was ovcrawed
recion in
Suabia. rather than subdued; and their gricvances multiplying conti-

nually, they ran to arms, this year, with the Inofi frantic rage.
Their firl appearance was near Uln in Suabia. The peasants
in the adjacent country flocked to their flandard with the ardour
and impatience natural to men, who having groaned long under
oppreflion, beheld at last some profped of deliverance; and the
contagion fprcading from province to province, reached almost

" Scckcnd. lib. ii. p. 2. 6.

every

every part of Germany. Wherever they came, they plundered BooK IV.
the monasteries; wafted the lands of their superiors; razed their i;6.
caffles; and massacred without mercy all persons of noble birth
who were so unhappy as to fall into their hands". Having inti-
midated their oppressors, as they imagined, by the violence of
these proceedings, they began to confider what would be the
most proper and effectual method of securing themselves for the
future from their tyrannical exactions. With this view, they
drew up and published a memorial, containing all their demands,
and declared that while arms were in their hands, they would
either persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full fatisfadion
with regard to these. The chief articles were, that they might
have liberty to chute their own pastors; that they might be
freed from the payment of all tythes but those of corn; that they
might no longer be confidered as the slaves or bondmen of their
superiors; that the liberty of hunting and fishing might be
common; that the great forests might not be regarded as private
property, but be open for the use of all; that they might be deli-
vered from the unusual burden of taxes under which they
laboured; that the administration of justice might be rendered
less rigorous and more impartial; that the encroachments of the
nobles upon meadows and commons might be restrained .

MANY of these demands were extremely reasonable; and Qulled,

being urged by such formidable numbers, might have met with
some redress. But those vast unwieldy bodies, assembled in dif-
ferent places, had neither union, nor conduct, nor vigour.
They were led by persons of the lowell rank without skill in war,

Petr. Crinitus de Bcllo Rufticano. ap. Frcher. Script. Rer. Germ. Argent.

17 . vol. iii. p. 243. ° Slcid. Hist. p. 90.
VOL. II. L 1 or

BOOK IV. or knowledge of what was necessary for accomplishing their

"a76 ^ designs; and all their exploits were distinguished only by a

brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose this, the princes and
nobles of Suabia and the Lower Rhine railed their, vaflals, and
attacking some of the mutineers with open force, and. others by
furprize, cut to pieces, or dispersed all who infested those pro-
vinces; so that the peasants, after ruining the open country, and
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their associates in the
field, were obliged to return to their habitations with less hope
than ever of relief from their grievances P

Their inrur- THESE commotions happened at first in provinces of Ger-
leeion in
TIluringia. many where Luther's opinions had made little progress; and

being excited wholly by political causes, had no connection with
the disputed points in religion. But the frenzy reaching at last
those countries in which the Reformation was established,
derived new strength from circumstances peculiar to them, and
rose to a still greater pitch of extravagance. The Reformation,
wherever it was received, increased that bold and innovating
spirit to which it owed its birth. Men who had the courage to
overturn a system supported by every thing which can command
refped or reverence, were not to be overawed by any authority,
however great or venerable. After having been accustomed to
confider themselves as judges of the most important doctrines
in religion, to examine these freely, and to reject, without scruple,
what appeared to them erroneous, it was natural for them to turn
lhc fame (daring and inquisitive eye towards government, and to
think of rectifying whatever disorders or imperfctions were dif-

' Seckend. lib. ii. p. 1o. Pctr. Gnodalius de Ruflicanorum Tunultu in (cGr-
maniia ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p. 131, &c.

covcered

covered there. And as religious abuses had been reformed in BOOK IV.
several places without the permission of the magistrate, it was an 6-
easy transition to attempt the rcdrefs of political grievances in the
fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break out in Thu- Mre jformi.

ringia, a province fubjcdt to the Eletor of Saxony, the inhabi- dab!e.
tants of which were moflly converts to Lutheranifinm, than it
affined a new and more dangerous form. Thomas Muncer,
one of Luther's disciples, having established hinfelf in that
country, had acquired a wonderful ascendant over the
minds of the people. He propagated among them the wildest
and most enthusiastic notions, but such as tended manifefily to
inspire them with boldness, and lead them to sedition. "Luther,
he told them, had done more hurt than service to religion. He Their fana.
had indeed rescued the church from the yoke of Popery, but his t f
doctrines encouraged, and his life set an example of the utmost
licentiousness of manners. In order to avoid vice, fays he, men
mull praCife perpetual mortification. They must put on a grave
countenance, speak little, wear a plain garb, and be fcrious in
thcir whole deportmcnt. Such as prepare their hearts in this
manner, may expct: that the filpreme Being will direct all
their ftcps, and by some visible sign discover his will to them;
if that illumination be at any time with-held, we may expoflu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us so harshly, and remind
him of his promises. This expostulation and anger will be highly
acceptable to God, and will at last prevail on him to guide us
with the fame unerring hand that conducted the patriarchs of
old. Let us beware, however, of offending him by our arro-
gance; but as all men arc equal in his eye, let them return to
that condition of equality in which lie formed them, and having

L1 2 all

BOOK IV. all things in common, let them live together like brethren,
- r--z" "without any marks of subordination or pre-eminence '

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they flattered so many

paflions in the human heart, as to make a deep impression. To
aim at nothing more than abridging the power of the nobles
was now confidered as a trifling and partial reformation,
not worth the contending for; it was proposed to level every
diftindion among mankind, and by abolishing property, to
reduce them to their natural state of equality, in which all
should receive their fubfifience from one common stock. Muncer
assured them, that the design was approved of by heaven,
and that the Almighty had in a dream ascertained him of its
success. The peasants set about the execution of it, not only
with the rage which animated those of their order in other
parts of Germany, but with the ardour that enthusiasm inspires.
They deposed the magistrates in all the cities of which they
were masters; seized the lands of the nobles; and obliged such
of them as they got into their hands, to put on the dress
commonly worn by peasants, and instead of their former
titles, to be satisfied with the appellation given to people in
the lowest class of life. Vast numbers engaged in this wild
undertaking; but Muncer, their leader and their prophet, was
dcflitute of the abilities necessary for conducting it. He had
all the extravagance, but not the courage, which enthufiafis
usually possess. It was with difficulty he could be persuaded to
take the field ; and though he soon drew together eight thou-
sand men, he filffcrcd hinfelf to be surrounded by a body of
cavalry unlcr the command of the Elcdor of Saxony, the Land-
grave of Hcitc, and Duke of Brunswick. Thcfe l'rinces, unwil-

q Scckcnd. lib. ii. p. 13. Skid. Ilift. p. 83.
I ling

ling to hed the blood of their deluded fubjeds, sent a young BOOK IV.
nobleman to their camp, with the offer of a general pardon, if 1; 6
they would immediately lay down their arms, and deliver up
the authors of the sedition. Muncer, alarmed at this, began to
harangue them with his usual vehemence, exhorting them not
to trust these deceitful promises of their oppressors, nor to desert
the cause of God, and of Christian liberty.

BUT the sense of present danger made a deeper impression on Peasants de.

feated.

the peasants than his eloquence, and confusion and terror were
visible in every face, when a rainbnw, which was the emblem
the mutineers had painted on their colours, happening to appear
in the clouds, Muncer, with admirable pretence of mind, laid
hold of that incident, and suddenly raising his eyes and hands
towards heaven, " Behold," cries he, with an elevated voice,
" the sign which God has given. There is the pledge of your
" safety, and a token that the wicked hall be deflroyed." Tle
fanatical multitude set up inflantly a great shout, as if vidory
had been certain; and paling in a moment from one extreme
to another, murdered the unfortunate nobleman who had come
with the offer of pardon, and demanded to be led towards the
enemy. Tie Princes enraged at this Shocking violation of the
laws of war, prevented them by beginning the attack; but the May 15,
behaviour of the peasants in the combat was not fucl as might
have been expected either from their ferocity or confidence of
success; an undisciplincd rabble was no equal match for well-
trained troops; above five thousand were slain in the field,
alimoft without making refiflance; the rcfl fled, and among the
foremofi Munccr, their general. -He was taken next day, and
bci;g condemned to fich punilhmnents as his crimes had

dctefrvcd,

BOOK IV. deserved, he suffered them with a poor and daflardly spirit. His

z' death put an end to the infurretions of the peasants which had
15z6.

filled Germany with such terror'; but the enthusiastic notions
which he had scattered were not extirpated, and produced, not
long after, effects more memorable, as well as more extravagant.

Luther's mo- DUR I NG these commotions, Luther acted with exemplary pru-
derate and
ludcntcon- dence and moderation; like a common parent, solicitous about
dud. the welfare of both parties, without sparing the faults or errors

of either. On the one hand, he addressed a monitory discourse
to the nobles, exhorting them to treat their dependants with
greater humanity and indulgence. On the other, he severely
censured the seditious spirit of the peasants, advifi ng them not to
murmur at hardships inseparable from their condition, nor to
seek for redress by any but legal means'.

LUTIE R'S famous marriage with Catharine a Boria, a nun of

a noble family, who having thrown off the veil, had fled from the
cloificr, happened this year, and was far from meeting with the
fame approbation. Even his molt devoted followers thought this
indecent at a time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned it with any foftcr
appellation than that of incefluous or profane. LIther himself
was fernible of the imprcllion it had made to his lifadvantage;
Iut being atisficd with his own conduct, he bore the cnf!;re of
his friends, and the reproaches of his advcrfarics, with his usual
fortitude '.

' Skid. Hilt. p. 84. Scckentl. lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodalius Tumult. Ruflican.
j55. ' Slid. lift. p. 87. ' Scckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

. Tills

THIS year the Reformation loft its firfi protetor, Frederick, BooK IV.

Eledtor of Saxony; but the blow was the less sensibly felt, as he 15z6.
was succeeded by his brother John, a more avowed and zealous, May .
though less able patron of Luther and his docrines.

ANOTHER event happened about the fame time, which, as it Prufawrefted

occasioned a considerable change in the state of Germany, must from the
be traced back to its source. While the frenzy of the Crusades order.
possessed all Europe during the twelfth and thirteenth centu-
ries, several orders of religious knighthood were founded in
defence of the Christian faith against Heathens and Infidels.
Among these the Teutonic order in Germany was one of the
most illustrious, the knights of which diffinguifhed themselves
greatly in all the wild enterprizes carried on in the Holy Land.
Being driven at last from their settlements in the east, they were
obliged to return to their native country. Their zeal, and valour,
were too impetuous to remain long inacive. They invaded,
on very flight pretences, the province of Pruflia, the inhabitants
of which were flill idolaters; and having completed the conquest
of it about the middle of the thirteenth century, held it many
years as a fief depending on the crown of Poland. Fierce contefis
arose during this period, between the grand maflers of the order,
and the Kings of Poland; the former struggling for indepen-
dcnce, while the latter afrerted their right of sovereignty with
great firmncfs. Albert, a Prince of the house of Brandcnblurgh,
who was lcted grand maler in the year one thousand live hun-
dred and cleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel, maintained a
long war with Sigifinund, King of Poland; but having be-
come an carly convert to Luther's dodrincs, this gradually
IcllIcicd his zal for the itercfts of his fratcrnity, io that lhe

too (k

BOOK IV. took the opportunity of the confusions in the Empire, and the

J abfcnce of the Emperor, to conclude a treaty with Sigismund,

greatly to his private emolument. By it, that part of Prussia
which belonged to the Teutonic order, was ereced into a secular
and hereditary dutchy, and the investiture of it granted to Albert,
who, in return, bound himself to do homage for it to the Kings
of Poland as their vassal. Immediately after this, he made pub-
lick profession of the reformed religion, and married a Princess
of Denmark. The Teutonic knights exclaimed so loudly against
the treachery of their grand malfter, that he was put under the
ban of the Empire; but he still kept possession of the province
he had usurped, and transmitted it to his posterity. In process
of time this rich inheritance fell to the electoral branch of the
family, all dependance on the crown of Poland was shaken off,
and the Margraves of Brandenburgh, having assumed the title of
Kings of Prussia, have not only risen to an equality with the firil
Princes in Germany, but take their rank among the great
Monarchs of Europe'.

Fifl mecaures UPON the return of the French King to his dominions, the
of the French
King upon eyes of all the powers in Europe were fixed upon him, that by
his return to
Irance. obfcrving his firfl motions, they might form a judgment concern-

ing his subsequent condut. They were not held long in fufpence.
Francis, as oon as he arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the King of
England, thanking him for his zealous and affectionate interpo-
fition in his favour, to which he acknowledged that he owed the
recovery of his liberty. Next day the Emperor's ambassadors
demanded audience, and in their mailer's name, required him

u Slcid. Hist. p. 98. Pfcffcl Abrcgc de l'hlit. de Droit Publ. p. 605, &c.

to

to iflue such orders as were necessary for carrying the treaty of BOOK IV.
Madrid into immediate and full execution; he coldly answered, i5z6.
that though for his own part he determined religiously to
perform all he had promiscd, the treaty contained so many
articles relative not to hinmfel alone, but affcting the interests
of the French monarchy, that he could not take any farther
flep without consulting the States of his kingdom, and that
ib'me time would be necefiary in order to reconcile their minds
to the hard conditions which he had consented to ratify .
This reply was confidered as no obscure discovery of his being
resolvcd to elude the treaty; and the complimentpaid to Henry,
appeared a very proper ftep towards securing the assistance of
that Monarch in the war with the Emperor, to which fich a relb-
lution would certainly give rife. These circumflances, added
to the explicit declarations which Francis made in secret to the
ambafladors from several of the Italian powers, fully satisfied
them that their conjcaurcs with regard to his conduct had been
just, and that inftcad of intending to execute an unreasonable
treaty, he was eager to seize the first opportunity of revenging
those ijuries which had compelled himl to fcign an approbation
of it. Even the doubts, and icilrn;, and lrIuples whlich tfctl, on
other occasions, to hold ('l.lncn il a atc ot' Ilncrtainty, were
(liTfipatcd by rancis's Iceming impatience to brak itlrough all
his lngalgemntItS with tl e inpcrl'ol . 'l he ltuatiiol ,

il c, of

affairs in Italy at that time, did Il(t allow the l'ope to licfitate
long. Sforza was fiill Ibelcged lby the Iperiallills in the caltl
of Milaln. That I'clIc I'rincc, deprived now of' iorolle's
advice, and unprovided withl every tiniig Ineccllary for dlecllcc,

Y MeI. IC c.ll;iy, p. 97.
Vo ,. I. IM J11 fo)llmd

BOOK IV. found means to inform Clement and the Venetians, that he

s z6. must soon urrender, if they did not come to his relief. The

Imperial troops, as they had received no pay since the battle
of Pavia, lived at discretion in the Milanese, levying such
exorbitant contributions in that dutchy, as amounted, if we may
rely on Guiccardini's calculation, to no less a fum than five thou-
sand ducats a day Y; nor was it to be doubted, but that the fol-
diers, as oon as the castle fiould fubnit, would chufe to leave a
ruined country which scarce afforded them fubfiflence, that they
might take possession of more comfortable quarters in the fertile
and untouched territories of the Pope and Venetians. The
affiflance of the French King was the only thing which could
either save Sforza, or enable them to protect their own domi-
nions from the insults of the Imperial troops.

A league FOR these reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, and duke of
f:,rmedagains Milan, were equally impatient to come to an agreement with
lhc Lmror.

Francis, who, on his part, was no less desirous of acquiring
so considerable an acccffion both of strength and reputation
as such a confederacy would bring along with it. The chief
objeds of this alliance, which was concluded at Cognac on
the twcnty-fecond of May, though kept secret for ome time,
were to oblige the Emperor to set at liberty the French King's
sons, upon payment of a reasonable ransom; and to re-eftablifl
Sforza in the quict poffcffion of the Milaneltc. If Charles
should rfutfe cither of there, the contracting parties bound
tllcmfelvcs to bring into the icld an army of thirty-five
thoufirnd men, with which, after driving the Spaniards out

Y Guic. 1. xvii. 360.

of

of the Milanese, they would attack the kingdom of Naples. BooK IV.
The King of England was declared Prote&or of this league, xsz6.
'which they dignified with the name of Holy, because the Pope
was at the head of it; and in order to allure Henry more effec-
tually, a principality in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thou-
sand ducats yearly revenue, was to be fettled on him; and lands
to the value of ten thousand ducats on Wolfey his favourite .

No sooner was this league concluded, than Clement, by the ThePope ab-
plenitude of his papal power, absolved Francis from the oath he fotlcs Finais

from his oath
had taken to observe the treaty of Madrid,. This right, how to obrerve the

treaty of

pernicious soever to morals, and deftrutive of that integrity Madrid.
which is the basis of all tranfadions among men, was the natu-
ral consequence of the powers which the Popes arrogated as
the infallible vicegerents of Chriit upon earth; and they having,
in virtue of these, often dispensed with obligations which
were held sacred, the interest of some men, and the credulity of
others led them to imagine that the decisions of a sovereign
pontiff authorized or justified aions which would, otherwise,
have bcen criminal and unbecoming.

MEANWvT I L, the discovery of Francis's intention to clude TlheFnmpcrof

the treaty of Madrid, filled the Emperor with a variety of dif- alarmed.
quieting thoughts. He had treated an unfortunate Prince with
the most ungenerous rigour; he had (lifplayed an insatiable
ambition in all his negociations with his prisoner: lie knew
what cenfurcs the former had drawn upon him, and what apprc-

v P. UIcuter. Rcr. Auflr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Rccucil dcs Trait. ii. 124.

(oldafl. I'olit. Imperial. p. oo?.. Pallav. Hil. p. 70.

1M in 2 liClreions

BooK IV. henfions the latter had excited in every court of Europe; nor

5 - J had he reaped from the measures he pursued, any of those advan-
1526.

tages which politicians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
most criminal condut, and a compensation for the severest
reproaches. Francis was now out of his hands, and not one of
all the mighty consequences which he expeted from the treaty
that set him at liberty, was likely to take place. His rashness
in relying so far on his own judgment as to trust to the sincerity
of the French King, in opposition to the sentiments of his wisest
ministers, was now apparent; and he easily conjetured, that the
fame confederacy, the dread of which had induced him to set
Francis at liberty, would now be formed against him with that
gallant and incensed Monarch at its head. Self-condemnation and
hamc, on account of what was paRl, with anxious apprehenfiorn
concerning what might happen, were the necessary result of these
rellcdions on his own condut and situation. Charles, however,
was naturally firm and inflexible in all his measures. To have
receded suddenly from any article in the treaty of Madrid,
would have been a plain confession of imprudence, and a palpa-
ble symptom of fear; lie determined therefore, that it was molt
suitable to his dignity, to infifl, whatever might be the confe-
quences, on the ftric execution of the treaty, and particularly
not to accept of any thing wlich might be offered as an equiva-
lent for the rcllitution of Burgundy .

IN confe(qunce of this rcfoluition, he appointed Lannoy and

l1 ti ,l to er- Alarcon, to repair, as his albaftladors, to the court of France,
fornlm vl:t lie
liidlliIII.itcl. Ind formally to fIu11mon the King either to execute the treaty

b (;uic. 1. xvii. 366.

z with

itlh the sincerity that became him, or to return, according to BOOK IV.

his oath, a prisoner to Madrid. Instead of giving them an imme- -
diate answer, Francis admitted the deputies of the flates of Bur-
gundy to an audience in their presence. They humbly repre-
sented to him, that he had exceeded the powers veiled in a King
of France when he consented to alienate their country from the
crown, the domains of which he was bound by his coronation oath
to preserve entire and unimpaired. Francis, in return, thanked
them for their attachment to his crown, and intreated them,
though very faintly, to remember the obligations which he lay
inder to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor. The depu-
ties assuming an higher tone, declared that they would not obey
commands which they confidered as illegal; and if lie flould
abandon them to the enemies of France, they had resolved to de-
fend themselves to the best of their power, with a firm purpose
rather to perish than submit to a foreign dominion. Upon which
Francis turning towards the Imperial ambassadors, represented to His answer.
them the impossibility of performing what he had undertaken, and
ofered in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the Emperor two million of
crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon, who cafily perceived that
thc fccne to which they had been witnefics, was concerted between
the King and his fitlujcds in order to impose on themn, ignified
to him their Inafter's fixed rcfolution not to ldepart in the fimallllc
point froml the terms of the treaty, and witlldrew . B3ctorc they
left tlic kingdom, they had the mortifecation to llcar tlec loly
league againfl tlhe Emperor publilhed with great flcmnity. June Ji.

; I1cI-ar. Commcnt. de Rcb. Gal. 573. Mcm. de B3c]ay, 97.

CIIARL S

BOOK IV. CHARLES no sooner received an account of this confederacy

irzT-' than he exclaimed in the molt publick manner, and in the harIheft
, I terms, againfl Francis, as a Prince void of faith, or of honour.

Th- I'mpc-
ror's l'ep:.ra- He complained no less of Clement, whom he follicited in vain to

abandon his new allies; he accused him of ingratitude; he taxed
him with an ambition unbecoming his characer; he threatened
him not only with all the vengeance which the power of an
Emperor can inflid, but by appealing to a general council, called
up before him all the terrors arising from the authority of those
aflcmblics so formidable to the lapal fee. It was necessary,
however, to oppose something elfc than reproaches and threats
to the powerful combination formed against him; and the
Emperor, prompted by so many passions, did not fail to exert
himself with unusual vigour, in order to fend supplies not only
of men, but of money, which was still more needed, into Italy.

Feble opera- ON the other hand, the efforts of the confederates bore no
tions of tie
confederateb. proportion to that animosity against the Emperor witl which

they seemed to enter into the holy league. Francis it
was thought, would have infused spirit and vigour into the
whole body. IHe had his lofl honour to repair, many injuries
to revenge, and the station among the Princes of Europe from
which lie had fallen to recover. From all these, added to the
natural impetuosity of his temper, a war more fierce and bloody
than any lie had hitherto made upon his rival, was expccd.
But Francis had gone through fch a fccne of distress, and the
imnpreflion it had made was Itill so frefll in his memory, that lie
was become diffident of himnfelf, diftrufiful of fortune, and dell-
rous of tranquillity. To procure the relcafe of his sons, and to
avoid the rcflitution of Burgundy by paying some rafonal)c

-I c(luivalent,

equivalent, were his chief objeas, and for the fake of these, he BOoKIV.
would willingly have sacrificed Sforza and the liberties of Italy '"-
to the Emperor. He flattered himself that the dread alone of
such a confederacy would induce Charles to liften to what was
equitable; and was afraid of employing any considerable force
for the relief of the Milanefc, left his allies, whom he had often
found to be more attentive to their own interest, than pundtual
in fulfilling their engagements, hould abandon him as oon as
the Imperialifis were driven out of that country, and deprive his
negociations with the Emperor of that weight which they derived
from his being at the hcead of a powerful league. Meanwhile the
caflle of Milan was pressed more closely than ever, and Sforza
was now reduced to the last extremity. The Pope and Venetians,
trufling to Francis's concurrence, commanded their troops to
take the field, in order to relieve him; and an army more than
fufficicnt for that service was soon formed. The Milanese, pas-
fionately attached to their unfortunate duke, and no less exafpe-
rated against the Imperialiits, who had oppressed them so cruelly,
were ready to aid the confederates in all their enterprizes. But
the duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally flow and indecisive,
and restrained, besides, by his ancient enmity to the family of
Medici, from taking any flep that might aggrandize or add
reputation to the Pope ', loft fme opportunities, and refufcl to
improve others, of attacking the Imperialifis, and raiing the
siege. These delays gave Bourbon time to bring up a reinforce-
ment of fresh troops, and a fiupply of money. ie immdc(liately July z4,
took the command of the army, and puflcd( on the ficge with
fuich vigour, as quickly obliged Sforza to filrrcllder, who retiring
to Lodi, which the confcdcratcs hald itrprizcd, left Bourbon in

d Guic. 1. 17. 382. r

full

BooK IV. full poifeflion of the reft of the dutchy, the investiture of whick

the Emperor had promiscd to grant him'.

1S26.

Disquietude TIt E Italians began now to perceive the game which Francis
pohersalan had played, and to be sensible that, notwithstanding all their

addrcfs, and refinements in negociation, which they boasted of
as talents peculiarly their own, they had for once been over-
reached in those very arts by a tramontane Prince. He had
hitherto thrown almost the whole burden of the war upon them,
taking advantage of their efforts, in order to enforce the propo-
fals which he often renewed at the court of Madrid for obtain-
ing the liberty of his sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftu-
lated and complained', but as they were not able to rouzc
Francis from his inadtivity, their own zeal and vigour, gra-
dually abated, and Clement having already gone farther than
his timidity usually permitted him, began to accuse himself of
rashness, and to rclapfc into his natural slate of doubt and uncer-
tainty.

Meafres cf AiLL te Flmperor's motions depending on himself alone,
thc Impe- were more briik and better concerted. The narrowness
rialilts.

of his revenucs, indeed, did not allow him to make any
Hfdden or great effort in the field, but he abundantly lipplicd
that dlcfcd by his intrigues and ngociations. The family of
(: 1(1ll ;, tlC most powctrfi;ll of all the IlRoman barons, had
adlhcred tuifornmly to the Clilbclinc or Inperial fadcion, duriing
thole fierce contentions between the Popes and Tmpcrors, which,
for igvcral ;:gcs filled Italy and Germany with discord and

'(;:!lc. . 17. 3;7, &c. ' Rufcclli Lcttcrc dc Principi ii. 57, &c.
15'), C16:loj66.

)loodthlld;

bloodilhd. Though the caufcs whlch at Lrst gave lirth to BOOK IV.
these dcPlruLive fations ci c no

onrs noon and tc rage with I

which tcv had i)Cen a.nimated was in a gr;at n-icafure l;ent, the
Colonnas fill rctainecd tlei attachmnt to to e

ri icrial iitc;-ci},

and by placing themfclvcs undci tlhel lp i'ln t.c Eip'c-
rors, fccurcd the qulli.t p1i l'U f Iei; o wn tci .'rics a n
Frivileges. The Cardinal ·.n1i.1o Cc o:i,. a 1a-

: a i:, 1

'

lcnt and ambitious temper, at il:.;: l tiic tic.;:' c., ,he . lil-,
had long been Clement's rival, to whole i,:incc i thc
conclave he imputed the di!appointmcnt o all lis Ihemes -foi
attaining the Papal dignityv , of fric, om his knovwn connic-
tion with the Emperor, lic thought himself ficure. This wa;
too great an injury to an aspiring mind ever to be forgiven; and
though he had difilmblcd his rccfntrment so far as to vote f;r
Clement at his clclion, and to accept of great ofliccs in his court,
hle v.aited with tlhe utmo ilnmp:tience for an opportunity of being
revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the inperial ambassador at
Rome, who was no stranger to there Itntiments, cafily persuaded
lim that now was te time, while all the Papal troops were
cmploycd ii Ilnl)irdy, t atciit f;il-cthling rvlwhich woulda, at
onc;, 1av n'C i s o'i, n v, w'r : , and be of efnnlii l hr icc to the
!i_(ICl'iC i11 ([llti: . '--1 1'11(',

l} . t1\ :'-,, )vr timlidity

ic lii ( li - i ) th . ? (

Vc, ' . i

t l,

tnd l.,'gill t: O.

..'i.tl '. (.' ') t .;'t i I.

1 ,.' li.t:\c t( ,:, l

t ot l . ': ) ( , ; l' ;

i-ii, l);i :' : ,

t i I

i;' 1 s',.

l ''' tiL 1 I' ii' l

( . ,, : 1 ; :1' ,!;* e. ti '; n ii'i ii!d(l 1ó1( , iLIJ Led
C o of i i l'pr. .*. ;

'Vol. 11. iI 11 ates

BOOK IV. gates of his capital, while he imagined himself to be in perfet

H"6.i security, and was altogether unprepared for refiffing such a

The Colon- feeble enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted Colonna's
:!b become
r.iacr3 of troops, from whom they apprehended no injury, to advance
iRome. without opposition; the Pope's guards were dispersed in a

moment; and Clement himself, terrified at the danger, ashamed.
of his own credulity, and deserted by almost every person, fled
with precipitation into the castle of St. Angelo, which was
immediately invested. The palace of the Vatican, the church
of St. Peter, and the houses of the Pope's ministers and servants,.
were plundered in the most licentious manner; the reft of the
city was left unmolested. Clement, destitute of every thing
ncceffary cither for fubfifence or defence, was soon obliged to

Accommoda. demand a capitulation; and Moncada, being admitted into the
ticn between
the Pope a.a castle, prescribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a conqueror,
kmperor. conditions which it was not in his power to rejed. The chief

of these were, That Clement should not only grant a full pardon
to the Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and immediately
withdraw all the troops in.his pay from the army of the confe-
derates in Lombardy .

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less than ofdepofing

Clement, and of placing Pompeo, their kinfinan, in the vacant
chair of' St. Peter, exclaimed loudly against a treaty which left
them at tile mercy of a Pontiff jufily incenscd against tlhem.
Bitt Mlolncla(a, attentive only to his malter's interest, paid little
rc;gard to their complainlt;, and by this fortunate mcafurc, broke
entirely the power of the confederates.

X Jovii Vita Pomnp. Colon. p. Guic. 1. 17. 47. Rufcclli Lcttcrc (ie
.riincipi i. p. 104.

WlI Lsn

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered such a confi- 3BOoK IV.

derable diminution, the ImperialifIs received two great rein-
forcements; one from Spain, under the command of Lannoy Ihel mp.rial

armv re,-

and Alarcon, which amounted to fix thousand men. The other ftccd.
was raised in the Empire by George Fronditerg, a German
nobleman, who having served in Italy with great reputation,
had acquired such influence and popularity, that multitudes of
his countrymen, fond on every occasion of engaging in military
enterprizes, and impatient at that junture to escape from the
opprefion of their superiors both in religious and civil matters,
crouded to his standard; so that without any other gratuity than
the payment of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand enlifed
in his service. To these the Archduke Ferdinand added two
thousand horse, levied in the Aufirian dominions. But although
the Emperor had raised troops, he could not remit the fums
necessary for their fipport. His ordinary revenues were
exhausted; the credit of princes, during the infancy of com-
merce, was not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some innovations
had been made in the constitution in order to secure their con-
currence, peremptorily refused to grant Charles any extraordi-
nary supply ; so that the more his army increased in number,
the more were his generals embaraffed and difireffcd. Bourbon,
in particular, was involved in such difficulties, tlat he flood in
need of all his addrcfs and courage in order to extricate him-
self. Vast fums were due to the Spaniflh troops already in the
Milanefc, when Frondfperg arrived with sixteen thousand hun-
gry Germans, dcflitutc of every thing. Both made their The lEpe.

mrr's financec
demands with equal ficrceneis; the former claiming their arrears, dcficient.

h Sandov. i. 84.

N n andl

BooK IV. and t'. latter, the pay which had been promised them on their

/ c·,n-tcri rln Lombardy: Bourbon was altogether incapable of giving

"'

' ,:;.ir. In this situation, he was confirained to

' :,-it afts of violence extremely shocking to his own nature,

vwhich was gentle and humane. He fcized the principal citizens
of lMiian, and by threats, and even by torture, forced from them
a confiicrable furn; he rifled the churches of all their plate
and ornamcnts; the inadequate fpply which these afforded, he
dif-ilbuted among the soldiers, with so many foething expressions
of l.s sympathy and affcction, that, though it fell far short of
the fums dac to thmn, it appeased their prefcnt murmurs h

Eo!l,)',in r' A:ONG other expedients for raising money, Bourbon granted
hLit,..1 liis ii- . and liberty to Moronc, who having been kept in pri-ibo

ftr:c' hi:L i:::.e with PcIcara, had been condemned to die by
t' S3):,iih jul'.eCs empowered to try him. For this rcmiflion
1- l': ild twencty tlhoutand ducats; and such Xwere his finguiar
ta!c!.t, and thn woa.dcrful afccndant ihe acqired over the minds
,o tlio!: to v.:hom lhe had acccfs, that in a few lays, fiomL being
i .) lr,)lns p;-itn'r, hle became his prime confident, with whom
c c::-!'.ilt. tl i all a a'alir;s of imn)ortance. To his iniualtions
n liit )c inilutcd tt suspicions vwliicli Bourbon bcgan to cnter-
t;lin, t!:at tlli Fipnlor lhad never intended to grant hlim the
iinvcl!it ilrc of 'Milan, blt lad aointed Icyva, and the otlicr
Slp;uii , gcnrTl';, r.;'llc'r to lc iio

be o11 llis conld(ltt, tlla to

C(-i; ;l':lI ;te llcaltily t()1wardsn. the cxccutioll of Ihis checs. 'To
iiinn l'!.c: i, ;s lic Ilill rtailnd at the atge of f;)tlicorc all tlle
cnltcrlriziig spirit (of y ulth, may )e attriblltce( tlhe bold and
unexpcdted mcaltirc oil wlhicll l ourbon on after ventured .

'Rilamont, lIfI. Mcdiol. lib. i. p. 7. Gui. 1. 7. 4

Sucii

SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Imperial troops in BOOK IV..
the Milanese, that it became indispensably neccffary to take some "--

*mme~t Itc1

" 52 5.

immediate frep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers ir; eibe-
increased daily; the Emperor made no remittances to his gene- re't:' 'lthis
rals; and the utmost rigour of military extortion could draw mo
nothing more from a cuntry entirely drained and ruined. In
this situation there was no choice left, but either to disband the
army, or to march forfLibfi.nce into the enemies country. The
territories of the Venetians lay ncareft at hand; but they, with
their ufuial forefi ,ht and prudence, had taken such precautions
as securcd them from any insult. Nothing therefore remained
but to invade the dominions of the church, or of the Flcrentines;
and Clement had of late ated such a part, as merited the feverelt
vengeance from the Emperor. No sooner did his troops return
to Rome after the insurrection of the Colonnas, than, witliout
paying any regard to the treaty with Moncada, lie degraded the
Cardinal Colonna, excommunicated the reft of the family, seized
their places of itrength, and wafted their lands with all the cru-
elty which the finart of a recent injury naturally excites. After
thllis, lie turned his arms against Naples, and as his operations
verc seconded by the French fleet, hle made some progrel' towards
the conquest of that kingdom; the Viceroy being no less dcii-
tute than the other Imperial generals, of the money rcquitite
for a vigorous defencek.

TIHESE proceedings of the Pope, juflificd, in appearance, tle 1;27.
mcafilrcs wlhicl Bourlon's situation rendered neccfihry; alnd lie .Mar1,' to

invtdc the
fct about executing tlhcm under such diliftvantages, as filrnlllh liC's tri-

tui ei.
J' Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. 8. 424.

the

Boo K IV. the strongest proof, both of the despair to which he was reduced,

,^S- and of the greatness of his abilities which were able to surmount
A527.

fomany obstacles. Having committed the government of Milan
toLeyva, whom he was not unwilling to leave behind; he began
January 30. his march in the depth of winter, at the head of twenty-five

thousand men, composed of nations differing from each other
in language and manners; without money, without magazines,
without artillery, without carriages; in flort, without any
of those things which are necessary to the smallest party, and
which eem essential to the exiflence and motions of a great
army. His rout lay through a country cut by rivers and moun-
tains, in which the roads were almost impracticable; as an
addition to his difficulties, the enemy's army, superior to his
own in number, was at hand to watch all his motions, and to
improve every advantage. But his troops, impatient of their
present hardihips, and allured by the hopes of obtaining an
immense booty, did not confider how ill provided they were for
a march, and followed him with great chearfulnefs. His firRf
fchemc was to have made himself master of Placentia, and to
have gratified his soldiers with the plunder of that city; but
the vigilance of the confederate generals rendered the design
abortive; nor had he better filccefs in his projed for the rcduc-
tion of Bologna, which was seasonably supplicd with as many
troops as fccurcd it from the insults of an army which had nei-
ther artillery nor ammunition. Having failed in both these
;ttcmpts to become mafler of fomc grcat city, he was under a
nccclity of advancing. But he had now been two months in the
li;ld; his troops had fuffcrcd every calamity which a long march,
togctlicr with the uncommon rigour of the season could bring

l01utiy of his upon inen dcflittc of all nccelfary accommodations, in an cnc-
uwo',s. ilICSi country; the mIllgnificenCt promilCS to which they trufled,

bal

had proved altogether vain; they saw no profpea of relief; their BOOK IV.
patience, tried to the utmost, failed at last, and they broke - i^
out into open mutiny. Some officers, who rafily attempted to
restrain them, fell vi&tims to their fury; Bourbon himself, not
daring to appear during the first transports of their rage, was
obliged to fly secretly from his quarters'. But this sudden
ebullition of wrath began at last to subside; where Bourbon, who
possessed in a wonderful degree, the art of governing the minds
of soldiers, renewed his promises with more confidence than
formerly, and assured them that they would be oon accom--
plifhed. He endeavoured to render their hardships more tole-
rable by partaking of them himself; he fared no better.than the
meanest centinel; he marched along with them on foot; he.
joined them in inging their camp-ballads, in which, with high.
praises of his valour, they mingled many strokes of military
raillery on his poverty; and wherever they came, he allowed
them, as a foretaste of what he had promised,. to plunder the
adjacent villages at discretion. Encouraged by all there soothing
arts, they entirely forgot their sufferings and complaints, and
followed him with the fame implicit confidence as formerly .

BOURBON, meanwhile, carefully concealed his intentions.. The Pope'3
Rome and Florence, not knowing on which the. blow would irrteo:tu""'

ant i npu-

fall, were held in the molt disquieting fate of fufpencc. Cle- dence.
ment, equally follicitous for the fafcty of both, flutuated
in more than his usual uncertainty; and while the rapid
approach of danger called for prompt and dccilive cmaflilrcs, lie
ipcent the time in deliberations wlhichl came to no ifluc, or in

X Guic. 1. 18. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. 163. '" Ocuvres de Brant.
vol. 4. 246, &c.

taLing
8

BOOK IV. taking ref)luions, lich:ll next day, his rcfllcfs mind, more

~-- .fap-gaious in diUCrning than in obviating disTiculties, overturned,
1527.

without being able to fix on what should be fuiltitutcd in thcir
place. At ;nc time h determined to unite hiifclf more clofi lv
than ever \with his allies, and to push the war with vigour; at
anothr, lie cinlied to bring all diffcrcnces to a final accommo-
(dation y a treaty with Lannoy, v.ho knowing his passion fb
ncgociation, solicitcd iiin inccfiantly with proposals for that
purpif:r. His timidity t lcngth ;rcvaiicd ; and led him to con-

M :ri 15. c .ie aln agrccment v-ith Iannoy, of which the following wcre
tr,;< ',. ja thi. chief articles : That a fenfion of armns shou!d take place

;s t
I Y l;ct,;,ccn, the Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight monnths;

That (;lemenct flould advance sixty thousand crovwns to-ards
satis: ying the demands of the Imperial army; That the Colnnnas
fliiold be afolvcd from censure, and their former dignities and
pocifTions be rorcd to tcm; That the viccroy fiould come to
Rome, and p1revcnt Bourbon fiom approaching nearer to that
city, or to Florence". On this fdden treaty, which deprived
him of all lI;pcs of afit',anc from lis allies, without affording
]iml any sild i)londation (, fcurity, Clement relied lb firmly,
that like a i:;-;tn extricated :,t onct out of all dli'lcultic:;, lie vwai
at plcrflt citf, and in the fulllc; of lii, confidence ('il ..(!.:d aH
Ins ltr-oo(s, except as many as were fuflicient to ()uar;d l:;s own
Cperfol. 'isli aImai'/ilig conl(fidnce ()I lClclnt's, who o(l every

other

other (c'caiol \i;o1'; Seal fil an: {Lli'i i>s to e--('C, ::;'- .lcacdl 1)
ullncc.n'.ii;t>lc to Cli;ci(lardii, x'yl) liiig at i[.it li;-,e tle -
tific;l ci(;inillry--)rci;aI and 'i iit in thl con (l.-d( r.at ; imv,
h1d 1r1';11 q(;rtlv s

wl '~it

s \ } ;; gre t a1l:'ilicvs lu' ( ':tri-vinc!V

low c'liimci ical all i:; li(,l s xvcc, tliat he imputes t c
l 'ol )e's

" uic. . 18. 436.

7 t, li
I' jl,

conduct, at this jundure, wholly to infatuation, which those BOOK IV.
who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid °. 27.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have executed the which Bour-

bon difte-

treaty with great sincerity; and having detached Clement from gards.
the confederacy, wished to turn Bourbon's arms againit the
Venetians, who, of all the powers at war with the Emperor,
had exerted the greatest vigour. With this view he dispatched
a courier to Bourbon, informing him of the suspension of arms,
which, in the name of their common malter, he had concluded
with the Pope. Bourbon had other schemes; and he had pro-
fecuted them now too far to think of retreating. To have men-
tioned a retreat to his soldiers, would have been dangerous; his
command was independant on Lannoy; he was fond of mortify-
ing a man whom he had many reasons to hate; for there reasons
without paying the least regard to the message, he continued to ra-
vage the ecclefiaflical territories, and to advance towards Florence.
Upon this, all Clement's terror and anxiety returning with new
force, he had recourse to Lannoy, and intreated and conjured
him to put a flop to Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly
set out for his camp, but durst not approach it; Bourlon's fol-
diers having got notice of the truce, raged and threatened,
demanding the accomplishment of the promises to which they
had trusted; their general himself could scarce restrain them;
every person in Rone perceived that nothing remained but
to prepare for refining a form which it was now impoflible
to (lifpcl. Clement alone, relying on some ambiguous and
deceitfill professions which Botirbon made of his inclination
towards peace, funk back into his f)rmer security P.

o Guic. . 18. 446. P Guic. 1. 18. 437, &c. Mem. de Bellay, p. 100oo.
VOL 01. II o BOUI1ION,

BOOK IV. BOURBON, on his part, was far from being free from follici-

,~. tude. All his attempts on any places of importance had hitliertt

Advnces miscarried; and Florence, tot ards which he had been approaching
tu,vzrds
Rome. for some time, was, by the arrival of tle duke d' Urbino's army,

put in a condition to set his power at defiance. As it now became
neceflary to change his rout, and to take instantly some new
resolution; he fixed without hesitation on one no less daring
in itself, than it was impious according to the opinion of that
age. This was to assault and plunder Rome. Many reasons,
however, prompted him to it. He was fond of thwarting Lan-
noy, who had undertaken for the safety of that city; he ima-
gined that the Emperor would be highly pleased to fee Clement,
the chief author of the league against him, humbled; he flattered
himself, that by gratifying the rapacity of his soldiers with such
immense booty, he would attach them for ever to his interest;
or (which is still more probable than any of there) he hoped that
by means of the power and splendor he would acquire from the
conquest of the first city in Chriflendom, he might lay the foun-
dation of an independent power; and that after haking off all
connection with the Emperor, he might take possession of Naples,
or of some of the Italian states in his own name'.

'I'he Pope' WHATEVER his motives were, he executed his resolution
preparations
for (iefCIcc. with a rapidity equal to the boldness with which he had formed

it. His loldiers, now that they had their prey in full view,
complained neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want of pay.
No fooncr did they begin to move from Tuscany towards Rome,
thanll the Pope, lfnfible at lait how fallacious the hopes had been
Al1 which hle ecpofcd, ilarted from his security. But no time

Brant. 4.271. 6. 89. Blcarii Comment. 594.

: now

now remained, even for a bold and decisive Pontiff, to have BooK IV.
taken proper measures, or to have formed any effetual plan of 527
defence. Under Clement's feeble conduc, all was conflerna-
tion, disorder, and irresolution. He colleced, however, such of
his disbanded soldiers as still remained in the city; he armed the
artificers of Rome, and the footmen and train-bearers of the
Cardinals; he repaired the breaches in the walls; he begun to
erec new works; he excommunicated Bourbon and all his
troops, branding the Germans with the name of Lutherans, and
the Spaniards with that of Moors'. Trusting to these inef-
fetual military preparations, or to his spiritual arms, which
were till more despised by rapacious soldiers, he seems to have
laid aside his natural timidity, and contrary to the advice of all
his counsellors, determined to wait the approach of an enemy
whom, by a timely retreat, he might easily have avoided.

B1ouRBON, who saw the neceflity ofdifpatch, now that his Afraultof

intentions were known, advanced with such speed, that he Rome.
gained several marches on the duke d'Urbino's army, and
encamped in the plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth of
May. From thence he hewed his soldiers the palaces and
churches of that city, into which, as the capital of the Chriflian
commonwealth, the wealth of all Europe had flowed during
many centuries, without having been once violated by any
hostile hand; and commanding them to refrefli themselves that
night, as a preparation for the assault next day, promised them
in reward of their toils and valour, the poffeflion of all the trca-
fiircs accumulated there.

f Scckwd. Lib. ii. 68.

O o Ear LY

B3OK IV. EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had determined to,

diitinguifh that day either by his death or the success of his
enterprize, appeared at the head of his troops, clad in cmpleat
armour, above which he wore a vest of white tissue, that he
might be more conspicuous both to his friends and to his ene-
mies; and as all depended on one bold impression, he led them
instantly to scale the walls. Three diftind bodies, one of Ger-
mans, another of Spaniards, and the last of Italians, the three
different nations of whom the army was composed, were
appointed to this service; a separate attack was assigned to each;
and the whole army advanced to support them as occasion
should require. A thick mist concealed their approach until they
reached almost the brink of the ditch which surrounded the
suburbs; having planted their ladders in a moment, each
brigade rushed on to the assault with an impetuosity heightened
by national emulation. They were received at first with forti-
tude equal to their own; the Swiss in the Pope's guards, and
the veteran soldiers who had been assembled, fought with a cou-
rage becoming men to whom the defence of the noblest city in
the world was entrufied. Bourbon's troops, notwithstanding all
their valour, gained no ground, and even began to give way;
when their leader, perceiving that on this critical moment
Wul.on the fate of the day depended, threw himfclf from his horfc,

pressed to the front, snatched a caling ladder from a soldier,
planted it against the wall, and began to mount it, encouraging
his men with his voice and hand, to follow hIin. But at that
very instant, a mufkct bullet from the ramparts picrced his
groin with a wound, which he immediately fclt to be mortal;
lnt lie retained to much prcice of mind as to decire tloic wll()
were near lhim to cover his body with ; cloak, tllat his death
might not ditheartcn his troops; and 'lon after he expired with ;i

courage

courage worthy of a better cause, and which would have BooKIV.
entitled him to the highest praise, if he had thus fallen in defence 527.
of his country, not at the head of its enemies'.

IT was impossible, to conceal this fatal event from the The city

takeL..

army; the soldiers soon miffed their general, whom they were
accustomed to fee in every time of danger; but inflead of
being disheartened by their loss, it animated them with new
valour; the name of Bourbon resounded along the line, accom-
panied with the cry of blood and revenge. The veterans who
defended the walls, were soon overpowered by numbers; the
untrained body of city recruits fled at the fight of danger, and
the enemy with irresistible violence rushed into the town.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed at the altar of

St. Peter's in offering up to heaven unavailing prayers for
victory. No sooner was he informed that his troops began
to give way than he fled with precipitation; and with an
infatuation fill more amazing than any thing already men-
tioned, inflead of making his escape by the opposite gate
where there was no enemy to oppose it, he slut himself up,
together with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambafla(lors, and
many pcrfons of difiinCtion, in the castle of St. Angelo, which
from his late misfortune, he might have known to be an infecurc
retreat. In his way from the Vatican to that fortress, he saw his
troops flying b1cfore an cnemy who purflcd without giving
(1nartcr; lie heard the cries and lamentationa of the Roman
citizens, and beheld the beginning of those calamities which

a Mem. c Bllaiy, loJ. Guic. 1. 18. p. 445, &c. Ocuv. d. 13iant. iv.
157, &c.

,v~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i 19

BOOK IV. his own credulity and ill-condud had brought upon his sub-

ISZ7. je,
Plur.dered. IT is impossible to describe, or even to imagine the misery and

horror of that scene which followed. Whatever a city taken
by florm can dread from military rage unrefrained by discipline;
whatever excesses the ferocity of the Germans, the avarice of
the Spaniards, or the licentiousness of the Italians could com-
mit, these the wretched inhabitants were obliged to susser.
Churches, palaces, and the houses of private persons were plun-
dered without diftinCion. No age, or characer, or sex was
exempt from injury. Cardinals, nobles, priefis, matrons,
virgins, were all the prey of soldiers, and at the mercy of men
deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor did these outrages cease,
as is usual in towns which are carried by aflault, when the first
fury of the storm was over; the Imperialists kept poffieflon of
Rome fevcral months; and during all that time the insolence
and brutality of the soldiers scarce abated. Their booty in
ready money alone amounted to a million of ducats; what they
raiscd by ransoms and cxadions far exceeded that fum. Rome,
though taken fcvcral different tines by the northern nations,
who over-ran th Empire in the fifth and sixth centuries, was
never treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous and heathen
luns, Vandals or Goths, as now by the bigotted fubjets of
a catholic Monarch".

The Pope AFTER Bourbon's deatl, the command of the Imperial army
t ofrgd in devolved on PI'llibert de Chalons prince of Orange, who with
the cafile of
lt. Angelo.

t Jov. Vit. Colon. 165. Jov. Vit. Colon. 66. Guic. 1. 18. 440, &c.

Comment. dc capta urbe Roma ap. Scardium 2. 230. Ulloa Vita dell. Carlo V.
p. Ilo, &c. Gianoinc Iici. of Nap. B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 507.

difliculty

difficulty prevailed on as many of his soldiers to desist from the BOOK IV.
pillage, as were necessary to invest the castle of St. Angelo. 1
Clement was immediately sensible of his error in having retired
into that ill provided and untenable fort. But as the Imperialists,
scorning discipline, and intent only on plunder, pushed the siege
with little vigour, he did not despair of holding out, until the
duke d' Urbino should come to his relief. That general ad-
vanced at the head of an army composed of Venetians, Floren-
tines, and Swiss in the pay of France, of sufficient strength to
have delivered Clement from the present danger. But d'Urbino,
preferring the indulgence of his hatred against the family of
Medici to the glory of delivering the capital of Christendom,
and the head of the church, pronounced the enterprize to be
too hazardous; and having, from an exquisite refinement in
revenge, marched forward so far, that his army being seen from
the ramparts of St. Angelo, flattered the Pope with the profpec:
of certain relief, he immediately retired % Clement, deprived Surrenders

himsel a

of every resource, and reduced to such extremity of famine Prisoner.
as to feed on afies flesh Y, was obliged to capitulate on such June 6.
conditions as the conquerors were pleated to precfribe. He
agreed to pay four hundred thousand ducats to the army; to
surrender to the Emperor all the places of flrength belonging
to the church; and, bcfides giving hoflages, to remain a pri-
soner himself until the chief articles were performed. IHe
was committed to the care of Alarcon, who, by his fvere vigi-
lance in guarding Francis, had given full proof of his being
qualified for that office; and thus, by a singular accident, the
tame man had the custody of the two most illullrious personages
who had been made prifoncrs in Europe tduring several ages.

2 Guic. . 18. 450. Y Joy. Vit. Colon. 167.

TIIE

BOOK IV. THE account of this extraordinary and unexpected event was

527-. no less furprizing than agreeable to the Emperor. But in order

The Empe- to conceal his joy from his fubjeds, who were filled with horror
ror's beha-
viour at this at the success and crimes of their countrymen, and to lessen the
jun&ure. indignation of the reft of Europe, he declared that Rome had

been assaulted without any order from him; he wrote to all
the princes with whom he was in alliance, difclaining his
having had any knowledge of Bourbon's intention ; he put
himself and court into mourning; commanded the rejoicings
which had been ordered for the birth of his son Philip to be
flopped; and employing an artifice no less hypocritical than
gross, he appointed prayers and processions throughout all Spain
for the recovery of the Pope's liberty, which by an order to
his generals he could have immediately granted him .

THE good fortune of the house of Austria was no less con-

v.des Hun- fpicuous in another part of Europe. Solyman having invaded
gary. Hungary with an army three hundred thousand strong, Lewis II.

King of that country, and of Bohemia, a weak and unexpe-
rienced prince, advanced rashly to meet him with a body of
men which did not amount to thirty thousand. With an im-
prudence fiill more unpardonalle, he gave the command of
thele troops to Paul Tomorri, a Francifican monk, archbishop of
(;olocza. This aukward general, in the dress of his order,
girt with its cord, marched at the head of the troops; and
hurried on by his own prefnimption, as well as by the impc-
tuofity of nobles who dcfpilled dangcr, but were impatient of
long fervicc, fought the fatal battle of Mohacz, in which the

A^,g. 9,
IA; 2 King, the flower of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of

Rufcclli Lettere di Principi, ii. 234.
SIcid. 0og. Sandov. i. 82. Mauroc. IIifl. Vcncta. lib. iii. 220.

twenty

twenty thousand men fell the vidims of his folly and ill-con- BOOK IV.
duct. Solyman, after his vitory, seized and kept poffeflion of -
several towns of greatest strength in the southern provinces of Defeat of the
Hungary, and over-running the reft of the country, carried Hungarians.
near two hundred thousand persons into captivity. As Lewis their King.
was the last male of the royal family of Jagellon, the Archduke
Ferdinand claimed both his crowns. This claim was founded
on a double title; the one derived from the ancient pretensions
of the house of Aufiria to both kingdoms; the other from the
right of his wife, the only filler of the deceased Monarch. The
feudal inflitutions however fubfited both in Hungary and
Bohemia in such vigour, and the nobles possessed such extensive
power, that the crowns were still elective, and Ferdinand's rights,
if they had not been powerfully supported, would have met
with little regard. But his own personal merit; the rfpcet due
to the brother of the greatest Monarch in Christendom; the
necessity of chufing a prince able to afford his fubjecds ome F,,eriand
additional protedion againit the Turkifil arms, which, as they elcRld King.
had felt their weight so lately, they greatly dreaded; together
with the intrigues of his filter, who had been married to the late
King, overcame the prejudices which the Hungarians had con-
ccived against the Archduke as a foreigner; and though a
considerable party voted for the Vaywode of Trailllvania,
at length securcd Ferdinand the throne of that kingdom.
The states of Bohlcmia imitated the example of their ncighbour
kingdom; but in order to ascertain and secure their own privi-
leges, they obliged Ferdinand before his coronation, to fiitlcril)
;a deed which they term a Reversi., declaring that he held that
crown not by any prcvious right, but by tlhir gratuitous and
voluntary eletion. By such a vail accellion of territories,
the hereditary poffeflion of which they secured in proccfs

VOL. II. P p of

BOOK IV. of time to their family, the princes of the house of Austria

15z7 attained that pre-eminence in power which hath rendered them

so formidable to the reft of Germany .

Progress of THE dissensions between the Pope and Emperor proved
the Refor- extremely favourable to the progress of Lutheranifmi. Charles,

exasperated by Clement's conduat, and fully employed in oppo-
sing the league which he had formed against them, had little
inclination and less leisure to take any measures for suppressing

June 25, the new opinions in Germany. In a diet of the Empire held at
1526. Spires, the state of religion came to be confidered, and all that

the Emperor required of the princes was, that they would wait
patiently, and without encouraging innovations, for the meeting
of a general council which he had demanded of the Pope. They,
in return, acknowledged the convocation of a council to be the
proper and regular ftep towards reforming abuses in the church;.
but contended, that a national council held in Germany would be
more effectual for that purpose than what he had proposed. To
his advice, concerning the discouragement of innovations, they
paid so little regard, that even during the meeting of the diet at
Spires, the divines who attended the Eledor of Saxony and
Landgrave of Heffe-Caffcl thither, preached publickly, and
adini niftered the sacraments according to the rites of the reformed
church'. The Emperor's own example imboldencd the Gcr-
mans to treat the Papal authority with little reverence. During
the heat of lis rieentcent against Clement, he lhad publiSlled a
long reply to an angry brieve which the Pope had intended as an
apology for his own con(ludi. In this Inanifefto, the Emperor,

b Steph. IBrodrick Procanelarii Hungar. Clades in campo Mohacz ap. Scar-
dim 2. 218. P. 1]arrc lift. d'Allcinagne, tom. viii. part i. p. 198. c Skid. o13.

(9 aftcr

after having enumerated many inflances of that Pontiff's ingra- BOOK IV.
titude, deceit and ambition, all which he painted in the strongest
and most aggravated colours, appealed from him to a general
council. At the fame time, he wrote to the college of Cardi-
nals, complaining of Clement's partiality and injustice; and
requiring them, if he refused or delayed to call a council, to
manifest their concern for the peace of the Christian Church,
so shamefully neglected by its chief pastor, by summoning that
assembly in their own named. This manifeto, scarce inferior
in virulence to the invedives of Luther himself, was dispersed
over Germany with great industry, and being eagerly read by
persons of every rank, did much more than counterbalance the
effec of all Charles's declarations against the new opinions.

d Goldaft. Polit. Imper. p. 984.

Pp : TIHE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK V.

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B OOK V.
BOOK V. I E account of the cruel manner in which the Pope had

152-;. been treated, filled all Europe with astonishment or

Gencral in. horror. To fee a Christian Emperor, who, by possessing that
dignu.tion ex
cited agallt dignity, ought to have been the protetor and advocate of the
th- Enpror. holy fee, lay violent hands on him who represented Christ on

earth, and detain his sacred person in a rigorous captivity, was
confidcrced as an impiety that merited the severest vengeance, and
which called for the immediate interposition of every dutiful
son of the church. Francis and Hecnry, alarmed at the progrcfs
of the Imperial arms in Italy, had, even before the taking of
Rome, entered into a closer alliance; and, in order to give some

check

check to the Emperor's ambition, had agreed to make a vigorous BOOK V.
diversion in the Low-Countries. The force of every motive ,5~7
which had influenced them at that time, was now increased;
and to there were added, the desire of rescuing the Pope out of
the Emperor's hands, a measure no less political, than it appeared
to be pious. This, however, rendered it necessary to abandon
their designs on the Low-Countries, and to make Italy the feat
of war, as it was by vigorous operations in that country, they
might promise most certainly upon delivering Rome, and fctting
Clement at liberty. Francis being now sensible, that in his
system with regard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement
had carried him too far; and that, by an excess of remissness,
he had allowed Charles to attain advantages which. he might
easily have prevented, was eager to make reparation for an error
of which he was not often guilty, by an acivity more suitable
to his temper. Henry thought his interposition necessary, in
order to hinder the Emperor from becoming master of all Italy,
and acquiring by that means such superiority of power, as would
enable him, for the future, to ditate without controul to the
other princes of Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis had taken.
care to secure by flattery and presents, the certain methods of
gaining his favour, negle&ed nothing that could incense his
master against the Emperor. Besides all thece publick con-
fiderations, Henry was ifluenced by one of a more private
nature; having begun about this time to form his great fchcmc
of divorcing Catharine of Aragon, towards the execution of
which he knew that the fandCion of Papal authority would be
ncceflary, he was dcfirous to acquire as much merit as poflible
witlh Clement, by appearing to be the chief infihumcnt of his
dclivcrancc. t

rat'

BOOK V. TiHE ncgociation, between princes thus disposed, was not

, -7-' tedious. \olfey hiimfelf conduced it, on the part of his fove-
12,7.

Confeeracy reign, with unbounded powers. Francis treated with him in
agaii.t him. person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appeared, and was received
July II.

with royal magnificence. A marriage between the duke of
Orleans and the princess Mary was agreed to as the basis of the
confederacy; it was resolved that Italy hould be the theatre of
war; the firength of the army which hould take the field, and
the contingent of troops or of money which each prince should
furnish, were fettled; and if the Emperor did not accept of the
proposals they were jointly to make him, they bound them-
Aug. 18. selves immediately to declare war, and to begin hostilities.

Henry, who took every resolution with impetuoity, entered so
eagerly into this new alliance, that in order to give Francis the
firongeft proof of his friendship and refped, he formally renoun-
ced the ancient claim of the English Monarchs to the crown of
France, which had long been the pride and ruin of the nation;
as a full compensation for which, he accepted a pension of fifty
thousand crowns, to be paid annually to himself and his fuc-
ceffors .

The Florcn- MEANWHILE the Pope, being unable to fulfil the conditions
tiness rcovc of his capitulation, remained a prisoner under the severe custody
their freedom.

of Alarcon. The Florentines no fboner heard of what had hap-
pened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a tumultuous manner;
expelled the Cardinal di Cortona, who governed their city in the
Pope's name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke in pieces
the statues of Leo and Clement; and declaring thcmfclves a free
ftatc, rc-cflablifhed their ancient popular government. The

lelbcrt, 83, &c. Rym. Foeder. 14. 203.

Venetians,

Venetians, taking advantage of the calamity of their ally the Pope, BooK V,
seized Ravenna, and other places belonging to the church, under ,7T

1.5 27.

pretext of keeping them in depofite. The dukes of Urbino and
Ferrara, laid hold likewise on part of the spoils of the unfortunate
Pontiff, whom they confidered as irretrievably ruined b.

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to derive some solid The mperial

troops in-

benefit from that unforeseen event, which gave such splendour afive.
and superiority to his master's arms. For this purpose he marched
to Rome, together with Moncada, and the marquis del Guafto,
at the head of all the troops they could assemble in the kingdom
of Naples. The arrival of this reinforcement brought new cala-
mities on the unhappy citizens of Rome; for the soldiers, envy-
ing the wealth of their companions, imitated their licence, and
with the utmost rapacity gathered the gleanings, which had
escaped the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans. There was
not now any army in Italy capable of making head against the
Imperialists; and nothing more was requisite to reduce Bologna,
and the other towns in the ecclesiastical state, than to have appeared
before them. But the soldiers having been so long accustomed,
under Bourbon, to an entire relaxation of discipline, and having
tatled the sweets of living at discretion in a great city, almost
without the controul of a fperior, were become so impa-
tient of military fuboldination, an(d so aver'e to fervicc, that
they refifced to leave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid; a
con(lition wlich they knew to be impossible; and declared, that
they would lIt obey ainy other perlin than the prince of Orange,
vwlomn the army had chofiCn gcncral. l innoy, inding that it
was no longer Iasf fo;r him to remain aonfl licentious troops,

Guic. 18. 453,

whoc

BooK V. who despised his dignity, and hated his person, returned to

.72 Naples; oon after the marquis del Guafto and Moncada

thought it prudent to quit Rome for the fame reason. The
prince of Orange, a general only in name, and by the most pre-
carious of all tenures, the good will of soldiers whom success
and licence had rendered capricious, was obliged to pay more
attention to their humors, than they did to his commands.
Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping any of the advantages he
might have expeded from the reduction of Rome, had the mor-
tification to fee the most formidable body of troops he had ever
brought into the field, continue in a slate of inactivity from
which it was impossible to rouze them'.

The French THIS gave the King of France and the Venetians leisure to
asrm y mni rches
wUo Itarly. form new schemes, and to enter into new engagements for

delivering the Pope, and preserving the liberties of Italy. The
newly restored republick of Florence very imprudently joined with
them, and Lautrec, of whose abilities the Italians entertained a
much more favourable opinion than his own master, was, in
order to gratify them, appointed generalissimo of the league.
It was with the utmost reluctance he undertook that office,
being unwilling to expose himself a fccond time to the difficul-
ties and disgraces which the negligence of the King, or the
malice of his favourites might bring upon him. The best
troops in France marched under his command, and the King
of England, though he had not yet declared war againll the
Emperor, advanced a contidcrable fulm towards carrying on the

.liopera- expedition. Lautrec's first operations were p)rulcnt, vig)orus,
Lions. and fucccfsful. By the affiflance of Andrew Doria, the ablest

Guic. 1. 18. 454.

sea

sea officer of that age, he rendered himself master of Genoa, BOOK VS..
and re-eflablifhed in that republick the facion of the Fregofi, ,5-7.
together with the dominion of France. He obliged Alexandria
to surrender after a short siege, and reduced all the country on that
fide of the Tefino. He took Pavia, which had so long resifted
the arms of his sovereign, by assault, and plundered it with that
cruelty which the memory of the fatal difafier that had befal-
len the French nation before its walls naturally inspired.
All the Milanese, which Antonio de Leyva defended with a
small body of troops kept together and supported by his own
address and industry, must have oon submitted to his power,
if he had continued to bend the force of his arms againit that
country. But Lautrec durst not compleat a conquest which
would have been so honourable to himself, and of such advan-
tage to the league. Francis knew his confederates to be more
desirous of circumscribing the Imperial power in Italy, than
of acquiring new territories for him, and was afraid that if
Sforza were once re-established in Milan, they would second but
coldly the attack which he intended to make on the kingdom of
Naples. For this reason he inftru&ed Lautrec not to push his
operations with too much vigour in Lombardy; and happily the
importunities of the Pope, and the follicitations of the Floren-
tines, the one for relief, and the other for proteaion, were o
urgent as afforded him a decent pretext to march forward without
yielding to the intreaties of the Venetians and Sforza, who
insisted on his laying siege to Milan'.

d Guic. 1. xviii. 461. Bellay, 107, &c. Mauroc. Hil. Vcnet. lib. iii. 238.
VOL. I. QCq WIIILE

BbtOK V. WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome, the Empe.

~7 . ror had time to deliberate concerning the disposal of the Pope's

The Emperor person, who fill remained a prisoner in the castle of St. Angelo.
lets the Pope
at liberty. Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion with which he

usually endeavourcd to cover his aions, Charles in many in-
stances appears to have been but little under the influence of
religious considerations, and had frequently on this occasion
expressed an inclination to transport the Pope into Spain, that
he might indulge his ambition with the fpeaacle of the two
most illuflrious personages in Europe successively prisoners in
his court. But the fear of giving new offence to all Christen-
dom, and of filling his own fubljets with horror, obliged him to
forego that fatisfation . The progress of the confederates.
made it now necessary either to set the Pope at liberty, or to
remove him to some place of confinement more secure than the
cafile of St. Angelo. Many considerations induced him to pre-
ser the former, particularly his want of the money requisite as
well for recruiting his army, as for paying off the vast arrears
due to it. In order to obtain this he had assembled the Cortes
Feb. 11, of Castile at Valladolid about the beginning of the year, and

having laid before them the state of his affairs, and represented
the neceflity of making great preparations to resist the enemies,
,whom envy at the success which had crowned his arms would
unite against him, he demanded a large supply in the most
pressing terms. But the Cortes, as the nation was already ex-
hauftcd by extraordinary donatives, refued to load it with any
new burden, and in spite of all his endeavours to gain or to
intimidate the members, perfiflcd in this resolution '. No re-
foulrce, therefore, remained but the extorting from Clement,

Guic. 1. 8. 45?. Sandov. i. p. 814.

by

by way of ransom, a fum sufficient for discharging what was BooK VV.
due to his troops, without which it was vain to mention to ---~

!jZ7.
therm th"ir leaving Rome.

NOR was the Pope inactive on his part, or his intrigues un;-

successful towards hastening such a treaty. By flattery, and
the app:ar.ncc of unbounded confidence, he disarmed the re-
fentment of the cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his vanity,
which made him desirous of shewing the world that as his
power had at first depressed the Pope, it could now raise him
to his former dignity. By favours and promises he gained
Morone, who, by one of those whimsical revolutions which
occur so often in his life, and which so strongly display his
characer, had now recovered 'his credit and authority with the
Imperialists. The address and influence of two such men easily
removed all the difficulties of the Emperor's ambassadors, and
brought to a conclusion the treaty for Clement's liberty, upon
conditions hard indeed, but not more intolerable than a prince
in his situation had reason toexpea. He was obliged to advance
in ready money an hundred thousand crowns for the use of the
army; to pay the fame fum at the distance of a fortnight; and
at the end of three months, an hundred and fifty thousand
more. He engaged not to take part in the war against Charles,
either in Lombardy or in Naples; he granted him a cruzado,
and the tenth of ecclesiastical revenues in Spain; and he not
only gave holtages, but put the Emperor in poffeflion of fevcral
towns, as a security for the performance of tlefe articles'.
Having raiscd the first moiety by a sale of ccclefiaftical dignities

e Guic. 1. 18. 467, &c.

Q.q 2 and

BooK V. and benefices, and other expedients equally uncanonical, a day

527T. was fixed for delivering him from imprisonment. But Clement,
December 6. impatient to be free, after a tedious confinement of fix months,

as well as full of the suspicion and distrust natural to the unfor-
tunate, was so much afraid that the Imperialists might still throw
in obstacles to put off his deliverance, that he disguised himself the
preceding night in the habit of a merchant, and Alarcon having
remitted somewhat of his vigilance upon the conclusion of the
treaty, he made his escape undiscovered. He arrived before next
morning, without any attendants but a single officer, at Orvieto;
and from thence wrote a letter of thanks to Lautrec, as the chief
instrument of procuring him liberty h

Overtures of DURING these tranfadtions) the ambassadors of France and
the Empiror England repaired to Spain, in consequence of the treaty which
to Francis
and Hery. Wolfey had concluded with the French King. The Emperor,

unwilling to draw on himself the united forces of the two Mo-
narchs, discovered an inclination to relax somewhat the rigour
of the treaty of Madrid, to which, hitherto, he had adhered
inflexibly. He offered to accept of the two millions of crowns
which Francis had proposed to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy
of Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty on condition that he
would rccal his army out of Italy, and restore Genoa together
with the other conquests he had ade in that country. With
regard to Sforza, he infited that his fate should be determined
by the judges appointed to enquire into his crimes. These pro-
positions being made to Henry, he tranfinitted them to his ally
the French King, whom it more nearly concerned to examine,
and to anfwcr them; and if Francis had been. fincercly flicitous

G.ic. 1. 8. 467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc. H[ist. Venet. lib. iii. 252.

either

either to conclude peace, or preserve consistency in his own BOOK V.
condua, he ought instantly to have closed with overtures which 152
differed but little from the propositions he himself had formerly
made . But his views were now much changed; his alliance
with Henry; Lautrec's progress in Italy, and the superiority of
his army there above that of the Emperor, scarce left him room
to doubt of the success of his enterprize against Naples. Full
of there sanguine hopes, he was at no loss to find pretexts for
rejecting or evading what the Emperor had proposed. Under
the appearance of sympathy with Sforza, for whose interests he
had not hitherto discovered much solicitude, he again demanded
the full and unconditional re-establishment of that unfortunate
prince in his dominions. Under colour of its being imprudent
to rely on the Emperor's sincerity, he insisted that his sons
should be set at liberty before the French troops left Italy, or
surrendered Genoa. The unreasonableness of these demands, as
well as the reproachful insinuation with which they were ac-
companied, irritated Charles to such a degre~ that he could
scarce liften to them with patience; and repenting of his modera-
tion which had made so little impression on his enemies, de-
clared that he would not depart in the smallest article from the
conditions he bad now offered. Upon this the French and
English ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn unaccount-
ably to concur with Francis in these flrange propositions, de-
manded and obtained their audience of leave k.

NEXT day, two heralds who had accompanied tie ambaffa- 152.
dors of purpose, though they had hitherto concealed their cha- January 2.-

i Recucil des Traitez, 2. 249.
k Rym. 14. 200. Herbert 85. Guic. 1. '-. 4q7'

catcr.

BOOK V. raóter, having assumed the ensigns of their office, appeared i

5Z8.' the Emperor's court, and being admitted into his presence, they

They declare in the name of their respeCtive masters, and with all the folem-
war againfs
the Emperor. nities cufomary on such occasions, denounced war against him.

Charles received both with a dignity suitable to his own rank,
but spoke to each in a tone adapted to the sentiments which he
entertained of their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the
English Monarch with a firmness tempered by some degree of
decency and refpec. His reply to the French King abounded
with that acrimony of expression, which personal rivalfhip,
exasperated by the memory of many injuries inflited as well
as suffered, naturally suggests. He desired the French herald
to acquaint his overeign, that he would henceforth confider
him as a base violator of publick faith, and a stranger to the
honor and integrity becoming a gentleman. Francis, too high
spirited to bear such an imputation, had recourse to an uncom-

Francis chal- mon expedient in order to vindicate his characer. He instantly
encso' to sent back the herald with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave
Tinglecombat. the Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to single combat,

requiring him to name the time and place of the encounter,
and the weapons with which he chose to fight. Charles, as he
was not inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery, readily ac-
cepted the challenge; but after several mcefages concerning the
arrangement of all the circumfiances relative to the combat,
aIccompanied with mutual reproaches, bordering on the mofl
indecent scurrility, all thoughts of this duel, more becoming the
heroes of romance than the two grcateft Monarchs of their age,
were entirely laid aside '.

l Rccueil des Traitez 2. Mcm. de Bellay, 103, &c. Sandov. Hifl. . 837.

TIE

THE example, of two personages so illuflrious drew such ge- BOOK V.

neral attention, and carried along with it so much authority, as 5, i:.
gave rife to an important change in manners all over Europe. Thle efft of;

this in ro-
Duels, as has already been observed, had long been permitted by moting he-

culton: of

the laws of all the European nations, and forming a part of their duelling.
jurisprudence, were authorized by the magistrate on many occa-
sions as the molt proper method of terminating queftionswith re-
gard to property, or of deciding in those which refpeded crimes..
But ingle combats being confidered as solemn appeals to the
omniscience and justice of the supreme Being, they were al-
lowed only in publick causes, according to the prescription of
law, and carried on in a judicial form. Men accustomed to
this manner of decision in courts ofjuftice, were naturally led:
to apply it to personal and private quarrels. Duels, which
at first could be appointed by the civil judge alone, were fought
without the interposition of his authority, and in cafes to
which the laws did not extend. The tranfadion between:
Charles and Francis itrongly countenanced this practice. Upon,
every affront, or injury which seemed to touch his honour, a.
gentleman thought himself entitled to draw his sword, and to
call on his adversary to make reparation. Such an opinion in-
troduced among men of fierce courage, of high ipirit, and of
rude manners, when offence was often given, and revenge was
always prompt, produced most fatal confquences. Much of
the best blood in Christendom was flied; many .feful .lives were
sacrificcd; and at ome periods, war itfelfhath scarce been more
defirutive than thef contefis of honour. So powerfil, how-
ever, is the dominion of fashion, that neither the terror of penal
laws, nor reverence for religion hlave been able entirely to abo-
lifl a pradice unknown among the ancients, and not julliiable

by

BOOK V. by any principle of reason; though at the fame time it mutl be

5ns. admitted, that to this absurd custom, we must ascribe in ome

degree the extraordinary gentleness and complaisance of mo-
dern manners, and that refpetful attention of one man to an-
other, which, at present, render the social intercourses of life
far more agreeable and decent than among the most civilized
nations of antiquity.

Retreat of WH I LE the two Monarchs seemed so eager to terminate their
the Imperia-
lifns fria quarrel by a personal combat, Lautrec continued his operations
Rome. which promised to be more decisive. His army, which was
Febrary. now increased to thirty-five thousand men, advanced by great

marches towards Naples. The terror of their approach, as well
as the remonstrances and the entreaties of the prince of Orange,
prevailed at last on the Imperial troops, though with difficulty,
to quit Rome, of which they had kept possession during ten
months. But of that flourishing army which had entered the
city, scarce one half remained; the reft, cut off by the plague,
or wafted by diseases, the effes of their inactivity, intempe-
rance, and debauchery, fell vitims to their own crimes m. Lau-
trec made the greatest efforts to attack them in their retreat to-
wards the Neapolitan territories, which would have finished the
war at one blow. But the prudence of their leaders disappointed
all his measures, and conducted them with little loss to Naples.
The people of that kingdom, always the prey of every invader,
extremely impatient to hake off the Spanish yoke, received the
French with open arms, wherever they appeared to take posses-
sion; and Gaeta and Naples excepted, scarce any place of impor-
tance remained in the hands of the Imperialists. The preservation

' Guic.!. 18. 478.
.X~~~~i ~of

of the former was owing to the strength of its fortifications, BOOK V.
that of the latter to the presence of the imperial army. Lautrec, '7S287
however, fat down before Naples, but finding it vain to think of French be.
reducing by force a city defended by so many troops, he was eoe ape.
obliged to employ the flower, but less dangerous method of
blockade; and having taken measures which appeared to him
effeaual, he confidently assured his mafrer, that famine would
soon compel the besieged to capitulate. These hopes were
strongly confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous attempt made by
the enemy in order to recover the command of the sea. The
gallies of Andrew Doria, under the command of his nephew
Philippino, guarded the mouth of the harbour. Moncada, who
had succeeded Lannoy in the vice-royalty, rigged out a number
of gallies superior to Doria's, and going on board himself,
together with the marquis del Guafto, and the flower of the
Spanish officers and soldiers, attacked Doria before the arrival
of the Venetian and French fleets. But Doria, by his
superior frill in naval operations, easily triumphed over the
valour and number of the Spaniards. The viceroy was killed,
most of his fleet destroyed, and Guafto, with many officers of
diftinaion being taken prisoners, were put on board the captive
gallies, and sent by Philippino, as trophies of his viaory, to his
uncle '.

BUT notwithstanding this flattering profped of success, many Circunlnancec

circumstances concurred to frustrate Lautrec's expecations. th progrcf1
Clement, though he always acknowledged his being indebted of it.
to Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and often complained
of the cruel treatment he had'met with from the Emperor, was

Guic. 1. 9. 487. P. Hcutcr. lib. x. c. 2. p. 23r.
VOL. II. r not

BOOK V. not influenced at this juncture by principles of gratitude, nor,

zT*.' which is more extraordinary, was he swayed by the desire of

revenge. His past misfortunes rendered him more cautious than
ever, and his recollection of the errors which he had committed,
incrcafed the natural irresolution of his mind. While he amused
Francis with promises, he secretly negociated with Charles; and
being follicitous, above all things, to re-eflablifh his family in
Florence with their ancient authority, which he could not expecd
from Francis, who had entered into ftrid alliance with the
new republick, he leaned rather towards the fide of his enemy
than that of his benefactor, and gave Lautrec no assistance
towards carrying on his operations. The Venetians, viewing
with jealousy the progress of the French arms, were intent only
on recovering such maritime towns in the Neapolitan domi-
nions as were to be pofleffed by their republick, while they
were altogether careless about the reduction of Naples, on which
the success of the common cause depended". The King of
England, inflead of being able, as had been projected, to em-
barafs the Emperor by attacking his territories in the Low-
Countries, found his fubjeds so averse to an unnecessary war,
which would have ruined the trade of the nation, that in
order to iilence their clamours, and put a flop to the ifurrcc-
tions ready to break out among them, he was compelled to con-
clude a truce for eight months with the governess of the Nether-
lands''. Francis himself, with the fame unpardonable inattention
of which he had formerly been guilty, and for which he had
fiutrced so severely, neglected to make proper remittances to
Lautrec for the support of his army".

° Gulic. 1. xix. 491. P Hecrbert, 90.- Ryner, 14. 258.
i Guic. 1. xviii. 478.

T'11i E:;

THESE unexpeaed eventsretarded theprogrefs of the French, BooK V.

and discouraged both the general and his troops; but the revolt '5 28.
of Andrew Doria proved a fatal blow to all their measures. Revoit oAn-

dreiw )oria

That gallant officer, the citizen of a republick, and trained up frm Fiance.
from his infancy in the fea-firvice, retained the spirit of inde-
pendence natural to the former, and the plain liberal manners
peculiar to the latter. A perfedt firanger to the arts of sub-
mission or flattery necessary in courts, and conscious at the
fame time of his own merit and importance, he always offered
his advice with freedom, and often preferred his complaints and
remonstrances with boldness. The French ministers, unac-
cuflomed to such liberties, determined to ruin a man who treated
them with so little deference; and though Francis himself had a
just sense of Doria's services, as well as an high esteem for his
charaCter, the courtiers, by continually representing him as a
man haughty, intractable, and more solicitous to aggrandize him-
self, than to promote the interest of France, gradually under-
mined the foundations of his credit, and filled the King's mind
with suspicion and diftrufI. From thence proceeded several
affronts and indignities put upon Doria. His appointments
were not rcgularly paid; his advice, even in naval affairs, was
often flightcd; an attempt was made to fcize the prisoners taken
by his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples; all which he bore
with alundancc of ill humour. But an injury offered to his
country, transportcd him beyond all bounds of patience. The
Frcnch began to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour, and,
removing thither ibme branchcs of trade carried on at CGenoa,
plainly flwewed that they intcnded to render that town, long the
o)hjcd of jealousy and hatred to the Genocfe, their rival in wealth
and commerce. Doria, animated with a patriotic zeal for the

R r honour

BOOK V. honour and interest of his country, remonstrated against this ir

^4s- the highest tone, not without threats, if the measure were not

instantly abandoned. This bold ation, aggravated by the
malice of the courtiers, and placed in the most odious light, irri-
tated Francis to such a degree, that he commanded Barbefieux,
whom he appointed admiral of the Levant, to fail direcly to
Genoa with the French fleet, to arrest Doria, and to seize
his gallies. This rash order, of which the most profound
secrecy alone could have secured the execution, was concealed
with so little care, that Doria got timely intelligence of it, and
retired with all his gallies to a place of safety. Guafto, his
prisoner, who had long observed and fomented his growing dif-
content, and had often allured him by magnificent promises to
enter into the Emperor's service, laid hold on this favourable
opportunity. While his indignation and resentment were at
their height, he prevailed on him to dispatch one of his officers
to the Imperial court with his overtures and demands. The
negociation was not long; Charles, fully sensible of the impor-
tance of such an acquisition, granted him whatever terms he
required. Doria sent back his commiflon, together with the
collar of St. Michael to Francis, and hoisting the Imperial colours,
failed with all his galleys towards Naples, not to block up the
harbour of that unhappy city as he had formerly engaged, but
to bring them protetion and deliverance.

w, tclied I ls arrival opened the communication with the fca, and
si taton of
flih t'rnch reflorcdt plenty in Naples, which was now reduced to the last
alc blfore cxtremity; and the French, having loft their superiority at

fca, were oon reduced to great fraits for want of provisions.
The prince of Orange, who succeedcd the viceroy in the com-
mand of the Imlperial army, flewed hiimfelf by his prudent

conduei

conduc worthy of that honour which his good fortune and BOOK V.
the death of his generals had twice acquired him. Beloved by -it.J
the troops, who remembering the prosperity they had enjoyed
under his command, served him with the utmost alacrity, he
let flip no opportunity of harassing the enemy, and by continual
alarms or allies, fatigued and weakened them'. As an addi-
tion to all these misfortunes, the diseases common in that coun-
try during the sultry months, began to break out ampng the
French troops. The prisoners communicated to them the pefti-
lence which the Imperial army had brought to Naples from
Rome, and it raged with such violence, that few, either officers
or soldiers, escaped the infetion. Of the whole army, not four
thousand men, a number scarce sufficient to defend the camp,
were capable of doing duty'; and being now besieged in their
turn, they suffered all the miseries from which the Imperialifis
were delivered. Lautrec, after struggling long with so many
disappointments and calamities, which preyed on his mind at
the fame time that the pestilence wafted his body, died, lament- Aug. 5j.
ing the negligence of his sovereign, and the infidelity of his allies,
to which so many brave men had fallen vitims'. By his
death, and the indisposition of the other generals, the command
devolved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer altogether un- Raise e
equal to such a trufi. He, withl troops no less dispiritcd than
reduced, retreated in disorder to Averfa; which town being
invested by the prince of Orange, Saluces was under the nccef-
fity of contcntilng, that he himfclf fliould remain a prifoncr of
war, that his troops should lay down their arms and colours, give
up their baggage, and march under a guard to the frontiers of

, Jovii Hist. lib. 36. p. 31, &c. Sigonii Vita Doria, p. 139. IlBela, I r4, c.
] Bcllay, 117, &c. ' . Iciutcr. Rcium Auflr. lib. x. c. 2. 231.

France.

BooK V. France. By this ignominious capitulation, the wretched remains

s;28. of the French army were saved; and the Emperor, by his own

perseverance and the good conduct of his generals, acquired
once more the superiority in Italy a.

Gens'a reo- THE loss of Genoa followed immediately upon the ruin of the
vers ts li-
berty. army in Naples. To deliver his country from the dominion of

foreigners was Doria's highest ambition, and had been his prin-
cipal inducement to quit the service of France, and enter into
that of the Emperor. A most favourable opportunity for exe-
cuting this honourable enterprize now presented itself. The city
of Genoa, afflited by the pestilence, was almost deserted by its
inhabitants; the French garrison being neither regularly paid nor
recruited, was reduced to an inconsiderable number; Doria's emif-
saries found that such of the citizens as remained, being weary
alike of the French and Imperial yoke, the rigour of which they
had alternately felt, were ready to welcome him as their deli-
verer, and to second all his measures. Things wc.ring this pro-
mifing aspcd, he failed towards the coast of Genoa; on his approach
the French gallies retired; a small body of men which he landed,
furprized one of the gates of Genoa in the night time ; Trivulci,
the French governor, with his feeble garrison, flint himself up in
Sert. Z tChe citadel, and Doria took poiflcfion of the town without blood-

flied or refiflance. Want of provisions quickly obliged Trivulci
to capitulate; the people, cager to abolifllh fich an odious
monument of their lcrvitudc, ran together with a tumultuous
violence, and levelled the citadel with the groutd.

])ifiintrclc I'm' was now in D),ria's povwer to havc rendered Iiiifclf the
l),i:,d. foveieigll of his country, whlich lie had happily lred( fr()o

l"cllay, 117, &c. Jovii H-lit. lib. 25, 26.

il ()pprelliol .

oppression. The fame of his former ations, the success of his pre- BOOK V.
sent attempt, the attachment of his friends, the gratitude of his g
countrymen, together with the fiupport of the Emperor, all con-
spired to facilitate his attaining the supreme authority, and invited
him to lay hold of it. But with a magnanimity of which there are
few examples, he sacrificed all thoughts of aggrandizing himself
to the virtuous fatisfation of establishing liberty in his country,
the highest object at which ambition can aim. Having assembled
the whole body of the people in the court before his palace, he
aflured them, that the happiness of feeing them once more in
poffefion of freedom, was to him a full reward for all his ser-
vices; that more delighted with the name of citizen than of fove-
reign, he claimed no pre-eminence or power above his equals;
but remitted entirely to them the right of fettling what form of
government they would now chute to be eftabliflied among them.
The people listened to him with tears of admiration, and of
joy. Twelve persons were elected to new-model the conftitu-
tion of the republick. The influence of Doria's virtue and
example, communicated itself to his countrymen; the facions
which had long torn and ruined the state, seemed to be forgot-
ten; prudent precautions were taken to prevent their reviving;
and the fame frm of government which hath fubfitcd with
little variation ince that time in Genoa, was eflballifed witl
univerltl applaufc. Doria lived to a great age, beloved,
rclcted, and honoured by his countrymen; and adhering uni-
formly to his protfcflons of moderation, without arrogating any
thing unbecoming i private citizen, hie prcrvcl a great alcen-
dant over the councils oftlhe republick, which owed its being to
his gncrolity. 'Ie alutlority he poflTfcd was more l;ttticr';;,
as well as more Itftisitdory, than that derived frolm lov, rci;t;

a (,lInilin

BooK V. a dominion founded in love and in gratitude; and upheld by

-^8' veneration for his virtues, not by the dread of his power. His

memory is still reverenced by the Genoese, and he is diflin-
guifhed in their publick monuments, and celebrated in the works
of their historians by the most honourable of all appellations,
THE FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY, AND THE RE-
STORERI OF ITS LIBERTY1.

9Ope,rs FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of his arms,

Operator s
i te M-- discredited by so many losses, made new efforts in the Milanese.

But the Count of St. Pol, a rash and unexperienced officer, to
whom he gave the command, was no match for Antonio de
Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial generals. He, by his superior
ikill in war, checked with a handful of men, the brisk but
ill concerted motions of the French; and though so infirm him-
self that he was carried constantly in a litter, he surpassed them
when occasion required, no less in aivity than in prudence.
By an unexpeced march he furprized, defeated, and took the
Count of St. Pol, and ruined the French army in the Milanese
as entirely as the prince of Orange had ruined that which
besieged Naples Y.

Ncgociatins AMIDST there vigorous operations in the field, each party
behtwen discovered an impatient desire of peace, and continual negocia-
Charles and
Francis. tions were carried on for that purpose. The French King

discouraged, and almot cexhaufted by so many unsuccessful enter-
prizes, was reduced now to think of obtaining the relcafe of
his sons by concessions, not by the terror of his arms. The

Guic. 1. 19. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Dorix, p. 1146. Jovii Hist. lib. 26.

p. 36, &c. Y Guic. 1. 19. 520. P. Hcuter. Rer. Aufr.
lib. x. c. 3. p. 233. Mem. deBellay, 121.

Pope

Pope hopcd to recover by a treaty whatever lie had loft in the B30o;KV.
war. I'lhe Emperor, notwithflanding the advantages which he lhad
gained, had many reasons to Imake him wiih for an accommoda-
tion; Sol)yman, having over-run HI-mnary, was ready to break
in upon the Aufirian territories with the whole force of the
lLa2; the Reformation gaining ground daily in Germany, the
princes vwho avoured it had entered into a confedceracy, which
lie thought dangerous to the tranquillty of the Empire ; the
Spaniards murmured at a war the weight of dwhich relicd
chiefly on them; the variety and extent of his operations, far
excceded what his revenues could fuipport; his success hitherto
]had been owing chiefly to his own good fortune, and to the
abilities of his generals, nor could lie latter limclif that they
with troops deflitutc of every thing ncccllary, would always
triumph over enemies Rill in a condition to renew their attack;.
All parties, however, were at equal pains to conceal, or to dif-
femble their real fentimcnts. The Emperor, that his inability
to carry on the war might not be fufpe&ed, infitced on high
terms in the tone of a conqueror. The Pope, solicitous not to
lofce lis prelent allies, before lie came to any agreement with
Charlcs, C(ontilliled to make a thouljand proteflations of fidelity
to ,c lh rr er, xlilc lie privately lglo:'itcd Vwitll the latter.
I';iiicis, a;tlaid that ills conl(idcratl s milt prevnct lill b)y
trc'li; ig f;r tihcii'lcl s withl tli i.ipcrr, .:dl r

ecour1 t o) many

(dii,),)i l)le artiliccs ill orle'' r to turnl tll ',ir attn ill fromIII

ll, :c.iw!;ires wiich lic .'as talcln to iadjIlil ill d'ii'crc:cc, \Mtlli
],:; rival.

I:; tis ituitlii of ;flqairs, .l ic ;i ll t (lc (

c nten(liig powers

w ilil'd l< )t';t(,'c, )ilt (!i11i'l lI't vcltur'c 1o lIafily on11 tlle

(c; iiccella t for attalillilnT; it, tw( ladies Iliticrto to proculre
\V ,.
I. 1S f tiis

BOOK V. this blefling so much desired by all Europe. Thefc were Mar-

529' garet of Auflria, dowager of Savoy, the Emperor's aunt, and
May. Louise Francis's mother. They agreed on an interview at Cam-

bray, and being lodged in two adjoining houses between which
a communication was opened, met together without ceremony
or observation, and held daily conferences to which no person
whatever was admitted. As both were profoundly skilled in
business, thoroughly acquainted with the secrets of their rcfpec-
tive courts, and possessed with perfect confidence in each other,
they soon made great progress towards a final accommodation;
and the ambassadors of all the confederates waited in anxious
suspense to know their fate, the determination of which was
entirely in their hands .

Separate trea- BUT whatever diligence they used to haften forward a general
ty between
the Pope and peace, the Pope had the address and industry to get the itart of
Charles.
lune 20, his allies, by concluding at Barcelona a particular treaty for

himself. The Emperor, impatient to visit Italy in his way to
Germany; and desirous of re-establishing tranquillity in the one
country, before he attempted to compose the disorders which
abounded in the other, found it ncccflary to fitcure at least one
alliance on whicl he might depend, among tlc Italian fiatcs.
That with the Pope, who courted it with unwearied importu-
nity, seemed more proper than any other. Charles being cx-
treinely solicitous to make fomc reparation for tl c inuilts which
lhe had oflered to his sacrcd character, and to redlcem pail:
offences by new merit, granted Clement, after all his Iini)rtiln;,
terms more Ia.volurable than lie co(ld llhave cxCpectd afilr ;t
continued scrics of' ticcefi. Among othcr articles, lie le)gaged

P. Hcutcr. Rcr. Auflr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 133. Memn. tiu cBllay, p. 22.

to

to restore all the territories belonging to the ecclesiastical slate; BOOK V.
to re-cftablifl the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to give 15^S9.
his natural daughter in marriage to Alexander the head of that
family; and to put it in the Pope's power to decide concerning
the fate of Sforza, and the pofflefion of the Milanese. In
return for there ample conceflions, Clement gave the Emperor
the invefliture of Naples without the reserve of any tribute,
but the present of a white steed in acknowledgment of his
sovereignty; aboblved all who had been concerned in assaulting
and plundering Rome; and permitted Charles and his brother
Ferdinand to levy the fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues
throughout their dominions a

THE account of this tranfaaion, quickened the negociations. Auguf 5.

Peace of

at Cambray, and brought Margaret and Louise to an immediate Cambray be-
agreement. The treaty of MIadrid served as the basis of that twecn Charls

.1~~~~~ ~and Francia.

which they concluded; the latter being intended to mitigate
the rigour of the former. The chief articles were, That the
I.l)peror fliould not, for the present, demand the rcflitution of
Blrgundy, rcltcrving however, in full force, his rights and pre-
tcnlonis to tllat duitchy; That Francis fliould pay two millions
of crowns as the ransom of his sons, and, before theywere flt at
liberty, lhould reflore fuclh towns as le flill held ill the Mvilancfe ;
That lie lhould rclign tlhe fovcrcignty of Ilanders ;ind Artois;
ITiltt lic flould rienoutnce all his prctenfions to Naplls, Milin,
(cnlloc, ;1d \every otller place beyond the Alps; That lie should
itlmncdiately conlimmate the marriage concluded betwccn himi
anrd the Emiperor's filler ecanora'.

; (C ic. i. 1 9. 522. t1' . Ilcuter. Rcr. Aufir. lib. x. c. 3. p. 234.
Sandov. Hilt, dcll 'nipcr. Carl. V. ii. 28.

S 1f T us

BoOK V. THus Francis, chiefly from his impatience to procureliberty

to his sons, sacrificed every thing which had at first prompted

15Z9.

Av.r. ae- him to take arms, or which had induced him, by continuing
c for th
Empe or. Lhofilities, during nine fucceflive campaigns, to protract the war

to a length scarce known in Europe before the eftablifiment of
flanding armies, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes became
universal. The Emperor, by this treaty, was rendered sole arbi-
ter of the fate of Italy; he delivered his territories in the
Netherlands from an ignominious badge of fuib:eCcion; and after
having baffled his rival in the field, he prescribed to him the
conditions of peace. The different conduct and spirit with
vhich the two Monarchs carried on the operations of war, led
natui.lly to such an ifTue of it. Charlcs, inclined by temper,
as well as obliged by his situation, concerted all his fchemcs
with caution, pursued them with perfeverancc; and obfcrving
circumflances and events with attention, let none escape that
could be improved to advantage. Francis, more cnterlpizing
than fReady, undertook great dceigns with warmth, but cxecuted
tllem v.ith ircmii'lncfs; and, iverted l)y his pleaflir(s, or dc-
cived by i:; avolurites, he (,otcll loft the moil l ,on!iinZ opp'tr-
tuiiiitis (cf iicccV. Nor had tlie chalraler the two rivls
tlic'n l:ilvcs grcatcr influence on the operations o(f tlle war, tlia!i
the oprlite ctliualitics (of thle gneracls wh!m they crllmloayl.
Alimoni-g tlhe Illmperialltis, v;tlo)ur temlpered with pruldence; f{'rti-
lity (,f iv\'Clltiol aided by cx:)lpri-nlce; i.It:;tiity t) p)CentratC the
(lcii,;ns o1 tliit ceiiici, as well co .lndiCl tlicir ov'n, witl
all tlc talents tliat f)iorm grceat coimmliidcrs anld ell ilCre vilory,
xvc'l(' ctui iu()lls. Ain()g tlie Frencli, tilc ( qualities were

c]il. \V;itlltil' ()or tle: v ery reverie o' tli il) ablmlnded; nor c(ouildl
thcy Lo()s (i (!ne main (uiilcf; wc c:,i l.,Lt Lutrec, who was

7 aiway:,

always unfortunate) that ccquailed the merit of Pcfcara, Leyva, BOOK V.
Guafto, the prince of Orange, and other leaders whom Charles ,"--
had to fct in opposition to them. Bourbon, Morone, and Doria,
who might have been capable of balancing by their abilities and
condclu the superiority which the Impcrialifts had acquired,
w-cre lot through the carelcfinefs of the King, and the malice or
injusice of his counsellors; and the most fatal blows given to
France during the progress of the war, proceeded from the
despair and resentment of thcfe three persons, who were forced
to abandon her service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was obliged to submit, P'Iicnolur-

:;h's t)

were not the most afflicting circumstance to him in the treaty of i racis.
Cambray. He loft his reputation and the conlidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival. Unwilling to
enter into the details ncccfliry for adjuling their intcrcfis, or
afraid that whatever he claimed fr thenm must have been pur-
chased by farther concessions on his own part, he gave thcen up
in a body ; and without the leaPt provision in their lchalf, left tile
Venetians, tle Elorentincs, the duke of l:crrara, together with
filchlof the Neaplolitan barons as had joincl his army, to the

ll cry

(' t e Elmperor. They exclaimed loudly against tliis lbal aild
perlidious atdlion, of whlichl Francis linf'lfwas tl) muclh alhamcd,
that, ill order to avoid the pl)in o f lic(;rili rm tllir a:Lifl-
dors te reproiaches xlwich liec jullly lld, it, it was loIIc tilnc
bleiore l would collficnt to allow them an audience. (3l Irlc;,
oll tllc otier lha;ltl, was attentive to the inltcrcfl of every 1)r1,;
who h( ad :leeTcd to im; the rights of l;nc of li:; l'lclliiflh ill)-
jcils, xvwlo had

I elacts or Iprctelllolis iln France, wvire ictl.rcd;

one article was insertcd, oligin, lr;aici; to reflore the 1,1,i ,
and memciory of tih Conllablic Bourbon ; ;and to granl IliS lIir's

the

BOOK V. the poffefion of his lands which had been forfeited; another,

-329.- by which indemnification was stipulated for those French gen-

tlemen who had accompanied Bourbon in his exile c. This con-
duct, laudable in itself, and placed in the most friking light by a
comparison with that of Francis, gained Charles as much efteern
as the success of his arms had acquired him glory.
lTrnryac- FRANCIS, did not treat the King of England with the

fame neglcd as his other allies. He communicated to him
all the flcps of his negociation at Cambray, and luckily found
that Monarch in a situation which left him no choice, but to
approve implicitly of his mcafurcs, and to concur wilh them.
HTi fch:e-mc Henry had been folliciting the Pope for foine time, in order to

[L ir,t g di-
vrorc (1 dfcmn obtain a divorce from Catharinc of AraLon his Q(een. Several

. (QC!. motives combined in prompting tle King to urge this ffit; as

le was )powcrfully inluenced at s(ome seasons by religious con-
fidcrations, he entertained many feruples concerning the legi-
timacy of his marriage with is brother's widow; his affcions
had long ceen cflrangcd from the Queen, who was older thain
limncl'i, and had loll all the cllrms filc pflChLd i the earlier
p.rt ( t(;' lecr li ifbc; ic wa I ,

1'1 lol al cy dcli rou o laving m:lc iflIuc;

Vy'ollcy arttully iorlti],d lis; t'irulls, and enclrnraged Ii It; (opes,
ti lit le militwd the rac

llbe ltween , In.i and tile Iniu pcror,

( .t all iIc's I C l V ; ; uld, what w\as monc irci! C )pel I ips in its

(i) r'tioll tl;ali all tliclb Illit(ld, tile Kit; ]i< l (c 'nc,-.ivc(l a vio-
lent 1 ,)\ve h

r tle c cel)i-rtc d Ain e lo,lylln, ; a :,.II :; l:iiy ol' reat

l).':niy, ;and l of reatcr a;cclinplithliicl ts, v:lio l,

1 L; lie f)ouI( it

jini l f,,il)!c to ,:i hero o ther trm , le dctrlnin ld t rai cto
the tlinone. 'T'lIc lPapa;l iltlio()ity 1lad OL I)ce bccii iI c,1,ILd to

j'uic. i. 9 '. p 575, '. lcuter. <cr. Aunfl. lib. x, . 4 . . 235.

grant

grant divorces for reasons less specious than those which Henry BooK V.
produced. W\hen the matter was first proposed to Clement, ,5
during his imprisonment in the castle of St. Angelo, as his hopes
of recovering liberty depended entirely on the King of England,
and his ally of France, he exprcifed the warmest inclination to
gratify him. But no sooner was he set free, tlan he dilcovcred
other entiments. Charles, who cfpouled the prcotcdion of his
aunt with zeal inflamed by rcfentmcnt, alarmed the Pope on the
one hand with threats which made a deep imprcflion on his
timid mind; and allured him on the other with those promifs
in favour of his family, which he afterwards accompliflhcd.
Upon the proipedt of these, Clement not only forgot all his
obligations to Henry, but ventured to cndanger the interest of
the Romish religion in England, and to run the risk of alienat-
ing that kingdom for ever from the obedience oi the Papal fee.
After amusing ITcnry during two cyars, withi all the fub!tltics
and chicane which the court of Rome can so dcxtcrolfly employ
to protract or deat any catul; aiter dilplaying the whole
extent of his amniguous and deceitful policy, tlh inricacics of
whlich tlhe Englifli hlcirians, to whom it propcirly lbelongs, have
01fond it nocafy mllttcr to trace and ulnravel; lhe, at lafl, rccall1.d
thle powers of lie d( legate s who li e had atppo)iltued to jli(dge ill
the p)illt, avocat'ed thle (c'ufc to !o()ne, lc:tvinl tlie King, no o(tlir
l!p1)('f ot lining a div.rc: but 10)11 tlle perlio

1)1 (cs'ii(ll o the

l'(pi lbimlni'l. As (cient was noV,' in fllid alli;lnc with tlce
l'.mpelI')r, Vwli' llad:l piirtl lic d Ills 1'ricl(dll i) l)y lilcli exorbitlnt

c :eiiolis, I l1r1y dlp):oi 'd

.l o)' >)cl rinii , any lenit ee ( 'i()r tlIe

llrmnlerl, btit xvllit bws

(lilat(l by llie latter. 1 is honour,

i< w(cve, and pid)1fiioIS (oiel d il preventing hii from m -
lii(iiitla iii; bhis liememllc (t a dlivorc(', \hllichl lie dl':i' (,
acecomplilll by other mIlan:;, and at y111 rate; and tlhe C(ont)ilitiall ilC

>l

'C. 'o C , i ,.'..

. z ' il' .i . noi)t only o ' rcdi

-'5) rrC :i: ap. ccs ''..-f.P t!: t;d l r n ' 1c (: til ir allies, in the
Itr;- tyj ( Cf C :.,i a , I -. l. ;

. '.: . . c

i nt of a large
1;J1~ ~ ~~... '

::.', ; ;: . '" :.

' .-' , .....

. :'. : -. .'.r:s t;,.' 'vi-m cnt of th_

2. ',' I^ ' 's i : . 2 .tll

' :.' 1 A \ ; ., ..1 ...

'', 1 ;

i 1

. h

a. num.
s, ,

{ -{) cl ia.. z't .() sltl~;,.(

1 l o .

. ,

z 1K.! '

t ]L r," .u:~I' .l ' ;:' , ' iis ;.t

of a lDc o.: tVo1 l

I .',i,2j:2 ;;s 1V'.' .'.'. ', LLi : '
!,: : ] :is untr <

',:, ' 1 :'' } i: i! ; i -i'l al cccinl cil tc thli m xill c'f liis

t ; r,: -i;,.' t '

t ! i ; i] i. ; l (ih'I ': c

, l .......

cunr-iC up;::

,.l . ', , .c Il

\t' li i lil 'dl "
1' I.; w r

: ( 1

; 1.. li .t

1. ;iri , l 'i Iel er.

Il i l

t' '.1,' c

i ;,c
1' ' i\.: ;1i':'s ;. !
ii ;p'.or, or as (unt of P arcclotna,

('1 ..... .

( ' I

t 1. :;:: 'V,

' ( i I :i:ttcr, (Icclaiing that
;; ( ,! i': .r r; aid aiii ai. lr; li'lnl all the piiic ,c; and s(l ets (oi

:llcJii

'j ... 1. Cl,
p. 1;'2. (;iSl iiv. ii. o. I.circr. ix. \\: .

tli;at

that country attended his court waiting to receive his decilion BOOK V,
with regard to their fate. At Genoa, where he firfi landed, he '" '
was received with' the acclamations due to the protector of
their liberties. Having honoured Ddria with many marks of
diflindion, and bestowed on the republick several new privi-
leges, he proceeded to Bologna, the place fixed upon for his
interview with the Pope. He affeced to unite in his publick
entry into that city the Rate and majesty that suited an Emperor, Nev.
with the humility becoming an obedient son of the church; and
while at the head of twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able to
give law to all Italy, he kneeled down to kifs the feet of that
very Pope whom he had o lately detained a prisoner. The
Italians, after suffering so much from the ferocity and licen-
tioufnefs of his armies, and after having been long accustomed
to form in their imagination a picture of Charles which bore some
resemblance to that of the barbarous Monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly afflided their country with like
calamities, were furprized to fee a prince of a graceful ap-
pearance, affable and courteous in his deportment, of regular
manners, and of exemplary attention to all the offices of reli-
gion '. They were fill more astonished when he fettled all the
concerns of the princes and flates which now depended on him,
with a degree of moderation and equity much beyond what they
had expected.

CHARLES himself, when he fct out from Spain, far from r, mocra-

tion and the

intending to give any such extraordinary proof of his self- motives of it,
denial, seems to have been resolved to avail himself to the utmost
of the superiority which he had acquired in Italy. But various

f Sandov. Hifl. dell Emp. Carl. V. ii. o, 53, &c.
VOL. II. T t circuinflance

BooK V. circulnfances concurred in pointing out the necessity of pursuing

a very difercnt course. The progress of the Turkish Sultan,
vho, after over-running Hungary, had Ipnetrated into Auflria,
S:-. 13. and laid siege to-Vienna with an army of an hundred and fifty

thousand men, loudly called on him to colled his whole force
to oppose that torrent; and though the valour of the Germans,
the prudent conduct of Ferdinand, together with the treachery
oa. 6. of the Vizier soon obliged Solyman to abandon that enterprize

with infamy and loss, the religious disorders fill growing in
Germany made the Emperor's presence higlly necessary there :
The Florentines, inftcad of giving their content to the rc-erPa-
hlifhment of the cMdlici, which by the treaty of Barcelona the
Emperor had bound hiimfclf to procure, were preparing to defend
their liberty by force of arms; the vail preparations for hisjourncy
la.d involved him in unusual cxpcnccs; and on this, as well as
many other occalions, the multiplicity of his affairs, and the
narrowness of his revenues obliged him to contra&t his vast
fchcmes of amlition, and to forego prefcnt and certain advan-
tages, that lie might guard againf more remote but unavoidable
dangers. Charles, from all thcfe considerations, finding it necef-
iary to afTume an air of moderation, acd llis part with a
good grace. He admitted Sforza into his presence, and not
only gave him a full pardon of all palt ocnces, but granted
him the invelliture of the dutclhy together with his nicce tlie
King of )cnmnark's daughter in marriage. Ihe allowed the
duke of Fcrrara to keep pollcllion of all hIis ldomiioins, ajultilln
the points in difpilte between him antl the Pope with an imparti-
ality not very agrecable to tlhe latter. I-He came to a final accoml-
modation with the Venctians upon the rcafonable condition of

t Slcidt.I, 121. C :. .
uc . 550.

their

their restoring whatever they had usurped during the late war, BOOK V.
either in the Neapolitan or papal territories. In return for flo -'
many concessions he exated considerable fums from eacl of
the powers with whom he treated, which they paid without
relucdance, and which afforded him the means of proceeding on
his journey towards Germany with a magnificence suitable to
his dignity h.

THESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to Italy after a 153.

tedious war, the calamities of which had chiefly affeCed thle autoriry
that country, were publilhed at Bologna with great folem- i 1lc1die.
nity on the first day of the year one thoufatndl five hundred
and thirty, amidt the universal acclamations of the people,
applauding the Emperor to whose moderation and generosity
they ascribed the blessings of peace which they had so long
desired. The Florentines alone did not partake of this gencral
joy. Animated with a zeal for liberty more laudable than
prudent, they determined to oppose the rcf.oration of the
Medici. The Imperial army had already entered their terri-
tories, and formed the ficge of their capital. But though de-
firtcd by all their allies, and left without any hope of filccour,
they defended themselves many months with an olflinate valour
worthy of better fucccfs, and even when they firrcndercd, they
obtained a capitulationll hicli gave them hopes o1 tClciming llf n

1e
remains of their liberty. E1 t te l.i pllror, from his (elir to

iratiy the Pope, frtuflratcd all tlheir cXl'lti'ns, alnd abolifih-

;it) their ancient fi)rm of governmllnt, railf'd Alcxandcr Ml'edici
it, tlhe fame ablfoluttc dominion over tat isite wlli'.ll

: i:; sthaily
Ilivc retained to the prefcnt tilnc;. 'llilbcrl dc Clialons prince

l Sandov. ii. 55, &c.

t 2 of

BoaK V. of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed during this siege..
' '- His estate and titles descended to his siser Claude de Chalons,,

who was married to Rene count of Nassau, and he transmitted
to her posterity of the house of Nassau the title of Princes.of
Orange which they have rendered so illustrious.'..

State ofaf. AFTER the publication of the peace at Bologna, and the
rair< civi ceremony of his coronation as King of Lombardy and Emperor
and re'igion
in Germaoy. of the Romans, which the Pope performed with.the accustomed
Feb. 22 and formalities, nothing detained Charles in Italy k; and he began
24. to prepare for his journey to Germany.. His pretence became

every day more necessary in that country, and was solicited with.
equal importunity by the catholicks and by the favourers of the
new doctrines. During that long interval of tranquillity which
the abfrnce Qs the Emperor, the contests between him and the
Pope, and his attention to the war with France afforded them,
the latter had gained much ground. Most of the princes who
had embraced Luther's opinions, had not only established in.
their territories that form of worihip which he approved; but
had entirely suppressed the rites of the Romish church. Many
of the free cities had imitated their conduc. Almost one half
of the Gcrmanick body had revolted from the Papal fee, and
its dominion, even in that part which had not hitherto fiaken
off the yoke, was considerably weakened by the example of the
neighbouring ftatcs, or by the secret progress of those dotrines.
which had undermined it among them. Whatever fatisfacion
the Emperor, while he was at open enmity with the fee of
Rome, might have felt in those events that tended to mortify

I Gui¢. 1. xx p. 541, &c. P. Hcuter. Rer. Aufr. lib. x. c. 4. p. 236
h H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici Coronatione Car. V. ap. Scard. ii. 266.

8 *and'

and embarafs the Pope, he could not help perceiving now; that BOOK V..
the religious divisions in Germany would, in the end, prove 3
extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority. The weakness of
former Emperors had suffered the great vassals of the Empire to
make such successful encroachments upon their power and pre-
rogative, that during the whole course of a war, which had-
often required the exertion of his utmost strength, Charles scarce
drew any effetual aid from Germany, and found that magnifi-
cent titles or obsolete pretensions were almost the only advantages
which he had gained by swaying the Imperial sceptre. He
now became fully sensible that if he did not recover in ome
degree the prerogatives which his predeceffrs had loll, and
acquire the authority, as well as posiess the name-of head of
the Empire, his high dignity would contribute more to obftruS&
than to promote his ambitious schemes. Nothing, he saw, was
more essential towards attaining this than to suppress opinions
which might form new bonds of confederacy among the princes
of the Empire, and unite them by ties fironger and more sacred
than any political conneCtion. Nothing seemed to lead more
certainly to the accomplishment of his designs, than to employ
zeal for the established religion, of which he was the natural
protector, as the instrument of extending his civil authority.

ACCORDING LY, a profpea nofooner opened of coming to an Proceedings
accommodation with the Pope, than by the Emperor's appoint- of s',te)it

at Spiret.

ment, a diet of the Empire was held at Spires, in order to take Alarch 15,
into consideration the slate of religion. The decree of the diet
assembled there in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, which was almost equivalent to a toleration of
Lutller's opinions, had given great offence to the rcft of Chris-

tendoim

BOOK V. tendom. The greatefi delicacy of address, however, was requi-

^ fitc in proceeding to any decision more rigorous. The mindsof

men kept i; perpetual agitation b a controvcrfy carried on
during twelve years without intcrrmiffion of debate, or abatement
of zeal, were now inflamed to an high degree. They were
accuilomcd to innovations, and saw the boldest of them success-
fil. ITaving not only abolished old rites, but fubffituted new
forms in their place, they were iniuenced -as much by attach-
ment to the fyftcm which tlley had embraced, as by aversion to
that which they had abandoncd. Luther himself, of afpirit not
to be worn out by the length and obflinacy of the combat, or to
become rcenifs upon fucccfs, continued the attack with as much
rigour as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom many
eq(ualled him in zeal, and some furpafled him in learning, vwere
ni, less capable than their malter to conduEc the controversy in
the properefi manner. Many of the laity, and even of the
princes, trained up amidlf these inceflant disputations, and in the
liabit of liflcning to the arguments of the contending parties
\lho alternately appealed to them as judges, came to be pro-
soundly fillcd in all tle qucllions which were agitated, and,
upon occasion, could flcw thcmfclvcs not inexpert in any of
the arts witll wliicl thctel tlieological encounters were managed.
It wa;s ,bviou:; firo all tlhce circumfl.nces, that any violent
ldccilloii of the diet inllf have inmediately precipitated mIatters
iito coln'lion, anld ]lave kindled in Germany the flanic o'ta
rcligiis w; ar. All, tliercftorc, that tile Archduke, and the othcr
ctOinHlli(ncr s all,)iltcd by tle linlpcror dcmland(d of the dit,

lwas, to ienjoin tliole Hlates ol tlhe EIlilire Vwo a() d ithcrto

(obl:,ed thc decree illiid againit Luthlr at Woris ill tile year
ojic thoutfliul ive huIlndred and twcnity-ibur, to pcicvcrc'in the

7 obfJrvation

observation of it, and to prohibit the other flates from attempt- BOOK V.
ing any farther innovation in religion, particularly from abo-

1530.

lilling the Mass, before the meeting of a general council.
After much dispute, a decree to that effet was approved of by
a majority of voices'.

TiE Elector of Saxony, the marquis of Brandenburgh, the The followrs

of Luther

Landgrave of Hesse, the dukes of Lunenburgh, the prince of protcLagaint
Anhalt, together with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free them.

April ig.

cities m, entered a solemn protest againfi this decree, as unjust and
impious. On that account they were diflinguifhed by the name
of PROTESTANTS", an appellation which hath since become
better known, and more honourable, by its being applied indif-
criminately to all the feds of whatever denomination which have
revolted from the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this decla-
ration of their dissent from the decree of the diet, the Protestants
sent ambassadors into Italy to lay their grievances before the
Emperor, from whom they met with the most discouraging
reception. Charles was.at that tine in close union with the Deliberations
Pope, and follicitous to attach him inviolably to his interest. aof 'L'pr.
During their long residence at Bologna, they held many consul-
tations concerning the most effedual means of extirpating' the
heretics which had sprung up in Germany. Clement, whose
cautious and timid mind the proposal of a general council fillcd
with horror, even beyond that which Popes, the conflant enc-

Seid. Hist. 117.
"' The fourteen cities were Strafburgh, Nurembcrgh, Ulm, Confl:ncc,

Reutlingcn, 'Vindfllcin, Mcincngcn, Lindaw, Kcnptcn, ailbron, Ifna,
Vcifl'cniburgh, Nordlingcn, and St. Gal.

Slcid. lif. 119. 1'. Paul, Hilt. p. 45. Scckend. ii. 127,

lliiCS,

BooK V. anies of such assemblies, usually feel, employed every argument

-'J to dissuade the Emperor from consenting to that measure. He

:represented general councils as faaious, ungovernable, prefump-
tuous, formidable to civil authority,-and too flow in their ope-
rations to remedy disorders which required an immediate cure.
Experience, he said, had now taught both the Emperor and
himself, that forbearance and lenity exasperated the spirit of
innovation which they ought to have mollified; it was necessary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous methods which such
*a desperate cafe required; Leo's sentence of excommunication,
and the decree of tie diet at Worms should be carried into exe-
cution, and it was incumbent on the Emperor to employ his
whole power, in order to overawe those on whom the reverence
due either to ecclefiaffical or civil authority had no longer any
influence. Charles, whose views were very different from the
Pope's, and who became daily more sensible how obstinate and
deep rooted the evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
-by means less violent, and confidered the convocation of a coun-
cil as no improper expedient for that purpose; but promised, if
these gentler arts failed of success, that then he would exert
himself with vigour to reduce those stubborn enemies of the
Catholic faith o

Emperor pre- SUCH were the entiments with which the Emperor set out
sent at the for Germany, having already appointed a diet of the Empire
Diet of Augf-
tlrg. to be held at Augsburg. In his journey towards that city, he
Marc 22,' had many opportunities of observing the disposition of the Ger-

mans with regard to the points in controversy, and found their
minds every where so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced

O F. Paul, 47. Seck. 1. ii. 142. ilL. de Conefst. d'Auxbourg, par D.
Chytrcus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

him

him that nothing tending to severity or rigour ought to be BoOK V.
attempted, till all other measures proved ineffectual. He made

1530.

his publick entry into Augsburg with extraordinary pomp; and
found there such a full assembly of the members of the diet as J-me r;.
was suitable both to the importance of the affairs which were to
come under their consideration, and to the honour of an Empe-
ror, who, after a long absence, returned to them crowned with
reputation and success. His presence seems to have communi-
cated to all parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire of
peace. The Eletor of Saxony would not permit Luther to
accompany him to the diet, left he should offend the Emperor by
bringing into his pretence a person excommunicated by the
Pope, and the author of all those dissensions which it now
appeared so difficult to compose. At the Emperor's desire, all the
Protestant princes sorbad the divines who accompanied them to
preach in publick during their residence at Augsburg. For the
fame reason they employed Melanfthon, the man of the greatest
learning, as well as of the most pacific and gentle spirit among
the Reformers, to draw up a confcffion of their faith cxpreffed
in terms as little offensive to the Roman Catholics, as a regard
for truth would permit. Melandhon, who seldom fiffered the The confer-
rancour of controvcrfy to envenom his style, even in writings f

Aur g.

purely polemical, executed a task so agreeable to his natural dif-
position with great moderation and success. The Creed which
he composed, known by the name of the Confeflion of Aug-
fburg, from the place where it was prcfented, was read pub-
lickly in the diet; some Popish divines were appointed to
cxamine it; they brought in their animadversions; a diflpte
cnfuid between them and Mclandhlon, seconded by firme of his
brcthren; but though Melandhon foftcned ome articles,

VOL. II.U made

BooK V. made conccfflons with regard to others, and put the leaf excep-

--S53o0. tionable fcnfe upon all; though the Emperor himself laboured

with great earnefinefs to reconcile the contending parties; so
many marks of distinCtion were now eftabliihed, and such infu-
perable barriers placed between the two churches, that all hopes
of bringing about a coalition seemed utterly desperate .

FROM the divines, among whom his endeavours had been foi

unsuccessful, Charles turned to the princes their patrons. Nor
did he find them, how desirous soever of accommodation, or
willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed than the former
to renounce their opinions. At that time, zeal for religion took
possession of the minds of men to a degree which can scarce be
conceived by those who live in an age when the passions excited
by the first manifestation of truth, and the first recovery of liberty,
have in great measure ceased to operate. This zeal was then of
such strength as to overcome attachment to their political interest,
which is commonly the predominant motive among princes.
The Elecor of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, and other chiefs
of the Proteflants, though solicited eparatcly by the Emperor,
and allured by the promise or profpea of those advantages
which it was known they were most solicitous to attain,
reftfCed, with a fortitude highly worthy of imitation, to abandon
what they deemed the cause of God for the fake of any earthly
acquilfitio '.

Severdre dc EV ERY scheme in order to gain or disunite the Proteflant
;ailgdii the
i'rotellants. party proving abortive, nothing now remained for the Emperor

P Scckend. lib. ii. 159, &c. Abr. Scultcti Annales Evangclici ap. Herm.
Von der llard. Hist. ,itcr. Reform. Lips. 717 fl. p. 159.

Slcid. 132. Scultct. Annal. 158.

9 but

but to take some vigorous measures towards aflerting the doc- BOOK V.
trines and authority of the established church. These, Cam-
peggio, the Papal nuncio, had always recommended as the only
proper and effetual course of dealing with such obitinate here-
tics. In compliance with his opinions and remonfirances, the
diet issued a decree, condemning most of the peculiar tenets held Nov. 9.
by the Proteflants; forbidding any person to proteCt or tolerate
those who taught them; enjoining a, firit observance of the
eftabliihed rites; and prohibiting any further innovation under
severe penalties. All orders of men were required to assist with
their persons and fortunes in carrying this decree into execution;
and such as refuscd to obey it were declared incapable of aCting
as judges, or of appearing as parties in the Imperial chamber,
the supreme court of judicature in the Empire. To all which
was subjoined a promise that an application should be made to
the Pope, requiring him to call a general council within fix
months, in order to terminate all controversies by its fovcreign
decisions'.

TH r severity of this decree, which they confidered as a pre- :

lude to tc m)os violent persecutions, alarmed the Protefhints,
and convinced them that the Emperor was rfolvcd on tlicir dc-
lruidion. The dread of thofi calamitics whliclh were r.(ly to !itll
on the church, opprefled the fccble fiirit ofMclanclton ; !n id as
if the cauft had already bccn (lcfperatc, he g;av up him;'lf' to
melancholy and lamentation. But Iuther, wlho (tIrilIr tli Inct'ilnl;
of the diet had cndcavourcd to confirm anl ali l'c !lis party y
several trcaltif Swihicit h e (lddi cl ed to 1' irn, x;ss 'i)t. .l (st;',rtel
or litfiayed at the jolf)cC. of tliis ew ld:ui;cr. . (; c;, 'rtcd

r )li ,. 139.

U Id 2 rMcIl.dlvlL)..

BOOK V. Melandhon and his other desponding disciples, and exhorted
-53,. the princes not to abandon those truths which they had lately

asserted with such laudable boldness'. His exhortations made
the deeper impression upon them as they were greatly alarmed
at that time by the account of a combination among the Popish
princes of the Empire for the maintenance of the established
religion, to which Charles himself had acceded'. This con-
vinced them that it was necessary to fland on their guard; and
that their own safety as well as the success of their cause depended
on union. Filled with this dread of the adverse party, and with
these sentiments concerning the conduc proper for themselves,
December22. they assembled at Smalkalde. There, they concluded a league of

mutual defence against all aggressors", by which they formed
the Proteflant flates of the Empire into one regular body, and
beginning already to confider themselves as such, they resolved
to apply to the Kings of France and England, and to implore
them to affifft and patronize their new confederacy.

'lifi F1cFror AN affair not conlnctClcd with religion furnishcd them with a
protufde tO
li,, :ioihro- prctcncc for courting the aid of foreign princes. Charles,
ti:( r lch(C<
Kil. (,f tile w'lofc ambitious views enlarged in proportion to the incrcalc of

his power and grandcur, had formed a scheme of continuing the
Imperial crown in his family, by procuring his brother Ferdi-
nand to be clcdcd King of the Romans. The prcfcnt juncture
was fivourale for the cxccution of that design. The Empe-
ror's arms hlad been every where victorious; he had given law
to all Europe at the late peace; no rival now remained in a
coIdition to balance or to controul lim; and the Elctors,

Seck. ii, 180. Slcid. 40. Sck. ii. 2oo. iii. i . ' Slcid. lift. 42.

7 dazzled

dazzled by the fplendorof his success, or overawed by the great- BOOK V.
ness of his power, durst scarce dispute the will of a prince whose ;-;o
follicitations carried with them the authority of commands.
Nor did he want plausible reasons to enforce the measure. The
affairs of his other kingdoms, he said, obliged him to be often
absent from Germany; the growing disorders occasioned by the
controversies about religion, as well as the formidable neigh-
bourhood of the Turks, who continually threatened to break in
with their desolating armies into the heart of the Empire, requi-
red the constant pretence of a prince endowed with prudence
capable of composing the former, and with power and valour
sufficient to repel the latter. His brother Ferdinand poffefied
there qualities in an eminent degree; by residing long in
Germany, he had acquired a thorough knowledge of their con-
ftitution and manners; having been present almost from the first
rife of their religious dissensions, he knew what remedies were
most proper, what they could bear, and how to apply them;
as his own dominions lay on the Turkish frontier, he was the
natural defender of Germany against the invasions of the Infi-
dels, being prompted by interest no less than he would be bound
in duty to oppose them.

TH ESE arguments made little impreflion on the Protestants. The Pro.

tcllnt avcr l

Experience taught them, that nothing had contributed more to to it.
the undiiurbed progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long abfcncc of Charles, and the
flackncfs in the reins of government which thctc occasioncd;
after deriving stich advantages from a ate of anarchy, they
were extremely unwilling to give tcmlnflvcs a new and a fixed
maftcr. They perceived clearly the cxtent of Charles's anlbi-

tion,

BooK \. tion, that h aimed at rendering the Imperial crown hereditary

in his family, and would of course establish in the Empire an
absolute dominion, to which eletive princes could not have
aspired with equal facility. They determined therefore to oppose
Ferdinand's elcdtion with the utmost vigour, and to rouse their
countrymen by their example and exhortations, to withfIand this
encroachment on their liberties. The Eleaor of Saxony

1531. accordingly, not only refused to be present in the electoral col-
Jaluaiy 5. lege, which the Emperor summoned to meet at Cologne, but

inftruted his eldest son to appear there, and to protefl against
the election as informal, illegal, contrary to the articles of the
golden bull, and subversive of the liberties of the Empire. But
He is chosen. the other Elctors, whom Charles had been at great pains

to gain, without regarding either his absence or protest, chose
Ferdinand King of the Romans; who a few days after was
crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle '.

"Cegociritons THE account of this tranfaaion, as well as of the commcin-e-
of tlie Prc-
tc.ftnts with ment of omce profccutions againfl them on account of their rcli-

gious principles, in the Imperial chamlber, b)ing brought th the
Protcflants, who were aflcmblcd a :ccnd time at Snall al(l,
they thought it nccc.flry blotll to renew tihir frnel r coafcdcrtcay,
and immediately to ldilpatch tliir ainhall'adors into FIrance ai I
Feb. :9. E]'ngland. Francis lad o(l)frrvcd, witli all the jcaloufy ofa rval,

the reputation which the llllrnperor had acq(ired by his feming
difintrcftcdnlcl' and moderation in fettling lie aflai rirs of rtaly;a(ld
l)cheld witlh great collccrn, the ftlccefsflf tlep wlhiIll hle had taken
towarlds  c'p tuatilnl and cxtcndllrli i;g autholity in ( ,rnlliaiy
by the clcion of a King of the Romans. Nothing, owever,

x Slcid. 142. Seek. iii, . P. Ilcuter. Rer. Auir, lil. x. c. 6. p. 2t0.

would

would have been more impolitic than to precipitate into a new BOOK V.
vwar his kingdom exhausted by extraordinary efforts, and difcou- "
raged by ill success, before it had got time to recruit its strength,
or to forget past misfortunes. Nor could he, when no provoca-
tion had been given, and scarce a pretext had been afforded
him, violate a treaty of peace which he hinfelf had so lately
solicited, without forfeiting the eteem of all Eur .p., and be-
ing detested as a prince void of probity and honour. He ob-
served, with great joy, powerful factions beginning to form
in the Empire; he listened with the utmost eagerness to ihe
complaints of the Proteflant princes; and without seeming to
countenance their religious opinions, determined secretly to
cheriflh those sparks of political discord which might be after-
wards kindled into a flame. For this purpose, he sent William
de Bellay, one of the ablest negociators in France, into Gerlany,
who visiting the courts of the malecontent princes, and heighten-
ing their ill-humour by various arts, concluded an ailiance
between them and his mafler, which though concia!lcd at that
time, and productive of no immediate effeds, laid the ibunda-
tion of an union fatal on many occasions to Charles's altious
projcdts; and shewed the discontented princes of Germany,
where they might, for the future, find a protctor n lcts powcr-
ful than willing to undertake their defence against the encroach-
ments of the Emperor.

TIIr King of England, highly inccnfcd againfl Chails, in 'vti ,g-

complaifancc to whom, the Pope ad long retardcd, and nw
openly opposcd his divorce, was no less disposcd than Francis
to ftrcngthen a league wlich might be rendercd so formidable

y Bellay, i29, a. 130, b. -Scck. iii. 4.

to

BOOK V. to the Emperor. But hisfavourite project of tle divorce led him

,'- '-*J into such a labyrinth of fchcmes and negociations, and he was,
'53'.

at the fame time, ib intent on abolishing the papal jurifdidion
in England, that he had no leisure for foreign affairs; and was
obliged to satisfy himself with giving general promises, together
with a finall supply in money to the confederates of Smalkalde .

Charl1e MEANWHILE, many circumifances convinced Charles that
(ourt, the
hrotei:,ts. this was not a jundure when the extirpation of heresy was to

be attempted by violence and rigour ; that, in compliance with
the Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded with impru-
(lent precipitation; and that it was more his interest to confo-
lidate Germany into one united and vigorous body, than to
divide and enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants, already
considerable by their numbers, and their zeal, had now acquired
additional weight and importance by their joining in that con-
federacy into which the rash fleps taken at Augsburg had forced
them. Having now discovercd their own strength, they de-
spifcd the decisions of the Imperial chamber; and being secure
of foreign protetion, were ready to set the head of the Empire
at defiance. At the fame time his peace with France was pre-
carious, the fricndflfip of an irrcfolute and intereflcd pontiff was
not to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to repair the infamy
and lots which his arms had fuifained in the former campaign, was
preparing to enter Aufria with more numerous forces. On all
thefc accounts, cfpccially the last, a speedy accommodation with
the malecontcnt princes, was ncccfltry not only for the accom-
plifhmcnt of his future fchcmes, but for ascertaining his prcfcnt
lafety. Ncgociations were, accordingly, carried on by his

* Herbert, 152, 154.

direction

tdiretion with the Eleor of Saxony and his aflociates; after BooK V.
many delays occasioned by their jealousy of the Emperor, 53.
and of each other, after innumerable difficulties arising from the
inflexible nature of religious tenets, which cannot admit of
being altered, modified, or relinquished in the fame man- Grants them

favourable

ner as points of political interest, terms of pacification were terms.
agreed upon at Nuremberg, and ratified solemnly in the July 23.

Augun 3,

Diet at Ratisbon. In this treaty, it was fipulated, Thai: iini-
versal peace be eflablifhed in Germany, until the meeting of a
general council, the convocation of which within fix months the
Emperor hall endeavour to procure; That no person be molest-
ed on account of religion; That a stop be put to all processes
begun by the Imperial chamber against Prpteftants, and the
sentences already passed to their detriment be declared void.
On their part, the Protestants engaged to assist the Emperor with
all their forces in refining the invasion of the Turks a. Thus by
their firmness in adhering to their principles, by the unanimity
with which they urged all their claims, and by their dexterity
in availing themselves of the Emperor's situation, the Protestants
obtained terms which amounted almost to a toleration of theit
religion; all the conccffions were made by Charles, none by them;
even the favourite point of their approving his brother's eletion
was not mentioned; and the Protestants of Germany, who had
hitherto been viewed only as a religious set, came hencefortl
to be confidered as a political body of no small consequence b.

TIE intelligence which Charles received of Solyman's having c.inmpa;.in i
entered HI-ungary at the head of three hundred thousand men lSa

' 1)u Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. 87, 89.
b Sleid. 149, &c. Seek. iii. 19.
VoL. II. X x cut

BOOK V. cut ihort the deliberations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the contin-

. gent both of troops and money which each prince was to furnish

towards the defence of the Empire having been already fettled.
The Protestants, as a testimony of their gratitude to the
Emperor, exerted themselves with extraordinary zeal, and
brought into the field forces that exceeded in number the quota
imposed on them; and the Catholics imitating their example,
one of the greatest and best appointed armies that had ever beea
levied in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Being joined by
a body of Spanish and Italian veterans under the marquis del
Guafto; by some heavy armed cavalry from the Low-Countries;
and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in Bohemia,
Austria, and his other territories, it amounted in all to ninety
thousand disciplined foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a
prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast army, worthy
the firfi prince in Chriitendom, the Emperor took the command
in person; and mankind waited in suspense the issue of a deci-
five battle between the two greatest Monarchs in the world.
But each of them dreading the other's power and good fortune,
they both conduced their operations with such exceflive caution,
that a campaign, for which such immense preparations had

September been made, ended without any memorable event. Solyman
and Otobcr.

finding it impossible to gain ground upon an enemy always
attentive, and on his guard, marched back to Constantinople
towards the end of autumn'. It is remarkable that in such a
martial age, when every gentleman was a bldier, and every
prince a general, this was the sirs time that Charles, who had
already carried on such cxtenfive wars, and gained so many
victories, appeared at the head of his troops. In this first cftay

Jovii lift. lib. 30 p. oo, &c. Barre lift. dc l'Empirc, i. 8. 347..

of

of his arms, to have opposed such a leader as Solyman, was no BOOK V.
small honour; to have obliged him to retreat merited very con- '-53'
fiderable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Eledtor of Aug. 6.

Saxony died, and was succeeded by his son John Frederick.
The Reformation rather gained than loft by that event; the
new Elecor, no less attached than his predecessors to the opi-
nions of Luther, occupied the station which they had held at the
head of the Protestant party, and defended, with the boldness
and zeal of youth, that cause which they had softered and
reared with the caution of old age.

I i MEDIATE LY after the retreat of the Turks, Charles, im- The Empe-

ror's interview

patient to revisit Spain, et out, on his way thither, for Italy. with the Pope
As he was extremely desirous of an interview with the Pope, hipway o.
they met a second time at Bologna, with the fame external
demonstrations of refped and friendship, but with little of that
confidence which had subsisted between them during their late
negociations there. Clement was much dissatisfied with the
Emperor's proceedings at Augsburg; his conceflions with regard
to the fpcedy convocation of a council, having more than can-
celled all the merit of the evcre decree againfl the dodrines of
the Reformers. The toleration granted to the Protefiants at
Ratisbon, and the more explicit promise concerning a council
with which it was accompanied, had irritated him still farther.
Charles, however, partly from conviction that the meeting of a
council would be attended with salutary effects, and partly from
his desire to please the Germans, having solicited him by his
ambassadors to call that affemblly without delay, and now urging codaNeriia
the fame thing in person, Clement was greatly embaraffed what genral coun-

X x reply

BOOK V. reply he should make to a request, which it was indecent to.
' _s -' refuse, and dangerous to grant. He endeavoured at firfl to.

divert Charles from the measure, but finding him inflexible, he
had recourse to artifices which he knew would delay, if not en-
tirely defeat the calling of that assembly. Under the plausible
pretext of its being previously neceflary to fettle, with all parties.
concerned, the place of the council's meeting; the manner of
its proceedings; the right of the persons who should be admit-
ted to vote; and the authorityof their decisions; he dispatched a
nuncio, accompanied by an ambafrador from the Emperor, to
the Eledor of Saxony as head of the Protestants.. With regard,
to each of these articles, inextricable difficulties and conteRfs
arose. The Protestants demanded a council to be held in Ger-.
many; the Pope insisted that it hould meet in Italy; they,
contended that all points in dispute should be determined by the-
words of holy scripture alone; he confidered the decrees of the
church, and the opinions. of fathers and dotors as of equal
authority; they required a free council in which the divines.
commissioned by different churches ihould be allowed a voice;
he aimed at modelling the council in such a manner as would,
render it entirely dependant on his pleasure: Above all, the
lProteflants thought it unreasonable that they hould bind them-.
iflvcs to submit to the decrees of a council, before they knew
on what principles thele decrees were to be founded, by what
persons they were to be pronounced, and what forms of pro-
cccding tlicy would obfervc. The Pope maintained it to be alto-
gether unncccfltry to call a council, if those who demanded it
did not previously declare their resolution to acquiesce in its
decrees. In order to adju fclh a variety of points, many cx-
pcdicnts were proposcd, and the ncgociations ifun out to filch

a length,

alength, as cffetually answered Clement's purpose of putting BooK V..
off the meeting of a council, without drawing on himself the -73
whole infamy of obftruding a measure which all Europe deemed
so essential to. the good of the churchd.

TOGET HER with this negociation about calling a council, the and cot pe.

Emperor carried on another which he had still more at heart, serving the
for securing the peace etablifhed in Italy. As Francis had re- Italy.
nounced his pretensions in that country with great relucance,
Charles made no doubt but that he would lay hold on the first
pretext afforded him, or embrace the first opportunity which
presented itself of recovering what he had loft. It became necef-
fary, on this account, to take measures for assembling an army
able to oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a long war,.
could not supply the fums requisite for keeping such a body.
constantly on foot, he attempted to throw that burden on his-
allies, and to provide for the safety of his own dominions at
their expence, by proposing that the Italian states should enter
into a league of defence against all invaders; that, on the first
appearance of danger, an army should be raiscd and maintained
at the common charge; and that Antonio de Leyva should be
appointed the generalissimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable
to Clement, tho' for a reason very different from that which in-
duced the Emperor to make it. He hoped, by this expedient, to
deliver Italy from the German and Spaniih veterans whicl had
so long filled all the powers in that country with terror, and still
kept them in fuiljcetion to the Imperial yoke. A league was ,%. z,.
accordingly concluded; all the Italian states, the Vcnctia ;
excepted, acceded to it; the um which each of the contracting

d F. Paul, Hilt. 61. Scckcnd. iii. 73.

8 parties

BOOK V. parties should furnish towards maintaining the army was fixed

s33-' the Emperor agreed to withdraw the troops which gave so

much umbrage to his allies, and which he was unable any longer
to support. Having disbanded part of them, and removed the
reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on board Doria's gallies,

April 2z. and arrived at Barcelona

Designs and NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for securing the
negciatioh peace of Germany, and maintaining that system which he had
of the French
King against established in Italy, the Emperor became every day more and
the Emperor,

more apprehensive that both would be soon disturbed by the
intrigues or arms of the French King. His apprehensions were
well founded, as nothing but the desperate situation of his
affairs could have brought Francis togive his consent to a treaty
so dishonourable and disadvantageous as that of Cambray: He
at the very time of ratifying it, had formed a resolution to observe
it no longer than necessity compelled him, and took a solemn
protest, though with the most profound secrecy, againfl several
articles in the treaty, particularly that whereby lie renounced all
prctenfions to the dutchy of Milan, as unjust, injurious to his
heirs, and invalid. One of the crown lawyers, by his command,
cntercd a protest to the fame purpofc, and with the like fecrccy,
when the ratification of the treaty was regiflered in the parlia-
ment of Pariss; and Francis fecms to have thought that, by
employing an artifice unworthy of a King, deflrudive of pub-
lic faith, and of the mutual confidence on which all tranfadions
between nations arc founded, he was relcafed from any obliga-
tion to perform the mofi solemn promifcs, or to adhere to the
inoft sacrcd cngagemcnts. From the moment lhe concluded the

G uic. 1. xx. 55r. Ferrcras, ix. 149.
f Du Mont Corps Diplom. ton. iv. part 2. p. ;2.

-* peace

peace of Cambray, he wished and watched for an opportunity BOOK V.
of violating it with safety. He endeavoured for that reason to '
strengthen his alliance with the King of England, whose friend-
ship he cultivated with the greatest afliduity. He put the
military force of his own kingdom on a better and more refpet-
able footing than ever. He artfully fomented thejealoufy and
discontent of the German princes.

BUT above all, Francis laboured to break the ftri& confe- particularly

deracy which subsisted between Charles and Clement; and with thePope.
he had oon the fatisfadion to observe appearances of disgust
and alienation arising in the mind of that suspicious and inte-
rerted Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their union would not
be lafiing. As the Emperor's decision in favour of the duke of
Ferrara had greatly irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the
injuflice of that proceeding, and flattered him that the Papal fee
would find in him a more impartial and no less powerful pro-
tetor. As the importunity with which Charles demanded a
council was extremely offensive to the Pope, Francis artfully
created obstacles to prevent it, and attempted to divert the Ger-
man princes, his allies, from infifing so obstinately on that
point . As the Emperor had gained such an ascendant over
Clement by contributing to aggrandize his family, Francis
endeavoured to allure him by the fame irrefiitible bait, propo-
sing a marriage between his second son Henry duke of Orleans,
and Catharine, the daughter of the Pope's cousin Laurence di
Medici. On the first overtures of this match, the Empcr(n
could not persuade himself that Francis really intended to dclbae
the royal blood of France by an alliance with Catharinc, wlhof

B Bcllay, 41, &c. Seek. iii. 48. F. Paul, 63.

anlccflorL

'BOOK V. ancelors had been so lately private citizens and merchants in

r""- Florence, and believed that he meant only to flatter or amuse

the ambitious Pontiff. 'He thought it necessary, however, to
-efface the impreflion which such a dazzling offer might have
made, by promising to break-off the marriage which had been
agreed on between his own niece the King of Denmark's daugh-
ter, and the Duke of Milan, and to substitute Catharine in her
place. But the French ambassadors producing unexpectedly full
powers to conclude the marriage treaty with the duke of Orleans,
this expedient had no effect. Clement was so highly pleased
with an honour which added such lustre and dignity to the
house of Medici, that he offered to grant Catharine the invefli-
ture of considerable territories in Italy by way of portion; he
seemed ready to support Francis in prosecuting his ancient
claims in that country, and consented to a personal interview
*with thatlMonarch h.
'Interview be- CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent a meeting, in

"oe thae which nothing was likely to pass but what would be of detri-
l lancis. ment to him; nor could he bear, after he had twice condescended

to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Clement should bellow
fich a mark of diltinsCion on his rival, as to venture on a voy-
age by fca, at an unfavourable fcafon, in order to pay court to
lfrancis in the French dominions. But the Pope's eagerness to
accomplifli the match overcame all scruples of pride, or fear, or
jcalouly, which mulf have influenced him on any other occasion.
The interview, notwithflanding several artifices of the Emperor
o()c:cr. to prevent it, took place at Marficillcs with extraordinary pomp,

and demonfrations of confidence on botll fides; and the mar-

· Guic. 1. xx. 55T, 533. Bcllay, 138.

rI;i';',

riage, which the ambition and abilities of Catharine renderedL BooK V.
in the sequel as fatal to France, as it was then thought ditho- '+-

'534.

nourable, was consummated. But whatever schemes may have
been secretly concerted by the Pope and Francis in favour of the
duke of Orleans, to whom his father proposed to make over all
his rights in Italy, so careful were they to avoid giving any cauil
of offence to the Emperor, that no t.-aty was concluded between
them h; and even in the marriage-articles, Catharine renounced
all claims and pretensions in Italy, except to the dutchy of
Urbino'.

BUT at the very time when he was carrying on there negociations, Poe's co--

du: with re-

and forming this connection with Francis, which gave so great gard to the
umbrage to the Emperor, such was the artifice and duplicity of In',doforc
Clement's character, that he suffered the latter to direa all his
proceedings with regard to the King of England, and was no
less attentive to gratify him in that particular, than if the
most cordial union had still subsisted between them. Henry's
suit for a divorce had now continued near fix years; during all
which period the Pope negociated, promiscd, retraced, and con-
cluded nothing. After bearing repeated delays and disappoint-
ments, longer than could have been expected from a prince of
such a clolcrick and impetuous temper, his patience was at last
so much cxhaufled, that lie applied to another tribunal for that dc-
cree wlich lie had lflicitcd in vain at lRome. Cranmer, archbishop
of Cante rbury, by a ;fntcncc foundcd on the authority of Univcr-
fities, D)odors, adiil Rabblis, whlo had been consultcd with rcfpeQ
to tlhe point, annulled the King's marriage with Catharinc; her
daughter was declared illegitimate; and Anne Bolcyn acknow-

h (uic. c. 20. 555. Du Mont Corps Diploin. iv, p ii. 10r.
VOL. . Y y lodged

BooK V. ledged as Queen of England. At the fame time Henry began

1534. to negled and to threaten the Pope whom he had hitherto

courted, and to make innovations in the church, of which he
had formerly been such a zealous defender. Clement, who had
already seen so many provinces and kingdoms revolt from the
Holy See, became apprehensive at last that England would imi-
tate their example, and partly from his solicitude to prevent
that fatal blow, partly in compliance with the French King's
solicitations, determined to give Henry such fatisfaaion as
might still retain him within the bosom of the church. But
the violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Emperor, did not
allow the Pope leisure for executing this prudent resolution, and
a,5h z3. hurried him, with a precipitation fatal to the Roman fee, to

issue a bull rescinding Cranmcr's fentencc, confirming Henry's
marriage with Catharine, and declaring him excommunicated,
if, within a time specified, he did not abandon the wife he had
taken, and return to her whom he had deserted. Enraged at

PV.ilal2ho this unexpected decree, Henry kept no longer any measures
r.t anholintd with the court of Rome; his fubjcts seconded his resentment
iM nngland.

and indignation; an ad of Parliament was passed, abolishing
the Papal power and jurifdidion in England; by another,
the King was declared fiupreme head of the church, and all the
authlority of which the Popes were dprived was vested in him.
Tl'at vail fabrick of ccclcfiaftical dominion which had been
railed with such art, and whose foundations feemned so deep,
l)cing no longcr supported by the veneration of the people, was
o(vcrturned in a moment. IHenry liimfclf, with the caprice
pcclIli.r to his character, continued to dccnd the dodrincs of
the Romnilh church as ficrcely as lhc attacked its jurifdition.
IHc alcl:tcatly perfccuted the Prote(lallts for rejctding the for-
mcr, and tlcl ( atihlicks tfr ackoiwlcldinlg the latter. But his

4 fulljeas

subjes beingonce permitted toenterinto newpaths,did not chufe BooK V.
to flop short at the precise point prescribed by him. Having been -^
encouraged by his example to break some of their fetters, they
were so impatient to hake off all that remained', that in
the following reign, with the general applause of the nation,
a total eparation was made from the church of Rome in articles
of doctrine, as well as in matters ofdifcipline and jurifdieion.

A SHORT delay might have saved the See of Rome from all Death of

the unhappy consequences of Clement's rashness. Soon after
his sentence against Henry, he fell into a languilhing distemper,
which gradually wafting his constitution, put an end to his Pon-
tificate, the moil unfortunate, both during its continuance, and Sept. z2.
by its effeds, that the church had known for many ages. The
very day on which the Cardinals entered the conclave, they raised Fa lainl of

-J ~~~ ~ ~~

-'~~~~~~~

*' ~~Paul ill.

to the Papal throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred col- Ot. 3.
lege, and the eldest member of that body, who aflumed the name
of Paul III. The account of his promotion was received with
extraordinary acclamations of joy by the people of Rome, highly
pleated, after an interval of more than an hundred years, to fee
the crown of St. Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen.
Perons more capable of judging, formed a favourable prcfage
of his administration, from the experience which he had acquired
under four Pontificates, as well as the character of prudence and
moderation which he had uniformly maintainled in a flation of
great eminence, and during an active and difficult juncturc that
required both talents and address'.

EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continuance of its peace to
the deatl of Clement; for although no traces remain in hiflory

-Herbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform. ' Gic.' . 20. 556. 1. Paul. 64.

Yy of

BooK V. of any leaguc concluded between him and Francis, it is scarce to

,- -' be doubted but that he would have seconded the operations of

the French arms in Italy, that he might have gratified his ambi-
tion by fcirg one of is famiiy poflffed of the supreme power
in Ilorencc, and another in Mlilan. But upon the election of
Paul II. who had hitherto adhered uniformly to the Imperial
inltcrcf, Francis found it neceflary to suspend his operations for.
some time, and to put off the commencement of hostilities against.
the Emperor, on which he was fully determined.

trfurrcon a x WIIILE Francis waited for an opportunity to renew a war-
of tl e A a-
Lrpi.t i n which had hitherto proved so fatal to himself and his fubjcds,
Ceimany.

a tranfacion of a very singular nature was carried on in Ger-
many. Among many beneficial and salutary effects of which
the Reformation was the immediate cause, it was attended, as.
mufi be the cafe, in all actions and events wherein men are con-
cerned, with some confcquences of an opposite nature. When
the human mind is rouzed by grand objects, and agitated by
fkrong passions, its operations acquire such force, that they are
apt to becolne irregular and extravagant. Upon any great
rcvolution in religion, fichI irregularities abound molt, at that
particular period, when men having thrown off the autority of
their ancient principles, do not yet fully comprehend the nature,
r fcl thle obligation of tllofc new oneC wh1ich they have cm-
b)rac:. ''llc Iniiitl, in that situation, puiflning forward with the
IOeldlcs wvliic pronpted it to rejct cfitlblifcd opillions, and
n;,t guidLel by ;a clear lknowledge of the fynflcn fi)bfituted in their
placc, dil(liailis all rlefrainlt, and runs into wild notions, that
nilIen ltad to lcalldalus or ilmmoral conduct. Thus, in the firfl'
;igcs of the Chrillian churchi, many of the new converts, hlaving

8 renounced.

renounced their ancient Creeds, and being but imperfealy BOOK V.
acquainted with the doctrines and precepts of Christianity, ','
broached the most extravagant opinions equally subversive of
piety and virtue; all which errors disappeared or were exploded
when the knowledge of religion increased, and came to be more
generally diffused. In like manner, oon after Luther's appear-
ance, the rashness or ignorance of some of his disciples led themn
to publihl absurd. and pernicious tenets, which being proposed to
men extremely illiterate, but fond of novelty, and at a time when
their minds were turned wholly towards religious speculations,
gained too easy credit and authority among them. To these
causes must be imputed the extravagancies of Muncer, in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-five, as well as the rapid
progress which they made among the peasants; but though
the infurredion excited by that Fanatic was soon suppresscd,
several of his followers lurked in different places, and endea.
voured privately to propagate his opinions.

IS those provinces of Upper Germany, which had already OrgVi .ind

tenet- of that

been so cruelly wafted by their enthusiastic rage, the magifrates set.
watched their motion with such severe attention, that many of
them found it neceflary to retire into other countries, some were
punished, others driven into exile, and their errors were entircly
rooted out. But in the Netherlands and Wcftplialia, where the
pernicious tendency of their opinions s as ore unknown, and
guarded against with less care, they got admnittaicc into fcvcral
towns, and fread the infcion of their principles. The nmol
remarkable of their religious tenets related to tle Sacrament of
Baptism, which, as they contended, ought to be adminillfcrcd only
topcrlons grown up to years of undcrlianding, and llhould be per-

formnctd.

BOOK V. formed not by sprinkling them with water, but by dipping them

V ' in it: For this reason they condemned the baptism of infants, and
1534.

rebaptizing all whom they admitted into their society, the fed
came to be diftinguilhed by the name of Anabaptists. To this
peculiar notion concerning baptism, which has the appearance
of being founded on the practice of the church in the apostolic
age, and contains nothing inconsistent with the peace and order
of human society, they added other principles of a most enthu-
fiaftic, as well as dangerous nature. They maintained that,
among Christians who had the precepts of the gospel to diret,
and the spirit of God to guide them, the office of magistracy
was not only unnecessary, but an unlawful encroachment on
their spiritual liberty; that the diftinEions occasioned by birth,
or rank, or wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
which confiders all men as equal, hould be entirely abolished;
that all Christians, throwing their possessions into one common
flock, should live together in that state of equality which
becomes members of the fame family; that as neither the laws
of nature, nor the precepts of the New Testament had placed
any refiraints upon men with regard to the number of wives
which they might marry, they fliouldufethat liberty which God
himfclf had granted to the patriarchs.

Srttle in S u(C:I opinions, propagated and maintained with entlhuiaflic
Mu.,lic. yvcal alnd oldncfs, were not long of producing the violent ccls

natural to them. Two Anabaptist prophets, John Mattlias, a
laker of I-acrlcm, and John Bocold, or Bcukcls, a journeyman
taylor of Lcyden, polceffcd with the rage of making profclytcs,
fixed their rcidcncc at Munflcr, ain Imperial city in Wcfiphalia,
of the firlt rank, under the fvcrcignty of its bilhop, but

governed

governed by its own senate and consuls. As neither of these BOOK V.
Fanaticks wanted the talents necessary for such an undertaking, ,534.
great resolution, the appearance of fandity, bold pretensions to
inspiration, and a confident and plausible manner of discoursing,
they soon gained many converts. Among these were Rothman,
who had first preached the Protestant dodrine in Munster,
and Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good birth, and considerable
eminence. Emboldened by the countenance of such disciples,
they openly taught their opinions; and not satisfied with that
liberty, they made several attempts, though without success, to
seize the town, in order to get their tenets established by publick
authority. At last, having secretly called in their aflociates from Become

mallers of

the neighbouring country, they suddenly took poffefion of the that city.
arsenal and fenate-houfe in the night-time, and running through
the streets with drawn swords, and horrible howlings, cried out
alternately, "Repent, and be baptized," and " Depart ye ungodly." February.
The senators, the canons, the nobility, together with the more
fober citizens, whether Papists or Protestants, terrified at their
threats and outcries, fled in confusion, and left the city under the
dominion of a frantic multitude, consisting chiefly of firangers.
Nothing now remaining to overawe or controul them, they set
about modelling the government according to their own wild
ideas; and though at firit they showed so much reverence for the
ancient conflitution, as to cled senators of their own fed, and to
appoint Cnipperdoling and another proselyte consuls, this was F.nlbifi a
nothing more than form; for all their proceedings were direded ovcrnlenlt.
by Matthias, who in the flile, and with the authority of a pro-
phet, uttered his commands, which it was inflant death to dlif-
obey. aving begun with encouraging the multitude to pillage
the chllurchcs, and deface their ornaincnts; lie enjoined them

to

BooK V. to destroy all books except the Bible, as useless or impious; he

'
~ ' appointed the estates of such as fled to be confiscated, and fold

to the inhabitants of the adjacent country; he ordered every
man to bring forth his gold, silver, and precious effcts, and
to lay them at his feet.; the wealth amassed by these means, he
deposited in a publick treasury, and named deacons to dispense
it for the common use of all. The members of his common-
wealth being thus brought to a perfec equality, he commanded
all of them to eat at tables prepared in public, and even prescribed
the dilhes which were to be served up each day. Having
finished his plan of Reformation, his next care was to provide
for the defence of the city; and he took meafuires for that pur-
pofc with a prudence which favoured nothing of fanaticism. He
collected vast magazines of every kind; he repaired and extended
the fortifications, obliging every person without diftindion to work
in his turn; he formed such as were capable of bearing arms into
regular bodies, and endeavoured to add the vigour of discipline
to the impetuosity of enthusiasm. He ent emiflaries to the
Anabaptists in the Low-Countries, inviting them to assemble at
Munster, which he dignified with the name of Mount-Sion,
that from thence they might set out to reduce all the nations
of the earth under their dominion. He himself was unwearied
in attending to every thing ncccfTary for the security or incrcafe
es the fcet; animating his disciples by his own example to refute
no labor, as well as to repine at no hardhlip; and their enthufi-
afic passions being kept from fulliding by a perpetual fuccellion
of exhlortations, revelations and prophecies, they fCemcd ready
to uindertake or to fuffcr any thing in maintenance of their

1¥I N
1:i A
III. ;

MEANWHILE, the bishop of Munfier having aflembled a BOOK V.
considerable army, advanced to besiege the town. On his ap- ' '

1534.
proach, Matthias allied out at the head of some chosen troops, The bishop of

Munster takes

attacked one quarter of his camp, forced it, and after great arms againit
slaughter, returned to the city loaded with glory and spoil. In- them.
toxicated with this success, he appeared next day brandishing a
spear, and declared, that in imitation of Gideon, he would go
forth with a handful of men and smite the hofl of the ungodly.
Thirty persons, whom he named, followed him without hefi- May.
tation in this wild enterprize, and rushing on the enemy with a
frantic courage were cut off to a man. The death of their prophet
occasioned at firfi great conflernation among his disciples, but Boc-
cold, by the fame gifts and pretensions which had gained Matthias John of Ley.

den acquires
credit, soon revived theirfpirits and hopes to such a degree, that he great autho-

rity a'ong
succeeded him in the fame absolute diretion of all their affairs. the Anabap-

tilt.

As he did not possess that enterprizing courage which distinguished
his predecessor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a defensive
war, and without attempting to annoy the enemy by allies,
he waited for the succours he expeAed from the Low-Countries,
the arrival of which was often foretold and promised by their
prophets. But though less daring in aion than Matthias, he
was a wilder enthufialt, and of more unbounded ambition.
Soon after the death of his predecessor, having by obscure visions
and prophecies, prepared the multitude for ome extraordinary
event, he stripped himfilf naked, and marching through the
fireets, proclaimed with a loud voice, " That the kingdom of
Sion was at hand; that whatever was highest on earth hould be
brought low, and whatever was lowefl lhould be exalted." In
order to fulfil this, lie commanded the churches, as the most
lofty buildings in the city, to be levelled with the ground ; ie

VOL. II. Z z degraded

BOOK V. degraded the senators chosen by Matthias, and depriving Cnip-

j--' perdoling of the consulship, the highest office in the common-

wvealth, he appointed him to execute the lowest and most
infamous, that of common hangman, to which strange tranfi-
tion the other agreed, not only without murmuring, butwith the
utmost joy; and such was the despotism and rigour of Boccold's
adminiflration, that he was called almost every day to perform
some duty or other of his wretched funcion. In place of the
dcpofed senators, he named twelve judges, according to the
number of tribes in Israel, to preside in all affairs; retaining to
linifclf the fame authority which Moses anciently possessed as
lcgiflator of that people.
ElcacJKin. NoT satisficd, however, with power or titles which were not

fuprecmc, a prophet, whom he had gained and tutored, having
called the multitude together, declared it to be the will of God,
that John Boccold should be King of Sion, and fit on the
June 4. throne of David. John kneeling down, accepted of the heavenly

call, which he solemnly protcfted had been revealed likewise
to himself, and was immediately acknowledged as Monarch
lby the deluded multitude. From that moment he assumed
all the slate and pomp of royalty. He wore a crown of gold,
and the richest and most fuimptuous garments. A Bible
was carried on his one hand, a naked sword on the other.
A great body of guards accompanied him when he appeared in
publick. He coined money flamped with his own image, and
appointed the great officers of his houfhlold and kingdom, amlong
whom Cnipperdoling was nominated governor of the city, as a
reward for his former fubmiflion.

I AvI NC

HAVING now attained the heighth of power, Boccold began BOOK V.

to discover passions, which he had hitherto refrained or in- ' "
dulged only in secret. As the excesses of enthusiasm have been His licentious

tenets and

observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifications, the fame condut.
conflitution that is ffceptible of the former, being remarkably
prone to the latter, he inflrudced the prophets and teachers to
harrangue the people for several days concerning the lawfulness,
and even neceflity of taking more wives than one, which they
asserted to be one of the privileges granted by God to the faints.
When their ears were once accustomed to this licentious dodcrine,
and their passions inflamed with the profped of such unbounded
indulgence, he himself set them an example of using what he
called their Chriflian liberty, by marrying at once three
wives, among which the widow of Matthias, a woman of
singular beauty, was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to the number of his wives
until they amounted to fourteen, though the widow of Matthias
was the only one dignified with the title of Queen, or who
flared with him the splendor and ornaments of royalty. After
the example of their prophet, the multitude gave themselves up
to the mofl licentious and uncontrouled gratification of their
desires. No man remained satisfied with a tingle wife. Not
to uflc their Chriflian liberty was deemed a crime. Persons were
appointed to search the houtiIs for young women grown up to
maturity, whom they iifantly compelled to marry. Together
with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its inceparable attendant,
was introdtced, and became a new ioulrce of corruption. I1'vcry
cxces was committed of which the paflions of men are capable,
wlhCIn ricraincd ncither lby the authority of laws nor the fienfi of

Z 2 decenlcy;

BOOK V. decency ; and by a monstrous and almot incredible conjunc-

£,3 tion, voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and diffoluto

riot accompanied the aufterities of fanatical, devotion.

Aconfederacy MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly offended at
against the
Anlabaptifts. the insult offered to their dignity by Boccold's presumptuous

usurpation of royal honours; and the profligate manners of his
followers, which were a reproach to the Chriflian name, filled
men of all professions with horror. Luther, who had testified
against this fanatical spirit on its first appearance, now deeply
lamented its progress, and exposing the delusion with great
firength of argument, as well as acrimony of tile, called loudly
on all the flates of Germany to put a flop to a phrenzy no less
pernicious to society, than fatal to religion.. The Emperor,
occupied with other cares and projets, had no leisure to attend
to such a diflant objet. But the princes of the Empire, afrem-
bled by the King of the Romans, voted a supply of men and
money to the bishop of Munster,. who being unable to keep a

Befiegc the fiuficient army on foot, had converted the siege of the town
town.

into a blockade.. The forces raised in.consequence of this refo-

m Prophetre & concionatorum autoritate jLxta etexemplo, tota urbe ad rapien-

das pulclcrrimas quafquc fminas difcurfum cft. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta
hominum turb3, fere ulla rcperta cft supra animum decimum quartum, qua ftu-
prum pafla non fuerit. Iamb. Hortcnf. p. 303. Vulgi viris quinas effe uxores,
pluribus f(:ii.s, nonnullis fcptcnas & otonas. Pucllas supra duodecimurn
atatis annum flatini amare. Id. 35. Ncno una contentus suit, ncquc cuiquam
extra cfE;tas & viris inniaturas contincnti tfli: licuit. Id. 307. Tacebo hlc, ut fit
lius honor auiibus, quanta barbaric ct malitia ufi funt in pucllis vitiandis non-
diim aptis matrimonia, id quod mihi ncque cx vano, ncquc ex vulgi fcrmonibus
hauflum eft, fed ex ca vetula, ui cura sic vitiatarum dcmandata suit, audituin.
Job. Cuio inus, 316.

1: lution,

lution, were put under the command of an officer of experience,. BOOK V..
who approaching the town towards the end offpring in the year
one thousand five hundred and thirty-five, pressed it more
closely than formerly, but found the fortifications so firong, and
so diligently guarded, that he durst. not attempt an assault. It
was now above fifteen months since the Anabaptifis had efta-
blihed their dominion in Munster; they had during that time
undergone prodigious fatigue in working on the fortifications,
and performing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent
attention of their King to provide for their subsistence, and his Diltrers and
frugal and regular ceconomy in their publick meals, they began faeaticifm of
to feel the approach of famine. Several small bodies of their
brethren, who were advancing to their afliftance from the Low-
Countries, had been intercepted, and cut to pieces; and while all
Germany was ready to combine againt them, they had no prof-
pet of succour. But such was the ascendant which Boccold had
acquired over the multitude, and so powerful the fascination of
enthusiasm, that their hopes were as sanguine as ever, and they
hearkened with implicit credulity to the visions and predicions
of their prophets, which assured them, that the Almighty would
speedily interpofc, in order to deliver the city. The faith, how-
ever, of some few, fliaken by the violence and length of their
sufferings, began to fail; but being fufpedcd of an inclination
to surrender to the enemy, they were punishcd with immediate
death, as.guilty of impiety in dilltrulfing the power of God.
One of the King's wives, having uttered certain. words that
implied foine doubt conccrning his divine million, lie iiiflantly
clled the whole numnber together, and coninunding the blaiL
phemer, as he called her, to kneel down, cut ofi her head with
his own.hands; and so far were tlhe reft from exprcling any

horroir

BOOK V. horror at this cruel deed, that they joined him in danc-

53^ ing with a frantick joy around the bleeding body of their com-

panion.

The city BY this time, the besieged endured the utmofl rigor of famine;
taken.
June . but they chore rather to susser hardships, the recital of which is

shocking to humanity, than to liften to the terms of capitulation
offered them by the bishop. At last, a detlrter, whom they had
taken into their service, being either less intoxicated with the
fumes of enthusiasm, or unable any longer to bear such diflrefs,
made his escape to the enemy. He informed their general of a
weak part in the fortifications which he had observed, and assuring
him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger and fatigue, kept
watch there with little care, he offered to lead a party thither in the
night. The proposal was accepted, and a chosen body of troops
appointed for the service; who, scaling the walls unperceived,
seized one of the gates, and admitted the rcft of the army. ' The
June 24. Anabaptiffs, though furprized, defended thcmfclves in the mar-

ket place with valour, heightened by despair; but being over-
powered by numbers, and surrounded on every hand, noft of
them were slain, and the remainder taken prifoncrs. Among

Punlifment the last were the King and Cnipperdoling. The King, loaded
of te King
n.d 'his a,: - with chains, was carried from city to city as a fpcclcle to gratify
ciates. the curiosity of the people, and was cxpofc(l to all their intilts.

Ilis fpilit, however, was not broken or humlnbled by this fad
rcvcrfe of his condition; and lhe adllirc(d witli unfhakcn firmncfs
to the difiinguiflhing tenets of his set. Aitcr this, he was brought
hack to Munpfcr, the cenc of his royalty and crimes, and put
to death witl the nofi cxquliite and lingering tortures, all which
he bore with aflonilhing fortitiudc. This cxt raordlilary man, who

hIad

had been able to acquire such amazing dominion over the minds BOOK V.
of his followers, and to excite commotions so dangerous to society, 153,
was only twenty-fix years of age".

TOGETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom of the Anabap- Charaer of

the fict since

tifts came to an end. Their principles having taken deep root in that period.
the Low-Countries, the party fill subsists there, under the name
of Mennonites but by a very singular revolution, this fed, so
mutinous and sanguinary at its firit origin, hath become altoge-
ther innocent and pacific. Holding it unlawful to wage war, or
to accept of civil offices, they devote themselves entirely to the
duties of private citizens, and by their industry and charity
endeavour to make reparation to human society for the violence
committed by their founders . A small number of this feet
which is fettled in England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of enthusiasm.

THIE mutiny of the Anabaptists, though it drew general Pro-eed;ngs

attention, did not so entirely engross the princes of Germany, ad authority
as not to allow leisure for other tranfadions. The alliance of Smalka!e.
between the'French King and the confederates at Slnalkalde,
began about this tine to pro duce great effcds. Ulric, Duke of
Wurtembcrg, having been cxpcllcd his dominions in the year
one thousand five hundred and nineteen, on account of his vio-
lent and oppreflive adniniitration, the house of Auflria had got

n Sleid. 19o, &c. Tunmultuum Anabaptiflarum Liberunus. Ant. Lamberto

Hortcnrio ;lmclarc ;ip. Scardillal vol. 2. p. 298, &c. De Mifcrabili Molnaftri-
cnitI lin 0bf.lilt) , &.-. libullit,; Alntjli Corvini ap. Scard. 313. Annales Ana-
baptilticl ; Jil. Il nllrico ()ttio, 4to. fle, 1672. Cor. Hecrfbachius Hist.
Anab. Edit. 1637. p. 140. * 3Bylc Didtion. Art. /Izhliptlies.

po. 1 lcsliol

BOOK V. pofleffion of his dutchy. That prince having now by a long

'3' exile atoned for the errors in his conduct, hich were the effec
1535.

rather of inexperience than of a tyrannical disposition, was
become the objea of general compassion. The Landgrave of
Hesse, in particular, his near relation, warmly espoused his
interest, and used many efforts to recover for him his ancient
inheritance. But the King of the Romans obstinately refused
to relinquish a valuable acquisition which 'his fnnily had made
with so much ease. The Landgrave, unable to compel him,
applied to the King of France his new ally. Francis, eager
to embrace any opportunity of ditfreffing the house of Austria,
and desirous of wresting from it a territory, which gave it foot-
ing and influence in a part of Germany at a drfance from its
other dominions, encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
secretly supplied him with a large fum of money. This he
employed to raise troops, and marching with great expedition
towards Wurtemberg, attacked, defeated, and dispersed a con-
fiderable body of Austrians, entrusted with the defence of the
country. All the Duke's fubjeds hastened, with emulation,
to receive their native Prince, and re-invested him with that
authority which is still enjoyed by his descendants. At the
fame time the cxcrcife of the Protestant religion was established
in his dominions P.

The King of FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this unexpcecd blow,
the 1(oii,ans
courts thn. not daring to attack a Prince whom all the Protestant powers

in Germany were ready to support, judged it expedient to con-
clude a treaty with him, by which he recognized in the most

P Slcid. 172. Bcllay, 159, &c.

ample

am;ple form his title to the dutchy. The success of the BooK V.
I.ftdgrave's operations in behalf of the Duke of Wurtemberg
having convinced Ferdinand that a rupture with a league so for.
midable as that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided with the utmost
care, he entered likewise into a negociation with the Eledor of
Saxony, the head of that union, and by some conceflions in
favour of the Proteflant religion, and others of advantage to the
Elector himself, he prevailed on him together with his confe-
derates to acknowledge his title as King of the Romans. At
the fame time, in order to prevent any such precipitate or irre-
gular election in times to come, it was agreed that no pcrfon
ihould hereafter be promoted to that dignity without the una-
nimous content of the Eletors; and the Emperor soon after
confirmed this flipulation .

THESE as of indulgence towards the Proteflants, and the Paul ITT. c.l's

close union into which the King of the Romans seemed to be coula gil t
entering with the Princes of that party, gave great offence at M^eta.
Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from a resolution of his
predeceflor, never to consent to the calling of a general council,
and had promitfd, in the firIt confiflory held after his elcdion,
that he would convoke that assembly Io much desired by all
Christendom, was no lcfs enraged than Clement at the innova-
tions in Germany, and no less avcrfe to any scheme for reform-
ing either the dodrines of the church, or the abuses in the court
of Rome: But having been a witness of the universal censure
which Clement had incurred by his obflinacy with regard to
these points, he hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the seem-
ing alacrity with which he proposcd a council; flattering hiim-

q Slcid. 173. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. p. 2. 11 9.
VOL. Ir. A a a fclt

BooK V. self, Wx.y.vevr, that filch ditliculties would arise concerning the

'''J tilme anld place of mecting, tle pcrfons who had a right to Se

prcfent, and the order of their proceedings, as would effectually
defeat the intention of those who demanded that aembly,
without exposing himself to any imputation for refusing to call
it. \Vith tllis view he dispatchcd nuncios to the several courts,
in order to make known his intention, and that lie had fixed on
Mlantua as a proper place in which to hold the council. Such
diiiculties as the Pope had forefccn, immediately presented
themfelvcs in great numlber. The French King did not approve of
the place which Paul had chofcn, as the Papal and Imperial influ-
cn.c would nccefTarily e too great in a town situated in that part
ofc Ialy. The King of England not only concurred with Francis
in uring thatol jction, but refuied, betides, to acknowledge any
council called in the name and by the authority of the Pope. The
Dec. . German Protcftants having met togetlicr at Smalkalde, infifled on

their original demand of a council to be held in Germany, and
pleading the Emperor's promise, as vwell as the agreement at Ratif-
bon totlhat eflect, declared that they would not confider an assembly
held at Mantua, as a lcgal or free rlprclcntative of tlhe church.
iy) tis divcrlity offentimcllnt and views, fich a field for intrigue
a:u(l ncgociaotion opened, as imade it cafy for tle Iope to anlilne
the merit of being cager to) anfliiible a council, while at tlie iamc
tinec lie c'uld put ofi its meeting at l)]Cafirt. 'l'lle lrotcflaiits on
tlie oticr al(lnd llufpclclig lilh dcligns, and 1cnfilblc of tlie imp)r-
tLiil(c lich licy derived froll teiri uiiol, renewed f(or ten years
tlie lc.;igu of Smallalde, wiich now Ibecame fironger and mInore
lrlmidablc l)y the acceClion of leveral new members '.

DURI N\(

''li. lt:,: I,:: .as colncliucd T) cccmb r, oe tlioifii(n five Ilntlird and th ll y-

fivc, but nutL cxtc
U ! Jc or (i.ii!cd in sorn till SeptembLcr in the followini year. The

Pl' ilCC.

DURING these tranfa'tions in Germany, the Emperor under- 300K Vr.

took his famous enterprise againfi the piratical states in Africa. ., -
That part of the African continent lying along the coast of the .e-
Meditcrranean sea, which anciently formed the kingdoms of tior:l,'; ,
Mauritania and Mlafylia, together with the republick of Car- and flae of

that cour:ry.

thagc, and which is now known by the general name of Barbar-,.
had undergone many revolutions. Subdued by the Romans, it
became a province of their empire. Conquered aftcrwards by
the Vandals, they ercaed a kingdom there. That being over-
turned by Belisarius, the country continued subjet to the Greek
Emperors, until it was over-run towards the end oftlhe seventh
century, by the rapid and irrcfiflible arms of the Arabs. It
remained for some time a part of that vai empire of which the
Caliphs were the head. Its immense diilance, however, from
the feat of government, encouraged the descendants of those
leaders, who had subdued the country, or the chiefs of the
Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to throw off the yoke, and to et
up for independence. The Caliphs, who derived their autho-
rity from a spirit ofcnthufiafm, more fitted for making conquefls
than for prcferving them, were obliged to connive at as of
rebellion which they could not prevent; and Barbary was
dividcd into iCvcral kingdoms, of which Morocco, Algiers and
Tunis were the mol confidcrable. The inhabitants of tlicfc

P icce, who ccetled to it werc Jo!hn EIlcCor of Saxony, l':lfn I)t I! (f :rullf-
wick, Philip Lilnlgravc of 11Uc1, U!.ri: Duke of Vs' ttnil'bcr , i.irniin ad I'Philip
Dukes of lllmc.::nii, John (e)i'c , ;id JJo:ichlim Priift's of An.hllt, (]>C.hard
;a3d Albert Counts of M ia:iifilcl., \Vi!i;ii Ct,)iiit of Nitl:tI. The Ccili', iStr.i-
biurg, Nuienibcrg, Conllaii.c, tUl.-, M.:idlit!'r, Pli m.'!, Rtutlinl;')n, lll;.-
bronl,

M m.ng, , C.I ('i, , If,.i , l;ilbr. ; ,\il!,lll ic,:, Anlli.l:;,, I .IelC

i 't,

- : i, ':n

l: , l} ti't w !., (io1 :, 1' .';vcr, ( ', ,LII;, !', J: il,). l'<, l:.,,lur:',
M idecn.

A a. l.iii ,oil

BooK V. kingdoms were a mixed race, Arabs, Negroes from the foutherr

--' _provinces, and Moors, either natives of Africa, or who had been

expelled out of Spain; all zealous professors of the Mahometan
religion, and inflamed against Christianity with a bigotted
hatred proportional to their ignorance and barbarous manners.

Rie of the AMONG these people, no less daring, inconstant and treache-
piratical
flat , rous, than the ancient inhabitants of the fame country described

by the Roman historians, frequent seditions broke out, and
many changes in government took place. These, as they
affecd only the internal slate of a country so barbarous, are
but little known, and deserve to be so: But about the beginning
of the sixteenth century a sudden revolution happened, which by
rendering the lates of Barbary formidable to the Europeans,
hath made their history worthy of more attention. This revolu-
and f the tion was brought about by persons born in a rank of life which

entitled them to a no such illustrious part. Horuc and Hay-
radin, the sons of a potter in the Isle of Lesbos, prompted by a
refllefs and enterprizing spirit, forsook their father's trade, ran
to fca, and joined a crew of pirates. They soon diftinguifled
themfelvcs by their valour and aivity, and becoming masters
of a fnall brigantine, carried on their infamous trade with such
condua and success, that they assembled a fleet of twelve galleys,
besides many veflels of finaller force. Of this fleet Horuc, the
elder brother, called Barbarossa from the red colour of his beard,,
was admiral, and Hayradin ifecond in command, but with almost
equal authority. They called themselves the friends of the sea5
:nd the enemies of all who fail upon it; and their names soon
lecamc terrille from the Straits of the Dardanels to those of
Gibraltar. Together with their fame and power, their ambi-

tious

tious views opened and enlarged, and while aing as Corsairs BOOK V.
they adopted the ideas, and acquired the talents of conquerors. ,535
They often carried the prizes which they took on the coasts of
Spain and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and enriching the inha-
bitants by the sale of their booty, and the thoughtless prodiga-
lity of their crews, were welcome guefis in every place at which
they touched. The convenient situation of these harbours lying
so near the greatefi commercial flates at that time in Christen-
dom, made the brothers wish for an establishment in that coun-
try. An opportunity of accomplishing this quickly presented
itself, which they did not susser to pass unimproved. Eutemi,
King of Algiers, having attempted several times, without success,
to take a fort which the Spanith governors of Oran had built
not far from his capital, was so ill advised as to apply for aid to
Barbarossa, whose valour the Africans confidered as irresistible.
The ative Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation, and leaving x5x6.
his brother Hayradin with the fleet, marched at the head of five
thousand men to Algiers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the town; and observing
that the Moors neither fufpeded him of any bad intention, nor
were capable with their light-armced troops of opposing his
lifciplined veterans, he fecrctly murdered the Monarch whom H-oruc, the

eder brother

he had come to assist, and caused himself to be proclaimed King beco mes
of Algiers in his lead. The authority which he had thus boldly mlgerof
usurped, lie endeavoured to eflablilh by arts suited to the genius
of the people whom he had to govern; by liberality, without
bounds to those who favoured his promotion, and by cruelty no
lels unbounded towards all whoin he had any rcafon to difruft.
Not satisfied with the throne which he had acquired, he attacked
the neighbouring King of Trcmeccn, and having vanquiflcd him

t ark

BOOK V. in battle, added his dominions to thoic of Algiers. At the fame
~, Y- time, he continued to inlfci the coafis of Spain and Italy with

1535.

fleets which rcfemblcd the armaments of a grcat Monarch, rather
than the light fqlualrons ofa Ca.f:r. The deva.ations which
these committed obligcd Charles, about tlhe beginning of his
J-i reign, to furnifhl the marquis de C. omares, governor of Oran,

with troops filficicnt to attack 1li:n. That officer, affifled by
the dethroned King (:f Trcmcccn, executed the commission
with fucli fririt, that Barbaroff's troops being beat in several
cncounters, lie imfclf was fiut up in Tremecen; after de-
fcdi'ig it to the last extreinit, he was overtaken i attempting
to make his efcapc, and slain while lie fought with an obflinate
valour, worthy of his former fame and exploits.

IIis brother Hayradin, known likewise by the name of Bar-

]'h 1 vrogrc

f .ai3raiii barofTa, alltuncd the fccptre of Algiers with the fame ambition
tile ft cond
lbro!her and abilities, but with better fortune. His reign being undi-

flurbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had full occupation
in the wars among the Europeant powers, he regulated with
admirable prudence the interior police of Iis kingdom, carried
on his naval operations witlh grc;t vigo(r;l, and e;xt:endd his
con(quLtls on tc ((ie nti') t of Afi Bca. Inlt, !)rceiving' that the
Moors and Arab fumittcd ito Iis ligover lllnint writh tel utmlofl
imjaticncerc, and )binig afixiid tllhat his contilnual depredations

Puitsl is do.- wold, >li day, dr;\' Ulp) llin tlic arms of tli Chriflials, ie put
iil.n,ui:ir llis , o iindS ll cr tlic oj)'(tcli()lO o" 1i( Grand Scignior, and
the' J,.,, v't a
of tile utlt.i. received f11om himi a hody ( f 'tirkilh 1t)ldiers fiflicient for his

fcur'ity ;aI:til1 hiis (ldolmellic as well nI a, h; 'orign enemies. At
lalt, tlic :,lnme (,I lIis cxploi L; daily illcrafin, So)]yman of'cred hI il
the co!niiand of the Turkif flect, as tlhe only lcrion vllo!:

9 valor

vaTourand fill in naval affairs entitled him to comrnand againt BOOK V..
Andrew Doria, the greatest fea-officer of that age. Proud of this ,,

'535.

diflinQion, Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and with a
wonderful versatility of mind, mingling the arts of a courtier
with the boldness of a Corlair, gained the entire confidence
both of the Sultan and his Vizier. To them he communicated
a scheme that lie had frmed of making himself mafterof Tunis;
the most flourinfing kingdom, at that time, on the coast of
Africa ; !which being approved of by them, hc obtaincd whate-
cvcrl- e demanded for carrying it into execution.

IIs hopes of fi!cccfs in this undertaking were foundeld on ILs feme

forconcuer v

the intcerine divisions inl the kingdom of tiunis. hIahmcd, the Tuns,.
]tit Kinll of that country, having thirty-fouLr tons by different
x ives, n Ilmd .NMley-I-Iafccn, one of the youngefl among tlhem,
lis fiicccldbr. That weak Prince, who owed this preference not
to is own mcriit, b't to the afcencdiilt which llis mothcr had ac-
quired over an old donting Mnarch, firfl poisoned his father in
order to prevent him finom altcriing his dcfiination; ;and then, with
the barbarous policy which prevails wherever polygamy is per-
mitted, and the riIght of tlccelioo n is not prccilcly fixed, lie put
to death all his 1brotl,-s -iwhom lie could ,ct ito his ;power.
Alrafcliid, one of the c; .ticl, wats i)o fortul;llte as to clclape Iis
rac,; ad fill(lii a retrc;t among the wanderig Arabs, mlade
fevcral attenlpts, by the aTi llance of ieic of tcir cliefl, to
rccover te tllron(, w i of -iright belolgecd to Iill. Blit tlicle
ro')vin;g ultiiccc'efil, ;i(idl the Arabs, flomn tlleir natilll levity,
beling, read y to (dliver lni ill to) his mcrcilcs brotlher, lie 1,ed to
Algirr , tlie ()o I lc c (i' r-C'i-e cmainilil)g, al(1 imntlr! ed lte
protcdioi of arl'l"roti ; who, (dilcerning at lice ;!l tme ;(lviln-

t "'* .

BOOK V. tages that might be gained by supporting his title, received him
I.~-35 with every possible demonfiration of friendship and refpea.

Being ready, at that time, tofet fail for Constantinople, he easily
persuaded Alrafchid, whose eagerness to obtain a crown disposed
him to believe or undertake any thing, to accompany him thi-
ther, promising him effectual assistance from Solyman, whom he
represented to be the mofR generous, as well as most powerful,
Monarch in the world. But no sooner were they arrived at
Constantinople, than the false Corsair, regardless of all his pro-
mises to him, opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering Tunis,
and annexing it to the Turkish empire, by making use of the
name of this exiled Prince, and by means of the party ready to
declare in his favour. Solyman approved, with too much
facility, of this perfidious proposal, extremely suitable to the
characer of its author, but altogether unworthy of a great
Prince. A powerful fleet and numerous army were soon assem-
bled; at the fight of which the credulous Alrafchid flattered
himself, that he would oon enter his capital in triumph.
Its uccefs. BUT jufi as this unhappy Prince was going to embark, he

was arrested by order of the Sultan, hut up in the seraglio, and
was never heard of more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two
hundred and fifty vessels towards Africa. After ravaging the
coafis of Italy, and spreading terror through every part of that
country, he appeared before Tunis; and landing his men, gave
out that he came to assert the right of Alrafchid, whom he pre-
tended to have left lick aboard the Admiral galley. The fort
of Goletta which commands the bay, soon fell into his hands,
partly by his own address, partly by the treachery of its
commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis, weary of Muley-

Hafcen's

Hafcen's government, took arms, and declared for Alrafchid BOOK V.
with such zeal and unanimity, as obliged the former to fly so '53
precipitately, that he left all his treasures behind him. The
gates were immediately set open to BarbarofTa, as the restorer
of their lawful sovereign. .But when Alrafchid himfelfdid not
appear, and when intlead of his name, that of Solymari alone
was heard among the acclamations of the Turkish soldiers inarch-
ing into the town, the people of Tunis began to ufipecq the
Corsair's treachery; and their suspicions being soon converted
into certainty, they ran to arms with the utmofl fury, and
surrounded the citadel, into which Barbarossa had lcd his troops.
But having foreseen filch a revolution, he was not unprepared
for it; e immediately turned against them the artillery on the
ramparts, and by one brisk discharge of it, and of his small-
arms, he dispersed the numerous but undireced assailants, and
forced them to acknowledge Solyman as their sovereign, and to
submit to himself as his viceroy.

His first care was to put the kingdom, of which he had thus Barlrfhm,'s

got poffeflion, in a proper posture of defence. He frengtllencd porncr.
the citadel which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vast expence, made it the
principal fiation for his fleet, and his great arsenal both for mili-
tary and naval stores. Being now poflefled of fucl) cxtnfive
territories, he carried on his depredations againfi the Christian
flates to a greater extent, and with more (lcflrutive violence
tlhan ever. Daily complaints of the outrages committed by is
cruizcrs were brought to the nlmperor by his lubjccd;, both in
Spain and Italy. All Cllrillcldonl felced to cxpcd from
]im, as its greatecn and miofl iortunatc Prince, that lic would

VOL. II. B b Pi

BOOK V. put an end to this new and odious species of oppreflion. At

---,-- the fame time Mulcy-Hafcen, the exiled King of Tunis, find-

The ex>.led ing none of the Mahometan Princes in Africa willing or able
K in, of l'Lnis
in.plores thec to assist him in recovering his throne, applied to Charles as the
,rXp.ror's only person who could assert his rights in opposition to such a
Ap4il 21, formidable usurper. The Emperor, equally desirous of deliver-
1553.

i:g his dominions from the dangerous neighbourhood of Bar-
barofa; of appearing as the protetor of an unfortunate Prince;
and of acquiring the glory annexed in that age, to every expe-
dition against the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty with
Muley-Hafcen, and began to prepare for invading Tunis.
Having made trial of his own abilities for war in the late cam-
paign in Hungary, lie was now become so fond of the military
character, that he determined to command on this occasion in

Hlis prepara- person. The united flrength of his dominions was called out
tion for the
expdition. upon an enterprize in which the Emperor was about to hazard

his glory, and which drew the attention of all Europe. A
Flemish fleet carried from the ports of the Low-Country a body
of German infantry'; the gallics of Naples and Sicily took on
l)oard the veteran bands of Italians and Spaniards, which had
diflinguilhcd themfclves by so many vidories over the French;
the Emperor hlimfelf embarked at Barcclona with the flower of
the Spaniffh nobility, and was joined by a considerable squadron
from Portugal, under the command of the Infant Don Lewis, the
linmprcls's brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own gallics,
tlhe b1cfl appointed at that time in Europe, and commanded by
the monlo fkillutl officers: The Pope frnilllled all the aflfflance ill
his power towards fch a pious entcrprize; and the order of

.* llardi Aninales Brabant. i. 599.

lAlaita

Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels, equipped a finall BOOK V.
squadron, but formidable by the valour of the knights who
served on board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was the
general place of rendezvous. Doria was appointed High Admi-
ral of the fleet; the command in chief of the land forces was
given to the marquis di Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting of near five .ands ia

hundred vessels, having on board above thirty thousand regular Africa.
troops, set fail from Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation,
landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa having early intelli-
gence of the Emperor's immense armament, and fufpeding its
deflination, prepared with equal prudence and vigour for the
defence of his new conquest. He called in all hi.s corsairs from
their different fations; he drew from Algiers what forces could
be spared; he dispatched messengers to all the African Princes,
Moors as well as Arabs, and by representing Muley-Hafcen as
an infamous apoflate, prompted by ambition and revenge, not
only to become the vassal of a Chriflian Prince, but to conspire
with hin to extirpate the Mahommedan faith, he inflamed those
ignorant and bigotted chiefs to fucl a degree, that they took
arms as in a common caufc. Twenty thousand horse, together
with a vafl body of foot, soon aflicmblcd at Tunis; and Barba-
rofla, by a proper distribution of prefcnts among them fiom time
to time, kept the ardour which had brought them together froml
flbiliding. But as lie was too well acquainted with the enemy
whom he had to oppose, to tlhi k that tllde light troops could rfifl
the heavy armed cavalry and veteran ill'nltry which conpol'cd
the Imperial army, his clit-' confidence wa\\s in tlhe lrcngtli of
the Golctta, and in his body of 'ltiuki f 1oldicrs who were armedl T,,v ,lce to

31b1) b and

Book V. and disciplined after the European fashion. Six thousand of
' ;" these, under the command of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the bravest

153S.

and most experienced of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort,
which the Emperor immediately invefled. As Charles had the
command of the ea, his camp was so plentifully supplied not
only with the necessaries, but with all the luxuries of life, that
Muley-Hafcen, who had not been accustomed to fee war carried
on with such order and magnificence, was filled with admiration
of the Emperor's power. His troops, animated by his presence,
and confidering it as meritorious to shed their blood in such a
pious cause, contended with each other for the posts of honour
and danger. Three separate attacks were concerted, and the
Germans, Spaniards and Italians, having one of these committed
to each of them, pushed them forward with the eager courage
which national emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and kill becoming the confidence which his master had put in
him; the garrison performed the hard service on which they were
ordered with great fortitude. But though he interrupted the
besiegers by frequent allies; though the Moors and Arabs
alarmed the camp with their continual incursions; the breaches
soon became so considerable towards the land, while the fleet
battered the fortifications which it could approach, with no les3
Takes it by fury and success, that an aftault being given on all fides at once,

fln. the place was taken by florm; Sinan, with the remains of his
July 2;.

garrison, retiring, after an obflinatc refinance, over a shallow
part of the bay towards the city. By the rcldulion of the
Golctta, the Emperor became matter of BarbarofTa's fleet, con-
fifling of eighty-fcven gallics and galliots, together with his
arfcnal, and three hundred cannon moflly brats, which -cre
planted on the ramparts; a prodigious number in that age, and

7 a remark-

a remarkable proof of the strength of the fort, as well as of the BOOK V.
greatness of the corsair's power. The Emperor marched into -
the Goletta through the breach, and turning to Muley-Hafcen
who attended him, " Here," fays he, " is a gate open to you,
by which you shall return to take possession of your dominions."

BARBAROSSA, tho' he felt the full weight of the blowwhich

he had received, did not, however, lose courage, or abandon the
defence of Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent, and
extremely weak; as he could not depend on the fidelity of the
inhabitants, nor hope that the Moors and Arabs would sustain
the hardships of a siege, he boldly determined to advance with
his army, which amounted to fifty thousand men ', towards the
Imperial camp, and to decide the fate of his kingdom by the ifiue
of a battle. This resolution he communicated to his principal
officers, and representing to them the fatal consequences which
might follow, if ten thousand Christian slaves, whom he had:
shut up in the citadel, should attempt to mutiny during the
absence of the army, he proposed as a necessary precaution for
the publick security, to massacre them without mercy before lie
began his march. They all approved warmly of his itntention
to fight; but inured as they were, in their piratical depredations,
to scenes of bloodshed and cruelty, the barbarity of his propofil
concerning the slaves filled them with horror; and 13arlbarofa,
rather from the dread of irritating them, than swayed by motives
of humanity, confcnted to fparc the lives of the lavcs.

BY this time the Emperor had begun to advance towards Del; T:,r-
Tunis; and though his troops suffercd inconceivable hardthils k:lIL:i'~

arpiiy.
I'piflrcs de Princcs, par Rufcclli, p. 119, &c.

in

BOOK V. in their march over burning sands, destitute of water, and'
-,-"3-' exposed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they soon came up

with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs, emboldened by their
vast fiiperiority in number, immediately rufled on to the attack
with loud shouts, but their undisciplined courage did not fland
one moment the hfock of regular battalions; and though Bar-
baroffa, with admirable pretence of mind, and by exposing his
own person to the greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally them,
the rout became so general, that he himself was hurried along
with them in their flight back to the city. There he found every
thing in the utmost confusion; some of the inhabitants flying
witl their families and effeas; others ready to set open their
gates to the conqueror; the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat;
and the citadel, which in such circumstances might have afforded
himn some refuge, already in the possession of the Christian cap-
tives. These unhappy men, rendered desperate by their fitua-
tizxn, had laid hold on the opportunity which Barbarossa dreaded.
As soon as his army was at some diflance from the town,
they gained two of their keepers, by whose affiflance, knocking
ofF their fetters, and burfling open their prisons, they over-
powercd the Turkish garrison, and turned the artillery of the
fort againfl their former matters. Barbarofla, disappointcd and
cnraged, exclaiming sometimes againfl the falfc compassion of
his officers, and fometincs condemning his own imprudent con-
pliance with their opinion, fled prccipitatcly to Bona.

TIlli rur- MIA 'N \W IIT IL, (harles, fttisficd with tle cafy and almnol blood-
rclluis. lcfs victory which lie hlad gaincd, and advancing lowly witl the

precaution neccflary in an cnemy's country, did not yet know the
wlole extent of his own good fortune. But at last, a mcilfnger

dilpatchcd

dispatched by the slaves acquainted him with the fuccefsof their BOOK V.
noble effort, for the recovery of their liberty; and at the fame - -
time deputies arrived from the town, in order to present him the
keys of their gates, and to implore his protection from military
violence. While he was deliberating concerning the proper
measures for this purpose, the soldiers fearing that they would
be deprived of the booty which they had expected, broke fud-
denly, and without orders, into the town, and began to kill and
plunder without diftindion. It was then too late to restrain
their cruelty, their avarice, or licentiousness. All the outrages
of which soldiers are capable in the fury of a storm, all the
excesses of which men can be guilty when their paflions are
heightened by the contempt and hatred which difference in
manners and religion inspire, were committed. Above thirty
thousand of the innocent inhabitants perished on that unhappy
day, and ten thousand were carried away as slaves. Muley-
Hafcen took poffeffon of a throne surrounded with carnage,
abhorred by his fubjets on whom he had brought such
calamities, and pitied even by those whose rashness had
been the occasion of them. The Emperor lamented the fatal
accident which had slained the lufire of his victory; and amildf
such a scene of horror there was but one ficdacle that afforded
him any fatisfadion. Tcn thousand Christian slaves, among
whom wcre several persons of diftintion, met him as lie entered
the town; and falling on their knees, thanked and bleffd him
as their dclivcrcr.

AT the fime time that Charles accomplifled his promise to Re.nrec t1e

C.\ihi xrg o

the Moorilh King of rc-cflal)lilhing hlil in his dominions, lie i;', t o
did not ieglcd what was ncccllary for bridling the power of

the

BoK V. the African corsairs, for the security of his own fubjeds, and for
~''- the interest of the Spanish crown: In order to gain these ends,

he concluded a treaty with Muley-Hafcen on the following
conditions; that he flould hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee of
the crown of Spain, and do homage to the Emperor as his liege
lord; that all the Chriflian saves now within his dominions, of
vhatevcr nation, should be et at liberty without ransom; that
no fiitljcd of the Emperor's should for the future be detained
in fervitudc; that no Turkish corsair should be admitted into the
ports of his dominions; that free trade, together with the publick
cxercife of the Christian religion, hould be allowed to all the
Emperor's fil)jeds; that the Emperor hould not only retain the
Goletta, ut all the other sea-ports in the kingdom which were
fortified, should be put into his hands; that Muley-Hafcen
should pay annually twelve thousand crowns for the subsistence
of the.Spanifh garrison in the Goletta; that he should enter into no
alliance with any of the Emperor's enemies, and should present
to him every year, as an acknowledgement of his vassalage, fix
Moorifl horfcs, and as many hawks u. Having thus fettled the
afalirs of Africa; chaflifcd the insolence of the corsairs; secured
a lfce rctreat for the ships of his fulbjeds, and a proper flation
for lis own fleets, on that coafi from which he was mofi infetced
Atlua 17. bly piratical dcpredations; Charles embarked again for Europe,

the tempcfluous weathcr, and fickncis among his troops, not
permitting him to purfiic Barbaroffit.

u N cntts Corps I)iplrnat. ii. 128. Stinmnnte lt. di Napoli, iv. 89.
Joh. lItiopii l)ialilun Expedition. Tunetanx ap. Scard. v. ii. p. 320, &c.

Jovii ililor. ilb. xxxiv. 153, &c. Sandov. ii. 154, &c. Vcrtot llit. de Cheval.
de Milthc. Epiflrc dcs Pliiiccs, par Rufcclli, traduitcs par Bellcfor, p. 1 9,
120, &c.

BY

BY this expedition, the merit of which seems to have been BOOK V.

eRtimated in that age, rather by the apparent generosity of the .
undertaking, the magnificence wherewith it was conducted, and The glory

which the

the success which crowned it, than by the importance of the Emperor ac.
consequences that attended it, the Emperor attained a greater quiled.
height of glory than at any other period of his reign. Twenty
thousand slaves whom he freed from bondage, either by his
arms, or by his treaty with Muley-Hafcen Y, each of whom he
cloathed and furnished with the means of returning to their
refpeEtive countries, spread all over Europe the fame of their
benefator's munificence, extolling his power and abilities
with the exaggeration flowing from gratitude and admiration.
In comparison with him, the other Monarchs of Europe made an
inconsiderable figure; he, as the chief Prince in Christendom,
appeared to be concerned for the honour of the Chriflian name,
for the publick security and welfare, while they were attentive
only to their private and particular interests.

, Summonte Hill. de Nap. vol. iv. p. o03.
Vo . . C cc TI-I E

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VI.

THE
HIS TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BO OK V.

BOOK VI. U NFORTUNATELY for the reputation of Francis L.
'--V--- JU among his cotemporaries, his conduct, at this jundure,
The cau1es of appeared a perfea contrast to that of his rival, as he laid hold on
a new ar be- the opportunity afforded him, by the Emperor's having turned
tween the
Emperor and his whole force against the common enemy, to revive his pre-
Francis.

tensions in Italy, and to plunge Europe into a new war. The
treaty of Cambray, as has been observed, did not remove the causes
of enmity between the two contending Princes; it covered up, but
did not extinguih the flames of discord. Francis, in particular,
who waited with impatience for a proper occasion of recovering
the reputation as wcll as territories which he had loft, con-

tinucd

tinued to carry on his negociations in different courts against the BooK VT.
Emperor, taking the utmost pains to heighten the jealousy I^;.
which many Princes entertained of his power or designs, and
to inspire the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: Among
others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who, though indebted to
Charles for the possession of the dutchy of Milan, had received
it on such hard conditions, as rendered him not only a vassal of
the Empire, but a tributary dependant upon the Emperor. The
honour of having married the Emperor's niece, did not recon-
cile him to this ignominious fiate of fubjeaion, which became
so intolerable even to Sforza, a weak and poor spirited Prince,
that he listened with eagerness to the first proposals Francis made
ofrefcuing him from the yoke. These proposals were conveyed
to him by Maraviglia, or Merveille, as he is called by the French
historians, a Milanese gentleman residing at Paris; and soon
after, in order to carry on the negociation with greater advan-
tage, Merveille was sent to Milan, on pretence of visiting his
relations, but with secret credentials from Francis as his envoy.
In this characer he was received by Sforza. But notwithftand-
ing his care to keep that circumflance concealed, Charles fufpet-
ing, or having received information of it, remonstrated and
threatened in such an high tone, that the Duke and his mini-
fters, equally intimidated, gave the world immediately a molt
infamous proof of their servile fear of offending the Emperor.
Having decoyed Merveillc, who had neither the prudence nor
temper which the flation wherein he was placed required, into
a quarrel, in which he happened to kill his antagonist, one of the
Duke's domestics, they inflantly commanded him to be seized, to
be tried for that crime, and to be beheaded. Francis, altonifhed at Dec. 1533,
this violation of a character held sacred among the most uncivi-

C c lizcd

BOOK VI. lized nations, and enraged at the insult offered to the dignity of

v -3 ' his crown, threatened Sforza with the effe&s of his indignation,

and complained to the Emperor, whom he confidered as the real
author of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with no satis-
fadion from either, he appealed to all the Princes of Europe, and
thought himself now entitled to take vengeance for an injury,
which it would have been indecent and pusillanimous to let pass
with impunity.

Francis defi- BEING thus furnished with a pretext for beginning a war,
tue of alies. on which he had already resolved, he multiplied his efforts in

order to draw in other Princes to take part in the quarrel. But
all his measures for this purpose were disconcerted by unforeseen
events. After having sacrificed the honour of his house by the
marriage of his son with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain
Clement, the death of that Pontiff had deprived him of all the ad-
vantages which he expeCted to derive from his friendship. Paul,
his successor, tho' attached by inclination to the ImperiaI interest,
seemed determined to maintain the neutrality suitable to his
character as the common father of the contending Princes. The
King of England, occupied with domcfic cares and projecs,
declined, for once, engaging in the affairs of tile continent,
and refused to assist Francis, unless he would imitate his exam-
ple, in throwing off the Papal supremacy. These disappoint-

}lis negocia- ments led him to follicit, with greater earncflnefs, the aid of the
tions with the
;crman Pro. Protestant Princes associated by the league of Smalkaldc. That
tuclants. he mightthe more easily acquire their confidence, he endeavoured

to accommodate himself to their predominant passion, zeal fr
their religious tenets. Hc affctcd a wonderful moderation
with regard to the points in diliutc; he permitted Bcllay, his

ClnvoU

envoy in Germany, to explain his sentiments concerning some BOOKVI.
of the most important articles, in terms not far different from 5
those used by the Protestants'; he even condescended to invite
Melandhon, whose gentle manners and pacific spirit diftin-
guifhed him among the Reformers, to visit Paris, that by his
assistance he might concert the most proper measures for recon-
ciling the contending feds, which so unhappily divided the
church b These concessions must be confidered rather as arts of
policy, than the result of convition; for whatever' impreffioni
the new opinions in religion made on his sifters, the Queen of
Navarre and Dutchess of'Ferrara, the gaiety of Francis's own
temper, and his love of pleasure, allowed him little leisure to
examine theological controversies.,

BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this disingenuous arti- Irritates them,

fice, by a ftep very inconsistent with his declarations to the Ger-
man Princes. This ftep, however, the prejudices of the age, and
the religious sentiments of his own fubjeds, rendered it necessary
for him to take. His close union with the King of England,
an excommunicated heretick; his frequent negociations with
the German Proteflants; but above all, his giving publick
audience to an envoy from Sultan Solyman, had excited violent
suspicions concerning the sincerity of his attachment to religion.
To have attacked the Emperor, who, on all occasions, made
high pretensions to zeal in defence of the Catholick faith, and
at the very jundure, when he was preparing for his expedition
against Barbarofa, which was then confidered as a pious nter-

Irreheri Script. Rcr. German. iii. 354, <c. Slcid. ift. 178, 83.
Seckend. lib. iii. io3.

b Ca1ncrarii Vita Ph. Mclai;chtholiis, 2°. Hag. 655. p. 12.

prize,
*# seei

BOOK VI. prize, could not have failed to confirm such unfavourable senti

v, -
ments with regard to Francis, and called on him to vindicate

himself by some extraordinary demonstration of his reverence for
the eftabliihed dotrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of
some of his fubjeas, who had imbibed the Protestant opinion
furniihed him with such an occasion as he desir.ed. They had
affixed to the gates of the Louvre, and other public places,
papers containing indecent reflections on the docrines and rites
of the Popish church. Six of the persons concerned in this rash
a&ion were discovered and seized. The King, in order to avert the
judgments which it was supposed their blasphemies might draw
down upon the nation, appointed a solemn procession. The
holy sacrament was carried through the city in great pomp;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch in his hand;
the princes of the blood supported the canopy over it; the nobles
marched in order behind. In the presence of this numerous
assembly, the King, accustomed to express himself on every sub-
jet in strong and animated language, declared that if one of his
hands were infe&ed with heresy, he would cut it off with the
other, and would not spare even his own children, if found
guilty of that crime. As a dreadful proof of his being in earnet,
the fix unhappy persons were publickly burnt before the pro-
cefion was finished, with circumstances of the molt hocking
barbarity attending their execution'.

They rerue THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled with resent-
so Join him.

ment and indignation at the cruelty with which their brethren
were treated, could not conceive Francis to be sincere, when he
offered to protct in Germany those very tenets, which he perse-

c Belcari Comment. Rcr. Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hill. 175, &c.

cuted
X:V1~~~~~~~~~

cuted with such rigour in his own dominions; so that all Bellay's BooKVI.
art and eloquence in vindicating his master, and apologizing for 535
his condu&, made but little impreflion upon them. Besides, the
Emperor, who hitherto had never employed violence against the
docrines of the Reformers, nor even given them much moleflationi
in their progress, was now bound by the agreement at Ratisbon,
not to disturb those who had embraced the new opinions; and the
Protestants wifely confidered this as a more certain and imme-
diate security, than the precarious and distant hopes with which
Francis endeavoured to allure them. The manner too in which
he had behaved to his allies at the peace of Cambray, was too
recent to be forgotten, and did not encourage others to redy much
on his friendihip or generosity. Upon all these accounts, the
Protestant Princes refused to affif the French King in any hostile
attempt against the Emperor. The Elecor of Saxony, e
most zealous among them, inaorder to avoid giving any umbrage
to Charles, would not permit Melanthon to visit the court of
France, although that Reformer, flattered perhaps by the invi-
tation of so great a Monarch, or hoping that his presence there
might be of signal advantage to the Proteflant cause, discovered
a strong inclination to undertake the journey .

BUT though none of the many Princes who envied or dreaded The French

the power of Charles, would feond Francis's efforts in order to e tyoadvar
reduce and circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded his Italy.
army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy. As his sole
pretext for taking arms was, that he might chaflife the Duke of
Milan for his insolent and cruel breach of the law of nations, it

d Camcrarii Vita Mclan. 42, &c. 415. Seckcnd. lib. iii. 107.

might

11OOKVI. might have been expeted that the whole weight of his evn-

,^3i. geance was to have fallen on his territories. But on a sudden,

and at their very commencement, the operations of war took
another direction. Charles Duke of Savoy, one of the least
aaive and able Princes of the line from which he descended,
had married Beatrix of Portugal, the Empress's filler. By her
great talents, he soon acquired an absolute ascendant over her
husband; and proud of her affinity to the Emperor, or allured
by the magnificent promises with which he flattered her ambi-
tion, she formed an union between the Duke and the Imperial
court, extremely inconfitent with that neutrality, which wife po-
licy as well as the situation of his dominions had hitherto induced
him to observe in all the quarrels between the contending Mon-
archs. Francis was abundantly sensible of the distress to which
he: might be exposed, if when he entered Italy, he ihould leave
behind him the territories of a Prince, devoted so obsequiously

ion of the to the Emperor, that he had sent his eldest son to be educated in
)uYke of Sa the court of Spainj as a kind of hostage for his fidelity. Clement
voy', domi-
lions. the Seventh, who had represented this danger in a strong light

during his interview with Francis at Marseilles, suggested to
him, at the fame time, the proper method of guarding against
it, having advised him to begin his operations againfi the Mila-
ncfe, by taking possession of Savoy and Piedmont, as the only
certain way of securing a communication with his own domi-
nions. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke on many accounts,
particularly for having supplicd the Conflablc Bourbon with the
money, which enabled him to levy that body of troops which
ruincd the French army in the fatal battle of Pavia, was not
unwilling to let him now feel both how deeply he resented, and
Low severely he could punifl these injuries. Nor did he want

^~*~~~~~ several

several pretexts that would give ome coldmt of equity td^bie BOOK VI.
violence which he intended:The rritos of France adlSkvoy 5
lying contiguous to each other, and intemingled in man-ptffa&f
various disputes, unavoidable in such a fiation, subsisted on-.
cerning the limits of their reiv: .prbperty; and,*efide; *
Francis had, in. right tfhis qiwtter Louise of Savoy, large claims '.-
upon the Duke hembrother, foslr fhareiF tWir fathes A1. ;
ceflion. Being unwilling, however, to begin hoftifities without
some cause of quarrlorjfpcici6us t ln there pretetXf many a
of which were obfolite, aid others dubious, he 'emarided per.
million to march-through Piedmoat in his waatki the Milanese,
hoping that the Duke,. onui acess ofaattachment to th^llpe-
rial interest, might rfufe ts request, and thus give a greater -
appearance ofjufficeto all his operatios against him. But, if we
may believe the historians of Savoy, btter informed with rega*
to this particular than those ofnce, the Duke readily, and witH?"
a good grace, granted What it was not in his power to deny, pro-
mifing free passage to the French troops Jasiw dtered; so that
Francis, .as the only method now left ofjuftifying the measures
which he determined to take, was oblged4 insist for full fatisfac-
tion with regard to every thing that either the crown j France or
his mother Louise coiud demand of the koufe of Savoy' Such ,
an evasive answer, as might have bien expgied, being made to
this requisition, the French army Wulcr the admiral Brion poured
at once into the Duke's territories at different places. The
countries of BreITc and Bugey, united at that time to Savoy,
were over-run in a moment. Molt of the towns in the dutchy
of Savoy opened their gate at the approach of the enemy; A few

, .,

Hiltoirc Genealogique de Savoye, par Guichenon. 2 tom. fol. Lyon-r66o,
i. 639, &c. 4 as

VOL. 11. Dd d which

j v-

BooK VL which attempted to make refitance were easily forced; and

before the end of the campaign, the Duke saw himself stripped
of all his dominions, but the province of Piedmont, in which.
there were not many places in a condition to be defended.

The city of To compleat the Duke's misfortunes, te city of Geneva, the
Gese.a rco- sovereignty of which he claimed, and in ome degree possesed,
vers its 1,ber-
ty. threw off his yoke, and its revolt drew along with it the loss of

the adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time, an Imperial
city; and though under the direc dominion of its own bishops,
and the remote sovereignty of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of
its internal confiitution was purely republican, being governed
by syndics and a council chosen by the citizens. From these
diltint and often clashing jurifdidions, two opposite parties took
their rife, and had long subsisted in the state; the one composed
of the advocates for the privileges of the community, assumed
the name of Eignotz, or confederates in defence of liberty; and
branded the other, which supported the episcopal or ducal pre-
rogatives, with the name of Mammnelukes or slaves. At length,
the lroteltant opinions beginning to spread among the citizens,
; ;3. infired such as enmbraced them with that bold enterprizing spirit

which always accompanied or was naturally produced by them
in their first operations. As both the Duke and Bishop were
fiom interest, from prejudice, and from political considerations,
violent enemies of the Reformation, all the new converts joined
with warmtl the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,

inilging with the love of liberty, added firength to that gene-
rous passion. The rage and animosity of two fadions, fliut up
within the fame walls, occasioned frcquent infurrcctions, which

tcrmni lating

termintitng mofily to the advantage of the friends of liberty, BooKr VI.
they daily gained ground.

THE Dukeand Bishop, forgetting their ancient contests about

jurifdidtion, had united against their common enemies, and each
attacked them with his proper weapons. The Bishop excom-
municated the people of Geneva as guilty of a double crime; of
impiety, in apostatising from the established religion; and of
sacrilege, in invading the rights of his fee. The Duke attacked
them as rebels against their lawful Prince, and attempted to
render himself master of the city, first by furprize, and then by ,534.
open force. The citizens, despising the thunder of the Bishop's
censures, boldly aerted their independance againif the Duke;
and partly by their own valour, partly by the powerful assistance
which they received from their allies, the canton of Berne, toge-
-ther with ome fnlal supplies both of men and money, secretly
furnished by the King of France, they defeated all his attempts.
Not satisfied with having repulsed him, or with remaining
always upon the defensive themselves, they now took advantage
of the Duke's inability to resist them, while overwhelmed by the
armies of France, and seized several castles and places of strength
which he possessed in the neighbourhood of Geneva; thus deli-
vering the city from these odious monuments of its former sub-
jction, and rendering the public liberty more secure for the
future. At the fame time the canton of Berne invaded and
conquered the Paijs de Vaud, to which it had ibme pretensions.
The canton of Friburgh, though zealously attached to the
Catholic religion, and having no fbjed of contest with the
Duke, laid hold on part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince.
A great portion of these conquests or usurpations being still

D d d retained

BooKY'I. retained by the two cantons, add considerably to their power,

,53TjZ and have become the most valuable part of their territories.
1535.

Geneva, notwithstanding many schemes and enterprizes of the
Dukes of Savoy to re-efablifh their dominion there, still keeps
possession of its independance; and in consequence of that blef-
sing, has attained a degree of consideration, wealth and elegance,
which it could not otherwise have reached'.

The Empe- AM IDST such a succession of disastrous events, the Duke of
roIt unabe t Savoy had no other resource but the Emperor's protection,
assist the Duke
of Savoy. which, upon his return from Tunis, he demanded with the most

earnest importunity; and as his misfortunes were occasioned
chiefly by his attachment to the Imperial interest, he had a just
title to immediate assistance. Charles, however, was not in a
condition to support him with that vigour and dispatch which
the exigency of his affairs called for. Most of the troops em-
ployed in the African expedition, having been raised for that
service alone, were disbanded as soon as it was finished; the
veteran forces under Antonio de Leyva were fearce sufficient for
the defence of the Milanese; and the Emperor's treasury was
entirely drained by his vast efforts against the Infidels.

O&. 24. BIUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned, according to some
Ceu4h of historians, by the terror of a French invasion, which had twice
Sforza Duke
.tMilln. been fatal to his family, afforded the Emperor full leifurc to

prepare for adion. By this unexpdced event, the nature of the
war, and the causes of discord, wcre totally changcd. Francis's.
first pretext for taking arms, in order to clhaitilc Sforza for the

Ilift. de la Ville de G-.ncvc, par Spon. 12°. Utr. 1685. p . -99. . de

la Reformation de Suisse, par Rouclat, Gen. 1728. tom. iv. . 94, &c. tom. r.
p. 2L6, &c. Mem. de Bcllay, 18i.

irnistlt

insult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at once cut off; BOOK VI.
but, as that Prince died without issue, all Francis's rights to the
dutchy of Milan, which he had yielded only to Sforza and his
posterity, returned back to him in full force. As the recovery
of the Milanese was the favourite objeEt of that Monarch, he
infiantly renewed his claim to it; and if he had supported his
pretensions by ordering the powerful army quartered in Savoy to
advance without losing a moment towards Milan, he could
scarce have failed to secure the important point of possession.
But Francis, who became daily less enterprizing as he advanced
in years, and who was overawed at ome times into an excess of
caution by the remembrance of his past misfortunes, endea-
voured to establish his rights by negociation, not by arms; and Francis's pre-

tensions to

from a timid moderation, fatal in all great affairs, negleCted to thatdutchy.
improve the favourable opportunity which presented itself.
Charles, meanwhile, in quality of sovereign, took possession of
the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the Empire; and while Francis
endeavoured to explain and aert his title to it, by arguments
and memorials, uing every art in order to reconcile the
Italian powers to the thoughts of his regaining footing in Italy,
his rival was silently taking effectual fleps to prevent it. The
Emperor, however, was very carefill not to discover too early
any intention of this kind; but seeming to admit the equity of
Francis's claim, he appeared follicitous only about giving him
pofleffion in fich a manner as might not lifiurb the peace of
Europe, or overturn the balance of power in Italy, which the
politicians of that country were so fond of prctcrving. By this
artifice he lcccivcd Francis, and gained fto nimchl conidclnce with
the reft of Europc, that alinof without incurring any itiificioln,
lie involved the affair in new difficultics, and protra(lcd the
negcciations at plc'aflr.. Sometimcs hl proposed to gnit the

inveshtiitre

BOOK VI. investiture of Milan to the Duke of Orleals, Francis's fecornA

i'-- ' son, ometimes to the Duke of Angoulesie, his third oh

as the views and inclinations of the Freinh ourt varied, he
transferred his choice alternately from the one to the other, with
such profound and well conduc&ed diffitulation, that neither
Francis nor his ministers seem to have penetrated his real inten-
tioh; and all military operations were entirety suspended, as if
nothing had remained but to enter quietly into poffefflon of
what they demanded.

r536. DURING the interval gained in this manner, Charles pre-

Charles's
preparations vailed on the flates both of Sicily and Naples, who thought
for war. themselves greatly honoured by the presence of their sovereign

on his return from Tunis, and who were no less pleated with
the apparent disinterestedness of his expedition into Africa,
than dazzled by the success which had attended his arms, to vote
him such liberal subsidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops, to levy a body of
Germans, and to take every other proper precaution for execu-
ting or supporting the measures on which he had determined.
Bellay, the French envoy in Germany, having discovered the
intention of railing troops in that country, notwithstanding all
the pretexts employed in order to conceal it, first alarmed his
mailer with this evident proof of the Emperor's insincerity.
But Francis was so pofcffecd at that time with the rage of nego-
ciation, in all the artifices and refinements of which his rival far
lurpafTcd him, that inflead of beginning his military operations,
and pushing them with vigour, or seizing the Milanese before
the Imperial army was aembled, he satisfied himself with
making new offers to the Emperor, in order to procure the

* Mcm. de Bellay, 192.

invefliture

nveftiture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, indeed, so BOOK VL
liberal and advantageous, that if ever Charles had intended to 56
grant his demand, he could not have rejected them with decency.
He dextroufly eluded them by declaring that, until he con-
fulted the Pope in person, he could not take his final resolution
with regard to a point which so nearly concerned the peace of
Italy. By this evasion he gained some farther time for ripening
the schemes he had in view.

THE Emperor at last advanced towards Rome, and made his TheEmperor

enters Rome..

public entry into that city with extraordinary pomp; but it April 6.
being found necessary to remove the ruins of an ancient temple
of peace, in order to widen one of the fireets, through which the
cavalcade had to pass, all the hiflorians take notice of this tri-
vial circumstance, which they are fond to interpret as an omen
of the bloody war that followed. Charles, it is certain, had by
this time banished all thoughts of peace; and at last threw off the
malk, with which he had so long covered his designs from the
court of France, by a declaration of his sentiments no less fingu-
lar than explicit. The French ambassadors having in their
mafler's name demanded a definitive reply to'his propositions
concerning the invcfliture of Milan, Charles promised to give
it next day in pretence of the Pope.and Cardinals aflcmbled
in full confiflory. Thef: bcing accordingly met, and all tlhe

lis pHlic
foreign anlaffitdors invited to attcnd, the Emperor flood upi invetive

ag"ainit

ant addrcffing llimiclf to tlhe 'ope, cxpatiated for oinc tinic aon i.,,ics.
the fillcerity of his own willhe3 fir the peacC of C riClencom, and
his ablhorrence of war, the micilrics of which lic cnunerated
at great length, witl fulied and clal)orate oratory; e
COmplailed that all his clldcavours to prcfrve tlie trianquillity

:T us

BOOK VI. of Europe had hitherto been defeated by the restless and unjust

1536. ambition of the French King; that even during his minority

he had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile intentions of that
Monarch; that afterwards, he had openly attempted to wrest
from him the Imperial crown which belonged to him by a title
no less just than natural; that he had next invaded his kingdom
of Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he had attacked his
territories as well as thofc of his allies both in Italy and the Low-
Countries; that when the valour of the Imperial troops, ren-
dered irresistible by the protection of the Almighty, had checked
his progress, ruined his armies, and seized his person, he con-
tinued to pursue by deceit what he had undertaken with injuf-
tice; that he had violated every article in the treaty of Madrid
to which he owed his liberty, and as soon as he returned to his
dominions took measures for rekindling the war which that
pacification had happily extinguished; that when new misfor-
tunes compelled him to sue again for peace at Cambray, he
concluded and obfcrved it with great insincerity; that soon
thereafter he had formed dangerous connections with the here-
t;cal Princes in Germany, and incited them to difurb the tran-
quillity of the Empire ; that now he had driven the Duke of
Savoy, his brother-in-law and ally, out of the greater part of
his territories; that after injuries so often repeated, and amidlt
so many sources of discord, all hope of amity or concord became

ldcfcrate; and though he was ffill willing to grant the invefi-

ture of Milan to one of the Princes of' France, there was little
probability of that event's taking place, as Francis, on the one
hand, would not contcnt to what he judged ncccfilry for securing
the tranquillity of Fluropc, nor, on the other, could lie think it rca-
fonable or fiafe to give him the unconditional poflcfion of all that
he demanded. Let us not, however, added he, continue wantonly to

, flied

lied the blood of our innocent fubjedcs; let us decide the quarrel BooK VI.
man to man, with what arms he pleases to chufe, in our shirts, i~36.
on an island, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a river; let Challenges

him to single

the dutchy of Burgundy be put in deposit on his part, and that combat.
of Milan on mine; these Ihall be the prize of the conqueror; and
after that, let the united forces of Germany, Spain and France,
be employed to humble the power of the Turk, and to extirpate
heresy out of Chrifiendom. But if he, by declining this method of
terminating our differences, renders war inevitable, nothing shall
divert me from prosecuting it to such extremity, as hall reduce
one of us to be the poorest gentleman in his own dominions.
Nor do I fear that it will be on me this misfortune hall fall; I
enter upon action with the fairest profpedt of success; the juflice
of my cause, the union of my fubjets, the number and valour
of my troops, the experience and fidelity of my generals, all
combine to ensure it. Of all there advantages, the King of
France is dcftitute; and were my resources no more certain, and
my hopes of vitory no better founded than his, I would inflantly
throw myfeilf at his feet, and with folded hands, and a rope about
my neck, implore his mercy'.

Tn s long haranguc the Emperor delivered with an elevated

voice, a haughty tone, and the greatefl vehemence of cxpreffion
and gcflurc. The Frcllh aml)anladlors, two did not fillly com-
lpre1C nd Ilis meaning, as l 1():ke ill the Spanith tonguc, were
totally difconccrtcd, aInd at a hlos how they should aw'cr flchl
all unexpeccd invciive; when

l (e of them began to vitl-

dicate his inafler's coiindt(l, (liarlcs itcrpofd abruptly, and
woUld not i t
per lili to lrc)cc('td. 'lhe Pope, without enter-

1 cllay,d

199 . SI. iflor, del Epcl. 1. 226.
Vol . 11. c ing

BOOK VI. ing into any particular detail, satisfied himself with a flort but

%-36. pathetic recommendation of peace, together with an offer of em-

ploying his sincere endeavours in order to procure that blessing to.
Christendom; and the assembly broke up in the greatest astonish-
ment at the extraordinary scene which had been exhibited. In no.

The motives part of his condua, indeed, did Charles ever deviate so widely
eftlsis rash
i.ceaaure. from his general characer. Instead of that prudent recollecion,

that composed and regular deportment so ftriftly attentive to
dccorum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his own passions,.
for which he was at all other times conspicuous, he appears on.
this occasion before the most august assembly in Europe, boast-
ing of his own power and exploits with insolence; inveighing
against his enemy with indecency; and challenging him to
combat with an ostentatious valour, more becoming a champion
in romance, than the first Monarch in Chriflendom. But the
well known and powerful operation of continued prosperity, and
of exaggerated praise, even upon the firmest minds, sufficiently
account for this eeming inconsistency. After having compelled
Solyman to retreat, and having firipped Barbarossa of a king-
dom, Charles began to confider his arms as invincible. He
had been entertained, ever since his return from Africa, with
repeated ccnes of triumphs and public rejoicings; the orators
and poets of Italy, the most elegant at that time in Europe, had
cxhaulled their genius in panegyric, to which the astrologers
added magnificent promifcs of a more splendid fortune still in,
Itore. Intoxicated with all there, he forgot his usual reserve
and moderation, and was unable to restrain this extravagant
(llly of vanity, which became the more rmarkable, by being
both to uncommon and so public.

HE

IHE himself seems to have been immediately sensible of the BOO3K VI.
impropriety of his behaviour, and when the French ambaffa- '" ,5

1536.

dors demanded next day a more clear explanation of what he
had said concerning the combat, he told them, that they were
not to confider his proposal as a formal challenge to their master,
but as an expedient for preventing bloodshed; he endeavoured
to soften other expressions in his discourse; and spoke in terms
full of refpest towards Francis. But though this flight apology
was far from being fuflicient to remove the offence which had
been given, Francis, by an unaccountable infatuation, continued
to negociate, as if it had still been poflible to bring their diffe-
rences to a period by an amicable composition. Charles, find-
ing him so eager to run into the snare, favoured the deception,
and by seeming to liflen to his proposals gained time to prepare
for the execution of his own designs .

AT las, the Imperial army assembled on the frontiers of the Charles in-

Milanese, to the amount of forty thousand foot, and ten thou-
sand horse, while that of France encamped near Vercelli in Picd-
mont, being greatly inferior in number, and weakened by the
departure of a body of Swiss, whom Charles artfully pcrfuladed
the Popiflh cantons to recal, that they might not fcrve agaifll
the Duke of Savoy, their ancient ally. The French gcneral,
not daring to rifque a battle, retired as soon as the Imperialifis
advanced. The Emperor put himfclf at the head of his forces, May 6.
which the marquis del Guaflo, the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand
dc Conzaga commanded under iln, though the fupremc direc-
tion of the whole was committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose
ablilitics and cxperience juflly entitled him to that diliindion.

Mcm. dc Bellay, 205, &c.

E c c Charll e

BooK VI. Charles soon discovered his intention not to confine his opera-

536.' tions to the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy, but to push for-

ward and invade the southern provinces of France. This. scheme
he had long meditated, and had long been taking measures for
executing it with such vigour as might ensure success. ITe
had remitted large fums to his fiter, the governess of the Low-
Countries, and to his brother, the King of the Romans, infirut-
ing them to levy all the forces in their power, in order to form
two separate bodies, the one to enter France on the fide of
Picardy, the other on the fide of Champagne; while he, with
the main army, fell upon the opposite frontier of the kingdom.
Trusting to these vast preparations, he thought it impossible that
Francis could resist so many unexpected attacks, on such different
quarters; and begun his enterprize with such confidence of its
happy issue, that lie desired Paul Jovius the historian, to make
a large provision of paper sufficient to record the vitories
which lhe was going to acquire.

I-I s minificrs antd generals, inficad of entertaining the fame

fanguinc hopes, reprefcntcd to him in the strongest terms the
danger of leading his troops to far from his own territories, to
litch a diitance fiom his magazines, and into provinces which
(lid not yicl( ftfficicnt fiil)fiftence fr their own inhabitants.
They intrcatcd him to confider the icxhautiiblc refourccs of
France in maintaining a dctfenlivc war, and the aive zeal. with
which a gallant nobility wouldl fcrv a Prince whom tliy lovcl,
in repelling tlc cnemies of tlhir country; they recalled to Ills
reimemlbrance thc fital milcarri.mre of Bourbonl and l'clcara, when
they ventured upon the famle iciterpi/.e under circiumiftnccs
which feemced as certainly to proniife licccfs; tle mar(lqis

dcl

del Guaflo in particular, fell on his knees, and conjured him to BOOK VI.
abandon the undertaking as desperate. But many circumfiances 536.
combined in leading Charles to disregard all their remonfirances.
He could seldom be brought, on any occasion, to depart from a
resolution which he had once taken; he was too apt to under-rate
and despise the talents of his rival the King of France, which dif-
sered so widely from his own; he was blinded by the prefump-
tion which accompanies prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in some
degree on the prophecies which prediced the increase of his
own grandeur. He not only adhered obstinately to his own
plan, but determined to advance towards France without wait-
ing for the redution of any part of Piedmont, except such towns
as were absolutely necessary for preserving his communication
with the Milanese.

TH E marquis de Salices, to whom Francis had entrufled the Recover3

part of the

command of a finall body of troops left for the defence of Pied- Duke of
nont, rendered this more cafy than he had any reason to expc. domiions.
That nobleman, educated in the court of France, diflinguifhlcd
by continual marks of the King's favour, and honourd io lately
with a charge of fiucl importance, suddenly, a(nd without any
provocation or pretext of difguil, revolted fiom his benefactor.
His motives to this trcacherous acion, were as cilclilh as the
deed itself was bati. 1Bcilng; Itrongly 1poflctled with a tipcrfli-
tious faith i,: divination and alhrology, lie l)lieved witli full
altilurancc, tat the fattal pci io( of the French nation was at hand;
tlhat on its ruills the mpl)cror would etlabllih an univerlal
monarchy; tliat therefore lie outgit to ollow the diaite
of prudence, i attaching liniclf to his riling frtlllc, andl
mould incur nlo blame fr (l.lrting a P'rince whom 1liavenll I;Lad

Jdevot(

BooK VI. devoted to deflru&ion . His treason became still more odious,
L - by his employing that very authority with which Francis

had invested him, in order to open the kingdom to his enemies.
Whatever was proposed or undertaken by the officers under his
command for the defence of their conquests, he rejected or.
defeated. Whatever properly belonged to himself as comman-
der in chief, to provide or perform for that purpose, he totally
negleced. In this manner, he rendered towns even of the
greatest consequence untenable, by leaving them destitute either
of provisions, or ammunition, or artillery, or a sufficient garri-
ion; and the Impeyialills must have reduced Piedmont in as
short time as was necessary to march through it, if Montpezat,
the governor of Foffano, had not, by an extraordinary effort of
courage and military condut, detained them, almost a month,
before that inconsiderable place.

Francis's BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he gained his
plan for the b
defenceof his master sufficient time for assembling his forces, and for concert-
kingdom. ing a system of defence against a danger which he now saw to be

inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper and effectual plan
for defeating the invasion of a powerful enemy; and his prudence
in chufing this plan, as well as his perseverance in executing it,
deserve the greater praise, as it was equally contrary to his own
natural temper, and to the genius of the French nation. HeI
determined to remain altogether upon the defensive; never to
hazard a battle, or even a great fkirmifl, without certainty of
tfccefs; to fortify his camps in a regular manner; to throw
garrisons only into towns of great firength; to deprive the
enemy of 1fl)flfience, by laying waste the country before them ;
and to favc the whole kingdom, by sacrificing one of its pro-

k Bellay, 222, a. 246, b.

vinccs.

inces. The execution of this plan he committed entirely to BOOK VI.
the marechal Montmorency, who was the author of it; a man 536.
wonderfully fitted by nature for such a trust. Haughty, severe, Entrifts

.lontmoren.
confident in his own abilities, and despising those of other men; cy with the

execution of

incapable of being diverted from any resolution by remonfiran- it.
ces or intreaties; and in prosecuting any scheme, regardless alike
of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY, made choice of a firong camp under the Heencamps

at Aiignon.

walls of Avignon, at the confluence of the Rhofne and Durancc,
one of which plentifully supplied his troops with all necessaries
from the inland provinces, and the other covered his camp on
that fide, where it was molt probable the enemy would approach.
He laboured with unwearied industry to render the fortifications
of this camp impregnable, and assembled there a considerable
army, though greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while the
King with another body of troops encamped at Valence, higher
up the Rhofne. Marseilles and Aries were the only towns he
thought it necessary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the sea; the latter, as the barrier of the pro-
vince of Languedoc; and each of there he furnifled with nume-
rous garriofns of his bect troops, commanded by officers, on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. The inhabitants of the
other towns as well as of the open country, were compelled to
abandon their houfcs, and were conducted to the mountains, to the
camp at Avignon, or to the inland provinces. The fortilications
of fuich places is might have affordedl flicltcr or delfence to the
enemy, were thrown d(lowl. Corn, forage ard provisions of every
kind, were carried away or lcftroycd; all tic mills and ovens were
ruined, and the wells filled ulp or rendered uiclcis. The (dcva-

ilatioll

BOOK VI. station extended from the Alps to Marseilles, and from the sea to

-- the confines of Dauphine; nor does history afford any instance

among civilized nations, in which this cruel expedient for the
public safety was employed with the fame rigour.

Cha-les en- MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived with the van of his
tr Irovcic. army on the frontiers of Provence, and was fiill so possessed with

confidence of success, that during a few days, when he was
obliged to halt until the reft of his troops came up, he began to
divide his future conquests among his officers; and as a new
incitement to serve him with zeal, gave them liberal promises of
offices, lands and honours in France'. The face of desolation,
however, which presented itself to him, when he entered the
country, could scarce fail to damp his hopes; and to convince
him that a Monarch, who, in order to distress an enemy, had
voluntarily ruined one of his richest provinces, would defend the
reft with obstinate despair. Nor was it long before he became
sensible, that Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as it ap-
peared to be extraordinary. His fleet, on which Charles chicfly
depended for fulfi flence, was prevented for some time by contrary
winds, and other accidents t which naval operations are fubljc&,
from approaching te IFrnch coal; an(l cven after its arrival, it
affor:dcd at bcft a precarious and scanty supply to iuch a nume-
rous body of troops"'; nothing was to be Iound in the country
itf'llf for tlhir fulpport; nor could tlicy draw any confidcrable
aid from the lominiions of the Duke of Savoy, cxlauflcd
already y ry .aintainiig two great armi;. ']he 1.imlpcor
was no less cbaralkd l)ow to employ, than hlow to fb'ttlfili lis
Ifrccs; for, though lec wa,; now in poficllion of alinolt an entire

i Jiliy, 266, a. "' S.lndov. ii. 231.

province,

province, he could not however be said to have the command of BOOK VI.
it, while he held only defenceless towns; and while the'French, 1536
besides their camp at Avignon, continued masters of Marseilles
and Aries. At first he thought of attacking the camp, and of
terminating the war by one decisive blow; but skilful officers,
who were appointed to view it, declared the attempt to be
utterly impraCticable. He then commanded Marseilles and Befege
Aries to be invetfed, hoping that the French would quit their Marseilles.
advantageous post in order to relieve them; but Montmorency
adhering firmly to his plan, remained immoveable at Avignon,
and the Imperialists met with such a warm reception from the
garrisons of both towns, that they relinquiihcd their enterprizes
with loss and disgrace. As a lall effort, the Emperor advanced
once more towards Avignon, tho' with an army harraffed by the
perpetual incursions of finall parties of the French light troops,
weakened by diseases, and dispirited by disasters, which seemed
more intolerable, because they were unexpected.

DunING these operations Montmorency found himself Montmoren.

exposed to greater danger from his own troops than from the iadhering
enemy; and their inconsiderate valour went near to have pre- to his planof

defence.

cipitated the kingdom into those calamities,which he with such
indufiry and caution had cndeavoured to avoid. Unaccustomed
to behold an enemy ravaging their country almost without
controul; impatient of fiich long inaction; unacquainted with
the flow and remote, but certain effects of Montmorency's
system of defence; the French wifhled fr a battle with no les
ardour than the linperialifts. They confidered the conduct of
their general as a difrace to their country. His caution they
imiputed to timidity; his circuimfiedion to want of spirit; and

VOL. II. F; f the

BoOK VI. the constancy with which he pursued his plan to obstinacy or

136 -I pride. These refletions, whispered, at first, among the soldiers

and subalterns, were adopted, by degrees, by officers of higher
rank; and as many of these envied Montmorency's favour with
the King, and more were dissatisfied with his harsh disgusting
manner, the discontent soon became great in his camp, which
was filled with general murmurings and almost open complaints
againit his measures. Montmorency, on whom thefentiments
of his own troops made as little impression as the insults of
the enemy, adhered steadily to -his system; though in order to re-
concile the army to his maxims, no less contrary to the genius
of the nation, than to the ideas of war among undisciplined
troops, he assumed an unusual affability in his deportment, and
often explained with great condefceniion the motives of his
conduct, the advantages which had already resulted from it,
and the certain success with which it would be attended. At
last Francis joined his army at Avignon, which having received
several reinforcements, he now confidered as of trength sufficient
to face the enemy. As he had put upon himself no finall con-
firaint, in having consented that his troops should remain so long
upon the defenfivc, it can be scarce doubted but that his fond-
ness for what was daring and fplcndid, added to the impatience
both of officers and soldiers, would have over-ruled Montmo-
rcncy's salutary caution".

The retreat IIAPPIL Y the rctrcat of the enemy delivered the kingdom
and WIC(cchc s
Coldltic n f fi-om the danger which any rafl resolution might haveoccalioned.
the Irnrerial Tle Emperor, after pcending two inglorious months in Provcnce,

*Me . de Bcllay, 269, &c. 312, &c.

1: having

having performed nothing suitable to his vast preparations, or BOOK VL
that could justify the confidence with which he had boasted of !5.

t

his own power, found that, besides Antonio de Leyva, and other
officers of diftintion, he had loft one half of his troops by dif-
cafes, or by famine; and that the reft were in no condition to
struggle any longer with calamities, by which so many of their
companions had periffied. Necessity, therefore, extorted from him
orders to retire; and though he was some time in motion before
the French fufpeacd his intention, a body of light troops, assistcd
by crowds of peasants, eager to be revenged on those who had
brought such desolation on their country, hung upon the rear of
the Imperialists, and by seizing every favourable opportunity of
attacking them, threw them often into confusion. The road by
which they fled, for they pursued their march with such difor-
der and precipitation, that it scarce deserves the name of a
retreat, was firewed with arms or baggage, which in their
hurry and trepidation they had abandoned, and covered with
the ick, the wounded, and the dead; insomuch, that Martin
Bellay, an eye-witness of their calamities, endeavours to give
his readers ome idea of it, by comparing their miseries to
those which the Jews suffered from the vicorious and dcftruc-
tive arms of the Romans°. If Montmorency at this critical
moment had advanced with all his forces, nothing could have
saved the whole Imperial army from utter ruin. But that gene-
ral, by standing so long and so obstinately on the defenfire, had
become cautious to excess; his mind, tenacious of any bent it
had once taken, could not afilume a contrary one as suddenly as
the change of circumstances required; and he flill continued to
repeat his favourite maxims, that it was more prudent to allow

° Meni. de Bellay, 316. Sandov. Hist. dcl Empcr. ii. 232.

I; f f z thC

BOOK VI. the lion to escape, than to drive him to despair, and that a bridge
-15 36. of gold should be made for a retreating enemy.

THIE Emperor having conducted the shattered remains,of his

troops to the frontiers of Milan, and appointed the marquis del
Guaflo to succeed Leyva in the government of the dutchy, set
out for Genoa. As he could not bear to expose himself to
the scorn of the Italians, after such a fad reverse of fortune; and
did not chufe, under his present circumstances, to revisit those
cities through which he had so lately passed in triumph for one
conquef, and in certain expectation of another; he embarked

Novemb. direcly for Spain .
Opeati7ns NO R was the progress of his arms on the opposite frontier of

France such as to alleviate in any degree the losses which he had
iluiained in Provence. Bellay by his address and intrigues
had prevailed on so many of the German Princes to withdraw
the contingent of troops which they had furnished to the King
of the Romans, that he was obliged to lay aside all thoughts of
his intended irruption into Champagne. Though a power-
fill army levied in the Low-Countries entered Picardy, which,
they found but feebly guarded, while the strength of the king-
dlomn was drawn towards the south; yet the nobility taking arms:
wvitll their ufilal alacrity, supplied by their spirit the defects of
the King's preparations, and defended with such vigour Peronne,
and other towns which were attacked, as obliged the enemy to
retire without making any conquest of importance .

Tiius Francis, by the prudence of his own meafuires, and by
the union and valour of his fubjcdls, rendered abortive thofi vast

v Jovii Hiflor. lib. 35. . 174, &c. q Mear. t(Ie 13llay, 3 38, &c

u. cifforts

efforts by which his rival had almost exhausted his whole force. BOOK VI.
As this humbled the Emperor's arrogance no less than it 1536.
checked his power, he was mortified more fentibly on this occa-
sion than on any other, during the course of the long contests
between him and the French Monarch.

ONE circumstance alone embittered the joy with which the Death of the

success of the campaign inspired Francis. That was the death Dauphin.
of the Dauphin, his eldest son, a Prince of great hopes, and
extremely beloved by the people on account of his resemblance
to his father. This happening suddenly, was imputed to poison,
not only by the vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illustrious
personages to extraordinary causes, but by the King and his
ministers. The count de Montecuculi, an Italian nobleman, cup- Imputed to
bearer to the Dauphin, being seized on suspicion and put to the poifoi
torture, openly charged the Imperial generals, Gonzaga and
Leyva, with having instigated him to the commission of that
crime, and threw out ome indirect and obscure accusations
against the Emperor himself. At a time when all France was
animated with implacable hatred againftCharles, this was confi-
dcred as an inconteftible proof of guilt; while the confidence with
which both he and his officers aflerted their own innocence, toge-
ther with the indignation and horror which they expressed on
their being supposed capable of such a detestable acion, were little
attended to, and lcfs regarded'. It is evident, however, that the
Emperor could have no inducement to perpetrate such a crime,
as Francis was fill in the vigour of life himself, and had two sons,
becides the Dauphin, grown up to a good age. That tingle confi-
deration, without mentioning the Emperor's general character,

Mcmn. de Bellay, 289.

unblcmnilled

BOOK VI. unblemished by the imputatien of any deed refermblihg this in

15i6 atrocity, is more than sufficient to counterbalance the weight of

a dubious testimony uttered during the anguish of torture'.
According to the most unprejudiced historians, the Dauphin's
death was occasioned by his having drunk too freely of cold water
after overheating himself at tennis; and this account, as it is the
lnoft simple, is likewise the most credible. But if his days were
cut hort by poison, it is not improbable that the Emperor con-
jecured rightly, when he affirmed that it had been administered
by the diretion of Catharine of Medici, in order to secure the
crown to the Duke of Orleans, her husband'. The advantages
resulting to her by the Dauphin's death, were obvious as well as
great; nor did her boundless and daring ambition ever scruple
at any adion necessary towards attaining the objecds which fie
had in view.

1537. NEXT year opened with a tranfadion very uncommon, but

Decree ofthe
parliament of f incapable of producing any effet, that it would not deserve
P.ris against to be mentioned, if it were not a firiking proof of that personal

animosity which mingled itself in all the hoflilities between
Charles and Francis, and which often betrayed them into such
indecencies towards each other, as lefencd the dignity of botih.
Francis, accompanied by the peers and princes of the blood,
having taken his feat in the parliament of Paris with the usual
folennities, the advocate-general appeared; and after accusing
Charles of Auflria, (for so he affcted to call the Emperor) of
having violated the treaty of Cambray, by which he was
absolvcd from the homage due to the crown of France for the
counties of Artois and Slanders; insistcd that this treaty being

" Sandov. 1Iif. del Empcr. ii. 231.
' Vra y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p 75.

110lW

now void, he was fill to bo confidered as a vaflal of the crown, BOOK VL
and, by consequence, had been guilty of rebellion in taking arms 1537
against his sovereign; and therefore he demanded that Charles
should be summoned to appear in person, or by his counsel,
before the parliament of Paris, his legal judges, to answer
for his crime. The request was granted; a herald repaired to the
frontiers of Picardy, and summoned him, with the accustomed
formalities, to appear against a day prefixed. That 'term
being expired, and no person appearing in his name, the parlia-
ment gave judgment, " That Charles of Austria had forfeited
by rebellion and contumacy these fiefs; declared Slanders
and Artois to be re-united to the crown of France; and ordered
their decree for this purpose to be published by found of trum-
pet on the frontiers of these provinces "."

SOON after this vain display of his resentment, rather than of Campaign

opens in the

his power, Francis marched towards the Low-Countries, as if Low-
he had intended to execute the sentence which his parliament MaCotries.
had pronounced, and to seize those territories which it had
awarded to him. As the Queen of Hungary, to whom her
brother the Emperor had committed the government of that
part of his dominions, was not prepared for to early a campaign,
he at first made some progress, and took fevcral towns of impor-
tance. But being obliged loon to leave his army, in order to
fiiperintend the other operations of war, the Flcmings having
affcmblcd a numerous army, not only recovcrcd noft of the placcs
which they had loft, )but began to make conquels in their turn.
At lafl they invcltcd Terouenne, and the Duke of Orleans, now

Lcttrcs ct Mcmoirca d'Etat, par Ribicr, 2 tom. Blois. i666. toni .
i . 1.

Dauphin,

BooK VI. Dauphin, by the death of his brother, and Moltmbrency, whom
' ,737' Francis had honoured with the conflable's sword, as the reward

of his great services during the former campaign, determined to
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. While they were advan-
A suspension cing for this purpose, and within a few miles of the enemy,

o ars . they were ftopt Ihort by the arrival of an herald from the Queen

of Hungary, acquainting him that a suspension ofarms was now
agreed upon.

THII unexpected event was owing to the zealous endeavours

of the two sifters, the Queens of France and of Hungary, who
had long laboured to reconcile the contending Monarchs. The
war in the Netherlands had laid waste the frontier provinces of
both countries, without any real advantage to either; the French
and Flemings equally regretted the interruption of their com-
merce, which was beneficial to both; and Charles and Francis,
who had each strained to the utmost, in order to flipport the
vast operations of the former campaign, found that they could
not now keep armies on foot in this quarter, without weakening
their operations in Piedmont, where both wished to push the
war with the greatest vigour. All these circumfiances facilitated
July 30. the negociations of the two Queens; a truce was concluded, to

continue in force for ten months, but it extended. no farther
than the Low-Countrics .

And i Pied- IN Piedmont the war was fill prosecuted with great animo-
mOOL. fity; an(t though ncither Charles nor Francis could make

the powerful efforts to which their aninofity prompted
them, they continued to exert thcmfclves like combatants,

Menmoircs dc Ribicr, 56.

whofc

whose rancour remains after their strength is exhaufled. Towns BOOK VI.
were alternately loft and retaken; kirinithes were fought every -537
day; and much blood was fled, without any decisive action,
that gave the superiority to either fide. At last the two Queens
determining not to leave unfinished the good work which they
had begun, prevailed, by their importunate follicitations, the one
on her brother, the other on her husband, to consent also to a
truce in Piedmont for three months, upon condition that each
should keep possession of what was in his hands, and leaving
garrisons in the towns, withdraw his army out of the province;
and that plenipotentiaries should be appointed to adjust all mat-
ters in dispute by a final treaty Y.

THE powerful motives which inclined both Princes to this Motives of it.

accommodation, have been often mentioned. The expences of
the war had far exceeded the iums which their revenues were
capable of supplying, nor durst they venture upon any great
addition to the impositions then eflablifhed, as fubjeds were not
yet taught to bear with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accustomed in modern times. The Emperor,
in particular, though he had contracted debts which in that age
appeared prodigious , had it not in his power to pay the large
arrears which had been long due to his army. At the fame time
he had no profped- of deriving any aid in money or men either
from the Pope or Venetians, though lie had employed promises
and threats, alternately, in order to procure it. But lie fund the
former fixed in his rcfolution of adhering flcadily to the
neutrality which lie lad always declared to be tiitalle to his
charader, and passionately defi:ous of bringing about a pcacc.

y Mem. de Ribier, 62. , Ribicr, i. 294.
VOL. II. Ggg Ie

BOOK VI. IHe perceived that the latter were still intent on their ancient
"~53;. objec of holding the balance even between the rivals, and folli-

citous not to throw too great a weight into either scale.

Cfwhich, WWHAT made a deeper impression on Charles than all these,
.:e wi;h was the dread of the Turkish arms, which Francis had drawn
the urkfhhi

ie npcr upon him by his league with Solyman. Though Francis,
tihe m0os without the affiflance of a single ally, had a war to maintain
cosiuderaale.

against an enemy greatly superior in power to himself, yet so
great was the horror of Chriflians, in that age, at any union
with Infidels, which they confidered not only as dishonourable
but profane, that it was long before he could be brought to
avail himself of the obvious advantages resulting from such a
confederacy. Necessity at last surmounted his delicacy and
f:ruplcs; and towards the close of the preceding year, La Forest,
a fccret agent at the Ottoman porte, had concluded a treaty with
the Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged to invade, next campaign,
the kingdom of Naples, and to attack the King of the Romans
in Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis undertook to
cnter the Milanese at the fame time witl a proper force. Soly-
man had pundually performed what was incumbent on him.
Parbarolla with a great fleet appeared on the coast of Naplcs,
filled that kingdom, from which all the troops had been drawn
towards Piedmont, with conflernation, landed without resistance
near Taranto, olliged Cafiro, a place of fmne frcngth, to fur-
rclnd(r, plundered the adjacent country, and was taking mca-
fuircs for fcuring andl xtending hlis conquefis, wvlcn the unex-
pec(ld arrival of Doria, together with thc Pope's gallics, and a
f(lju;dr.oii o(f the Venetian flect, nmade it prludcnt for lim to
rtirc. In lIungary tlh progrecs of the Turks was more for-

7 midablc.

midable. Mahmet, their general, after gaining several finall BOOK VI.
advantages, defeated the Germans in a great battle at Effek on -,

I537.

the Drave a. Happily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's
power to execute with equal exaanefs what he had stipulated;
nor could he assemble at this jundure an army strong enough to
penetrate into the Milanese. By this he failed in recovering
poffeflion of that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved from the
calamities of a new war, but from feeling as an addition to all that
it had suffered the desolating rage of the Turkish arms '. As the
Emperor knew that he could not long resist the efforts of two
such powerful confederates, nor could exped that the fame fortu-
nate accidents would concur a second time to deliver Naples, and
to preserve the Milanese: As he foresaw that the Italian flates
would not only tax him loudly with insatiable ambition, but
might even turn their arms against him, if he hould be so
regardless of their danger as obfinately to protrac the war,
he thought it necessary, both for his safety and reputation, to
give his consent to a truce. Nor was Francis willing to fufRain
all the blame of obflruding the re-eflablifhment of peace, or to
cxpofe himself on that account to the danger of being deserted
by the Swiss and other foreigners in his fcrvicc. He cven began
to apprehend that his own filjcls would serve him coldly, if
by contriluting to aggrandize the power of the Infidels, whiclh
it was his duty, and had been the ambition of his anccltors to
dcprefs, he continued to a in direct oppolition to all the prin-
ciples which ought to influcnce a Monarch lilingtifl'i^d by the
title of Most Chrillian King. Ile cliofl, for all tcl realolrs,
rathcr to run the rililuc of dill,,iig lis Cew ally tlhc Sultan,

a llnainhaffi Hilt. IHung. lib. xiii. p. 13').
h Jovii IIifor. lib. xxxv. p. 183.

C; g t';
g thlan,

BOOK VI. than, by an unseasonable adherence to the treaty with him, to
i7 ^ ' forfeit what was of greater consequence.

Negociation BUT though both parties consented to a truce, the plenipo-
of a peace be.
twecnCharle tentiaries found insuperable difficulties in fettling the articles of
and Francis. a definitive treaty. Each of the Monarchs, with the arrogance

of a conqueror, aimed at giving law to the other; and neither
would so far acknowledge his inferiority, as to sacrifice any
point of honour, or to relinquish any matter of right; so that
I538. the plenipotentiaries spent the time in long and fruitless nego-

ciations, and separated after agreeing to prolong the truce for a
few months.

The Pope THE Pope, however, did not despair of accomplishing a
condu&s these
in perion. point in which the plenipotentiaries had failed, and took upon

himself the sole burden of negociating a peace. To form a
confederacy capable of defending Christendom from the formi-
dable inroads of the Turkish arms, and to concert effetual
nmeafures for the extirpation of the Lutheran heresy, were two
great objects which Paul had much. at heart; and he confidered
the union of the Emperor with the King of France as an essential
preliminary to both. To be the instrument of reconciling thcf
contending Monarchs, whom his predecessors by their intercflcd
and indecent intrigues had so often embroiled, was a circum-
fiance which could not fail of throwing diftinguiflicd luffre on
his charatcr and adminiltration. Nor was he without hopes
that while he pursued this laudable end, he might fccurc advan-
tages to his own family, the aggrandizing of which he did not
ueglca, though he aimed at it with a less audacious ambition
than was common among the Popes of that century. Influ-
¢nced by tllcfe considerations, he proposed an interview between.

the

the two Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair thither inperfon, BooK VI.
that he might ac as mediator in composing all their differences. 533
When a Pontiff of a venerable chara&er, and of very advanced
age, was willing, from his zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues
of such a distant journey neither Charles nor Francis could
with decency decline the interview. But though both came to
the place of rendezvous, so great was the difficulty of adjusting .
the ceremonial, or such the remains of distrust and rancour on
each fide, that they refused to. fee one another, and every thing
was tranfaded by the.intervention of the Pope, who visited them
alternately. Nor.could he with all his zeal and ingenuity find
out any method of removing the obflacles, particularly those
arising from the poffeflion of the Milanese, which prevented a
final accommodation; nor was all the weight of his authority
sufficient to overcome the obstinate perseverance of either Mo-
narch in asserting his own claims. At last, that he might not A truce fbr

ten years con-

seem to have laboured altogether without effe&c, he prevailed cluded at
on them' to sign a truce for ten years,- upon the fame condi- Nice.

June is.

tion with the former, that each hould retain what was now in
his poffeion, and in the mean time flitould fend ambassadors to
Rome, to discuss their pretensions at leisure c.

THus ended a war of no long continuance, but very extcn-

five in its operations, and in which both parties exerted their
utmofl trcugth. 'Tho' Francis failed in the objcd t hat he had
principally in view, the recovery of the Milancfc, lhe acquired,
nevertlclcfs, great reputation by the wildoin of his meafurcs as
well as the fucccfs of his arms in repulsing a formidable invasion;
and by securing poffiflion of one half of the Duke of Savoy's

' Recueil des Traitez, ii. 210. Relatione del NicoloTiepolo dcl'abocamcnto
li Nizza chcz. Du Mont Corps Diplomat, par. ii. p. 172.

do nii iions,.

BooK VI. dominions, he added no inconsiderable accefflon to his kingdom.

Xi 38' Whereas Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boasted so

arrogantly of vi&ory, purchased an inglorious truce, by facri-
sicing an ally who had rashly confided too much in his friendship
and power. The unfortunate Duke murmured, complained,
and remonstrated against a treaty so much to his disadvantage;
but in vain; he had no means of redress, and was obliged to
submit. Of all his dominions, Nice, with its dependencies,
was the only corner of which he himself kept possession. He
saw the reft divided between a powerful invader and the ally to
whose protection he had trusted, while he remained a fad
monument of the imprudence of weak Princes, who by taking
part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours, between whom they
happen to be situated, are crushed and overwhelmed in the
ihock.

Interview e- A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce, the Emperor
twcc n
C larls and set fail for Barcelona, but was driven by contrary winds to
Franci at
Aigues mor- the island St. Margaret on the coast of Prvoence. When
tcs. Francis, who happened to be not far distant, heard of this, he

confidered it as an office of civility to invite him to take shelter
in his dominions, and proposed a personal interview with him at
Aigues-mortes. The Emperor, who would not be outdone by his
rival in complaiiancc, inflantly repaired thither. As oon as he
cast anchor in the road, Francis, without waiting to fettle any
point of ceremony, but relying implicitely on the Emperor's
honour for his fccurity, vilited him on board his galley, anid
was reccived and entertained with the warmest demonflrations
of cefccim and affecion. Next day the Emperor repaid the con-
fidence which the King had placed in him. He landed at

Aigucs-

Aigues-mortes with as little precaution, and met with a recep- Book xL
tion equally cordial. He remained on ihore during the night, ' 5^" -
and in both visits they vied with each other in expressions of
refped and friendship d, After twenty years of open. hoflili-
ties, or of secret enmity; after so many injuries reciprocally
infliced or endured; after having formally given the lie and
challenged one another to single combat; after the Emperor had
inveighed so publickly against Francis as a Prince void of honour
or integrity; and Francis had accused him as acceifary to the'
murder of his eldest son, such an interview appears altogether
singular and even unnatural. But the history of these Monarchs,
abounds with such furprizing transitions. From implacable
enmity they appeared to pass, in a moment, to the most cordial
reconcilement; from suspicion and difiruft to perfec confidence;
and from pradifing all the dark arts of a deceitful policy, they
could assume, of a sudden, the liberal and open manners of two.
gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having reflored peace to

Europe, gained, according to his expetation, a point of great
consequence to his family, by prevailing on the Emperor to be-
troth Margaret of Aufiria his natural daughter, formerly the
wifc of Alexander de Medici, to his grandson Odavio Farnese,
and in consideration of this marriage, to bellow several honours
and territories upon his future fon-in-law. A very tragical. The aflii-
event, which happened about the beginning of the year one nation of

Alexander

thousand five hundred and thirty fevcn, had deprived Margaret de Medici.
of her first husband.. That young prince, whom the Emperor's

d Sandov. Hist. vol. ii. 238 Relation de 'cntrevue de Charl. V. & Fran. I.

par M. de la Rivoire. Hilt. de Langucd. par. D. D. De Vie & Vaifctte. tom. v.
I'reuves, p. 93.

partiality

BoqK VI. partiality had raised to the supreme power in Florence, upon the

- 5-8 ; ruins of the public liberty, negleed entirely the cares of govern-

ment, and abandoned himself to the most dissolute debauchery.
Lorenzode Medici his nearest kinfmanwas not only the companion
but diretor of his pleasures, and employing all the powers of a
cultivated and inventive genius in this dishonourable ministry,
added such elegance and variety to vice as gained him an absolute
ascendant over the mind of Alexander. But while Lorenzo
seemed to' be funk in luxury, and affeced such an appearance
of indolence and effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword,
and trembled at the fight of blood, he concealed under that
disguise, a dark, designing, audacious spirit. Prompted
cither by the love of liberty, or allured by the hope of attaining
the supreme power, he determined to aflaffinate Alexander
his benefacor and friend. Though he long revolved this
design in his mind, his reserved and suspicious temper pre-
vented him from communicating it to any person what-
.ever; and continuing to live with Alexander in their usual
familiarity, he, one night, under pretence of having
secured him an assignation with a lady of high rank whom he
had often follicited, drew that unwary Prince into a secret
apartment of his house, and there flabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch expecting the arrival of the lady whose
company he had been promised. But no sooner was the deed
done, than sanding astonished, and firuck with horror at its
atrocity, lie forgot, in a moment, all the motives which had
induced him to commit it, and instead of rouzing the people
to recover their liberty by publishing the death of the tyrant,
instead of taking any iecp towards opening his own way to the
Jlignity now vacant, he locked the door of the apartment, and

like

like a man bereaved of reason and pretence of mind, fled with BOOK VI.
the utmost precipitation out of the Florentine territories. It was '-

1538.

late next morning before the fate of the unfortunate Prince was
known, as his attendants, accustomed to his irregularities, never
entered his apartment early. Immediately the chief persons
in the state assembled. Being induced partly by the zeal of car-
dinal Cibo for the house of Medici, to which he was nearly re-
lated, partly by the authority of Francis Guicciardini, who Cosmo de
recalled to their memory and represented in itriking colours the Medici placed

at the head of

caprice as well as turbulence of their ancient popular govern- theFlorentine
ment, they agreed to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eighteen,
the only male heir of that illustrious house, at the head of the
government; though at the fame time such was their love of
liberty, that they eftablilhed several regulations in order to -ir-
cumfcribe and moderate his power.

ME ANWNIL E Lorenzo having reached a place of safety, made iBis govern-

ment opposed

known what he had done'to Philip Strozzi and the other by the Flo-
Florentines who had been driven into exile, or who had volun- rentinc
tarily retired, when the republican form of government was abo-
lifhed in order to make way for the dominion ofthe Medici. By
them, the deed was extolled with extravagant praises, and the
virtue of Loreazo was compared with that of the elder Brutus,
who disregarded the ties of blood, or with that of the younger,
who forgot the friend&ip and favours of the tyrants that they
might prefirve orecover the liberty of their country . Nor did
they reft satisfied with empty panegyricks; they immediately
quitted their different places ofretreat, assembled forces, animated
their vaffdai and partizans to tke arms, nld to seize this oppor

Lettere di Principi, tomn. iii. p. 52.
VOL. II. H h 1h tunity

B6ox VI. tunity of re-eftablifliing the publick liberty on its ancient fours-

53s.- dation. Being openly assisted by the French ambaffadorat Rome,:

and secretly encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good will to
the house of Medici, they entered the Florentine dominions with
a considerable body of men. But the persons who had eleted'
Cofino possessed both the means of supporting his government,
and abilities to employ them in the most proper manner. They
levied, with the greatest expedition, a good number of troops;
they endeavoured by every art, to gain the citizens of greatest
authority, nd to render the administration of the young prince
agreeable to the people. Above all, they courted the Emperor's
protection, as the only firm foundation of Cosmo's dignity and
power. Charles, knowing the propensity of the Florentines
to the friendship of France, and how much all the partizans of
a republican government detested him as the oppressor of their
liberties, saw it to be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-
eftabiihment of the antient constitution in Florence. For this
reason, he not only acknowledged Cosmo as head of the Floren.
tine state, and conferred on him all the titles of honour with
which Alexander had been dignified, but engaged to- defend
him to the utmost; and as a pledge of this, ordered the comr
nanders of such of his troops as were stationed on the frontiers
of Tuscany, to.fupport him against all aggreflbrs. By their aid;
Cosmo obtained an easy victory over the exiles, whose troops he
furprized in the night-time, and took molt of the chiefs prir
foners; an event which broke all their measures, and fully efta.
blifhed his own authority. But though he was extremely
desirous of the additional honour of marrying the Emperor's
daughter, the widow of his predecessor, Charles,,fccure already

t of

of his attachmhet, chose rather to gratify the Pope by byftw- BOOK VI.
ing her on his nephew f. 1i3.

DuRI N G the war between the Emperor and Francis, an event The ftend

ship bet.veen
had happened which abated in some degree the warmth and cor- Francis and

Henry VI1[.

diality of friendlhip which had long subsisted between the begins o
latter and the King of England. James the fifth of Scotland, abS-.
an enterprizing young Prince, having heard of the Emperor's
intention to invade Provence, and being fond of hewing that
he did not yield to any of his ancestors in the sincerity of his
attachment to the French crown, as well as eager to diflinguifh
himself by some military exploit, levied a body of troops with
an intention of leading them in person to the assistance of the
King of France. Though some unfortunate accidents prevented
his carrying any troops into France, nothing could divert him
from going thither in person. Immediately upon his landing
he hastened to Provence, but had been detained so long in
his voyage that he could not have any hare in the military
operations, and he met the King on his return after the re-
treat of the Imperialists. Francis, greatly pleased with his
zeal, and no less with his manners and conversation, could
not refute him his daughter Magdalen, whom he demanded in Jan. , 53.
marriage. It mortified Henry extremely to fee a Prince of
whom he was lately become jealous, after having long treated
him and his fubjeds with contempt, form an alliance, from
which he derived such an accession both of reputation and fecu-
rity'. He could not, however, with decency oppose Francis's

f Jovii His. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Belcarii Comment. 1. 22. p. 696. Iforia
dc ui tempi di Giov. Bat. Adriani. Ven. 1587. p. 1o.

6 Hist. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

I- h li1 betlowing

BooK VI. beflowing his daughter upon a Monarch descended from a race-

538. 'of Princes, the most antient and faithful allies of the French.

crown. But when James, upon.the sudden deathof Magdalen,
demanded as his second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly folli-
cited Francis to deny his suit, and in order to disappoint him
asked that lady in marriage for himself When; Francis pre-
ferred the Scottish King's sincere courtship to his artful and
malevolent proposal, he discovered much. diflatisfacion. The
pacification agreed upon at Nice, and the familiar interview of
the two rivals at Aigues-mortes, filled IHenry's. mind with new
suspicions, as if Francis had altogether renounced his friendship
for the fake of new connecions with.the Emperor.. Charles,
The FmFeror thoroughly acquainted with the temper of the English King,

co enry. and watchful to observe all the shiftings and caprices of his

passions, thought this a favourable opportunity of renewing his
negociations with him, which had long been. broken off. By
the death of Queen Catherine, whose interest the Emperor
could not with decency have abandoned, the chief cause of their
discord was removed'; so that without touching upon the delicate
question of her divorce, he might now take what measures he
thought most effectual for regaining Henry's good will. For
this purpose, he began with proposing several marriage-treaties
to the King. He offered his niece, a daughter of the King of
Denmark, to Henry himself; he demanded the princess Mary
for one of the Princes of Portugal; and was even willing to
rcccive her as the King's illegitimate daughter h. 'iTough,
none of thcfe projeedCl alliances ever took place, or perhaps.
vcrc ever lerioufly intended, they occasioned lfch frequent in--

* Mem. d Riblcr, t. i. 496.

tcrcourfc

tercourfe between the courts, and so many reciprocal protefSons BOOK V1
of civility and efteem,--as considerably abated the edge 'of ~'-3~

1538.

Henry's rancour against the Emperors and paved the way for
that union between them which. afterwards proved so difadvan',
tageous to the French King.

THE ambitious schemes in which the Emperor had been,en- Progress of

the Reforma-

gaged, and the wars he had been carrying on for some years tion.
proved, as usual; extremely favourable to the progress of the
reformation in Germany. While Charles was absent upon
his African, expedition, or intent on his. vafi projects against
France, his chief object in Germany was to prevent the diffen-
sions about religion from diflurbing the publick tranquillity,
by granting such indulgence to the Protestant Princes as might
induce them, to concur with his measures, or at least hinder them.
from taking part with his rival. For this reason, he was care-
ful to secure to the Protestants the poffeflionof all the advantages
which they had gained by the articles of pacification-at Nurem-
berg, in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-two ';
and except ome flight trouble from the proceedings of the
Imperial chamber, they met with nothing to disturb them in.
the exercise of their religion,. or to interrupt the successful zeal
with which theypropagated their opinions. Meanwhile the Pope
continued his negociations for convoking a general council; and Negoci;tion
though the Protestants had exprcffed great diffatisfadion with wi.h rcfpet
his intention to fix upon Mantua as the place of meeting, he t a general

council.

adhered obstinately to his choice, iued a bull on the second
of June, one thoufind five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing

J Du Mont C9rps Diplom. torn. iv. part. 2. p. 138.

it

BooK V. it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of May the year

,', following; he nominated three cardinals to preside in his name;

enjoined all Chriltian Princes to countenance it by their autho-
rity, and invited the prelates of every nation to attend in pcr-
son. This citation of a council, an aflembly which from its
nature and intention demanded quiet times, as well as pacific
dilpofitions, at the very juncture, when the Emperor was on his
march towards France, and ready to involve a great part of
Europe in the confusions of war, appeared to every person ex-
tremely unseasonable. It was intimated, however, to all the
different courts by nuncios dispatched of purpose ;. The Em-
peror, with an intention to gratify the Germans, had, during
his residence at Rome, warmly follicited the Pope to call a
council; but being at the fame time willing to try every art in
order to persuade Paul to depart from the neutrality which he
preserved between him and Francis, he ent Heldo his vice chan-
cellor along with the nuncio whom the Pope employed in Ger-
many, infiru&ing him to second all the nuncio's reprefenta-
tions, and to enforce them with the whole weight of the Imperial
Pebruary S2, authority. The Proteflants gave them audience at Smalkaldc,

'i37 where they had assembled in a body, in order to receive them.

But after weighing all their arguments, they unanimously refused
to acknowledge a council summoned in the name and by the
authority of the Pope alone;' in which he assumed the sole right
of presiding; which was to be held in a city not only far difant
from Germany, but subjed to a Prince, a firanger to them,
and closely connected with the court of Rome; and to which
their divines could not repair with safety, especially after
their doctrines had been fligmatized in the very bull of convo-

" Pallavic. Hist Conc. Tiid. 1 3.

cation

cation witi the name of heresy. These and many other objec- BOOK VR
tions against the council, which appeared to them itnanfwer- s ' '8
able, they enumerated in a large mahifefio, which they pub;-
lifhed in vindication of their condud '.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed as a flagrant

proof of their obstinacy and presumption, and the Pope still per-
filsed in his resolution to hold the council at the time and in the
place appointed. But fomne unexpeced difficulties being flarted
by the Duke of Mantua, both about the right of jurifdicion
over those who retorted to the council, and the security of his
capital amidst fach a concourse of strangers, the Pope, after
fruitless endeavours to adjust these, first prorogued the council
for some months, and afterwards transferring the place of oa. 8, ls3$
meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian territories, appointed it to
assemble on the first of May in the following year. As
neither the Emperor nor French King, who had not then come
to any accommodation, would permit their fubjers to repair
thither, not a single prelate appeared on the day prefixed, and
the Pope, that his authority might not become altogether con-
temptible by o many ineffetual intimations, put off the meet-
ing by an indefinite prorogation m.

MEANWHILE, that lie might not fem to have turned his A partialre-

f">rmation of

whole attention towards a reformation which he was not able abues by ihe
to accomplish, while he negleded that which was in his power, Popo.
he deputed' a certain number of cardinals and bishops with full
authority to inquire into the abufcs and corruptions of the

Sleidan, . xii. 123, &c. Seckend. Corn. lib. iii. p. 143, &c.
F. Paul, 117. Pallavic, 1r7.

Iioman.

ODK VI. Roman court; and to propose the most effecual method ct
43.' removing them. This crutiny undertaken with relucance,

was carried on slowly and with remissness. All defe&s were
touched with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too deep, or of
discovering too much. But even by this partial examination,
nmany irregularities were detected, and many enormities exposed
to light, while the remedies which they suggested as most proper
were either inadequate, or-were never applied. The report and
resolutions of thefC deputies, though intended to be kept secret,
were transmitted by some accident into Germany, and being
immediately made publick, .afforded ample matter for reflection
and triumph to the Protestants . On the one hand they de-
.monftrated the neceilty of a reformation in the head as well as
the members of the church, and even pointed out many of the
corruptions aganft which Luther and his followers had remon-
firated with the greatest vehemence. They shewed, on the other
hand, that it was vain to expea this reformation from ecclesia-
flicks themselves, who, as Luther frongly expressed it, piddled
at curing warts, while they overlooked or confirmed ulcers °.

A league TiH earnestness with which the Emperor seemed, at first,
formed in
.oppoitionto to press their acquiescing in the Pope's scheme of holding a
thalc t Smal- council in Italy, having alarmed the Protestant Princes so much,
&aide.

that they thought it prudent to strengthen their confederacy,
by admitting several new members who follicited that privilege,
particularly the King of Denmark; Heldo, who during his
residence in Germany, had observed all the advantages which
they derived from that union, endeavoured to counterbalance its

' Sleidan, 233. o Sock. 1. iii. 64.

It cfeas

efeas by an alliance'among the catholick powers of the Em- BOOK VI.
pire. This league distinguished by the name of Holy, was ' --
merely defensive, and though concluded by Heldo in the Em-
peror's name, was afterwards disowned by him, and subscribed
by very few Princes P.

THE Protestants soon got intelligence of this affociatio, not- Alarms the

withflanding all the endeavours of the contracting parties to con- Prctefants.
ceal it; and their zeal, always apt to fufpea and to dread, even
to excess, every thing that seemed to threaten religion, instantly
took the alarm as if the Emperor had been just ready to enter
upon the execution of some formidable plan for the extirpation
of their opinions. In order to disappoint this, they held frequent
consultations, they courted the Kings of France and England
with great assiduity, and even began to think of raising the
repedtive contingents both in men and money which they were
obliged to furnish by the treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not
long before they were convinced that these apprehensions were
without foundation, and that the Emperor, to whom repose was
absolutely necessary after being exhausted by efforts beyond his
strength in the war with France, had no thoughts of diiturbing
ile tranquillity of Germany. As a proof of this, his ambafft-
dors, at an interview with the Proteltant Princes in Francfiort,
agrced that all concessions in their favour, particularly toc
contained in the pacificatiorrof Nuremberg, hould contiilli in
force for fifteen months; that during this period all proceedings
of the Imperial chamber against them fIould be filfpcnded;
that a conference flould be held by a few divines of each party,

P Seek. 1. iii. 17r. Rcciil (tc Tiaitcz.
V\oL. I i i. i

BOOK VI. in order to discuss the points in controversy, and to propose arti-

3.. cles of accommodation which should be laid before the next diet.

Though the Emperor, that he might not irritate the Pope,
who remonstrated against the first part of this agreement as im-
politick, and against the latter as an impious encroachment
upon his prerogative, never formally ratified this convention, it
was observed with confiderable'exadnefs, and greatly strength-
ened the bails of that ecclesiastical liberty, for which the Pro-
teflants contended .

April 24. A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, happened the
Reformation
eflablifled in death of George Duke of Saxony, an event of great advantage
every part of to the reformation. That Prince, the head of the Albertine, or
Saxony.

younger branch of the Saxon family, possessed, as marquis of
Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories, comprehending
Dresden, Leipfick, and other cities now the most considerable
in the elecorate. From the first dawn of the reformation, he
had been its enemy as avowedly as the electoral Princes were
its protecors, and had carried on his opposition not only with
all the zeal flowing from religious prejudices, but with a viru-
lence inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and inbittered
by the domeflick animosity subsisting between him and the
other branch of his family. By his death without ifue, his
fuccefflon fell to his brother Henry, whose attachment to the
Protestant religion surpassed, if possible, that of his predecessor
to popery. Henry no sooner took poffefion of his new domi-
nions, than, disregarding a clause in George's will, didated
by his bigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his territories to the

t F. Paul, 82. Sleid. 247. Sck. 1. iii. 200.

Emperor

Emperor and King of the Romans, if his brother should attempt BOOK VI.
to make any innovation in religion, he invited ome Protestant j39
divines, and among them Luther himself, to Leipfick. By
their advice and assistance, he overturned in a few weeks the
whole system of antient rites, establishing the full exercise of
the reformed religion, with the universal applause of his sub-
jeas, who had long wished for this change, which the authority
of their Duke alone had hitherto prevented '. This revolution
delivered the Protestants from the danger to which they were
exposed by having an inveterate enemy situated in the middle of
their territories; and their dominions now extended in one
great and almost unbroken line from the shore of the Baltick to
the banks of the Rhine.

SOON after the conclusion of the Truce at Nice, an event A mutinyof

happened, which satisfied all Europe that Charles had prose- the opeial
cuted the war to the utmost extremity that the state of his affairs
would permit. Vast arrears were due to his troops, whom he
had long amused with vain hopes and promises. As they now
foresaw that little attention would be paid to their demands, wheli
by the re-establishment of peace their services became of less
importance, they loft all patience, broke out into an open mutiny,
and declared that they thought themselves entitled to seize by
violence what was detained from them contrary to all justice.
Nor was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of the Empe-
ror's dominions; the mutiny was almost as general as the grie-
vance which gave rife to it. The soldiers in the Milanese plundered
the open country without controul, and filled the capital itfclf

' Sleidan, 249.

I i i with

BOoK VI. with consternation. Those in garrison at Goletta threatened to

,39- give up that important fortress to Barbarofla. In Sicily the

troops proceeded to Rill greater excesses; having chaced away
their officers, they eleCted others in their flead, defeated a
body of men whom the viceroy sent against them, took and
pillaged several cities, conducing themnfelves all the while, in
tuch a manner, that their operations resembled rather the regu-
lar proceedings of a concerted rebellion, than the rashness and
violence of a military mutiny. But by the address and pru-
dence of the generals, who partly by borrowing money in their
own name, or in that of their mafier, partly by extorting large
fums from the cities in their refpedive rovinces, raised what
was sufficient to discharge the arrears of the soldiers, these in-
furredions were quelled. The greater part of the troops
being disbanded, such a number only as was neceflary for gar-
rifoning the principal towns, and protecting the ea coasts from
the insults of the Turks, was kept in pay'.

Cortes of IT was happy for the Emperor that the abilities of his gene-
Caftlle held rals extricated him out of these difficulties, which it exceeded his
at ioledo.

own power to have removed. He had depended, as his chief
resource for discharging the arrears due to his Ioldiers, upon the
ful)fidies which he expected from his Castilian fubjeds. For
this purpose, he assembled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo, and
having represented to them the great expence of his military
operations, together with the vafi debts in which there had nc-
cetarily involved him, he proposed to levy such fpplics a, the
present exigency of his affairs demanded, by a general excile on

* Jovii Hiflor. 1. xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. Fcrreras, ix. 209.

coin modiics.

commodities. But the Spaniards who already felt themselves BOOKVI.
oppressed with a load of taxes unknown to their ancefiors, and ,53.
who had often complained that their country, in order to prosecute The com-

plaints and
quarrels in which it was not interested, and to fight battles from diffatisfaaion

of that aflem-

which it could reap no benefit, was drained not only of its bly.
wealth but of its inhabitants, determined not to add voluntarily to
their own burdens, or to furnish the Emperor with the means of
engaging in new enterprizes no le's ruinous to the kingdom than
most of those which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in
particular, inveighed with great vehemence againff the im-
position proposed, as an encroachment upon the valuable and
distinguishing privilege of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. They demanded a conference
with the representatives of the cities concerning the slate of the
nation. They contended that if Charles would imitate the
example of his predecessors, who had resided constantly in
Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in a multiplicity of
tranfadions foreign to the concerns of his Spanish dominions,
the flated revenues of the crown would be fully sufficient to
defray the neceflary expences of government. They repre-
sented to him that it would be unjust to lay new burdens upon
the people, while this prudent and effeual method ofre-efla-
blifhing public credit, and securing national opulence, was totally
negleded'. Charles, after employing arguments, entreaties
and promifcs, but without success, in order to overcome their
obflinacy, difminfcd the acmbly with great indignation. From The anc'ent

'confitution

that period neither the nobles nor the prelates have been called of the Cortes
to thefc assemblies, on pretence that such as pay no part of subverted.

' Sandov. Hilt. vol. ii. 269.

the

BoOKVI. the publick taxes, hould claim no vote in laying them on.

-r ' None have been admitted to the Cortes but the procurators or

representatives of eighteen cities. These, to the number of
thirty-fix, being two from each community, form an assembly
which bears no resemblance either in power or dignity or inde-
pendence to the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at the devo-
tion of the court in all their determinations . Thus the im-
prudent zeal with which the Castilian nobles had supported the
regal prerogative, in opposition to the claims of the commons
during the commotions in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty-one, proved at last fatal to their own body. By
enabling Charles to depress one of the orders in the state, they
destroyed that balance to which the constitution owed its fecu-
rity, and put it in his power and in that of his fucceflors to
humble the other, and to strip it of its most valuable privileges.

The Spanifi AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees flill possessed
grandees f" l extraordinary power as well as privileges, which they exercised
pofrfesed high
privileges. and defended with an haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this

the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof during the meet-
ing of the Cortes at Toledo. As he was returning one day
from a tournament accompanied by most of the nobility, one
of the serjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to clear the
way for the Emperor, struck the Duke of Infantado's horse with
his batton, which that haughty grandee relenting, drew his
sword, beat and wounded the officer. Charles, provoked at such
an insolent deed in his presence, immediately ordered Ronquillo
the judge of the court to arrest the Duke; Ronquillo advanced

" Sandov. ibid. La Science du Gouvcrncment, par M. de Real, tom. ii.
p. 102.

3 to

t6 execute his charge, when the constable of Castile interposing, BOOK VI.
checked him, claimed the right of jurifdition over a grandee as '^

1539.

a privilege of his office, and conduced Infantado to his own
apartment. All the nobles. present were so pleated with the
boldness of the constable in aferting the rights of their order,
that deserting the Emperor, they attended him to his house
with infinite applauses, and Charles returned to the palace
without anyperfon along with him but the cardinal Tavera. The
Emperor, how sensible soever of the affront, saw the danger of
irritating a jealous and high-fpirited order of men whom the
slightest appearance of offence might drive to the most unwar-
rantable extremes. For that reason, instead of firaining at any
ill-timed exertion of his prerogative, he prudently connived at
the arrogance of a body too potent for him to controul, and
sent next morning to the Duke of Infantado offering to inflict
what punishment he pleased on the person who had affronted
him. The Duke confidering this as a full reparation to his
honour, instantly forgave the officer; bestowing on him, be-
fides, a considerable present as a compensation for his wound.
Thus the affair was entirely forgotten x; nor would it have
deserved to be mentioned, if it were not a striking example of
the haughty and independent spirit of the Spanish nobles in
that age, as well as an inflance of the Emperor's dexterity in
accommodating his conduct to the circumstances in which he
was placed.

CHARLES was far from discovering any such condescension nfarreaio
or lenity towards the citizens of Ghent, who not long fter at Ghcn.

Sandov. 11. 274. Ferreras, ix. 212. Miniana, I13.

broke

BOOK VI. broke out into open rebellion against his government. An

event which happened in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this rash infurre&ion so fatal
to that flourihing city. At that time the Queen dowager of
Hungary, governefe of the Netherlands, having received orders
from her brother to invade France with all the forces which lhe
could raise, he assembled the States of the united Provinces,
and obtained from them a subsidy of twelve hundred thousand
florins, to defray the expence of that undertaking. Of this fum,
the county ofFlanders was obliged to pay a third part as its

Pretenions of proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the moss considerable
the citizens.

city in that country, averse to a war with France with which
they carried on an extensive and gainful commerce, refused to
pay their quota, and contended that in consequence of ftipula-
tions between them and the ancestors of their present sovereign
the Emperor, no tax could be levied upon them, unless they had
given their express consent to the imposition of it. The gover-
ness, on the other hand, maintained that as the subsidy of twelve
hundred thousand florins had been granted by the States of
Slanders, of which their representatives were members, they
wvcre bound, of course, to conform to what was enacted by
them, as it is the first principle in society, on which the tran-
(quility and order of government depend, that the inclinations
of the minority must be over-ruled by the judgment and dci-
fisn of the superior number.

prcccedings THE citizens of Chent, however, were not willing to relin-
ag.inl them. quifh a privilege of fuich high importance as that which they

craincd. Having been accuflomed, under the government
of the house of Burgunidy, to enjoy cxtenfivc immunitics, and

4 to

to be treated with much indulgence, they disdained to sacrifice BooK VI.
to the delegated power of a regent those rights and liberties ~

1539.

which they had often and successfully aflerted against their
greatest Princes. The Queen, though he endeavoured at fitrR
to sooth them, and to reconcile them to their duty by various
concessions, was at laftfo much irritated by the obRtinacy with
which they adhered to their claim, that he ordered all the citi-
zens of Ghent, on whom the could lay hold in any part of the
Netherlands, to be arrested. But this rash action made an im-
preflion very different from what he expeced on men, whole
minds were agitated with all the violent passions which indig-
nation at oppression and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affeCted
with the danger of their friends and companions, than irritated
at the governess, they openly despised her authority, and sent
deputies to the other towns of Slanders, conjuring them not to
abandon their country at such a juncure, but to concur with
them in vindicating its rights against the encroachments of a
woman, who either did not know or did not regard their im-
munities. All but a few inconsiderable towns declined entering
into any confederacy againfi the governess; however, they
joined in petitioning her to put off the term for payment of the
tax so long, that they might have it in their power to fend some
of their number into Spain, in order to lay their title to exemption
before their sovereign. This fie granted with ome difficulty.
But Charles received their commiflioners with an haughtincfs to
which they were not accutlomed from their antient Princes,
and enjoining them to yield the fame rcfpcdtfil obedience to his
filler, which they owed to him in pcrfon, remitted the examina-
tion of their claim to the council of Malines. This court,
which is properly a anding committee of the parliament or

VOL. II. K k k flates

BooKVL flates of the county, and which poi&ft the supreme jrifdic-
- 53' tion n all matters civil as well as criminal , pronourted the

claim of the citizens of Ghent to be ill founded, and appointed
them forthwith to pay their proportion of the tax.

They take ENRAGED at this deciion, which they confidered as noto-
offcr to sub- rioufy unjust, and rendered desperate on feeing their rights be-
mittoFrace. trayed by that very court which was bound to protect them, the

people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary manner, drove
such of the nobility as resided among them out of the city;
secured several of the Emperor's officers; put one of them to
the torture, whom they accused of having stolen or destroyed the
record, that contained the privileges of exemption from taxes
which they pleaded; chose a council to whom they committed
the direction of their affairs; gave orders for repairing and
adding to their fortifications ; and openly ere&ed the flandard
of rebellion against their sovereign z. SefibIe, however, of
their inability to support what their zeal had prompted them to
undertake, and desirous of securing a prote&or against the
formidable forces by which they might expect oon to be at-
tacked, they sent some of their number to Francis, offering not
only to acknowledge him as their sovereign, and to put him in
immediate possession of Ghent, but to afift him with all their
forees in recovering those provinces in the Netherlands, which
had antiently belonged to the crown of France, and had been fa

r Defcrittione di tutti paefi bafli di Lud. Guicciardini. Ant. 157r. fol. p. 53.
. Mcmoires fur la revolte de Gantois en 1539, par Jean d'Hollander, ecrit e:

I547. A la Haye 1747. P. Hcutcr. Rer. Aust. lib. xi. p. 262. Sandov.
Hiflor. tom. ii. p. 282.

lately

lately re-united to it by the decree of the parliament of Pari. BooK VI.
This unexpeced proposition coming from persons who had it 3
in their power to have performed inftaritly one part of what
they undertook, and who could contribute so effetually to-
wards the execution of the whole, opened vait as well as alluring
profpeas to Francis's ambition. The counties of Slanders and
Artois were of greater value than the dutchy of Milan, which
he had so long laboured to acquire with passionate but fruitless
desire; their situation with refpea to France rendered it more
easy to conquer or to defend them; and they might be
formed into a separate principality for the Duke of Orleans, no
less suitable to his dignity than that which his father aimed at
obtaining. From this, the Flemings, who were acquainted with
the French manners and government, would not have been
a-verse; and his own fubjeas, weary of their deftrudive expedi-
tions into Italy, would have turned their arms towards this
quarter with.more goodlwill, and with greater vigour. Several Francis de-
considerations, nevertheless, prevented Francis from laying hold dines their
of this opportunity, the most favourable in appearance which had
ever preiented itself, of extending his.dominions or distressing
the Emperor. From the time of their interview at Aigues-
mortes, Charles had continued to court the King of France
with wonderful attention; and often flattered him with hopes
of gratifying at last his wishes concerning the Milanese, by
granting the investiture of it either to him or to one of his
foes. But.though these hopes and promises were thrown out
with no other intention. than to detach him from his confede-
racy with the grand Seignior, or to raise suspicions in Soly-
man's mind by the appearance of a cordial and familiar in-
tercourfe fubfifling between the courts of Paris and Madrid

K kk 2 Francis

BOOK VI. Francis was weak enough to catch at the shadow by which he

'S 39 had been so often deceived, and from eagerness to seize it, re-

linquifhed what must have proved a more substantial acquisition.
Besides this, the Dauphin jealous to excess of his brother, and
unwilling that a Prince who seemed to be of a restless and enter-
prizing nature hould obtain an establishment, which from its
situation might be confidered almost as a domeflick one, made use
of Montmorency, who by a singular piece of good fortune, was
at the fameme te the favourite of the father and of the son, to
defeat the application of the Flemings, and to divert the King
from espousing their cause. Montmorency represented accord-
ingly the reputation and power which Francis would acquire by
recovering that footing which he had formerly in Italy, and that
nothing could be so efficacious to overcome the Emperor's aver-
sion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce, and refuiing on
this occasion to countenance his rebellious fubjeds. Francis, apt
of himself to over-rate the value of the Milanese, because he
efiimated it from the length of time as well as from the great
efforts which he had employed in order to re-conquer it, and
fond of every aion which had the appearance of generosity,
assented without difficulty to entiments so agreeable to his own,
rejected the propositions of the citizens of Ghent, and dismissed
their deputies with an harsh answer .

Communi- NOT satisficd with this, by a farther refinement in genero-
cates their in- fity, lie communicated to the Emperor his whole negociation
tentions to the
Emperor. with the malecontents, and all that he knew of their schemes

Mern. de Bcllay, p. 263. P. Heuter. Rer. Aufir. lib. xi. 263.

and

and intentions b This convincing proof of Francis's disinterest- BOOK VI.
ednefs relieved Charles from the molt disquieting apprehensions, r 1]
and opened a way to extricate himself out of all his difficulties.
He had already received full information of all the tranfadions
in the Netherlands, and of the rage with which the people
of Ghent had taken arms against his government. He was
thoroughly acquainted with the genius and qualities of his sub-
jeds in that country; with their love of liberty; their attach-
ment to their antient privileges and customs; as well as the
invincible obflinacy with which their minds, flow but firm and
persevering, adhered to any measure on which they had leisure
to fix. He easily saw what encouragement and support they
would have derived from the afilance of France; though now
free from any danger on that quarter, he was still sensible that
some immediate and vigorous interposition was necessary in order
to prevent the spirit of difaffedion and rebellion from spreading
in a country where the number of cities, the multitude of peo-
ple, together with the great wealth diffused among them by com-
merce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and would supply it
with inexhautfible resources. No expedient, after long delibera-
tion, appeared to him so effecual as his going in person to the Charles's de-
Netherlands; and the governcfs his fitler being of the fame opi- c,,l,,,,cng
nion, warmly follicited him to undertake the journey. There his journey to

the Nether-

were only two different routs which he could take ; one by land, lands.
through Italy and Germany, the other, entirely by fca, fiom
some port in Spain to one in the Low-Countries. But the
former was more tedious than filited the prefnt exigency of his
affairs; nor could he in confiflency with his dignity or even

b Sandov. Hiflor. tom. ii. 284.

his

BjO-. VI. his safety pass through Germany without such a train both of

attendants and of troops, as would have added greatly to the
time that he must have consumed in his journey; the latter was
dangerous at this season, and not to be ventured upon, while he
was on bad terms with the King of England, unless under the
convoy of a powerful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which
he''was under a necessity of chufing, and did not know what to
chufe, inspired him at last with the singular and seemingly

Propores to extravagant thought of passing through France, as the most ex-
parthrough peditious way of reaching the Netherlands. He proposed in
I rance. peditious way of reaching the Netherlands. He propored. in

his council to demand Francis's permission for that purpose. All
his counsellors joined with one voice in condemning the mea-
sure as no less rash than unprecedented, and which must infal-
libly expose him to disgrace or to danger; to disgrace, if the
demand were rejected in the manner that he had reason to ex-
ped; to danger, if he put his person in the power of an enemy
whom he had often offended, who had antient injuries to re-
venge, as well as fubjeds of present contest ffill remaining unde-
cided. But Charles, who had studied the charaaer of his
rival with greater care, and more profound discernment than
any of his ministers, persisted in his plan, and flattered himself
that it might be accomplished not only without danger to his
own person, but even without the cxpenc of any concession
detrimental to his crown.

To which Wj T HI this view lie communicated the matter to the
frncscon. French ambassador at his court, and feet Granvelle his chief

minister to Paris, in order to obtain from Francis permif-
sion to pass through his dominions, and to promise that he
would soon fettle the affair of the Milanese to his fatisfaaion;

* but

but at the fame time to intreat that he would not exaa anhy new BOOK VI.
promise, or even insist on former engagements, at this junc- 539
ture, left whatever he should grant, under his present cicum-
flances, might seem rather to be extorted by neeefity, than to
flow from friendship or the love of jutice. Frateis, instead
of attending to the snare which such a flight artifice scarce epn
cealed, was so dazzled with the splendor of overcoming*r
enemy by ats of generosity, and so pleased with the air of fupe-
riority which the rectitude and disinterestedness of his proceed-
ings gave him on this occasion, that he at once assented to all
that was demanded. Judging of the Emperor's heart by
his own, he imagined that the sentiments of gratitude, arising
from the remembrance of good offices and liberal treatment,
would determine him more forcibly to fulfill what he had so
often promised, than the most precise stipulations, that could be
inserted in any treaty.

UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment was precious, ;,s reception

set out, notwithstanding the fears and suspicions of his Spanish io that king-
fubjeCs, with a fmaell but splendid train of about an hundred
persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers of France, he was re-
ceived by the Dauplin and the Duke of Orleans attended by the
conflable Montmorency. The two Princes offered to go into
Spain, and to remain there as hostages fir the Ensperor's
safety; but this he rejected, declaring that he relied with im-
plicit confidence on the King's honour, and had never dc-
manded nor would accept of any other pledge for his fcurity.
In 11 the towns through which he paffT-l the greatest poflible
magnificence was displayed; the mnagiftratcs prcfcnted him the
keys of the gates; the prison doors were flt open; and by the

royal

BooK VI. royal honours paid to him, he appeared more like the sovereign

'-'3 ' of the country than a stranger. The King advanced as far

as Chatelherault to meet him; their interview was diftin-
guifhed by the warmest expressions of friendihip and regard.
1+. They proceeded together towards Paris, and presented to the

inhabitants of that city, the extraordinary fpeatacle of two rival
Monarchs whose enmity had diflurbed and laid wate Europe,
during twenty years, making their solemn entry together with
all the symptoms of confidence and harmony, as if they had
forgotten for ever past injuries, and would never revive hoftili-
ties for the future .

The Empe- CHARLES remained fix days at Paris; but amidst the per-
ror's ol ici-
tude. petual caresses of the French court, and the various entertain-

ments contrived to amuse or do him honour, he discovered an ex-
treme impatience to continue his journey, arising as much from
an apprehension of danger which conftantlyoppreffed him, as
from the necessity of his presence in the Low-Countries. Con-
fcious of the difingenuity of his own intentions, he trembled
when he reflected that some fatal accident might betray them to
his rival, or lead him to fufpce them; and though his arti-
sices to conceal there flhould be successful, he could not help
fearing that motives of interest might at last triumph over the
fcruplcs of honour, and tempt Francis to avail himielf of the
advantage now in his hands. Nor were there wanting persons
among the French minifecrs, who advised the King to turn his
own arts againIt the Emperor, and as the retribution due for
so many inflanccs of fraud or fallichood, to icize and detain his

' Thuan. lilft. lib. i. c. 14. Mem. de Bellay, 264.

t person

person till he granted him full fatisfadion with regard to all the BOOK VI.
just claims of the French crown. But no consideration could o.
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had pledged, nor
could any argument convince him that Charles, after all the pro-
mises that he had given, and all the favours which he had re-
ceived, might still be capable of deceiving him. Full of this false
confidence he accompanied him to St. Quintin, and the two
Princes, who had met him on the borders of Spain, did not take
leave of him until he entered his dominions in the Low-Countries.

As soon as the Emperor reached his own territories, the and difi.le-

French ambassadors demanded the accomplishment of what he nuity.
had promised concerning the investiture of Milan, but Charles,
under the plausible pretext that his whole attention was then
engrossed by the consultations necessary towards fupprefling the
rebellion in Ghent, put off the matter for ome time. But in
order to prevent Francis from fufpeting his sincerity, he fiill
continued to talk of his resolutions with refped to that matter
in the fame strain as when he entered France, and even wrote
to the King much to the fame purpose, though in general terms,
and with equivocal expressions which he might afterwards ex-
plain away or interpret at pleasure a.

M E A NWHIL FE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, deflitute of Reduiflon of

leaders capable either of directing their councils, or conducing Ghe,
their troops; abandoned by the French King and unfilpported
by their countrymen; were unable to resist their offended fove-
reign who was ready to advance againfi them with one body of
tioolps which he had raised in the Netherlands, with another

* Memoircs de Ribicr, i. 504.
VoL. . 1 1 (lrawn

BooKVI. drawn out of Germany, and a third which had arrived from

40o. Spain by sea. The near approach of danger made them, at last,

so sensible of their own folly, that they sent ambassadors to the
Emperor imploring his mercy, and offering to set open their
gates at his approach. Charles, without vouchsafing them any
other answer, than that he would appear among them as their
sovereign, with the sceptre and the sword in his hand, began his
march at the head of his troops. Though he chose to enter the
city on the twenty-fourth of February, his birth-day, he was
touched with nothing of that tenderness or indulgence which

and puni;fi was natural towards the place of his nativity. Twenty-fix of
ment of the
citizens. the principal citizens were put to death ; a greater number was
April 0o. sent into banishment; the city was declared to have forfeited

all its privileges and immunities; the revenues belonging to it
were confiscated; its ancient form of government was abolished;
the nomination of its magistrates was vested for the future in
the Emperor and his successors; a new system of laws and political
administration was prescribed b, and in order to bridle the fedi-
tious spirit of the citizens a firong citadel was appointed to be
ereced, for defraying the expence of which a fine of an hundred
and fifty thousand florins was imposed on the inhabitants, to-
gether with an annual tax of fix thousand florins for the fiupport
of a garrison. By theie rigorous proceedings, Charles not only
punished the citizens of Ghcnt, but set an awful example of
severity before his other futbjeds in the Netherlands, whose
immunities and privileges, partly the cffed, partly the cause of
their xtenfive commerce, circumscribed the royal prerogative

b Les coutumes & loix du Comlptc de Flandrc, par Alex. Ic Grandc, 3 tom.
fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i. p. 169.

Harxi Annalcs Brabantiar, vol. i. 66.

,~ itlhin

within very narrow bounds, and often flood in the way of mea- BOOK V.
fures which he wished to undertake, or fettered and retarded L--

1540.
him in his operations.

Cii AR LES having thus vindicated and rc-eflablifhed his autho- Charles rc-

rity in the Low-Countries, and being now under no neceflty furs to fujl
of continuing the fame scene of falsehood and dissimulation with ] f.; t
which he had long amuscd Francis, began gradually to throw
aside the veil under which he had concealed his intentions with
refped to the Milanese. At first, he eluded the demands of the
French ambafladors when they again reminded him of his pro-
mises; then he proposed, by way of equivalent for the dutchy of
Milan, to grant the Duke of Orleans the invefliture of Slanders,
clogging the offer, however, with impraticable conditions, or
such as he knew would be rejected d. At las, being driven from
all his evasions and subterfuges by their insisting fr a categorical
answer, he peremptorily refuscd to give up a territory of such
value, or voluntarily to make such a liberal addition to the
ftrcngth of an enemy by diminishing his own power c. He denied
at the fame time, that he had ever made any promise which could
bind him to an action so foolifli, and so contrary to his own intercft '.

OF all the ations in the Emperor's life, this, without doubt,

reflects the greatest dishonour on his reputation g. Tho' Charles
was not extremely scrupulous at other times about the means
which he employed for accomplilhing his ends, or always obfcr-
vant of the ftridt precepts of veracity and honour, he had hitherto
maintained some regard for the maxims of that lets precise and

,' Mcm. de Ribier, i. 509. 514. 0 Ribier, i. 5g9.

B Jllay, 365-6. g Jovii Hill. lib. xxxix. p. 238. a.

L 11 2 rigid

BO9K VI. rigid morality by which monarchs think themselves entitled to

1Z,740. rcgulate their conduc. But, on this occasion, the scheme that he

formed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted Prince; the
illiberal and mean artifices by which he carried it on; the insen-
fibility with which he reeived all the marks of his friendihip,
and the ingratitude with which he requited them; are all
cyl;ally unbecoming the dignity of his character, and incon-
fifent with the grandeur of his views..

'Tiiis transaction exposed Francis to as much scorn as it did.

t E!, Emperor to ccnfure. After the experience of a long reign,
ailer so many opportunities of discovering the duplicity and
* artifices us his rival, the credulous simplicity with which he

trufied im at this juncture feemeed to merit no other return
than it altulally met with. Francis, however, remonfirated and
cxclaimed, as if this had been the firfl instance in which the Em-
pce or had deceived him. Feeling, as is usual, the insult which was
offered to his underfanding fill more sensibly than the injury
lone to his interest, he difcovcred such resentment as mnade it
obvious that he would lay hold on the first opportii:ity ii'. cin
revengcd, and that a war, no less rancorous than thait which }i .
so lately raged, would soon break out anew in Europ.

'rT PopC TIIns year is rendered memorable by tle citabliftinent of the

lT:::t' .t

()O rder of Jesuits; a body whose inlucnce on ccclcliafical as well
rh, ° )tr of as civil afFairs hathl bnci. o confi(lerabl, that an account of the

Igenius of its laws and govcrnment juifly merits a place in hifory.
When men take a view of the rapid progrlcf of tlii focicty to-
vai dls wcaltll and power; when they contemplate lc atlnirablle
prudeuce with which it has been govcrned ; when they attend

to.

to the persevering and fyfRematick spirit with which its schemes BooKVI.
have been carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a singular -,,.
inltitution to the superior wiflom of its founder, and to suppose
that he had formed and digested his plan with profound policy.
But the Jesuits, as well as the other monaflic orders, are in-
debted for the exiftcncc of their order not to the wisdom of their
founder, but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio Loyola, whom I have
already mentioned on occasion of the wound which he received
in defending Pampeluna h, was a fanatick diflinguifhed by
extravaganci-s in sentiment and condut, no less incompatible
with the maxims of fober rcafon, than repugnant to the spirit
of true religion. The wild adventures, and visionary schemes,
in which his enthufiafin engaged him, equal any thing recorded
in the legends of the Romish faints; but are unworthy of
notice in hiflory.

PROMPTE D by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the love of Fanaticism of
power and dilfindion, from which such pretenders to superior Loyola itC

founder:

fandity are not exempt, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
founder of a religious order. The plan, which he formed of
its constitution and laws, was ifggeftd, as he gave out, and as
his followers fill teach, by the immediate inspiration of hea-
Ve i. 13it notwvihfltaniding this high prctenfion, his design
met at silt w;lih violent (l)pofiti')ll Tle PIope, to whom
Loyola had a'~licd for the fanclion of his authority to confirm
the inflit ltin, ref crrcl his petilion t,) a; cominittee of Cardinals.
Tlley rclr-ct(l d tle letlllilhnclli t to be unnccelTary as well as
daj, erous, and Paul refuted to Iant lii:i approbation of it. At

h !'ok ii. . 132. ' Compte rcndu des Constitutions
'Jes Jcfuitc', au Pl'rlemcnt de Provence, par M. (ti Monclar. p. 285.

Lift,

BoOKVI. last, Ioyola removed all his scruples by an offer which it wa,

,54. impossible for any Pope to resist. He proposed that besides the

The Pope's three vows of poverty, of chastity, and of monastic obedience,
motives fobr
corfirming which arc common to all the monastic orders, the menmbrs of
tie order.

his society should take a fourth vow of obedience to the Pope,
binding themselves to go whithersoever he should command for
the service of religion, and without requiring any thing from
the Holy See for their support. At a time when the papal
authority had received such a hock by the revolt of so many
nations from the Romish church; at a time when every part of
the poplifh fyflem was attacked with so much violence and fuc-
cess, the acquisition of a body of men, thus peculiarly devoted to
the fee of Rome, and whom it might set in opposition to all its
Sept. 27. enemies, was an objet of the highefc consequence. Paul, in-

ftantly perceiving this, confirmed the institution of the efuiits
by his bull ; granted the most ample privileges to the members
of the ociety; and appointed Loyola to be the firfl General of
the order. The event hath fully juflified Paul's discernment, in
cxpecting such beneficial confcqucnces to the fee of Rome from
this institution. In less than half a century, the fciety obtained
citablifhmcnts in every country that adhered to the Ronan
catholic church; its power and wealth increased amazingly; the
number of its members became great; their charater and ac-
compliiimncllts were (lill greater; and the Jcfuits were celebrated
b1y the friends, an(d dreaded by the nenics of te lRo nifhi
faith, as the molt able al d enltcrprizing order in the churclh.

Itsc)rfiilu- TII conflitution and laws of the focicty were pcrfedctd by
,I.11,
, l : I

1ni1 ert Laynez aind Aquaviva, the two generals who succeeded Loyola,
prtcul. at- ICn fear fi)perior to their malter in abilities, and in the Cicence

of

of government. They framed that fyflem of profound and BOOK VI.
artful policy which distinguishes the order. The large infusion -

1540.

of fanaticism, mingled with its regulations, should be imp.itcd to
Loyola its founder. Many circumfiances concurred in giving a
peculiarity of charater to the order of Jesuits, and-in forming
the members of it not only to take greater part in the affairs of
the world than any other body of monks, but to acquire fupc-
rior influence in the condud of them.

THE primary object of almost all the monastic orders is to The oje of

the rder fin-

separate men from the world, and from any concern in its affairs. gular.
In the solitude and silence of the cloister, the monk is called to
work out his own salvation by extraordinary ads of mortifica-
tion and piety. He is dead to the world, and ought not to
mingle in its tranfadions. He can be of no benefit to mankind,
but by his example and by his prayers. On the contrary, the
Jesuits are taught to confider themfclves as formed for aion.
They are chosen soldiers, bound to exert themfelvcs continually
in the frvice of God, and of the Pope, his vicar on earth.
Whatever tends to initrud the ignorant; whatcver can be of
use to reclaim or to oppose the enemies of the Holy Scc, is their
proper olbjct. That they may have full lifure for this ative
service, they are totally exempted from those functions, the per-
formance of wlicl is the chief business of other monks. They
appear in no proccflions; they pradife no rigorous auflcritics;
they do not conilunc one ialfof their time in the repetition of
tc(lious (lliccs . But they are required to attend to all the tranl-
actions of tie world, on account of the1 inluclnce which tlhcf

k Conlpte Rcnldl, par AM. dc Mlonclar. p. 13. 290. Sur la dctlir'. (l s
Jcfuitc,, par M. D'Alnibcrt, p. 42.

illay

BOOK VI. may have on religion; they are directed to fludy the difpofi-

---
~ tions of persons in high rank, and to cultivate their friendship';

and by the very constitution as well as genius of the order, a
spirit of acion and intrigue is infused into all its members.

peculiariies As the objecQ of the society of Jesuits differed from that of
in the form of the other monastic orders, the diversity was no less in the form
its policy,par-
ticulaily with of its government. The other orders are to be confidered as
refte& to the
rowcr of the voluntary aflociations, in which whatever affects the whole
general. body, is regulated by the common suffrage of all its members.

The executive power is veiled in the persons placed at the head
of each convent, or of the whole society; the legislative autho-
rity resides in the community. Affairs of moment, relating to
particular convents, are determined in conventual chapters; such
as refpec the whole order are confidered in general congrega-
tions. But Loyola,full of the ideas of implicit obedience, which
he had derived from his military profession, appointed that the
government of his order should be purely monarchical. A Ge-
neral, chosen for life by the deputies from the several provinces,
possessed power that was supreme and independent, extending to
every pcrfon, and to every cafe. He, by his sole authority nomi-
atcd provincials, rctors, and every other officer employed in the
government of the lociety, and could remove them at pleasure.
In him was vested the sovereign adminifiration of the revenues
and funds of the order. Every member belonging to it was
at his disposal; and by his uncontroulable mandate, he could
impose on them any talk, or employ them in what service soever
he pleased. To his commands they were required to yield not

Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 12.

.t only

only outward obedience, but to resign up to him the inclinations BooK Vr.
of their own wills, and the sentiments of their own underhfand- '
ings. They were to liften to his injuncions, as if they had been
uttered by Christ himself. Under his direcion, they were to
be mere paflive infiruments, like clay in the hands of the
potter, or like dead carcases incapable of refifRance ". Such a
singular form of policy could not fail to impress its character on
all the members of the order, and to give a peculiar force to
all its operations. There is not in the annals of mankind any
example of such a perfect despotism, exercised not over monks
shut up in the cells of a convent, but over men dispersed among
all the nations of the earth.

As the constitutions of the order velf, in the General, such Cirurr.nan-

ces Which en-

absolute dominion over all its members, they carefully providle be him to
for his being perfectly informed with refpe to the character ei'hiret
and abilities of his fubjeds. Every novice who offers himself Ircatel ad-
as a candidate for entering into the order, is obliged to imanrifjl
his conficiece to the superior, or to a person appointed by him;
and is required to confess not only his fins and defecs, but to
discover the inclinations, the plffons, and the bent of his foul.
This manifestation mull be renewed every fix months ". The
society not satisfied with penetrating in this manner into the in-
ncrmoft recesses of the heart, directs each member to observe the
words and actions of the novices; they are conflitutcd spies
upon their conduct; and are bound to (lifclole every thing of in-
portance concerning them to the fiullrior. In order that this
Icrutiny into their chatracer lmay be as compleat as lpollible, a

'" Cnmpc rcnld au Pirlrcn. (' lrc( .'l , ,par M. lc Cii lo:ii;, 1). 4-l, &c.
Comple r 1pi M. Mon lir. 8. i15. 3;13.

" (,omipte ip;r M. dc Monc)ar. p. 121, &C.
'V ol 1-- 1. NI inl mlll

BoOKVI. long noviciate must expire, during which they pass through
L- -- / the several gradations of ranks in the society, and they mull

have attained the full age of thirty three years, before they can
be admitted to take the final vows, by which they become
proseed members °. By these various methods, the superiors,
under wlhofe immediate infpedion the novices are placed, ac-
quire a thorough knowledge of their dispositions and talents. In
order that the General, who is the foul that animates and moves
the whole society, may have under his eye every thing necessary
to inform or direct him, the provincials and heads of the several
houses are obliged to tranfinit to him regular and frequent
reports concerning the members under their infpetion. In
these they descend into minute details with refped to the cha-
racter of each person, his abilities natural or acquired, his tem-
per, his experience in affairs, and the particular department
for which he is best fitted P. These reports, when digested and

arranged,

* Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur la defir. des Jef. par M. D'Alcmb.
P. 39.

MI. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number of these reports,

which the gencral of the Jcfuits mufi annually receive according to the regula-
tions of the society. These amount in all to 6584. If this fum be divided by
37, the number of provinces in the order, it appears that 1 77 reports concerniing
the state of each province are transmitted to Rome annually. Compte, p. 52.
Betides this, there may be extraordinary letters, or such as are sent by the mo-
nitors or spics which the general and provincials entertain in each house.
Compte par M. deMoncl. . 431. Hiit. des Jesuites, Amft. 1761. tom. iv.
p. 56. The provincials and heads of houses not only report concerning the
members of the society, but are bound to give the general an account of the
civil affairs of the country wherein they are fettled, in so far as the knowledge
of there may be of benefit to religion. This condition may cxtcnd to every

Farticular,

arranged, are entered into registers, kept of purpose that the BooK VT.
General may, at one compreheafive view, survey the state of '

1540.

the society in every corner of the earth; observe the qualifica-
tions and talents of its members; and thus chufe, with perfec
information, the instruments, which his absolute power can
employ in any service for which lie thinks meet to destine
them .

As it was the profeflfd intention of the order of Jesuits to Progress of

the powerand

labour with unwearied zeal in promoting the salvation of men, influence of
this engaged them, of course, in many active functions. From the rder.
their first inflitution, they confidered the education of youth as
their peculiar province; they aimed at being spiritual guides and
confessors; they preached frequently in order to infirut the peo-
ple; they set out as missionaries to convert unbelieving nations.
The novelty of the inflitution, as well as the singularity of
its objects procured the Order many admirers and patrons.
The governors of the society had the address to avail themselves
of every circumfiance in its favour, and in a short time, the
number as well as influence of its members increased wonder-
fully. Before the expiration of the sixteenth century, the
Jeftuits had obtained the chief direction of tle education of youth
in every catholic country in Europe. They had become the

particular, so hat the gcneral is frniflhcd with full information concerning the
trarnfations of every Prince and I ttc in the world. Conpte par M. dc Moincl.
443. Iifi. des Jcfuit. ibid. ). 58. When the affairs with cfp)c& to which the
provincials or rectors write are of inp)ortancc, they are dircced to use cylphers,
and each of them has a particular cypher fruni the Gienral. Compte pa M.
Chalot.is, p. 54.

q Cornpte par M. de Mounc. p. 215. 4 .. -- Compte par M. tle Chalotais,
p. 52. 222.

AM m 1 2 conlf'HlIrs

BooXh V. confciilfrs of almost all its monarchs, a funclion of no finall

,~7 ilmportance in any reign, but under a weak Prince, superior

even to that of miniifser. I hey were the spiritual guides of
almost every person eminent for rank or power. They possesscd
the highcft degree of confidence and interest with the papal
court, as the molt zealous and able champions for its authority.
The advantages which an aive and entcrprizing body of men
might derive from all these circumfianccs are obvious. They
formed the minds of men in their youth. They retained an
ascendant over them in their advanced years. They possessed, at
different periods, the diretion of the most considerable courts
in Europe. They mingled in all affairs. They took part in
every intrigue and revolution. The General, by means of the
extensive intelligence which he received, could regulate the
operations of the order with the most perfec discernment, and
by means of his absolute power could carry them on with the
utmost vigour and effc '.

rogrefs of its ToG; F r E R with the power of the order, its wealth continued
wealh.

to increale. Various expedients were devised for eluding the
obligation of the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample
potefflions in every catholic country; and by the number as

' lVhen Loyola in the year 1540 petitioned the Pope to authorize the inftitu-

lion (,f the order, he hd only ten dltkiplcs. But in the year 1608, sixty eight
year; as tr their lirft inititutioin, the number of Jcfuits had incrcafed to ten thou-
lii.l live hll(rd anil eighty one. li the year 1710, the order poflffcd twenty-
fCaur i/ i ) tId loul.cs ; fifty--nine Ilti'cs of probh.tion ; three hundred and forty
r.fidlenrki ; fix lhuidred andl twelve collegs; two hundred milions; one hun-
<li d ;atill Ity frnii i:i rics and b:iartdini llhools ; 1n conflaed of 19,998 Jesuits.
I ti . d (c Jl cluits ,, ttjl. i. p. 2. ).

i ~\well

well as magnificence of its publick buildings, together with the BOOK VI.
value of its property, moveable or real, it vied with the most - -

1540.

opulent of the monaflick fraternities. Besides the sources of
wealth common to all the regular clergy, the Jesuits possessed
one which was peculiar to themselves. Under pretext of pro-
moting the success of their mnifions, and of facilitating the
support of their miflonaries, they obtained a special licence
fronm the court of Rome, to trade with the nations which they
labourced to convert. In consequence of this, they engaged in
an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in the East and Weft
Indies. They opened ware-houfcs in different parts of Europe,
in which they vended their commodities. Not satisfied with
trade alone, they imitated the example of other commercial
ibcieties, and aimed at obtaining settlements. They acquired
possession accordingly of a large and fertile province in the
southern continent of America, and reigned as sovereigns over
some hundred thousand fubjets.

UN HS A P 1'I L Y for mankind, the vast influence whicl the order Pcrnlcious

of jcfits acqbircd by all thcfe different means, has been often ol civil bIce-
cxertcd with the mofl prnicious effect. Such was the tendency ty.
of that (iicipline oc('ve by the society in forming its mem-
I)erl, and fiich the fndameltal maxims in its conflitution,
tlhat every Jcfiit was taught to regard the interest of the order
as tlhe capital oljcc', to, which every colfiderasion was to be
lacriiiccd. This i)irit of attachment to their order, the Iioft
ardenlt ,

peh tllit ever inllllunced any lbody of m1ll ', is
the ch(aratcrilit c principle of the Jcliits, and fcrvcs as a key to

lifi. (s Je: iv. 18--196, &c.
1 (',inlte pa:r . de Moncl. p. 285.

t!ii'

BOOKVT. the genius of their policy, and to the peculiarities in their fen-

4 ' timents and conduct.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the society, that

its members should possess an ascendant over persons in high
rank or of great power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a direcion of their condut, with greater facility, has led
the Jesuits to propagate a fyttem of relaxed and pliant
morality, which accommodates itself to the passions of men,
which jufifies their vices, which tolerates their imperfeaions,
which authorizes almost every action that the most audacious
or crafty politician would wifl to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately connected with

the preservation of the papal authority, the Jesuits, influenced
by the fame principle of attachment to the interests of their
society, have been the most zealous patrons of those doctrines,
which tend to exalt ccclefiaftical power on the ruins of civil
government. They have attributed to the court of Rome a
jurifldidion as cxtcnfive and absolute as was claimed by the
nmol prcfumptuous pontiffs in the dark ages. They have con-
tended for tlh entire indcpcndancc of ecclcliafticks on the civil
magi flrate. They hlave pulifllcd fch tenets concerning the
duty of opposing Princes who were enies of tle catholic f itil,
as cointenanced the Imolt atrocious crimes, and tended to dil-
solve all the tics wlhich conned fuljcd-s with their rulers.

As the order derived b1oth reputation and authority from
hle zeal with vwhich it flood fortl in defcnce of the ornifli

() clhurch

church against the attacks of the reformers, its members, proud BOOK VI.
of this diflintion, have considered it as their peculiar function 15q.
to combat the opinions, and to check the progress of the Pro-
teftants. They have made use of every art, and have em-
ployed every weapon against them. They have set themselves
in opposition to every gentle or tolerating measure in their fa-
vour. They have incessantly stirred up against them all the
rage of ecclesiastical and civil persecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed, ventured to

teach the fame pernicious doctrines, and have held opinions
equally inconliftent with the order and happiness of civil so-
ciety. But they, from reasons which are obvious, have either
delivered such opinions with greater reserve, or have propa-
gated them with less success. Whoever recollecs the events
which have happened in Europe during two centuries, will
find that the Jesuits may justly be confidered as responsible for
most of the pernicious cffets arising from that corrupt and
dangerous cafuifiry, from those extravagant tenets concerning
ecclesiastical power, and from that intolerant firit, which have
been the disgrace of the church of Rome throughout that pc-
riod, and which have brought so many calamities u)pon civil
Iociety '.

BUT amidst many bad confequcnces flowing from the in- soncidr,
flitution of this order, mankind, it mull be acknowledg(d, have t1ges lc u't-

I ~ ~ in ,. frnm the
derived from it fomre conliidcrale advantages. As the Jcilits intitutolln o

this order,

made the education of youth one of their capital objctdl;, andh
as their irlt attcmpis to cllal)l.ilh colleges for the rception of

» Encyclopedic, Ait. 7Jiuit', toml. viii. 513.

Flu d1 cts

BOOK VI. students were violently opposed by the universities in different

-54. countries, it became necessary for them, as the mos effedual

method of acquiring the publick favour, to surpass their rivals

Particularly in science and induflry. This prompted themi to cultivate with
to licrature. great ardour the study of ancient literature. This put them

upon various methods for facilitating the inftrution of youth;
and by the improvements which they made in it, they have
contributed not a little towards the progress of polite learning,
and have on this account meritcd well of society. Nor has the
order of Jefiits been successful only in teaching the elements
of literature, it has produced likewise eminent masters in many
branches of science, and can alone boast of a greater number
of ingenious authors, than all the other religious fraternities
taken togetler .

X M. d'Alembert has observcd that though the Jesuits have made extraordi-

nary progress in erudition of every species ; though they can reckon up many of
their brethren who have been eminent mathematicians, antiquarians, and cri-
ticks; though they have even formed ome orators of reputation ; yet the order
has never produced one man, whose mind was so much enlightened with found
knowledge, as to merit the name of a philosopher. But it fems to be the un-
avoidable cffet of monaftick educationl to conract and fetter the human mind.
The partial attachment of a monk to the interest of his order, which is often
incompatible with that of other citizens ; the habit of implicit obedience to the
will of a superior, together with the frequent return of the wcarifome and fiivo-
lous duties of the cloiiter, debate his faculties, and extinguifli that gencrofity
of sentiment and fpilit, which qualifies men for thinking or feeling justly with
refpcA to what is proper in life and conduti. Father Paul of Venice is, per-
haps, the only person educated in a cloister, that ever was altogether fipcrior to
its prejudices, or who viewed the tranfaions of men, and reasoned concerning
the intercfts of oIcicty, with the enlarged sentiments of a philosopher, with the
dilfcrnmint of a man convcrfant in affairs, and with the liberality of a gentle-
man.

13 u '

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have exhibitea the BOOK VI.

mioft wonderful display of their abilities, and have contributed 7T
most effectually to the benefit of the human fpccies. The con- Mor cfe', i-
querors of that unfortunate quarter of the globe had nothing .,... ,
in view, but to plunder, to enslave, and to exterminate its in- i':r j.. ,,
habitants. The Jeiuits alone have made humanity the olject of
their fettling there. About the beginning of the last century thiey
obtained admiflion into the fertile province of Paraguay, which
firetches across the southern continent f America, from the
bottom of the mountains of Potofl, to the confincs of the
Spanifli and Portuguese fcttlcmcnts on tle banks of the river
de la Plata. They found the inhabitants in a fiatc, little dif-
ferent from that which takes place amongt men whlcn they firi-
begin to unite together; tfrangers to the arts; fbfillting pre-
carioufly by hunting or fishing; and scarce acquainted with the
first principles of fidbordination and government. The Jesuits
set themselves to inftrud and to civilize these savages. They
taught them to cultivate the ground, to rear tame animnals, and
to build houses. They l)rought the o live together in vil-
lages. They trained them to arts and manufailurcs. rlThey
madc them tafle the fwccts of focicty ; and accuflomlcl tllem to
the bleflings of Iccuri ty and order. 'f'lleI people bc 'nc tlhe
fibljedts of their bclnef.iclors ; v.'h.L hatve verJclr tic'n withll a
tender attention, 'clenllllilln tl;lt, w\itl W\vlic ; ftlir (ir.Cl s
his children. Rcfpcded ;ad Icloved aliotf to adoralion, a f'ew
!etitits prclided over Ifomc liundrld ihol l'ti Itndli;an. 'I'licy
maiiltained a perled q cquil.ity amoii .all the lil)c'ri; of t!ls:
coinimnity. lach of tlictm vas ollicd to 1.10il nt ir ]isi'

bt-lt sJ,)]ic 1o '()o i h t b

alniel , 1)t fl('

tl e II l) lic: . Tlc pl.)(. c ol' tic l-il:., to(ctli.:'
;il c(in0 l )i' f()'cliol ;ii ;, froiin \'.l iil car'; it (lividi:;;l rc: .'i. 1

BOOK VI. every thing necessary for the supply of h's wants. By this in-

1540. ftitution, almost all the passions which disturb the peace of

society, and render the members of it unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magiflrates, chosen by the Indians themselves,
watched over the publick tranquillity, and secured obedience
to the laws. The sanguinary punihments frequent under
other governments were unknown. An admonition from a
Jesuit; a flight mark of infamy; or, on some singular occasion,
a few lathes with a whip, were sufficient to maintain good order
among these innocent and happy people .

Ien here the BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Jesuits for
ambizion and

lcy of the the good of mankind, the genius and spirit of their order

r der dif.
tcInible. have mingled and are discernible. They plainly aimed at efta-

blifhing in Paraguay an: independant empire, filbjed to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excellence of its con-
ftitution and police, could scarce have failed to extend its domi-
nion over all the southern continent of America. With this
view, in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese in the
adjacent settlements, from acquiring any influence over the
people whom they governed that might be dangerous, theJefuits
endeavoured to infpirc the Indians with hatred and contempt of
these nations. They cut off all intercourse between their sub-
jeds and the Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They pro-
hibited any private trader of either nation from entering their
territorics. When they were obliged to admit any person in
a publick character from the neighbouring governments, they
did not permit him to have any converlation with their fuljcds,

r Hilt. du Paraguay par Pcre de Charlcvoix, tom. ii. 42, &c. Voyage au
rcrou par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de Ulloa, tom, i. 540, &c, Par. 4to. 175z.

anli

and no Indian was allowed even to enter the house where these BooKVI.
strangers resided, unless in the presence of a Jesuit. In order "

,

to render any communication between them as difficult as pof-
fible, they induitrioufly avoided giving the Indians any know-
ledge of the Spanish, or of any other European language; but
encouraged the different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a certain dialect of the Indian tongue, and laboured to
make that the universal language throughout their dominions.
As all these precautions, without military force, would have been
insufficient to have rendered their empire secure and permanent,
they inftruded their fubjeds in the European arts of war. They
formed them into bodies of cavalry and infantry, completely
armed and regularly disciplined. They provided a great train
of artillery, as well as magazines stored with all the implements
of war. Thus they eablifhed an army so numerous and well-
appointed, as to be formidable in a country, where a few sickly
and ill-difciplined battalions composed all the military force
kept on foot by the Spaniards or Portuguefez.

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of power during Reason or

the reign of Charles V. who, with his usual sagacity, discerned g vg of theul
the dangerous tendency of the institution, and checked its pro- gpernmen
grefs a But as the order was founded in the period of which I of the order.
write the hiltory, and as the age to which I address this work
hath seen its fall, the view which I have exhibited of the laws
and genius of this formidable body will not, hope, be unaccep-
table to my rcaders; cccially as one circiumtance has enabled
me to enter into this detail witl particular advantage. Europe

Voyage de Juian & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Rccucil dcs toutes les Pieces qui
out par u fur les Aflaires ties Jesuites en Portugal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.

Conipte par M. de Momil. 1. 1

N n 2 had

BOOK VI. had observed for two centuries, the ambition and power of the

i. . order. But while it felt many fatal effects of these, it could&

not fully discern the causes to which they were to be imputed.
It was unacquainted with many of the singular regulations in the
political conflitution or government of the Jesuits, which form--
ed that spirit of intrigue and enterprize which distinguished its
members, and eevated the body itself to such a height of power.
It was a favourite maxim with the Jesuits, from their sirs infti-
tution, not to publish the rules of their order. These they kept
concealed as an impenetrable mystery. They never communi-
cated them to trangers; nor even to the greater part of their
ownv members. They refused to produce them when required by
courts ofjuflice b; ant! by a strange solecism in policy, the civil
power in different countries authorized or connived at the efta-
bliflment of an order of men, whose conflitution and laws were
concealed with a follicitude, which alone was a good reason for
having excluded them. During the prosecutions lately carried
on againfl them in Portugal and France, the Jesuits have been
ib inconidlerate as to produce the mysterious volumes of their
iiifltutc. By the aid of these authentick records, the prin-
ciples of tlicir govecrnmrent may be delineated, and the iburces
c:f their power invcfligated with a degree of certainty and prc-
cifon, which, previous to that event, it was ilp( fible to attain c.

H[iPR,. des Jc. tom. iii. 2.,6, &c. Cuinp:e par M. d ChIliot. p. 38.
c T ' {.-c u;itt: r )p.rt (! y ihfornl;a:i , l (ol ..'[:ib ),s

thl' '(,vi-'riimcit and l.ws of

lh e orld r (, Jfslit;:, I ha:i: derived from; tlic l'po(lt., f M. ,1i (l';.t!(t.li:; ;1nd MI.
de MonIclir. I rcfl not, lhowever, upon the authiit y v'ven ,f t!h tlcf rcfipcitalcl
Inli;itr iic', :iit(l l

dr aw2it wriluc :, bi)tt Lpon in) m

n r;blc p.ille'. whichl tlhy h;ive

.r tra (tc( i, )ni t t' irii tI ti

n )i of tc orl I

w , ' i(l !l i tl(;i iiu ,!';. l [)li)l i:il),

a; I'roteliiit d(lit nc of' / r it h, in hii l-l//.,iI ; /../ititr,, pint .'(( ]. . 619, l, --

lilhcI a fill i uirt (,U tir c- ititrtions ol the J.fits, ui.whish lby (b: m

:.cciilicn-
hi Lh 1 sLot .1 op'v ; p. 1 -54.

J',l.t

Butas I have pointed out the dangerous tendency of the conflitu- BOOKV' .
tion and spirit of the order with the freedom becoming an hifto- ~ "
rian, the candour and impartiality no less requisite in that cha-
racer call on me to add oneobfervation, That no class of regular-
clergy in the Romiih church has been more eminent for decency,
and even purity of manners, than the major part of the order of
Jesuits . The maxims of an intriguing, ambitious, interefied
policy, might influence those who governed the society, and
might even corrupt the heart, and pervert the conduc of fomc
individuals, while the greater number, engaged in literary pur-
suits, or employed in the functions of religion, was left to the
guidance of those common principles which refrain men from
vice, and excite them to what is becoming and laudable. The
causes which occaioned the ruin of this mighty body, as well as
the circumflances and effects with which it has been attended in
the different countries of Europe, though objes extremely
worthy the attention of every intelligent observer of human.
affairs, do not fall within the period of this hiltory.

No sooner had Charles re-cflablifhcd order in the Low- Afl.irsc'

t;rrmnan;'.

Countries, than he was obliged to turn his attention to the
affairs of Germany. The protetlants prcffcd lim earncftly to
appoint that conference between a fcled number of the divines
of each party, which l;d(1 1)bell nilplal;icd in tice cvention at
t'rankfort. IThe Pope, tofli(ilrilng fuel) :ti

a tlitrmpt to exallmine

or decide the points in dlifl)ite as d(erogattory to his right of
bciog the iipreme jlge in ctrl-ovcr) f, anti prliladled tli;;t it
'would citlthr lb ilcf ual lIy dIetcrm inl ing

g

hi ting,

r prox C
daingcroL'; >by dcetcrmining tot( ilithi, employed every art to

5 alr la d(flrudl. dtis J(,, pa:tr M. D'Aknlt bcr,, p. ;5.

r-,1,c L tit.

BooxKVI. prevent the meeting. The Emperor, however, finding it moe

1-~o, for his interclt to sooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid

A conferencc little regard to his remonfirances. In a diet held at Haguenaw,
hctwren the
Popifil and matters were ripened for the conference. In another diet assem-
Jcertlas lbled at Worms, the conference was begun, Melandhon on the
d iins.
June z. one fide and Eckius on the other, fuflaining the principal part in

the dispute; but after they had made some progress, tho' without
concluding any thing, it was suspended by the Emperor's com-
mand, that it might be renewed with greater solemnity in his own
i54,. presence in a diet summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This assem-

bly was opened with great pomp, and with a general expedation
that its proceedings would be vigorous and decisive. By the
confcnt of both parties, the Emperor was entrufied with the
power of nominating the persons who ihould manage the con-
ference, which it was agreed hould be conduted not in the
form of a publick disputation, but as a friendly scrutiny or ex-
amination into the articles which had given rife to the present
controversies. He appointed Eckius, Gropper and Pflug, on
.the part of the Catholicks, and Melanthon, ucer and Piftorius,
on that of the Protestants, all men of diflinguifhed reputation
among their own adherents, and, except Eckius, all eminent for
their moderation, as well as desirous of peace. As theywere about
to begin their confilltations, the Emperor put into their hands a
book, composed, as he said, by a learned divine in the Low-Coun-
tries, with such extraordinary pcrfpicuity and temper, as might go
far, in his opinion, to unite and comprehend tih twocontending
parties. Gropper, a canon of Cologne, whom he had named
among the managers of the conference, a man of address as well
as of erudition, was afterwards fufpeded to be the author of this
lhort trcatife. It contained politions with regard to twenty-two
,of the chief articles in theology, which included moll of the

2 qucflions

questions then agitated in the controversy between the Luthe- Boo KVT.
rans and the church of Rome. By ranging his sentiments in' a -7~
natural order, and exprefling them with great simplicity; by
employing often the very words of scripture, or of the primitive
fathers; by softening the rigour of some opinions, and explain-
ing away what was absurd in others; by concessions, now on
one fide, and now on the other; and especially by banishing as
much as possible scholastic phrases, those words and terms of art
in controversy; which serve as badges of diflindion to the diffe-
rent feds, and for which theologians often contend more
fiercely than for opinions themselves; he framed his work in
such a manner, as promised fairer than any thing that had
hitherto been attempted, to compose and to terminate religious
dissensions .

BUT the attention of the age was turned, with such acute Fruitless.

observation, towards theological controversies, that it was not
easy to impose on it by any gloss how artful or specious soever.
The length and eagerness of the dispute had separated the con-
tending parties so compleatly, and had set their minds at such
variance, that they were not to be reconciled by partial concef-
lions. All the zealous Catholics, particularly the ecclefiaffics who
had a feat in the diet, joined in condemning Cropper's treatise as
too favourable to the Lutheran opinions, the poison of which he-
refy it conveyed, as they pretended, with greater danger, because
it was in ibme degrec dlguifd. The rigid Protestants, eiecially
Luther hiiinclf, and his patron the EIlecor of Saxony, were for
rcjecding it as an impious compound of error and truth, craftily
prcparcd that it might ipoic on the weak, the timid and tire

c (olJaft. Conflit. Impcr. ii. p. 182,

unthinking,

BooK VI. unthinking. But the divines, to whom the examination of it

.. wascommitted, entered upon that business with greater delibera-

tion.and temper. As it was more easy in itself, as well as more
.consistent with the dignity of the church to make concessions,
and even alterations with regard to speculative opinions, the
difculion whereof is confined chiefly to schools, and which pre-
ient nothing to the people that either firikes their- imagination
*or affeds their senses, they came to an accommodation about
these without much labour, and even defined the great article
concerning juflification to their mutual fatisfacion. But, when
they proceeded to points of jurifdidion, where the interest and
authority of the Roman See were concerned, or to the rites and
forms of external worflip, where every change that could be
made must be public, and draw the observation of the people,
there the Catholics were altogether untradable; nor could the
church either with safety or with honour abolish its ancient in-
flitutions. All the articles relative to the power of the Pope, the
authority of councils, the administration of the sacraments, the
worflip of faints, and many other particulars did not, in their
nature, admit of any temperament; so that after labouring
long to bring about an accommodation with refped to these, the

'Rcccrs of Emperor found all his endeavours ineffcatual. Being impatient,
the ict of
Raiibnrlin however, to clotc the diet, he at last prevailed on a majority
fvurofla of the members to approve of the following rccefs; " That
cucjIil. the articles concerning which the divines had agreed in the con-
,July 23.

frencc, houl be held as points decided, and be obl)rvedl invio-
laibly y all; that the other articles about which they had dlifferd,
iliould be referred to tiec dctcriltti )n; of a general council, or
it' that could not be obtained, to a national ynod of Germany;
:andt if it lould prove imlnra(ical)lc, likcwilf, to afinblc a fylnod,
tlihit a general diet of the Empire fliould be called within cigli-

^~8~~~~~~ teccn

teen months, in order to give some final judgment upon the BooKVI.
whole controversy; that the Emperor should use all his interest '-'

'54'.

and authority with the Pope, to procure the meeting either of a
general council or fynod; that, in the mean time, no innovations
should be attempted, no endeavours should be employed to gain
proselytes; and neither the revenues of the church, nor the rights
of the monasteries, should be invaded .

ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the recess in Gives ofence

both to 'a p1s

which they terminated, gave great offence to the Pope. The power and 'rotc-
which the Germans had assumed of appointing their own divines Rants.
to examine and determine matters of controversy, he confidered
as a very dangerous invasion on his rights; the renewing of their
ancient proposal concerning a national fynod, which had been so
often rejeced by him and his predecessors, appeared extremely
undutiful; but the bare mention of allowing a diet, composed
chiefly of laymen, to pass judgment with refpea to articles of
faith, was deemed no less criminal and profane, than the worst of
those herefies which they seemed zealous to suppress. On the
other hand, the Proteflants were no less dissatisfied with a recess,
which considerably abridged the liberty which they enjoyed at
that time. As they murmured loudly againfl it, Charles, unwil- (:,ares
ling to leave any feeds of ditcontcnt in the Empire, granted court th

ProxclLrir.

them a private declaration, in the molt ample terms, exempting
them from whatever they thought oppreflive or injurious in the
rccets, and afccrtaining to them the full poffrelion of all the
privileges which they had ever enjoyed.

Sleidan, 267, &c. Iallav. 1. iv. c. 11. p. 36. F. Paul, p. 86. Seckcnd.
i. iii. 256.

Sid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diploni. iv. p. ii. p. 210.
VoL. I. IL o EXTIRA-

BoOKVI. EXTRAORDINARY as these conceffioas may appear, the fitua.

,-' tion of his affairs at this juncture made it necessary for the Em-
AfFri f peror to grant them. he forcfaw a rupture with France to be

I""ar". unavoidable, as well as near at hand, and durR not give any such

cause of lifgult or fear to the Protestants, as might force them,
il flf-defencc, to court the proteflion of the French King, from
wh>n, at prcih::, they were much alienated. The rapid pro-
grels of the Turks in IHungary, was a more powcrful and prc-
fcnt caule of the moderation which Charles discovered. A great
revolttiion had happened in that kingdom; John Zapol Scxpus hav-
ing chofin, as as bccn related, rather to possess a tributary king-
dom, than to renounce the royal dignity to which he had been
accustomed, had, by the afFillance of his mighty protedor Soly-
man, wrefled from Ferdinand a great part of the country, and
left him only the precarious p)olcffion of the reft. But being
a Pri:ce of paci'ic qualities, the frequent attempts of Ferdinand,.
orof lis partizans among the Hungarians, to recover what they
had loft, gave him great pain; and the necessity, on these occa-
sions, of calling in the Turks, whom he confidered and felt to
be his inafters rather than auxiliaries, was scarce less mortifying.
In order, theretorc, to avoid these distresses, and to secure quiet
and leisure to enjoy the arts and amusements in which he de-
A. D.- '35 lighted, he fccrctly came to an agreement with his competitor,

on this condition; That Ferdinand lhould acknowledge him as
King of Hungary, and leave him, during life, the umolefled.
poft:llioii of that part of the kingdom now in his power; but
that, upon his dclleit, the sole right to the whole hould dlevolve
lupon lerdinand". As Jolln had nevcr bccn married, and was
then far advanced in life, the terms of the contrat fecined very

Illuanhaffi ilft. Hung. lib. Xii. p. 135.
.(. favourable

favourable to Ferdinand. But, soon after, some of the Hunga- BooKVT.
rian nobles, follicitous to prevent a foreigner from ascending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end to a long celi-
bacy, by marrying Isabella, the daughter of Sigifinond, King of
Poland. John had the fatisfadion, before his death, which hap- Jcath of tcle
pened within less than a year thereafter, to fee a son born to in- liung, r
herit his kingdom. To him, without regarding his treaty with
Ferdinand, which he confidered, no doubt, as void, upon an event
not foreseen when it was concluded, he bequeathed his crown;
appointing the Queen and George Martinuzzi, bifbop of Wara-
din, guardians of his son, and regents of the kingdom. The greater
part of the Hungarians immediately acknowledged the young
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their monarchy,
they gave the name of Stephen'.

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by this un- Ferdilan.l's

efF}/ts to o

expeted event, resolved not to abandon the kingdom which he in the
had acquired by his compac with John. He sent ambafiTdors c'oW".
to the (Qeen to claim possession, and to offer the province f
Tranifylvania as a settlement for her son, preparing at the ftme
time to affcrt his right by force of arms. 13ut John had com-
mitted the care of his son to persons, who had too mich firit to
give up the crown tamely, and who poffcf'cTl :bilitiesfilcic:nt
to defend it. The Queen, to all the address peculiar to her own
sex, added a masculine courage, mbition, and magnanimity.
Martinuzzi, who had raised hiinfelf from the lowest rank in life Cliar.acrarT

p )ower of

to his present dignity, was one of tliole extraordinary men, who Maitiinuzi.
by the extent as well s variety of their talents, are fitted toa(1:
a- fupcrior part in Ibutling and fatiotus times. In dili;llar;i;ilg tle

Jovii Flift. lib. 39, p. 239, a. &c.

0 o o 2 ftllisls

BOOK VI. fundions of his ecclefiaflical office, he put on the semblance of

an hulbnle and austere fantity. He discovered, in civil tran-
1541.

facions, industry, dexterity and boldness. During war he laid
aside the cassock, and appeared on horseback with his fcymeter
and buckler, as aaive, as oflentatious, and as gallant as any of
his countrymen. Amidst all there different and contradicory
forms which he could aflume, an insatiable desire of dominion
and authority was conspicuous. From such persons it was ob.
vious what answer Ferdinand had to exped. He soon perceived
that he must depend on arms alone for recovering Hungary.
Having levied for this purpose a considerable body of Germans,
whoml his partizans among the Hungarians joined with their.
vassals, he ordered them to march into that part of the kingdom
which adhered to Stephen. Martinuzzi, unable to make head
againfi such a powerful army in the field, satisfied himfelfwith
holding out the towns, all of which, epecially Buda, the place
of greatest consequence, he provided with every thing necessary

ili1 ii, the for defence; and in the mean time he ent ambassadors to Soly-
'rks. man, beseeching him to extend towards the son, the fame Imperial.

protection which had so long maintained the father on his.
throne. The Sultan, though Ferdinand ued his utmost endea-
vours to thwart this negociation, and even offered to accept of
the Hungarian crown on the fame ignominious condition of pay-
ing tribute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had held it,
saw filch profpeds of advantage from espousing the interest of
the young King, that he inflantly promised, him his protetion;
and commanding one army to advance towards Hungary, he
himself followed with another. Meanwhile the Germans,
hoping to terminate the war by the redution of a city in which
tUc King and his mother werc ihut up, had formed the siege of

Buda.

Buda. Martinuzzi, having drawn thither the strength of the BOOKVL
Hungarian nobility, defended the town with such courage and
ikill, as allowed the Turkish forces time to come up to its relief.
They instantly attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue,
diseases and desertion, and defeated them with great slaughter .

SOLYMAN soon after joined his vicorious troops, and being Solyman'

weary of so many expensive expeditions undertaken in defence of óund-"*
dominions which were not his own, or being unable to resist this
alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom, while poffelfed by
an infant, under the guardianship of a woman and a priest, he
allowed interelted considerations to triumph with too much
facility over the principles of honour and the sentiments of hu-
manity. What he planned ungenerously, he executed by fraud.
Having prevailed on the Queen to fend her son, whom he
pretended to be desirous of feeing, into his camp, and having
at the fame time invited the chief of the nobility to an enter-
tainment there, while they, fufpeading no treachery, gave them-
selves up to the mirth and jollity of the feast, a feledc band of
troops by the Sultan's orders seized one of the gates of Buda.
Being thus master of the capital, of the King's person and of
the leading men among the nobles, he ordered the Queen together
with her son to be conducted to Tranfilvania, which province he
allotted to them, and appointing a Bafha to rcfide in Buda with
a large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary to the Ottoman Em-
pire. The tears and complaints of the unhappy Queen had no
influence to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi either rcfift
his absolute and uncontroulable command, or prevail on him to
recal it '.

Ifluanhaffi. hifl. Hung. lib. 14. p. 150.
'Uluanhaffi. lib. 14. p. 56, Jovii hiftor. lib. 39. p. 2476, &c.

BEFOR n

BOOK VI, BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation reached Ser-

lil dinand, he was o unlucky as to have dispatched new ambaffa-
1j41.

Ferdinand's dors to Solyman with a fresh representation of his right to the
overtures to
SolymSn. crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of his former overture to

hold the kingdom, of the Ottoman Porte, and to pay for it an
annual tribute. This ill-timed proposal was rejeted with scorn.
The Sultan elated with success, and thinking that he might
prescribe what terms he pleased to a Prince who voluntarily
prosered conditions so unbecoming his own dignity, declared
that he would not suspend the operations of war, unless Ferdi-
nand inflantly evacuated all the towns which he flill held in Hun-
gary, and contented to the imposition of a tribute upon Auflria, in
order to reimburse the fiums, which his presumptuous invasion
of Hungary had obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in de-
fence of that kingdom "'.

SUCH was the state of affairs in Hungary. As the unfor-

tunate events there had either happened before the diffolu-
tion of the diet at Ratisbon, or were dreaded at that time,
Charles saw the danger of irritating and inflaming the minds of the
Germans, while Lfch a formidable enemy was ready to break into
the Empire; and perceived that he could not expcd any vigo-
rous afilancc either towards the recovery of lungary or the
defence of the Aullrian frontier unlcef lie courted and itisfied
the Proteflants. By the concessions which have been mentioned,
lie gained this point, and such liberal iippl)lics both of menc and
money were voted for carrying on the war against the Turks,

Ifluanhaffii hii. HIung. 1. 14... 158.

as

as left him under little anxiety about the security of Germany BOOK VI.
during next campaign".

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, the Empe- Emperor

ror set out for Italy. As he pasTed through Lucca he had a short s
interview with the Pope, but nothing could be concluded con-
cerning the proper method of composing the religious disputes
in Germany, between two Princes whose views and interest
with regard to that matter were at this juncture so opposite.
The Pope's endeavours to remove the causes of discord between
Charles and Francis, and to extinguish those mutual animofities
which threatened to break out suddenly into open hostility,
were not more successful.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely, at that time, His cxredi-

:* *111'1~~~ * n AI * ~~~tion againit
on the great enterprize which he had concerted againt Algiers, A Sins, :nh

mnotivs of it,

that he listened with little attention to the Pope's schemes or
overtures, and hastened to join his army and fleet .

ALGIIERS ftilI continued in that slate of dependance on the

Turkifhl empire to which llarbarofla had filbjeed it. Ever since
he, as captain Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Algiers
had been governed by HFafccn-Aga, a rcnegado eunuch, who by
paflling through every flation in the Corsairs fcrvice, had ac-
quired great experiencce in war, and was well fitted for a station
which required a ltan of tried and dlaring courage. Iaflccn,.
in order to shew how well lie deserved that dignity, carried on

" Slei. 283. Saidlov. iiflor. torn. ii. 298.

his

BooJKVI. his piratical depredations against the Christian States with

J4. - amazing aivity, and out-did, if pollible, Barbarossa himself

in boldness and cruelty. The commerce of the Mediterranean
was greatly interrupted by his cruisers, and such frequent
alarms given to the coasts of Spain, that there was a necessity
of ereding watch-towers at proper distances, and of keeping
guards constantly on foot, in order to descry the approach of his
lquadrons, and to protet the inhabitants from their descents P.
Of this the Emperor's fubjets had long complained, represent-
ing it as an enterprize corresponding to his power, and becom-
ing his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which since the conquest
of Tunis, was the common receptacle of all the free booters;
and to exterminate that lawless race, the implacable enemies of
the Chriffian name. Moved partly by their intreaties, and
partly allured by the hope of adding to the glory which he had ac-
quired by his last expedition into Africa, Charles before he left
Madrid in his way to the Low-Countries had issued orders both
in Spain and Italy to prepare a fleet and army for this purpose.
No change in circumflances, since that time, could divert
him from this resolution, or prevail on him to turn his arms
towards Hungary; though the success of the Turks in that
country seemed more immediately to require his prefcnce there;
though many of his most faithful adherents in Germany urged
that the defence of the Empire ought to be his first and peculiar
care; though such as bore him no good will ridiculed his pre-
pofterous condut in flying from an enemy almost at hand, that
lie might go in quest of a remote and more ignoble foe. But to
attack the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid focver that mea-
furc might appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his

* Jovii hist. 1. 40. p. 266.
*.. -t power,

power, and was not consistent with his interest. To draw BooK VI.
troops out of Spain or Italy, to march them into a country so t5.
distant as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus necessary for
transporting thither the artillery, ammunition and baggage of
a regular army, and to push the war in that quarter, where it
could scarce be brought to any issue during several compaigns,
were undertakings so expensive and unweildy as did not cor-
respond with the low condition of the Emperor's treasury.
While his principal force was thus employed, his dominions in
Italy and the Low-Countries must have lain open to the French
King, who would not have allowed such a favourable opportu-
nity of attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which were already
finished and almost the whole expence of it defrayed, would de-
pend upon a single effort, and besides the security and satis-
fadion which the success of it muff give his fubjeds, would
detain him during so short a space, that Francis could scarce
take advantage of his absence, to invade his dominions in
Europe.

ON all there accounts, Charles adhered to his sir/s plan, and His prepara.

with such determined obstinacy, that he paid no regard to the tions.
Pope who advised, or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not
to expose his whole armament to almost unavoidable deftruc-
tion, by venturing at such an advanced season of the year, and
while the autumnal winds were so violent, to approach the
dangerous coast of Algiers. Having embarked on board Doria's
gallies at Porto-Venere in the Genoese territories, he oon
found that this experienced sailor had not judged wrong con-
cerning the element with which lie was so well acquainted; for

VOL. II. P p p fich

BOOK VI. such a storm arose that it was with the utmost difficulty and

""41-. danger he reached Sardinia, the place of general rendezvous.

But as his courage was undaunted, and his temper often inflexi-
ble, neither the remonfirances of the Pope and Doria, nor the
danger to which he had already been exposed by disregarding
them, had any other effect than to confirm him in his fatal re-
solution. The force, indeed, which he had collected was such
as might have inspired a Prince less adventrous, and less con-
sident in his own schemes, with the most sanguine hopes of
fucccfs. It confifled of twenty thousand foot, and two thou-
i.nd horse, Spaniards, Italians and Germans, mostly veterans,
togcthr with three thousand volunteers, the flower of the
Spanilh and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Em-
peror by attending him in this favourite expedition, and eager
to share in the glory which they believed he was going to reap;
to thLic were added a thousand soldiers sent from Malta by the
order of St. John, led by an hundred of its most gallant
Knights.

1alnde in THIE voyage, from Majorca to the African coast, was not
Aflita.

lcfs tedious, or full of hazard, than that which he had jufi
finiflicd. When he approached the land, the roll of the
fca, and vehemence of the winds, would not permit the troops
to difcmbark. But at last, the Emperor seizing a favourable
opportunity, landed them without opposition, not fr from
Algiers, and immediately advanced towards the town. To
oppose this mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred
Turks, and five thousand Moors, partly natives of Africa, and
partly refugees from Granada. He rturned, however, a fierce
and haughty afwcr when summoncd to urrcnder. 13ut witl

.-, icIx
*

such a handful of soldiers, neither his desperate courage, nor BOOK VI.
;onfummate skill in war could have long resifted forces fupe- '
rior to those which had defeated Barbarossa at the head of sixty
thousand men, and had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his cii-
deavours to save it.

BUT how far soever the Emperor might think himself be- The diflt,'r
yond the reach of any danger froln the enemy, he was suddenly which befell

his arnmyv.

exposcd to a more dreadfiul calamity, and one againls wlich
hluman prudence, and human efforts availed nothing.. On tie
second day after his landing, and before he llad time for any
thing but to dili)erfe some light armed Arabs who molesed llis
troops on their march, the clouds began to gather, and tle
heavens to appear with a fierce and threatening aspet. To-
wards evening rain began to fall accompanied with violent wind,
and the rage of the tempest increasing during the niglt, the
soldiers who had brought nothing afllore but their arms, re-
mained exposed to all its fury without tents, or flelter, or cover
of any kind. The ground was soon so wetthat they could not lie
down on it ; their camp being in a low situation was ovcrflowcd
with water, and they funk at every flop to tlie ankles in mud;
while tle vind blew with such impletuoity, that to prevent
their flling they were obliged to thruI thcir fi)ears into tlie
lground, a;ln to itlpp)ort tlainiclvcs by taking hold of thlcl.
Ilaifcen wa; to vigilant anll oicer to allovw aii enemlly i inch
diflrefs to remain uiilnoleflcd. A)boult the dawni of' Ilmonigiwi,
lie fillicd out xvilth folliers, wlo avillg been Icrccncl llfom- tlle
I(loi-n till dr tcir own roofs, were firclh and vigolous. A body
ft Italials wlo were flati)Cod nearef'l tll city, diliiritcd and
bLinuimbd witl coldl, fl1d at tie pplroaclh of the T'Iuks. lThe

1' P1 1P - troops

BooKVI. troops at the post behind them, discovertd greater courage,

IS4,.J but as the rain had extinguiihed their matches and wet their

powder, their muskets were useless, and having scarce firength
to handle their other arms, they were soon thrown into con-
fusion. Almofi the whole army, with the Emperor him-
self in person, was obliged to advance before the enemy could
be repulsed, who, after spreading such general conflernation,
and killing a considerable number of men, retired at last in good
order.
And fleet. BUT all feeling or remembrance of this ofs and danger were

quickly obliterated by a more dreadful as well as affeding spec-
taclc. It was now broad day; the hurricane had abated no-
thing of its violence, and the sea appeared agitated with all the
rage of which that dcflruEtive element is capable; all the ships, on;
vhich alone the whole army knew that their safety and sub-
Iiflencc depended, were cfen driven from their anchors, some
dafhling against each other, ome beat to pieces on the rocks,
many forced ashore, and not a few finking in the waves. In.
lcef than an hour, fifteen fllips of war, and an hundred and'
forty transports witl eight thousand men perished ; and such of
tlhe unhlappy crews, as cfcapcd tlh fury of the fca, were inur-
dered, without mercy, y the Arabs, as soon as they reached
land. The Emperor flood in silent anguifll and aonifhlncnt
Ieho)lding tills fatal event, which at once laltcd all his hopes
of ficccfs, and buried in the depths the vaRl flores which lie liad
provided as well for annoying the cnemy, as for fiiblfling Ihis
own troops. He had it not in his power to afford them any other
ai;fl;ancc or relief thlan by flnding Iome troops to drive away the
Arabs, and thus (llivcring a few who wcrc t) ortunate as to get

aflhorc

a·aore from the cruel fate which their companions had met with. BOOK I.
At last the wind began to fall, and to give some hopes that as
many hips might escape, as to save the army from perishing by
famine, and transport them back to Europe. But these were
only hopes; the approach of evening covered the sea with dark-
ness; and it being irpoflible for the officers aboard the ships
that had out-lived the storm to fend any intelligence to their
companions who were aihore, they remained during the night
in all the anguish of fulpenfe and uncertainty. Next day, a
boat dispatched by Doria made shift to reach land, with infor-
mation, that having weathered out the florm, to which, during
fifty years knowledge of the sea, he had never seen any equal ia
fierceness and horror, he had found it neceflary to bear away
with his shattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised the Em-
peror, as the face of the sky was flill lowering and tempestuous,
to march with all speed to that place, where the troops could re-
imbark with greater ease.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afforded Charles, from Obligedto

being assured that part of his fleet had escaped, was ballanced by te,.
the new cares and perplexity in which it involved him with re-
gard to his army. Metafuz was at least three days march from
his present camp; all the provisions which lie had brought ashore
at his firls landing were now consumed; his soldiers, worn out
with fatigue, were fcarcc able for such a journey, even i n a friendly
country; and being (Iiltirited by a ILicceflon of hardllips, which
vidcory itfclf would falrcc have rcndered tolerable, they were
in no condition to undergo new toils. But the situation of the
army was filch, as allowed not one omelnt for deliberation, nor
left it in the leal doultful what to chuic. They were ordered
inflantly to march, the wounded, the ick and the fble beinoa

placed

BOOK VI. placed in the centre; such as seemed most vigorous were fta-

-s ^ ' tioned in the front and rear. Then the fad effeds of what they
1S41.

had suffered began to appear more manifefily than ever, and new
calamities wcrcadded to all these which they had already endured.
Some could scarce bear the weight of their arms; others, spent
with the toil of forcing their way through deep and alinoft im-
pafflble roads, funk down and died; many periflicd by famine,
as the whole army fubfiflcd chiefly on roots and berries, or the
fleflh of horfcs, illed by the Emperor's order, and distributed
among the fevcral battalions; many were drowned in brooks which
were fwvoln so much by the exceflive rains, that in pafling them
they waded up to the chin; not a few were killed by the enemy,
who during the greatest part of their retreat, alarmed, harraffed
and annoyed thc.n night and day. At last they arrived at Meta-
fuz; and the weather being now so calm as to retore their com-
munication with the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of
provifiols, and cheered with the profped of safety.
Ilis fortitu!e DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the Emperor dif-

of i. covered great qualities, many of lwhich an almnofl uninterrupted

ilow of plrofperity had hitherto afforded him no opportunity of
liiiiplying. He was colfplicuous for firmncis and conllancy of
is)irit, for nm.igtaninlity, fortitude, humanity and compa;llion.
lhe cendclrcd as great l.irdihips as tlhe ncanefl fildier; lie cxlxpfccd
lis own pcrfoi llv icr-cvcr danger al)piar'c(; lie cncouraged tle
dclielrlinrvr; vilitctl tile ick a111d nVwotJnlcdl ; and alillated all by
Iis words and cxalill)l. \Vl(en the army cnmbIrkdt , hle was
anoi( te as who left the l)lore, although a body of Ar)abs
hovcred at no great (dillicc, rea(dy to fll oln le rear. lv tlheic
virtues, (',liarles atto)}cd, in l o i e degree, ior lis obhllilacy al(d

rCf;dlinltion in undertakiing all Cx (Iedition ( sO tal to his Iillj('ds.

'1 1

THE calamities which attended this unfortunate enterprize did BooK VI.

not end here; for no sooner were the forces got on board, than
a new florm arising, though less furious than the former, scat- Retunsto

Euroe.

tered the fleet, and obliged them, separately, to make towards
such ports in Spain or Italy as they could first reach; thus spread-
ing the account of their disasters, with all the circumflances of
aggravation and horror, which their fear or fancy suggested.
The Emperor himself, after efeaping great dangers, and being
forced into the port of Bugia in Africa, where he was obliged December z.
by contrary winds to remain several weeks, arrived at last in
Spain, in a condition very different from that in which lie had
returned from his former expedition againfl the Infidels'.

'z Carol. v. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villagnonem Equitem Rho-

dium ap Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii Hifl 1. xl. p. 269-b. Vera. y Zunia
vid' de Carlos v . p. 3 Sandov. Hiflor. ii. 299, &c.

END OF TIlE SECOND VOLUMIE,
