THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Q.een MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

W I T H A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to

that PERIOD;
And an A PPEN DIx containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

VOLUME I.
THE SEVENTH EDITION.

DUBLIN;
PRINTED FOR THE UNITED COMPANY OF BOOKSELLERS.

MDCCLXXV.

# BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

O F
S C O T L A ND.

BOOK 1.

Contaihiig a review te

of So T T I H ft
' lorU reviMuw, t the

death of JAMES V.
T HE first ages of the Scottish tHiRory are dark and fa. BooK 1.

bulous. Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity. '-V

by degrees, and the events which happened during their infancyq The 'igin
or early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not to bef-bl'uosd
remembered. The gross ignorance, which anciently covered bfaure.
all the North of Europe, the continual migrations of its inha-
bitants, and the frequent and destructive revolutions which
these occasioned, render it impofiible to give any authentic
account of the origin of the different kingdoms now eftabliih-
ed there. Every thing beyond that. ihort period, to which well
attested annals reach, is obscure; an immense space is left.
for invention to occupy, each nation, with a vanity infepara-
ble from human nature, hath filled that void with events cal.
culated to display its own antiquity, and lustre. And hifto-
ry which ought to record truth and.to teach.wifdom, often
sets out with retailing fictions and absurdities.

T H E Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high as any:Origin of

of. their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and. the the Seota
traditions of their bards, still more uncertain, they reckon up a
series of kings several ages before the birth of Christ; and give
a particular detail of the occurrences, which happened in their'
reigns. But with regard to the Scots,. as well as the otherJ
northern nations, we receive the carlicft accounts on which'
we can depend, not from their own, but from the Roman au-
thors. When theRomans, under Agricola, firlt carried theirA D. t*
arms into the northern parts of Britain they found it polbffedY'
by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people ; and having
repulsed, rather than conquered them, they erested a strong
wall between the firths of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed'
tlhe boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on, account of the
difficguly of defending such a distant frontier, contrasted the

VOL. I. B limits

BOOK I. limits of the Roman province in Britain, by building a second
L4 wall which ran between Newcastle and Carlisle. The am-
A. D. 11l. bition of succeeding emperors endeavoured to recover what

Adrian had abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was alternately under the dominion of the Romans, and the
Caledonians. About the beginning of the fifth century, the
inroads of the Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Romans,
in order to defend the centre of their empire, to recall those
legions, which guarded the frontier provinces; and at that
time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.
A. D. 4t1. THE I R long residence in the island had polifled, in some

degree, the rude inhabitants, ard the Britons were indebted
to their intercourse with the Romans, for the art of writing,
and the use of numbers, without which it is impofilble long
to preserve the memory of past events.

N o R T H BR IT A I N was, by their retreat, left under the

dominion of the Scots and Pi&s. The former, who were not
mentioned by any Roman author, before the end of the fourth
century, were probably a colony of the Celta or Gauls;
their affinity to whom appears from their language, their man-
ners and religious rites: circumstances more decisive, with
regard to the origin of nations, than either fabulous traditi-
ons, or the tales of ill-informed, and credulous Annalists.
The Scots, if we may believe the common accounts, fettled at
first in Ireland; and extending themselves by degrees, landed at
last on the coasts opposite to that island, and fixed their habita-
tions there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several ages,
carried on between them and the Pits. At length, Kenneth
A. D. 838. II. the fixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to their own

fabulous authors) obtained a complete vicory over the PiAs,
and united under one monarchy, the whole country, from the
wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean. And his kingdom be-
came known by its present name, which it derived from a peo-
ple who at first fettled there as strangers, and remained long ob-
fcure and inconsiderable.

HiRory of FROM this period, the history of Scotland would merit
Scotlian pe. rome attention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But
srcurl o. as our remote antiquities are involved in the fame darkness with

those of other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has
thrown almost an equal obscurity over our more recent tranfacti-
ons. This was occasioned by the malicious policy of Edward
I. of England. Towards the end of the thirteenth century,
this monarch called in question the independence of Scotland;
pretending that that kingdom was held as a fief of the crown
of England, and fubje&ted to all the conditions of a feudal te-
nure. In order to eAablifl his claim, he seized the public ar-
chives, he ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
polffllion, by force or fraud, of many historical monuments,

which

which tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king- BOOK r.
dom, he carried some of them into England; and comimanded 'v'"-
the ref to be burned. ' An universal oblivion of past tranfac- * Ines EBT
tions might have been the effect of this fatal event, but tome far Si;.
imperfect Chronicles had escaped the rage of Edward ; foreign
writers had recorded some important fats relating to Scotland;
and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were frelh and
worthy of credit. These broken fragments, John deFordun;
who lived in the fourteenth century, colleced with a pious
indufiry, and from them picked out materials, which he form-
ed into a regular history. His work was received by his coun-
trymen with applause; and as no recourse could. be had to
more ancient records, it supplied the place of authentic annals
of the kingdom. It was copied in many monasteries, and the
thread of the narrative was continued, by different monks, thro'
the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the sixteenth cen-
tury, John Major and He&tor Boethius publilhed their history
of Scotland, the former a fuccin& and dry writer, the latter a
copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work; and if his
accuracy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to
the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and vigour of his
style, his history might be placed on a level with the most ad-
mired compositions of the ancients. But, instead of rejecting
the improbable tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the ut-
most pains to adorn them; and hath cloathed with all the
beauties and graces of fiEtion, those legends, which formerly
had only its wildness and extravagance.

TH E history of Scotland may properly be divided into four Four re,-

periods. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to rkas in the
the reign of Kenneth II. The second from Kenneth's conquest Scottish his-
of the Picts, to the death of Alexander III. The third ex- tory.
tends to the death of James V. The last, fiom thence to the
acceflion of James VI. to the crown of England.

TH E firit period is the region of pure fable and conjeCture,

and ought to be totally neglected, or be abandoned to the in-
duftry and credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in
the second period, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually
increasing; and the events which then happened, may be
slightly touched, but merit no particular or laborious enquiry.
In the third period, the history of Scotland, chiefly by means
of records preserved in England, becomes more authentic; not
only are events related, but their causes and effeces explained;
the characer of the actors arc displayed ; the manners of the
age described ; the revolutions in the constitution pointed out:
and here every Scotfnian flould begin, not to read only, but
to fudy the history of his country. During tie fourth period,
the affairs of Scotland were so mingled wit those of other na-

B z tions,

BooK I. tions, its fituatiqn: in the .political fate ofEurope was so imn-

sy portant, its .influence on the operations of the neighboufing

kingdoms. ws si visible, that. its hitory -becomes an object of
tSintion 'to foreigners, and without some knowledge of the
varnous and extraordinary .revolutions which happened.there,
tey cannot form a jiff nQtion either of .the. most illutrious e-
vents, or of the characters of the most distinguished personages
in the sixteenth century.

.A ew of TH s following history is copfined to the last of these peri-
the third E-ods. To give a view of the political slate of the kingdom,
ra. during that which immediately preceded it, is the design of

this .preliminary book. The imperfet .knowledge which ttran-
gers have of the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scots-
men themifelves have imbibed with regard to the various revo-
lutions in the government of their country, render such an in-
troduction equally neeeffary to both.

TH a period from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, front
the year.1286, to the year 1542.

Rife of the IT opens with the famous controveriy, concerning the inde-
coatroverfy pendence of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms,
concerning this was a question of much importance. If the one crown
heindeof had been coniidered not as imperial and independent, but as
Scotland. feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could not have been

concluded on equal terms, and every advantage which the de-
pendent kingdom procured, muff have been esteemed the con-
cefiion of a sovereign to his vassal. Accordingly about the be-
ginning of the present century, and while a treaty of union be-
tween the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy was a-
gitated with all the heat, which national animofities naturally
inspire. What was then a subjet of serious concern, the union
of the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere curiosity.
But though the objecs, which at that time warmed and inte-
refted both nations, exist no longer, a question which appeared
so momentous to our ancestors, cannot be altogether indifferent
or uninitrucive to us.

So M g of the northern counties of England were early in the

hands of the Scottish kings, who, as far back as the feudal
cultoms can be traced, held these possessions of the kings of
England, and did homage to them on that account. This ho-
mage, due only for the territories which they held in England,
was in no wife derogatory from their royal dignity. Nothing is
more Ciitable to feudal ideas, than that the fame person ihould
be both a lord and a vaflal, independent in one capacity, and
dependent in another . The crown of England was without

doubt

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hisftry. 4rlu'
fold the vicompte of the city Bourges to Philip I. who did homage to the

Count

doubt imperial and independent, though the princes who wore it BOOK I.
were, for many ages, the vaflals of the kings of France; and, --V
in consequence of their poHieilions in that kingdom, bound to
perform all the services, which a feudal sovereign has a title to
exat. The fame was the condition of the monarchs of Scot-
land; free and independent as kings, but, as poflefling Englilh
territories, vassals to the king of England. The Englifl mo-
narchs, satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted rights,
were neither capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more.
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being divided by
them into many small kingdoms, was in no condition to extend
its dominion over Scotland, united at that time under one mo-
narch. And though these petty principalities were gradually
fonned into one kingdom, the reigning princes.expofedi itocon-
tinual invasions of the Danes, and often fubjtited to the 'yole
of those formidable pirates; feldorii turned their arms tbwards
Scotland,'and were utterly incapable of.eftablihing'new rights
in that country. The first kings of the Norman ra'ce, busied
with introducing~their town laws and manners 'into the kingdom
-which they had conquered, or with niaintaining' theinfelves on
the throne which some of them poIleffed by a very dubious ti-
tle, were as little solicitous tb acquire new autliority, dor to forhn
new. pretensions in Scotland. An unexpeted clamnity' tiaifa'-

'. .

fell one. of the Scotch' kings;, firt ehcouraged the: Enklfhi tio
think of bringing this kinigdom uinder dependence. William
king of Scotland.being taken prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as
the price.of his liberty, not only extorted from him an exor-
bitant. ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of greateit
firength in his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous prince, so-
lemnly renounced this claim of homage, and absolved William
from the hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the
death of Alexander'III. near a century after, Edward' I. avail-
ing himself of the fituati'n of affairs in Scotland, acquired an
influence in that kingdom, which no Englifl monarch before
him ever pofefTed, and iintating the intercfted policy of Henry,
rather than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of
sovereignty to which the former had pretended.

B 3 MA RGARE T

Count of Sanccrre for a part of there lands, which lie held of that no-
bleman, A. D. slop, I believe that no example, of a King's doing ho-
mage to one of his own fubjeas, is to be met with in the hilloric. cither
of England or Scotland. Philip eI bel abolifitld this pradtice in. Frinqe,
A. D. 1302. Henaut. Abreg, Chrwole. Somewhat fimilnr to this, is a
charter of the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D. 1534;, confiituting JameiCV. the'
biliff or Rleward of that abbey, veRting in 'himnll the powers which per-
tained to that office, and requiring him to be apfwerable to the abbot for
his exercise of the fame. Alrthiv, pu6l, Edi,.

BooK I. MARGARET of Norway, grand-daughter of Alexander.
'--v- and heir to his crown, did not long survive him.. The right of
Pretensions fucceflion belonged to the descendants of David Earl of Hun-
of Br.o tingdon, third ion of King David I. Among these, Robert
examined. Bruce, and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for the

crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel Earl David's
second daughter; Baliol, the grandson of Margaret the eldest
daughter. According to the rules of fucceflion which are now
established, the right of Baliol was preferable, and notwith-
Btanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl David,
Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother and grand-
mother, would be deemed inconteftible. But, in that age, the
order of fucceflion was not ascertained with the fame precision.
The question appeared to be no less intricate, than it was im-
portant. And though the prejudices of the people, and per-
haps the laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of the
rivals was supported by.a powerful faction. Arms.ahne, itwas
feared, mut determine a dispute too weighty for the laws to
decide. But, in order to avoid the miseries of a civil war,
Edward was chosen umpire, and both parties agreed to acqui-
efce in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal to the in-
dependence of Scotland ; and the nation by its eagerness to
guard againrt a civil war, was not only exposed to that calami-
ty, but almofr fubjeced to a foreign yoke. Edward was art-
ful, brave, enterprising, and commanded a powerful and mar-
tial people, at peace with the whole world. The anarchy
which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of competitors
ready to sacrifice their country in order to obtain even a depen-
dent crown, invited him firif to seize, and then to fubjeat the
kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which had been un-
warily beflowed upon him, and from which the Scots dreaded
no dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his schemes
with the greater facility. Under pretence of examining the
question with the utniofi folcmnitv, he summoned all the Scot-
tifli barons to Norhanm, and having gained tolle, and intimi-
dated others, he prevailed on all who were present, not except-
ing Bruce and Baliol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scot-
land a ficfof the Englill crcown, and to swear fealty to him as
their Sovereign or Liee Lord. This ftep led to another still
more important. As it was vain to pronounce a sentence which
he had not power to execute, Edv.ard demanded pcfeffion of
the kingdom, that he might be abie to deliver it to him whose
right fliould be found preferable. And such was the pufillani-
niity of the nobles, and the iinpatient ambition of the compe-
titors, that both aflented to this (Irange demand, and Gilbert
de Urnfiavillc, earl of Angus, was the only man who refuied
to surrender the cafflcs in his culktoy to the enemy of his coun-
try. Edward finding Baliol the moP: obfcquious and the Icasi.

forni(lable

formidable of the two competitors, soon after gave judgment BoOK I.
in his favour. Baliol once more profefled himself the vaflal'-'-v-.
of England, and submitted to every condition which the so-
vereign whom he had now acknowledged was pleated to pre-
scribe.

ED WA R D, having thus placed a creature of his own upon

the throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce
the ancient liberties and independence of their country, had
reason to conclude that his dominion was now fully eftablilhed.
But he began too soon to aflume the master; his new vassals,
fierce and independent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which
they were not accuftamed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even
the paflive spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Edward, who
had no longer use for such a pageant king, forced him to resign
the crown, and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to himself,
by the rebellion of his vaifal. At that critical period, arose
Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom the fond admiration of
his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous acs of prowess,
though his real valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such
as needs not the heightenings of ficion. He, almost single,
ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen. At last, Robert
Bruce, the grandson of him who stood in competition with Ba-
liol, appeared to aftert his own rights, and to vindicate the ho-
nour of his country. The nobles, ashamed of their former
baseness, and inraged at the many indignities offered to the na-
tion, crowded to his flandard. In order to crush him at once,
the Englifll monarch entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty
army. Many battles were fought, and the Scots though often
vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent zeal with which
the nobles contended for the independence of the kingdom, the
prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national enthufiafim,
inlpired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived
from the number, and wealth of his fubjets. And though the
war continued with little intermillion upwards of seventy years,
Bruce and his posterity kept poffeflion of the throne of Scot-
land, and ruled with an authority not inferior to that of its
former monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes

between contending nations, was employed to terminate this
controversy, neither Edward nor the Scots seemed to difruft
the justice of their cause and both appealed to history and
records, and from there produced, in their own favour, such
evidence as they pretended to be unanswerable. The letters and
memorials addreflfd by each party to the Pope, who was then
reverenced as the common father, and often appealed to as the

common

BOOK I. common judge of all Christian princes, are fill extant. The
'_"v3 ' fabulous tales of the early Britifli history; the partial teftimo-

ny of ignorant chronicles; suppositions, treaties and charters;
are the proofs, on which Edward founded his title to the so-
vereignty of Scotland: and the homage done by the Scottifli
monarchs for their lands in England, is preposterously supposed

A nder- to imply the fubielion of their whole kingdom *. Ill founded,

sc';s EHf-l however, as their right was, the Englifl did not fail to revive
concerning it, in all the subsequent quarrels between the two kingdoms ;
the Inde. while the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost indignation. To
pendency, this, we must impute the fierce and implacable hatred to each
&C<. other, which long inflamed both. Their national antipathies

were excited, not only by the ufial circumitances of frequent
hostilities, and reciprocal injuries ; but the Engliih confidered
the Scots as vassals who had presumed to rebel; and the Scots,
in their turn, regarded the Englifl, as usurpers who aimed at
enslaving their country.

s306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scot-

StAte of land, the fame form of government was eftabliflied in all the
dom whenkingdoms of Europe. And the surprising similarity, in their
Bruce beganconflitution and !awvs, demonfirates that the nations whidh
his reign. overturned the Roman empire, and erected these kingdoms,

though divided into different tribes, and diftinguified by diffe-
rent names, were originally the fame people. When we take
a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that supen-
dous and singular fabric ere&ed by them; the first object that
strikes us is the king. And when we are told that he is the
sole proprietor of all the lands within his dominions, that all
his fubjeEts derive their poffeflions from him, and in return con-
fecrate their Lves to his service: when we hear that all marks
of distinCtion, and titles of dignity, flow from him as the only
fountain of honour; when we behold the most potent peers,
on their bended knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty
at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign, and
their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a powerful,
nay an absolute monarch. No conclusion, however, would be
more rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal go-
vernment was purely ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of
royalty, and with many appearances of despotic power, a feu-
dal king was the most limtted of all princes.

Origin of BE F Q R E they sallied out of their own habitations to con-
the feudal quer the world, many of the northern nations feerns not to
government have been fiubjec& to the government of kings*; and even
tocradiicl where monarchical government was e(tal)liflicl, the prince
genius. poffefled but little authority A general rather than a king,
* Caf. lib. his military command was cxtcnfivc, his civil jurifdiltion almost
vi' C. 13. nothing, . The army which he led was; ot compnCfdc of fol-
MoI. a'trn. edi whl could bc compelled to flrve, but of such as volun-
c. 7' tarily

tarily followed his standard . These conquered not for their BooK I.
leader, but for themselves; and being free in their own coun- -v-J
try, renounced not their liberty when they acquired new set- * Czf. ib.
tlements. They did not exterminate the ancient inhabitants of
the countnes which they subdued, but seizing the greater
part of their lands, they took their persons under protecion.
And the difficulty of maintaining a new conquest, as well
as the danger of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it
necessary to be always in a posture of defence, the form of go-
vernment which they established, was altogether military, and
nearly resembled that to which they had been accustomed in
their native country. Their general still continuing to be the
head of the colony, part of the conquered lands were allotted
to him; the remainder, under the name of keneficia or fiefs,
was divided amongst his principal officers. As the common
safety required that these officers should, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence, and should
continue obedient to their general, they bound themselves to
take the field, when called, and to serve him with a number of
men, in proportion to the extent of their territory. These great
officers, again, parcelled out their lands among their followers,
and annexed the fame condition to the grant. A feudal king-
dom was properly the encampment of a great army; military
ideas predominated, military Subordination was eftablithed,
and the poffeflion of land was the pay which soldiers received
for their personal service. In consequence of these notions,
the pofleflion of land was granted during pleaiure only, and
kings were ele&ive. In other words, an officer disagreeable to
his general was deprived of his pay, and the person who was
most capable of cbnducting an army, was chosen to command
it. Such were the firit rudiments, or infancy of feudal govern-
ment.

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth century,

the feudal syRem had undergone many changes, of which the
following were the most considerable. Kings, formerly elec-
tive, were then hereditary; and fiefs granted at first during
pleaftire, dcfcended from father to fan, and were become per-
petual. These changes, not less advantageous to the nobles,
than to the prince, made no alteration in the arillocratical fpi-
rit of the feudal constitution. The Iing, who, at a dilance, General
seemed to be inverted with majeRy and power, appears on a causes
nearer view, to poflefs none of thofc advantages, which beflow which h-

mited the

on monarchs their grandeur an'l authority. I-s revenues were power of
scanty; he had not a itanding army and he enjoyed no proper the reu(iI
jurifdicaion. monarchs.

AT a time when pomp and splendor were unknown, even Their re.

in the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown 're- venues
Peived little salary betides the fee. and perquisite; of their of- werelmall.

nfoe.

BOOK I. fice; when embaflies to foreign courts were rare; when armies
a_%-L-v )were composed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not

neceflary that a king should poflefs a great revenue; nor did
the condition of Europe, in those ages, allow its princes to
be opulent. Commerce made little progress in the kingdoms,
where the feudal government was eftablilhed. Institutions,
which had no other object but to inspire a martial spirit, to train
men to be soldiers, and to make arms the only honourable pro-
feflion, naturally discouraged the commercial arts. The re-
venues, arising from the taxes imposed on the different bran-
ches of commerce, were by consequence inconsiderable, and
the prince's treasury received little supply from a source, which
among a trading people, flows with fich abundance, and is
almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied even on land;
uich a burden wvould have appeared intolerable to men who
received their estates, as the reward of their valour, and who
confidered their service in the field as a full retribution for
what they possessed. The king's demesnes, or the portion of
land which he frill retained in his own hands unalienated, fur-
nilhed subsistence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary ex.
pence of government*. The only stated taxes which the feudal
law obliged vaflals to pay to the king, or to those of whom they
held their lands, were three; one when his eldest son was made
a knight: another when his eldest daughter was married: and
a third in order to ransom him if he flould happen to be taken
prifoncr. Besides there, the king received the feudal casualties
of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals. And, on some
extraordinary occasions, his fubjees granted him an aid, which
they diftinguiflied by the name of a benevolence, in order to
declare that he received it not in consequence of any right,
but as a gift, flowing from their good-will t. All these added
together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which
far fiom enabling the king to attempt any thing that could
excite the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual
indigence, anxiety, and dependence.

They hail No R could the king supply the defe& of his revenues, by
so find- the terror of his arms. Mercenarytroops and standing armies
s ImiCs. were unknown as long as the feudal government subsisted

in vigour. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vaials of
the king; and the fub-vaffals of the barons were all obliged to
carry arms. And while the poverty of princes prevented them
fiom fortifying their frontier towns, while a campaign continued!
but a few weeks, and while a fierce and impetuous courage
was impatient to bring every quarrel to the decision of a bat.
tie, an army without pay, and with little discipline, was fuffici
ent for all the purposes both of the fccurity and of the glor1

o

' Cr.ig. ide Feud. lib. i. Dicg. 14. Du Cange Gloss voc. Dominicuin
·* thi C.arr vyc, Auxilium.

of a nation. Such an army, however, far from being an en- BooK I.
gine at the king's disposal, was often no less formidable to him -
than to his enemies. The more warlike any people were, the
more independent they Secame; and the fame persons being
both soldiers and fubjets, civil privileges and immunities were
the consequence of their victories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, under
our present forms of government, often render the tyrants of
their own people, as well as the scourges of mankind, were
commonly, under the feudal constitution, the most indulgent
of all princes to their fubjeEts, because they stood molt in
need of their afihllance. A prince, whom even war and vic-
tories did not render the malter of his own army, poffefled no
ihadow of military power during times of peace. His diibanded
soldiers mingled with his other subjects; not a single man
received pay from him; many ages elapsed even before a guard
was appointed to defend his person ; and, deltitute of that
great instrument of dominion, a standing army, the authority of
the king continued always feeble, and was often contemptible.

No R were there the only circumstances which contributed Their ja-

towards depressing the regal power. By the feudal system, the rifdiaion
king's judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At first, ed
princes seem to have been the supreme judges of their people,
and, in person, heard and determined all controversies among
them. The multiplicity of causes soon made it necessary to ap-
point judges, who, in the king's name, decided matters, that
belonged to the royal jurifdi&ion. But the Barbarians, who
overran Europe, having destroyed most of the great cities,
and the countries which they seized being cantoned out among
powerful barons, who were blindly followed by numerous vas-
fals, whom, in return, they were bound to protet from every
injury; the administration of justice was greatly interrupted,
and the execution of any legal ftescnce became almost imprac-
ticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and dilorder of all kinds pre-
vailedin every kingdom of Europe, to a degree alnoft in-
credible, and scarce compatible with the fubfillencc of civil
society. Every offender sheltered hinifclf under the protec-
tion of some powerful chieftain, who fcrccned him from the
pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and topunifl a criminal,
often required the union and effort of half a kingdom *. In

order

* A remalkable inluance of this occm- in the fll'owing hiflory, so laie

as the year ic61. Mary having aplpnintced 4 couro of jollice to be held on
the borders, the inhabitnts ,or no lief than eleven conritie were lum-
inoned to guard the person, who was to tli as ju !cg, and to enable him
to rnforce his decisions. T'le words of a proclanatiol,) which afiord filcll
a convincing proof of the teblcnefrs of the feindal government, dleerve
our notice. --- Ani because it is ncceffary for the execcu:ian of her
highnefi's commandments, and scr/ics, that her jultice be well accnrm-
tnaicld, and her authority sufficiently tortified, by the concurrrcce of a

goqd

1BoX I. order to remedy these evils, many persons of diftintion were

C--'-- entrusted with the administration of justice within their own

territories. But what we may presume was, at first, only a'
temporary grant or a personal privilege, the incroaching spirit
of the nobles soon converted into a right, and rendered here-
ditary. The lands of some were ereted into Baronies, those
of others into Regalitie,. The jurisdiction of the former was
extensive, that of the latter, as the name implies, royal and
almost unbounded. All causes, whether civil or criminal,
were tried by judges, whom the lord of the regality appointed;
and if the king's courts called any person within his territory
before them, the lord of regality might. put a flop to their pro-
ceedings, and' by the privilege of repledging, remove the cause
to his own court, and even punish his vaflal, if he Submitted

Craig. 'to a foreign jtirifdiftion . Thus, almost every question,. in
ic".I :rhicshi ny person, who resided on the lands of the nobles,

7 was interested, being determined by judges appointed by the

nobles themselves, their vaftals were icarce sensible of being,
in any degree, fubjeat to the crown. A feudal kingdom was
split into many finall principalities, almost independent, and held
together by a feeble and commonly an imperceptible bond
of union. And the king was not only stripped of the authority
annexed to the person of a fuprenme judge, but his rev.enues
sufFered no small diminution, by the lofs.of.thofe.pecuniiary
emoluments, which were, in that age, due to the person who
adminiftred justice. ' . -.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the

nobles tof towards independence. Not satisfied with having
obtained an hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly
held during pleafulr, their ambition aimed at something bolder,
and by introducing entails, endeavoured, as far as human in-
genuity and invention can reach that end, to render their pof-
ieflions unalienable and everlasting. As they had full power to
add to the inheritance tranfinitted to them from their ancestors,
but none to diminifl it; time alone,. by means, of marriages,
legacies, and oilher accidents, brought continual accessions of
wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like a river, be-
calme considerable from the length of its course, and as it rol-

. led

good power of her faithful fuljees.--- Therefore commands and
ch.arecs nll and rundry earls, barons, froe-holders, landed-men, and
other gentlecnme, dIwelling within the ifid counties, that they, »nd every
one of them, with their kin, fricndl, fcrvants, and houlhold-men, well
bodin in fcir of war in the most lubltantioua manner, [i. e. complently
amlned aln provided,] and with twenty days vietualp, to meet and to pals
tr.w Arrd will him to the borough of Jedbur'h, and there to remain during
tl;e raid france of twenty days, and to receive such 'dirction and corn
rma.d, as fn.tll be given by him to them in our rovercign lady's name,
f )r q:ictncle of the cotitry : and lo put the fame in execution under
l.h. p:in .a' lofLng terir !ifr, land?, and goods," Keith's Hit. of Scot.
l*,Ib, iys.

led on, new honours and new property flowed fucceflively in- BooK I.
to it. Whatever influence is derived froin titles of honour, . *
the feudal barons likewise possessed in an ample manner. These
marks' of distinction are, in their own nature, either official or
personal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or be-
stowed by the admiration of mankind upon illufrious charac-
ters, ought to be appropriated to there. But the son, however
unworthy, could not bear to be stripped of that appellation, by
by which his father had been diftinguiihed. His presumption
claimed, what his virtue did not merit; titles of honour be-
came hereditary, and added new luRre to nobles already in pof-
feflion of too much power. Something more audacious, and
more extravagant still remained. The tupreme diretion of all
affairs, both civil and military, being committed to the great
officers of the crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well
as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of
there officers. But such was the preposterous ambition of.the
nobles, and so successful, even their wildest attempts to ag-
grandize themselves, that in all the kingdoms where the feudal
intRitutions prevailed, most of these offices were annexed to
great families, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A
person, whose undutiful behaviour rendered him odious to his
prince, or whose incapacity exposed him to the contempt of
the people, often held a place of power and trust, of the
greatest importance to both. In Scotland, the offices of lord
justice general, great chamberlain, high feward, high con-
stable, earl marhal, and high admiral, were all hereditary; and
in many counties, the office of lheriff was held in the fame
manner.

Non LEs, whose property was so extensive, and whose

power so great, could not fail of being turbulent and formida-
ble. Nor did they want instruments for executing their bold-
eft designs. That portion of their lands, which they parcelled
out among their followers, fipplied them with a numerous band
of faithful and determined vassals; while that, which they
retained in their own hands, enabled them to live with a
princely splendour. The great hall of an ambitious baron was
often more crowded than the court of his sovereign. The
strong catles, in which they resided, afforded a secure retreat
to the discontented and Seditious. A great part of the revenue
was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but bold retainers.
And if at any time they left their retreat, to appear in the court
of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even in times of
peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual re-
tinue of William the sixth earl of Douglas confifled of zooo
horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificent and for-
midable in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and for-
getting theirproperrank, such potent and haughty barons were

their

Boor I. the rivals, rather than the fubjeCs, of their Prince. They
'-v-I often despised his orders, insulted his person, and wrested from

him his crown. And the history of Europe, during several
ages, contains little else, but the accounts of the wars and re-
volutions, occasioned by their exorbitant ambition.

Theirpoer Bu T, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its proper
Scotland bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may airn that the
than in any balance which ought to be preserved between a king and his
other king- nobles was intirely loft in Scotland. The Scottish nobles en-
dom. joyed, in common with those of other nations, all the means

for extending their authority, which arise from the ariftocratical
genius of the feudal government. Besides these, they pof-

The part- fefled advantages peculiar to themselves; the accidental
cular causes sources of their power were considerable; and singular circum-
ot thi!. stances concurred with the spirit of the constitution to aggran-

dize them. To enumerate the most remarkable of these, will
serve both to explain the political state of the kingdom, and to
illustrate many important occurrences, in the period now under
our review.

if the ourn- 1. TH E nature of their country was one cause of the power
try. and independence of the Scottish nobility. Level and open

countries are formed for servitude. The authority of the fu-
prerne magistrate reaches with ease to the most distant corners,
and when nature has erected no barrier and affords no retreat,
the guilty or obnoxious are soon detected, and punished. Moun-
tains. and fens, and rivers set bounds to despotic power, and
amidif there, is the natural state of freedom and independence.
In such places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their re-
lidence. By retiring to his own cartle, a mutinous baron could
defy the power of his Sovereign ; it being impracicable to lead
an army through a barren country, to places, almost inaccessible
to a tingle man. The fame causes, which checked the pro-
grefs of the Roman arms, and rendered all the efforts of
Edward 1. abortive, often protected the Scottish nobles from
the vengeance of their prince; and they owed their personal
independence, to those very mountains and marflies, which
saved their country from being conquered.

The small II. Ta E want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a
numher of little to increase the power of the nobility and to weaken that
great cilies. of the prince. Where-ever numbers of men aflemble together,

order must be eftabliflied, and a regular form of government
instituted, the authority of the magistrate must be recognized,
and his decisions meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws
and subordination take rife in cities; and where there e arfew
cities as in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no
traces of any fort of police. But under the feudal govern-
ments, commerce, the chief means of affelebling mankind,
tv.as neglEted ; the nobles, in order to (trengthen their influ-

ence

ence over their vassals, resided among them, and seldom ap- BOOK I.
peared at court, where they found a superior, or dwelt in cities, -v-
where they met with equals. In Scotland the rich counties in
the south lying open to the Engliih, no town situatcd there
could rife to be great or populous amidst continual inroads and
alarms; the residence of our monarchs was not fixed to any
particular place; many parts of the country were barren and
uncultivated; and in consequence of there peculiar circnm-
fiances, added to the general causes flowing from the nature of
the feudal inefitutions, the towns in Scotland were extremely
few, and very inconsiderable. .The vassals of every baron
occupied a distinct portion of the kingdom, and formed a fc-
parate and almost independent society. Instead of giving aid
towards reducing to obedience their feditous Chieftain, or any
whom he took under his protection, they were all in arms for
his defence, and obftruced the operations of jultice to the ut-
most. The prince was obliged to connive at criminals, whom
he could not reach; the nobles, conscious of this advantage,
were not afraid to offend; and the difficulty of punishing
almost assured them of impunity.

III. TH E division of the country into clans had no finall The inftitu-

effcc in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations, which tion of
overran Europe, were originally divided into many imall tribes; Claus.
and when they came to parcel out the lands which they had
conquered, it was natural for every chieftain to bestow a portion,
in the first place, upon those of his own tribe or family. Theei
all held their lands of him; and as the safety of each indivi-
dual depended on the general union, there finall societies clung
together, and were distinguished by rome common appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the introduction of
surnames, or ensigns armorial. But when these became com-
nlon, the descendants and relations of every Chieftain afuumed
the fame name and arms with him ; other vassals were proud
to imitate their example, and by degrees they were communi-
cated to all those who held of the fame superior. Thus clan-
ihips were formed; and in a generation or two, that con-
Ianguinity which was, at firit in a great measure, imaginary,
was believed, to be real. An artificial union was converted in-
to a natural one; men willingly followed a leader, whom
they regarded both as the superior of their lands, and the
chief of their blood, and served him not only with the fidelity
of vassals, but with the affection of friends. In the other feu-
dal kingdoms, we may observe such unions as we have de-
fcribed, imperfectly formed; but in Scotland, whether they
were the prodution of chance, or the effeEt of policy, or in-
troduced by the Itifhl colony above-mentioned, and strengthened
by carefully preserving their genealogies both genuine and
fabulous, clanfllips were universal. Such a confederacy might

be.

BooK I. be overcome, it could not be broken; and no change of man-

ners, or of government, has been able, in some parts of the
kingdom, to dissolve associations which are founded upon
prejudices so natural to the human mind. How formidable
were nobles at the head of followers, who, counting that cause
just and honourable which their chief approved, were ever
ready to take the field at his command, and to sacrifice their
lives in defence of his person, or of his fame ? Against such
men, a king contended with great diladvantage, and that
cold service, which money purchases, or authority extorts, was
not an equal match for their ardor and zeal.

nuThbr at IV. 'Tn E smallness of their number may be mentioned a-
t hnoble. mong the causes of the grandeur of the Scottish nobles. Our

annals reach not back to the firt division of property in the
kingdom; but so far as we can trace the matter, the original
poffeflionsof the nobles seem to have been extensive. The
ancient Thanes were the equals and the rivals of their prince.
Many of the earls and barons, who Succeeded them, were
masters of territories no less ample. France and England,
countries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to a numerous
and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither extensive
nor rich, could not contain many such overgrown proprietors.
But the power of an aristocracy always diminishes, in propor-
tion to the increase of its numbers ; feeble if divided among a
multitude; irresistible if centered in a few. When irbles are
numerous, their operations nearly resemble those of die people,
they are routed only by what they feel, not by whatthey ap-
prehend 3 and submit to many arbitrary and oppreffivea&ts, be-
tore they take arms against their sovereign. A small body, on
the contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick in
discerning, and prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are
as sudden, as those of the other are flow. Hence pro-
ceeded the extreme jealousy, with which the Scottifll
nobles observed their monarchs, and the fierceness with
which they opposed their encroachments. Even the vir-
tue of a prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager
to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithitanding
the splendor of his victories, and the glory of his name, was
upon the point of experiencing the vigour of their resistance,
no less than his unpopular descendant James III. Besides this,
the near alliance of the great families, by frequent intermar-
riages, was the natural consequence of their finall number.
And as consanguinity was, in those ages, a powerful bond of
union, all the kindred of a nobleman interefled themselves in
his quarrel, as a common cause, and every contet the king had.
though with a sing!e baron, loon drew upon him the arms of a

u~em and whole confederacy.
conibina- V. TN os E natural conne&ions both with their equals, and
tions. with their inferiors, the Scottifl nobles strengthened by a

device,

device, which if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more BooK I.
frequent among them, than in any other nation. Even in times v.
of profound peace, they formed aflociations, which when made
with their equals, were called leagues of mutual defence; and
when with their inferiors, bonds of manrent. By the former,
the contrating parties bound themselves mutually to affif each
other, in all causes, and againif all persons. By the latter,
prote6cion was itipulated on the one hand, and fidelity and
personal service promised on the other . Self-prefervation, it * At. 30.
is probable, forced men at first into there confederacies, and Parl. 144.
while disorder and rapine were universal, while government A. 43. P
was unsettled, and the authority of laws little known or re- 55$
garded, near neighbours found it necessary to unite in this man-
ner for their security, and the weak were obliged to court the
patronage of the strong. By degrees, these associations be-
came so many alliances offensive and defensive against the
throne; and as their obligation was held to be more sacred
than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to our kings,
and contributed not a little to the power and independence of
the nobility. In the reign of James II, William the eighth
earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with the
earls of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamil-
ton, Balveny, &c. and so formidable was this combination to
the king, that he had recourse to measures no less violent than
unjust in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and Scotland The fre-

proved another cause of augmenting the power of the nobility. quent warc
Nature has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a with Eng
river, almost every where fordable, divides them towards the
east; on the weft they are separated by an imaginary line.
The small revenues of our kings prevented them from fortify-
ing, or placing garrilons in the towns on the frontier; nor
would the jealousy of their subje&s have permitted such a me-
thod of defence. The barons, whose cftates lay near the
borders, confidered themselves as bound both in honour and in
interest to repel the enemy. The wardenflips of the different
marches, offices of great trust and dignity, were always be-
Rowed on them. This gained them the leading of the war-
like counties in the south; and their vassals, living in a state of
perpetual hostility, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, be-
came more inured to war than even the reft of their country-
men, and more willing to accompany their chieftain in his mofR
hardy and dangerous enterprizes. It was the valour, no less
than the number of their followers, that rendered the Douglases
great. The nobles in the northern and midland counties were
often dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs
always found it impracticable to subdue the mutinous and un-
governable spirit of the borderers. In all our domestic quar-

VoL.,. C rel,

BOOK I. rels, those, who could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the
'--V--' southern counties, were sure of victory; and conscious of this

advantage, the lords who poffiefed authority there, were apt
to forget the duty which they owed their sovereign, and to
aspire beyond the rank of fubjets.

Thefre- VII. TE calamities which befell our kings, contributed
quent mino- more than any other cause to diminilh the royal authority.
rities which Never was any race of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scottiflh.
Scotland. Of fix fuccefive princes, from Robert II. to James VI. not

one died a natural death; and the minorities, during that time
were longer, and more frequent, than ever happened in any
other kingdom. From Robert Bruce to James VI. we reckon
ten princes; and seven of there were called to the throne,
while they were minors, and almost infants. Even the mos
regular and best eftabliflhed governments feel sensibly the per-
nicious effects of a minority, and either become languid and
inactive, or are thrown into violent and unnatural convulsions.
But, under the imperfect ill-adjufted system of government in
Scotland, there effeCts were flill more fatal; and the fierce and
mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrestrained by the authority of
a king, scorned all subjection to the delegated jurisdiction of a
regent, or to the feeble commands of a minor. The royal
authority was circumscribed within narrower limits than ever;
the prerogatives, of the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were
reduced almost to nothing; and the ariftocratical power gra-
dually rose upon the ruins of the monarchical. Left the per-
fonal power of a regent lhould enable him to aft with too
much vigour; the authority, annexed to that office, was some-
times rendered inconsiderable, by being divided; or if a single
regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and the heads of the
more illustrious families, were seldom raised to that dignity. It
was often conferred upon men, who possessed little influence,
and excited nojealoufy. They, conscious of their own weak-
ness, were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and to per-
mit others: and, in order to support their authority, which
was destitute of real strength, they endeavoured to gain the
most powerful and active barons, by granting them poffefiions
and immunities, which raised them to fill greater power.
When the king himself came to assume the reins of govern-
ment, he found his revenues wafted or alienated, the crown
lands seized or given away, and the nobles so accustomed to
independence, that after the fruggles of a whole reign, he
was seldom able to reduce them to the fame state, in which

Review of they had been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrest
theevents from them what they had ufiuped during that time. If we
to ihc no. take a view of what happened to each of our kings, who
blesduring was sO unfortunate as to be placed in this situation, the
each mi. truth and importance of this observation will fully appear.
nority. Tl e

TH E minority of David II. the ion of Robert Bruce, was BOOK I.

disturbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who relying on -~
the aid of England, and on the fupporr of some difaffeded '30.°
barons among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The fuccefi David II
which at firRf attended his arms, obliged the young king to re-
tire to France; and Baliol took pofiefion of the throne. A
finall body of the nobles, however, continuing faithful to
their exiled Prince, drove Baliol out of Scotland; and after an
absence of nine years, David returned from France, and took
the government of the kingdom into his own hands. But
nobles, who were thus walting their blood and treasure in de-
fence of the crown, had a right to the undisturbed pofleflion of
their ancient privileges, and even rome title to arrogate new
ones. It seems to have been a maxim, in that age, that every
leader might claim as his own, the territory which his sword had
won from the enemy. Great acquisitions were gained by the
pobility in that way; and to there the gratitude and liberality
of David added, by diltributing, among such as adhered to
him, the vast poffefions which fell to the crown by the for-
feiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas, which began
to raise above the other nobles, in the reign of his father,
augmented both its power and its property, during his mi-
nority.

JAM Es I. was seized by the Englifl during the continuance 1405.

of a truce, and ungenerously detained a prisoner almost nine- Jame; I1
teen years. During that period, the kingdom was governed,
first by his uncle Robert duke of Albany, and then, by Mur-
do his son. Both these noblemen aspired to the crown, and
their unnatural ambition, if we may believe molt of our his-
torians, not only cut ihort the days of prince David the king's
elder brother, but prolonged the captivity of James. They
flattered themselves, that they might Itep with less opposition
into a throne, when almost vacant ; and dreading the king's re-
turn, as the extincion of their authority, and the end of their
hopes, they carried on the negotiations for obtaining his liber-
ty, with extreme remifflefs. At the fame tinme they negleEted
nothing that could either sooth or bribe the nobles to approve
their scheme. They slackened the reins of government; they
allowed the prerogative to be encroached upon; they suffered
the most irregular ats of power, and even wanton inflances of
oppreflion, to pass with impunity ; they delt out the patri-
mnony of the crown among those whose enmity they dreaded,
or whose favour they had gained; and reduced the royal au-
thority, to a fRate of imbecility, fiom which succeeding mo-
narchs laboured in vain toraife it.

Du a N G the minority of James II. the adminiltration of 1437.

affairs and the custody of the king's person was committed to James II.
Sir William Cricliton, and Sir Alcxander Livingston. Jealousy

C z and

BOOK I. and discord were the effects of their conjunc authority, and
-vL-' each of them, in order to ftrenghtcn himself, bestowed new

power and privileges upon the great men, whose aid he courted.
While the young earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions,
erected a fort of independent principality within the kingdom;
and forbidding his vassals to acknowledge any authority but his
own, he created knights, appointed a privy council, named
officers civil and military, assumed every ensign of royalty, but
the title of king, and appeared in public with a magnificence
more than royal.

1460. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom, dur-
James 111. ing the minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing

the person of the young king, and by the ascendant which he
acquired over him, soon engrossed the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious project of raising his family to the fame
pitch of power and grandeur with those of the prime nobility;
and he etfeced it. While intent on this, he relaxed the vi-
gour of government, and the barons became accustomed, once
more, to anarchy and independence. The power which Boyd
had been at so much pains to acquire was of no long continu-
ance, and the fall of his family, according to the fate of fa-
vourites, was sudden and deftruCive; but upon its ruins, the
family of Hamilton arose, which soon attained the highest rank
in the kingdom.
James V. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise

more turbulent than those of the preceding kings. And the
contending nobles, encouraged or proteced either by the king
of France, or of England, formed themselves into more regu-
lar factions, and disregarded more than ever the restraints of
order and authority. The French had the advantage of feeing
one, devoted to their interest, raised to be regent. This was
the duke of Albany, a native of France, and a grandson of
James II. But Alexander Lord Home, the most eminent of
all the Scottifl peers, who survived the fatal battle of Flowden,
thwarted all his measures, during the first years of his adminif-
tration; and the intrigues of the queen dowager, fiter of
Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no less feeble.
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised
his authority, and regardless either of his threats, or his in-
treaties, peremptorily refused, two several times, to enter En-
gland, to the borders of which kingdom he had led them.
Provoked by thete repeated instances of contempt, the regei.t
abandoned his troublesome station, and, retiring to France,
preferred the tranquillity of a private life, to an office destitute
of real authority. Upon his retreat, Douglas earl of Angus
became nmater of the king's person, and governed the kingdom
in his name. Many efforts were made to deprive him of his
usurped authority. But the numerous vassals and friends of his

family

family adhered to him, because he divided with them the power BOOK I.
and emoluments of his ofice; the people reverenced and loved '-
the name of Douglas; he exercised without the title of regent,
a fuller and more absolute authority than any who had enjoyed
that dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous pre-eminence of
the Douglases seered to be restored.

To these and to many other causes omitted or unobserved

by us, did the Scottilh nobility owe that exorbitant and uncom-
mon power, of which inftancesoccur, so frequently in our his-
tory. Nothing, however, demonstrates so fully the extent of
their power, as the length of its duration. Many years after
the declension of the feudal system in the other kingdoms of
Europe, and when the arms or policy of princes had, every
where, Ihaken, or laid it in ruins, the foundations of that an-
cient fabric remained, in a great measure, firm and untouched
in Scotland.

TH E powers, which the feudal institutions veited in the The power

nobles, soon became intolerable to all the princes of Europe, nobles be-
who longed to posses fromething more than a nominal and pre- came into-
carious authority. Their impatience to obtain this, precipita- lerable to
ted Henry III. of England, Edward II. and some other weak princes.,
princes, into rafl and premature attempts against the privileges
of the barons, in which they were disappointed, or perilhed.
Princes, of greater abilities, were content to mitigate evils
which they could not cure; they fought occupation for the
turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars; and allowed
their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign expeditions, which,
if they brought no other advantage, secured at leaf domestic
tranquillity. But, time and accidents ripened the feudal go- The at-
vernments for deflruaion. Towards the end of the fifteenth tempts to

rlhumble the

century, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the princes of Eu- hbl, fuc-
rope attacked, as if by concert, the power of their nobles. cefsrul in
MVen of genius then undertook with success, what their unlkil- France and
ful predecefbors had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, in England.
the motl profound and the inoll adventurous genius of that
age, began, and in a single reign almost compleated the fcheine
of theirdeftruction. The sure but concealed policy of Henry
VII. of England produced the fame effect. The means, in-
deed, employed by these monarchs were very different. The
blow which Lewis struck was sudden and fatal. The artifices
of -Ienry resembled those flow poisons, which walte the con-
1litution, but become not mortal till some distant period. Nor
did they produce consequences lets opposite. Lewis boldly ad-
ded td the crown whatever he reRed from the nobles. I-Ienry
undermined his barons by encouraging them to fell their lands,
which enriched the commons, and gave thenm a weight in the
legifiature unknown to their predecessors. But while these great
revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot.

lanj

Boox I. land was intimately connected, no alterations happened there
-- v'--' the king neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the
But the no- commons to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not on-
btol gtheir ey retained their ancient privileges and poffefions, but daily
firength in made new acquisitions.
Scotland. TH I S was not owing to the inattention of our princes, or
Our kings to their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of
endeavour the exorbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous
to exend the to humble that order. They did not, however, possess means
royal au- sufficient for accomplihing that end. The resources of our

monarchs were few, and the progress which they made incon-

Ceneral fiderable. But as the number of their followers, and the ex-
means to- tent of their jurifdi&ion, were the two chief circumstances
wards this which rendered the nobles formidable; in order to counterba-
end. lance the one, and to restrain the other, all our kings had re-

course to the fame expedients.

Encoarage I. AM o NG nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpolilhed
discord a- manners, surrounded with vassals bold and licentious, whom
rnong the they were bound by interest and honour to proteEt, the causes
0nokes. of diScord were many and unavoidable. And as the contend-

ing parties could seldom agree in acknowledging the authority
of any common superior or judge, and their impatient fpint
would seldom wait the flow decisions of justice, their quarrels
were usually terminated by the sword. The offended baron
assembled his vassals, and wafted the lands, or flied the blood
of his enemy. To forgive an injury, was mean, to forbear
revenge infamous or cowardly*. Hence quarrels were transmit-
ted from father to son, and under the name of deadly feuds,
subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated ran-
cour. It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than
to extinguish these quarrels, and by scattering or cheriffling
the feeds of discord among the nobles, that union which would
have rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which must at
once have annihilated the prerogative, was effecually
prevented. To the fame cause, our kings were indebted

for

* The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the minners, but,

what is more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any pc ron
thought the prosecution of an injury offered to his family, too trouble-
some, or too dangerowus, the Salique laws permitted him publickly to desist
from demanding vengeance; but the fame laws, in order to punifl his
cowardice, and want of affection to his family, deprived him of the right
of fucceflion. Hcnnut. Abrege Chronol. p. 81. Among the Anglo-
Saxons, we find a singular inftituti n dillinguifhed by the the name ot
Jda/litium; a vuluntarv alrociation, the ohje& whereof Wias the perfrlnai
lecurity of thole who joi led in it, and which the feblecnef3 of govern-
ment a tt time crnderer neccTiary. Aminng other rcgulations, which
are contained in one of those Ilill extant, the following ldeierve notice.
If any nifociale lhall uither eat or drink with a person vlho has killed any
member of theJ daliiium, unlelb in the preli'cce of the king, the billo1p,
or the count, and unlefL he can prove that he did not knnow the perlon,,
let him pay a great fine," Hlitli' Dilrert. Ep: lolar, aipd Thc!ur. Lirig.
Septentr, vol. i. pI. '1.

for the success, with which they Sometimes attacked BOOK I.
the miot powerful chieftains. They employed private revenge '-V
to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming against the
person who had incurred their displeasure, those rival families
which had willed his fall, they rewarded their service, by
sharing among them the spoils of the vanquiflled. But this
expedient, though it served to humble individuals, did not
weaken the body of the nobility. Those, who were now the
instruments of their prince's vengeance, became, in a lhort
time, ?he objects of his fear. Having acquired power and
wealth by serving the crown, they, in their turn, let up for
independence: and though there might be a fluctuation of
power, and of property; though old families fell, and new
ones rose upon their ruins; the rights of the aristocracy re-
mained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration of jufticeis one of the most power- Extend the

ful ties between a king and his subje&s, all our monarchs were jurifdiEtion
at the utmost pains to circumscribe the jurifdition of the barons, of theking's
and to extend that of the crown. The external forms of sub- courts
ordination, natural to the feudal system, favoured this attempt.
An appeal lay from the judges and courts of the barons to those
of the king. The right, however, of judging in the sift
instance, belonged to the nobles, and they easily found means
to defeat the effeE of appeals, as well as of many other feu-
dal regulations. The royal jurifdition was almost confined
within the narrow limits of the king's demesnes, beyond which,
his judges claimed indeed much authority, but poffefled next
to none. Our kings were sensible of there limitations, and
bore them with impatience. But it was impossible to overturn
in a moment, what was so deeply rooted ; or to strip the nobles,
at once, of privileges which they had held so long, and which
were wrought alinoft into the frame of the feudal constitution.
To accomplifil this, however, was an objeEt of uniform and
anxious attention to all our princes. James I. led the way,
here, as well as in other instances, towards a more regular
and perfeft police. He made choice, among the estates of
parliament, of a certain number of persons, whom he dif-
tinguifled by the name of lords of Segion, and appointed them
to hold courts for determining civil causes, three times in the
year, and forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleated to
name. Their jurisdiction extended to all matters, which for-
merly came under the cognizance of the king's council, and
being a committee of parliament, their decisions were final.
James II. obtained a law, annexing all regalities, which should
be forfeited to the crown, and declaring the right of jurifdic-
tion to be unalienable for the future. James III. imposcd fe-
vere penalties upon those judges appointed by the barons,
whose decisions Should be found on a review to be unjust; and

by

BOOK I. bymanyother regulations,endeavoured to extend the authorityof
'-_v-"- his own court*. James IV. on pretence of remedying the incon-
* At. 26. veniencies arising from the short terms of the court of session,
P' '469. appointed other judges called lords of daily council. Theffifon
p. 1949. was an ambulatory court, and met feldon: the daily council,
Aa. 99. was fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh; and though not
P. 1487. composed of members of parliament, the fame powers, which

the lords of fellion enjoyed, were vested in it. At last, James
V. ereted a new court, that still subsists, and which he named
the college of jflice, the judges orfenators of which were called
lords of council and fefon. This court not only exercised the
fame jurifdiAion which formterly belonged to the fellion and
daliy council, but new rights were added. Privileges of
great importance were granted to its members, its forms were
prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity, power and splendor
conferred upon it. The persons constituted judges in all these
different courts, had, in manyrefpets, the advantage of thore
who presided in the courts of the barons; they were more
eminent for their Ikill in law, their rules of proceeding were
more uniform, and theirdecifions more confidtent. Such judi-
catories became the objects of confidence, and of veneration.
Men willingly submitted their property to their determination,
nd their incroachments on the jurifditions of the nobles were
popular, and for that reason successful. By devices of a similar
nature, the jurifdietion of the nobles in criminal causes was
restrained, and the authority of the court of jufliciary extend-
ed. The crown, in. this particular, gaining insensibly upon
the nobles, recovered more ample authority; and the king,
whose jurifdiaion once resembled that of a baron, rather than
that of a sovereign*, came more and more to be confidered as

the

* The most perfect idea of the feudal system of government may Lc at-

tained by attending to the slate of Germany, and to the hiltowy of France.
In the former, the feudal inflitutions fill subsist with great vigour; and
though altogether abolished in the latter, the public records have been ftr
carefully preserved, that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been
enabled, with more certainty and precifioo, than those of any other country
in Europe, to trace its rife, its progrcfs, and revolutions. In Germany,
every principality may be confidered as a fief, and all its great princes as
vassals, holding of the emperor. They pefgf-f all the feudal privileges;
their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifdtictions within their own tcrritories, fe-
parate and extensive; and the greai offices of the empire are all here-
ditary, and annexed to particular families. At the fame time, the empe-
ror retains many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them,
his clams and pretenlions are innumerable, and his power small; his ju-
rifdi&ion within his own demel.es, or hereditary countries, is cornpleat;
beyond Ihe bounds of these it is almost nothing. Anti so permanent are
feudal principles, that although the feudal fytlem be overturned in almost
every partictlar fate in germ:ny, and althouglh its princes have all bc-
:ome abfnlute, rtle original feudal ennfittiion ,f the empire till remains;
and ideas peculiar to that form of governmont, dire& all its operations,
and determine the rights of all its princes. Our oblotvAtions, with regard

to

the head of the community, and the filpreme dispenser of BOOK f.
justice to his people. These acquisitions of our kings, how- '--v-
ever, though comparatively great, were in reality inconfidera-
ble; and notwithstanding all their efforts, many of the fcpa-
rate jurifdiaions pofleffed by the nobles remained in great vi-
gour; and their final abolition was reserved to a diltant and
more happy period.

B T besides there methods of defending their prerogative, Each of our
and humbling the aristocracy which may be confidered as com- king' plr-

11, '* J

.n ':

j i i * lued sme

mon to all our princes, we shall find, by taking a review ofpliaofhumr
their reigns, that almost every one of our kings, from Robert bling the
Bruce to James V. had fermed some particular system fornobles.
depressing the authority of the nobles, which was the objec
both of theirjealoufy and terror. This conduc of our mo-
narchs, if we reft satisfied with the accounts of their his-
torians, must be confidered as flowing entirely from their re-
fentment against particular noblemen; and all their attempts
to humble them, must be viewed as the sallies of private pas-
sion, not as the consequences of any general plan of policy.
But, though some of their actions may be imputed to those
paflions,'though the different genius of the men, the temper
of the times, and the Itate of the nation necessarily occasioned
great variety in their schemes, yet without being chargeable
with exceflive refinement, we may affirm that their end was This prnv-
uniformly the fame. And the project of reducing the power ofed by are-

view of the

the aristocracy, sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; *.ie o'
sometimes concealed, or feenlingly suspended; was never alto- their reigns.
gether abandoned.

No prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert Robert

Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him Bruce.
on the throne. His gratitude and gencrofity heflowed on them
the lands of the vanquifhled. Property has fildom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those to which it was
subjet, at that time, in Scotltnd. Edwcard I. having forfeited
the estates of most of the ancient Scottifli barons, granted
them to his Engliffi subjea.. These were expelled by the
Scots, and their lands seized by new, mnafers. Amnidft such ra-

pid

to the limited jurirdi'tion of kincs andelr the feudal gtoernments, are
greatly illustrated by what happened in F[rancc. The fecbtrnrls and do-
tage of the dercendlints of Chlirleil;nencougncl ad the peers to ifurp all
independent JurifdiEtion. Nothling rcm;iinil in the hnid.s of the crown;
all was seized by themr. When Hugh Capet alcrnded ile thline, A. D.
g917. he kept polTelion of his private patriilonly the Corm!te of lPais, and
all the jurifdietion, which the kings hi, rilccefll;,r exer'.i'ict or lome time,
was within its territories. There x, ere only four towns in Firance, wvhere
he could ehablinf granJtl batillir or royal jiudgle; all the nther landr,
towns, and bailliges belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the
French monarchs hid recourse lor extdnding their jurillidiain were cxaiAly
similar to thole employed by our princes. tlenaili's tl,' i, p, 617) S&c.
Dc L'Efprit des Loix, Liv. 30. ch. ao, :, &.

BoOK I. pid changes, confusion was unavoidable; and many poflefled
'.-v ^-'
t their lands by titles extremely defetive. During one of those

truces between the two nations, occasioned rather by their be.
ing weary of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formed a
fcheime for checking the growing power and wealth of the
nobles. He summoned them to appear, and to Ihew by what
rights they held their lands. They assembled accordingly, and
the quetfion being put, they started up, at once, and drew
their swords, " By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and
with these we will defend them." The king, intimidated by
their boldness, prudently dropt the project. But so deeply did
they resent this attack upon their order, that notwithfianding
Robert's popular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous
con fpiracy against his life.
David IT. D AVI D his ion, at first an exile in France, afterwards a

prisoner in England, and involved in continual war with Edward
III. had not leisure to attend to the internal police of his
kingdom, or to think of retrenching the privileges of the no-
bility.
Robert I. Ou n historians have been more careful to relate the mili-

tary, than the civil tranfaaions of the reign of Robert II.
Skirmishes and inroads of little consequence, they describe
minutely, but with regard to every thing that happened,
during several years of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.
Robert III. THE feeble administration of Robert III. mufl likewise be

pafied over slightly. A prince, of a mean genius, and of a
fiail and sickly constitution, was no fit person to enter the lifts
with acive and martial barons, or to attempt wresting from
them any of their rights.
.ames I. TH E civil tranfations in Scotland are better known since the

beginning of the reign of James I. and a compleat series of
our laws supplies the defects of our historians. The Englif
made some amends for their injustice in detaining that prince a
prisoner, by their generous care of his education. During his
long residence in England, he had an opportunity of observing
the feudal fyftenm in a more advanced itate, and refined from
many of the imperfecions which frill adhered to itr, in his own
kingdom. He saw there, nobles great, but not independent;
a king powerful, though far from absolute; he saw a regular
adminiflration of government; wife laws enaced ; and a na-
tion flourifiing and happy, because all ranks of men were ac-
customed to obey them. Full of these ideas, he returned in-
to his narive country, which presented to him a very different
fceo'e. The royal authority, never great, was now con-
temptible, by having been so long delegated to regents. The
ancient patrimony and revenues of the crown, were almost
totally alienated. During his long ablence, the name of a
king was little known, and less regarded. The license of many

years

years had rendered the nobles independent. Universal anarchy BOOK I.
prevailed. The weak were exposed to the rapine and oppref- -v-
lion of the firong. In every corner some barbarous chieftain
ruled at pleasure, and neitherfeared the king, nor pitied the
people '.

J A M E S was too wife a prince to employ open force to cor-

ret such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times
would have borne it. He applied the gentler, and less offen-
five remedy of laws and statutes. In a parliament held imme-
diately after his return, he gained the confidence of his peo-
ple, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-establish order,
tranquillity, and justice in the kingdom. But, at the fame
time, that he endeavoured to secure there blessings to his sub-
jects, he discovered his intention to recover those pofeflionsof
which the crown had been unjustly bereaved; and for that pur-
pole obtained an ad by which he was impowered to summon
those, who had obtained crown lands during the three last
reigns, to produce the rights by which they held them *. As
this flatute threatened the property of the nobles, another A.'.9
which pafle.d in a subsequent parliament, aimed a dreadful44
blow at their power. By it, the leagues and combinations,
which we have already described, and which rendered the no-t a.
bles so formidable to the crown, were declared unlawful t. p. 1414.
Encouraged by this success in the beginning of his enterprize,
James's next ftep was still bolder and more decisive. During
the fitting of parliament, he seized at once, his cousin Murdo
duke of Albany, and his sons.; the carls of Douglas, Lenox,
Angus, March, and above twenty other peers and barons of
prime rank. To all of them, however, he was immediately
reconciled, except to Albany, and his Cons, and Lenox. These
were tried by their peers, and condemned ; for what crime is
now unknown. Their execution struck the whole order with
terror, and their forfeiture added vast pnfflirtons to the crown.
He seized, likewise, the earldoins of lIuchan and Strathern,
upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell to him by inheri-
tance. The patience and inactivity of the nobles, while the
king was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown,
are amazing. The only obfltltion he met with was fiolii a
flight infurreation headed bv the duke of Albany's youngclt
son, and that was easily fupprerid. The splendor and presence
of a king, to which the great men hnd been long unaccutolll-
edl, inspired revercncc: James was a prince of great abilities,

and

* A cotemporary Monlkifil wriLcr dercribes these calamiliic very fccling-

ly, in Iil ruide Latin. In dlibus illiF, non ernt lcx in Snoti;i, Ixd iuililt:t
potcentiorum junioiem opprefit; ct totutnl reglum suit unum latircinium
homicidin, deprimdationue, incendii, et c:etcra malelicitl rinmanierint im-
punita; et jtilliti. relagata extra tcrminos :cgni cxulavit. Chartulur.
Morav. apud Innet Eir;ay vol, i. p. z7z.

BOOK I. and conduted his operations with much prudence. He was
'- ---'-w in friendflip with England, and closely allied with the French

king: He was adored by his people, who enjoyed unusual fe-
curty and happiness under his administration: And all his ac-
quifitions, however fatal to the body of the nobles, had been
gained by attacks upon individuals; were obtained by decisions
of law ; and being founded on circumnfances peculiar to the
persons who suffered, might excite murmurs and apprehensions,
but afforded no colourable pretext for a general rebellion. It
was not so with the next attempt which the king made. En-
couraged by the facility with which he had hitherto advanced,
he ventured upon a mieafure that irritated the whole body of
the nobility, and which the event shews either to have been
entered into with too much precipitancy, or to have been carried
onwith too much violence. The father of George Dunbar earl
of March had taken arms against Robert III. the king's father;
but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands restored by
Robert duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the regent had
exceeded his power, and that it was the prerogative of the
king alone to pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed to
the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to be
void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Many of the
great men held lands by no other right than what they derived
from grants of the two dukes of Albany. Such a decision,
tho' they had reason to expet it in consequence of the statute
which the king had obtained, occasioned a general alarm.
Though Dunbar was, at present, the only sufferer, the prece-
dent might be extended, and their titles to possessions, which
they confidered as the rewards of their valour, might be sub-
jetcd to the review of courts of law, whose forms of pro-
cecding, and jurifdition, were in a martial age little known,
and extremely odious. Terror and discontent spread fast upon
this difcovcry of the king's intentions; the common danger
called on the whole order to unite, and to make one bold
stand, before they were fripped successively of their acquifiti-
ons, and reduced to a state of poverty and insignificance.
The prevalence of there sentiments among the nobles ericoura-
ged a few desperate men, the fiiends or followers of those who
had been the chief sufferers under the king's administration, to
form n conspiracy againlt his life. The first uncertain intelli-
gence of this was brought him, while he lay in his camp be-
tce Roxburgh castle. He durst not confide in nobles, to
whom he had given so many causes of disgust, but instantly
diliniflid them and their vassals, and retiring to a monastery
near Perth, was soon after murdered there, in the most cruel
maunner. All our hiltorians mention, with afloninlment, thlis
ciiumllllllance of the king'?s disbanding his army, at a time,
when it was to necpllary for his preservation. A king, fay

they,

they, funrounded with his barons, is secure from secret treason, BOOK I.
and may defy open rebellion. But those very barons were the \--v
persons whom he chiefly dreaded ; and it is evident, fron this
review of his administration, that he had greater realbn to ap-
prehend danger, than to expect defence, fiom their hands. It
was the misfortune of James, that his maxims and manners
were too refined for the age in which le lived. Happy ! had
he reigned in a kingdom more civilized ; his love of peace, of
justice, and of elegance, would have rendered his fclemes fuc-
ceisful: and instead of periflling because he had attempted too
much, a grateful people would have applauded and ie-conded
his efforts to reform and to improve them.

CRIcH Tr o r, the noft able man of those, who had the di-

re'tion of affairs during the minority of James If. had been J"mes II
the minister of James I and well acquainted with his refoluti-
on of humbling the nobility. He did not relinquifli the de-
sign, and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the fame
sentiments. But what James had attempted to effea slowly,
and by legal means, his son and Crichton pursued with the im-
petuofity natural to Scotlinen, and with the fierceness peculiar
to that age. William the sixth earl of Douglas was the firfi
victim to their barbarous policy. That young nobleman (as
we have already observed) contemning the authority of an in-
fantprince, almost openly renounced his allegiance, and afpi-
red to independence. Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such
an insult, but ea

too weak o curb or to bring to juhtice so powerful

an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an interview in
the caste of Edinburgh, and, notwithstanding there, murder-
ed both h h

ad is brother. Crichton, however, gained little

by this aft of treachery, which rendered him universally odi-
ous. William the eight earl of Douglas was no less powerful,
and no le's formidable to the crown. By forming the league
which we already mentioned with the earl of Crawfurd and o-
ther barons, he had united against his sovereign alihnoft one
half of his kingdom. But his credulity led him into the fame
fiare, which had been fatal to the former earl. Relying on the
king's promises, who had now attained to the years of man-
hood, and having obtained a safe conduct under the great ceal,
he ventured to meet him in Sterling calte. James urged hinm
to diflolve that dangerous confederacy into which he had en-
tered, the earlobitinately refuted; " If you will not," said the
enraged monarch, drawing his dagger, " this lhall ;" and
flabcbd him to the heart. An atlion to unworthy of a king
filled the nation with aftonilhment, and with horror. The
earl's vaflals ran to arms with the utmost fury, and dragging
the lIfe condut, which the king had granted and violated, at
a horse's tail, they marched towards Sterling, burnt the town,
and threatened to besiege the castle. An acconrmoda;tion enfu.

ed,

BooK I. ed, on what terms is not known. But the king's jealousy, and
>--»rcr the new earl's power and resentment, prevented it from being

of long continuance. Both took the field, at the head of
their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the earl, corn-
posed chiefly of borderers, was far superior to the king's both
in number, and in valour ;.and a single battle must, in all
probability, have decided Atether the house of Steward or of
Douglas was henceforth to pollefs the throne of Scotland.
But, while his troops impatiently expected the signal to engage,
the earl ordered them to retire to their camp, and Sir John Ha-
milton of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the greatell
confidence, convinced of his want if genius to improve an
opportunity, or of his want of courage to seize a crown, de-
ferted him that very night. This example was followed by
many; and the earl, despised or forsaken by all, was soon
driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to. depend for his sub-
fiftence, on the friendlhip of the king of England. The ruin
of this great family, which had To long rivalled and overawed
the crown, and the terror with which such an example of un-
successful ambition filled the nobles, secured the king for some
time, from opposition ; and the royal authority remained uncon-
trouled and almost absolute. James did not susser this favoura-
ble interval to pass unimproved; he procured the consent of
parliament to laws more advantageous to the prerogative, and
more subversive of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were
ever obtained by any former or subsequent monarch of Scot-
land.

By one of there, not only all the vast poffeflions of the earl

of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and fu-
ture alienations of crown lands were declared to be void, and
the king was impowered to seize them at pleasure, without any
process or form of law, and obliged the possessors to refund

Aa. 41. whatever theyhad received from them . A dreadful inftru-
' "455· ment of oppreflion in the hands of a prince.

AN To a it law prohibited the wardenihip of the marches

to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in several instances, the

. Ibid. A. jurifdicrion of that office; and extended the authority of the
4z. king's courts f.

BY a third, it was enaaed, that no regality, or exclusive

right of administering justice within a man's own lands, fliould
be granted in time to come, without the content of parlia-

t Ibid. Aa. ment X, a condition, which implied almost an express prohibi-
43. tion. Those nobles who already poflefled that great privilege,

would naturally be solicitous to prevent it from becoming com-
mon, by being bestowed on many. Those, who had not
themselves attained it, would envy others the acquisition of
Iuch a flattering diftinEtion ; and both would concur in reject-
ing the claims of new pretenders.

BY

BY a fourth a&, all new grants of hereditary offices were Boo L.

prohibited, and those obtained since the death of the last king *v-
were revoked §. Ibid:

EACH of there statutes undermined rome of the great pil- § Aa. 44.

lars, on which the power of the aristocracy refted. During the
remainder of his reign, this prince pursued the plan which he
had begun, with the utmost vig0or ; and had not a sudden
death, occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burf near
him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he want-
ed neither genius nor courage to perfect it ; and Scotland
might, in all probability, have been the firRf kingdom in Eu-
rope, which would have seen the subversion of the feudal
sysem..

JA M E s III. discovered no less eagerness than his father or

grandfather to humble the nobility; but far inferior to either of
them in abilities and address, he adopted a plan extremely im-
politic, and his reign was difaifrous, as well as his end tragi-
cal. Under the feudal governments, the nobles were not only
the king's ministers, and pofeffed of all the great offices of
power or of trust; they were, likewise, his companions and
favourites, and scarce any but them approached his person, or
were entitled to his regard. But James, who both feared and
hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual distance, and bestow-
ed every mark of confidence and affetion upon a few mean
persons, of professions so diflsonourable, as ought to have ren-
dered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up with there, in
his cable of Stirling, he reldom appeared in public, and amnu-
fed himself with architecture, music, and other arts, which
were then little esteemed. The nobles beheld the power and
favour of there ministers, with indignation. Even the fangui-
nary measures of his father provoked them lets than his negleE.
Individuals alone suffered by the fonner; by the latter, every
man thought himself injured, because all were contemned.
Their discontent was much heightened by the king's recalling
all rights to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and e-
very other concession, which was detrimental to his preroga-
tive, and which had been extorted during his minority. Cotn-
binations among themselves, secret intrigues with England, and
all the usual preparatives for civil war, were the effects of their
resentment. Alexander duke of Albany, and John earl of
Mar, the king's brothers, two young men of turbulent and
ambitious spirits, and incensed against James, who treated
them with the fame coldness, as he did the other great men,
entered decply into all their cabals. The king deteced their
dfigns, before they were ripe for execution, and seizing his
two brothers, committed the duke of Albany to Edinburgh
'cafle. The earl of Mar having remonstrated with too much

boldness

BoOK I. boldness against the king's condu&, was murdered, if we may

v- >- believe our historians, by his command. Albany, apprehensive

of the fame fate, made his escape out of the castle, and fled
into France. Concern for the king's honour, or indignation at
his meafurcs, were perhaps the motives, which first induced
him to join the malecontents. But James's attachment to fa-
vourites rendering him everyday more odious to the nobles, the
prolpcct of the advantages which might be derived from their
general difaffecion, added to the resentment which he felt on
account of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon in-
spired Albany with more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He
concluded a treaty with Edward IV. of England, in which he
affunied the name of Alexander King of Scots, and in return
for the altiftance which was promised him towards dethroning
his brother, he bound hinflelf, so soon as he was put in posics-
sion of the kingdom, to swear fealty and to do homage to the
Englilh monarch, to renounce the ancient alliance with France,
to contract a new one with England, and to furnender some of

Abircr. the strongest castles, and mloft valuable counties in Scotland *.

Aa v. ii. Thataid, which the duke so basely purchased at the price of
443. his own honour, and the independence of his country, was

punctually granted him, and the duke of Gloucester with a
powerful army conducted him towards Scotland. The danger
of a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the afliftance of
those nobles whom he had so long treated with contempt.
Some of them were in close confederacy with the duke of
Albany, and approvedof all his pretensions. Others were im-
patient for any event, which would restore their order to its an-
cient pre-eninence. They took the field, however, at the
head of a powerful army of their followers, but with a firon-
ger disposition to redress their own grievances, than to
annoy the enemy; and with a fixed resolution of punifl-
ing those minions, whose iiifolence they could no longer
tolerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp
near Lawder, with a militaly dispatch and rigour. Having
previously concerted their plan, the earls of Angus, Huntly,
Lenox, followed by almost all the barons of chief note
in the army, forcibly entered the apartment of their fove-
reign, seized all his favourites, except one Ramsay, whom they
could not tear from the king, in whose arms he took shelter,
and without any form of trial, hanged them instantly over a
bridge. Among the inoft remnarkable of those who had engrossed
the king's affeition, were Cochran, a mason, Hommil a tay-
lor, Leonard a fiilth, Rogers a muficiail, and Torfifan, a ten-
cing-mafter. So idefpcable a retinue discovers the capricious-
neil of James's character, and accounts for the indignation of
the nobles, when they beheld the favour, due to then, bestow-
cd on 'uclh unnvornvy objec&s.

J A M e.

JA sE s had no reason to confide in an army folittle under' BOOK r.

his command, and difinifling it, shut himself up in the castle --
of Edinburgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and
honours were at length restored to him, and he eemed even
to have regained his brother's favour, by rome important fervi-
ces. But their friendflip was not of long duration. James a-
bandoning himself, once more, to the guidance of favourites;
and the fate of thole who had suffered at Lawder, did not de-
ter others from courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Albany,
on pretext that an attempt had been made to take away his life
by poison, fled from court, and retiring to his caftleof Dun-
bar, drew thither a greater number of barons than attended on
the king himself. At the fame time he renewed his former
confederacy with Edward ; the earl of Angus openly negociat-
ed that infamous treaty; other barons were ready to concur
with it ; and if the sudden death of Edward had not prevent-
ed Albany's receiving any aid from England, the crown of Scot-
- land would probably have been the reward of this unworthy
combination with the enemies of his country. But, infead of
any hopes of reigning in Scotland, he found, upon the death
of Edward, that he could not reside there in safety, and flying
fiE f to England, and then to France, he seems, from that time
to have taken no part in the affairs of his native country. Em-
boldened by his retreat, the king and his nlinifters multiplied
the insults which they offered to the nobility. A flanding
guard, a thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconsistent with the familiaritv and confidence with which
monarchs then lived aniidfl their nobles, was railed for the
king's defence, and the command of it given to Ramsay, late-
ly created earl of fothwell, the fame person who had so nar-
rowly escaped when his companions were put to death at Law-
der. And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient, a pro-
clamation was issued forbidding any person to appear in arms
within the precints of the court - ; which, at a time when no " Ferrieri,
man of rank left his own hoirfc without a numerous retinue ofust 398-
arlled followers, was, in effect, debarring the nobles from all
;iccefs to the king. James, at the fame tine, became fonderof
retirement than ever; and funk in indolence, or superstition, or
attentive only to amuicfn ents, devolved his whole authority up-
on his fiLvoulites. So many injuries provoked the nlof confi-
derable nobles to take arns, and having persuaded or obliged
tle duke of Rolhfay, the king's eldflt Ibn, a youth of fifteen,
to let himself at their head, they openly declared their intenti-
on of depriving Janmes of a crown, of which he had dicfover-
ed hinmfelf to be Co unworthy. Ro:uzed by this danger, the
king quitted his retirement, took the field, and encountered
:hen near Bannockburn; but the valour of the Borderers, of
whom the ariy of the ilalecontents was chiefly composed,

Vo . I D soon

BOOK I. soon put his troops to flight, and he himself was slain in the
*_-V^~ pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate attachment to fa-

vourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind, are visible in his
whole conduct; but the character of a cruel and unrelenting
tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to him by our historians. His
neglec of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken them ; and
their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two brothers,
and their unnatural confederacies with England, were sufficient
to have disturbed a more vigorous adminiltration, and to
have rendered a prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank exprefled

against the conduct of the conspirators, together with the ter-
ror of the excommunication which the Pope pronounced against
them, obliged them to use their victory with great moderation
and humanity. And being conscious how detestable the crime
of imbruing their hands in the blood of their sovereign appear-
ed, they endeavoured to regain the good opinion of their coun-
trymen, and to atone for their treatment of the father, by their
loyalty and duty towards the son, they placed him initantly on
the throne, and the whole kingdom soon united in acknowled-
ging his authority.

JAM ES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in

an high degree, all the poffions which animate a young and
noble mind. He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, and
was eager to obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient and
hereditary enmity between the king and nobles seems almost
intirely to have ceased. He envied not their splendor, because
it contributed to the ornament of his court; nor did he dread
their power, which he confidered as the security of his king-
dom, not as an objeCt of terror to himself. This confidence,
on his part, met with the proper return of duty and affection,
on theirs ; and, in his war with England, he experienced how
much a king, beloved by his nobles, is able to perform. Though
the ardour of his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather
than the profpeet of any national advantage, were the motives
of that expedition ; such was the zeal of his subjects for the
king's glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army, as
ever any of his ancestors had led upon English ground. But
tho' James himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimen-
tal to the aristocracy, his reign was diftinguiflied by an event,
extremely fatal to it; and one accidental blow humbled it
more than all the premeditated attacks of preceding kings. In
the rafli and unfortunate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility
chose rather to die, than to desert their sovereign. Twelve
earls, thirteen lords, five eldest sons of noblemen, and an in-
credible number of barons, fell with the king*. The whole
* Abr. i. body of the nobles, long and sensibly, felt this disaster; and ii

r'55~~~~~~~40."·~~~~ a prince

a prince of full age had then ascended the throne, their con- BOOK f.
ftemation and feebleness would have afforded him advantages, -' -^
which no monarch ever pofieffed.

BUT James V. who Succeeded his father, was an infant of

a year old ; and though the office of regent was conferred on
the duke of Albany, a man of genius and enterprize, a native
of France, and accultomed to a government where the power
of the king was alrecdy great; though he made many bold
attempts to extend tle royal authority; though he put to
death lord Home, and banifled the earl of Angus, the two no-
blemen of greatest influence in the kingdom, the ariflocracy lo1t
no ground under his administration. A firanger to the man-
ners, the laws, and the language of the people whom he was
called to rule, he acted, on some occasions, rather like a vice-
roy of the French king, than the governor of Scotland ; but
the nobles aflerted their own privileges, and contended for the
interest of their country, with a boldness, which convinced
him of their independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unsuccessful iPruggles, he voluntarily
rerired to France, and the king, being then in his thirteenth
year, the nobles agreed that he ihould aflunie the government,
and that eight perbons should be appointed to attend him by
turns, and to advise and aflift him in the administration of
public affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one of that
number, did not long remain satisfied with such divided power.
He gained some of his colleagues, removed others, and inti-
midated the rcft. When the term of his attendance expired
he Rill retained authority, to. which all were obliged to fubmir,
because none of them was in a condition to dispute it. The as-
section of the young king was the only thing wanting, to fix
and perpetuate his power. But an active and high-fpirited
prince submitted, with great imp;tience, to the reifraint, in
which he was kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be
confined as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated
with no refpet ; and to be deprived of all power. He could
not, on tome occafiuns, conceal his indignation and resentment.
Angus foresaw that he had much to dread from there, and as
he could not gain the king's heart, he resolved to make sure of
his person. James was continually surrounded by the earl's
spies and confidants ; many eyes watched all his motions, and
oblcrved every ftep he took. But the king's eagerness to ob-
tain liberty eluded all their vigilance. He escaped from Falk-
land, and fled to the castle of Stirling, the residence of the
queen his mother, and the only place of reng in the king-
dom which was not in the hands of the Douglases. The no-
bles, of whom faone werc influenced by their hatred to Angus,
aind others by their refp.:.t for the king, crowded to Stirling, and
his court w:is soon filled with persons of the greatest diftinaion.

D .) The

BooK I. The earl, though aftonilhed at this unexpeced revolution, re-
-" solved, at firt, to make one bold pufll for recovering his autho-

rity, by marching to Stirling at the head of his followers ; but
he wanted either courage, or strength, to execute this refoluti-
on. In a parliament held soon after, he and his adherents were
attainted, and after escaping from many dangers, and enduring
much misery, he was at length obliged to fly into England, for
refige.

J A M E S had now not only the name, but, though extreme-

ly young, the full authority of a king. He was inferior to no
prince of that age in gracefulrefs of person, or in vigour of
mind. His understanding was good, and his heart warm ; the
former capable of great improvement, and the latter fufcepti-
ble of the best impreflions. But according to the usual fate of
princes who are called to the throne in their infancy, his edu-
cation had been negle'ted. His private preceptors were more
ready to flatter, than to instruCt him. It was the interest of
those who governed the kingdom, to prevent him from knowing
.too much. And the earl of Angus, in order to divert him
from business, gave him an early taste for such pleasures, as as-
terwards occupied and engrossed him more than became a king.
Accordingly, we discover in James all the features of a great,
but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand, violent paflions,
implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of power, and
the utmost rage at disappointment. On the other, love to his
people, zeal for the punifliment of private opprefiors, confi-
dence in his favourites, and the most engaging openness and
affability of behaviour.

WH^ AT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power

of the nobles led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their
attempts to humble them. The plan he formed for that pur-
pose was more profound, more systematic, and pursued with
greater confkancy and tfeadinefs, than that of any of his ancef-
tors. And the influence of the events in his reign upon those of
the subsequent period, render it neceflary to explain his condut,
at greater length, and to enter into a more minute detail of his
actions. He had penetration enough to discover those defets
in the schemes, adopted by former kings, which occasioned
their miscarriage. The example of James I. had taught him,
that wife laws operate slowly on a rude people, and that the
fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued by there
alone. The effets of the violent measures of James II. con-
vinced him, that the oppreflion of one great family is apt ei-
ther to excite the fufpiclon and resentment of the other no-
bles, or to enrich with its spoils Come new family, which would
soon adopt the fame sentiments, and become equally formida-
ble to the crown. He saw, fiom the fatal end of James ITs.
that neglect was cfill more intolerable to the nobles than op-

prcflion,

prcllion, and that the miniftly of new men and favourites was BOOK I.
hoth diflonourable, and dangerous to a prince. At the fame '"-'"
time, he felt that the authority of the crown was not sufficient
to counterbalance the power of the aristocracy, and that with-.
out tome new acccfiion of strength, he could expet no better
llccels in the struggle than his ancestors. In this extremity, he'
applied himself to tie clergy, hoping that they would both re-
lillt his plan, and concur, with all their influence, in enabling
him to put it in execution. Under the feudal government, the
church being reckoned a third effare, had its representatives ini
parliament ; the number of these was considerable, and they.;
poitefled great influence in that assembly. The superstition of.
former kings, and the zeal of an ignorant age, had bestowed,
upon ecclefiafticks, a great proportion of the national wealth,
and the authority which they acquired by the reverence of the,
people, was superior even to that which they derived from their
riches. This powerful body, however, depended entirely on
the crown. The popes, notwithstanding their attention to ex-
tend their usurpations, had negleced Scotland as a distant and.
poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise powers, which
they disputed with more considerable princes. The Scottish
nonarchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant bishop-
ricks and abbeys *; and James naturally concluded, that men
who expected preferment from his favour, would be willing to * Epil5o
nerit it, by promoting his designs. Happily for him, the no- . eg7, &c;
bl-s had not yet recovered the blow which fell on their order at Aft. i:S.P.
Flowden, and if we may judge either from their condut, or 1540.
from the charater given of them by Sir Ralph Sadler the En-
glish envoy in Scotland, they were men of little genius, of no
experience in business, and incapable of aCting either with una-
nility, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on the other
hand, were diftinguilhed by their great abilities, and no less
by their ambition. Various causes of disgust had arisen be-
tween them and the nobles who despised their character, and
envied their power, or their wealth. By acting in concert with
the king, they not only gratified him, but avenged themselves,
and hoped to aggrandize their own order, by deprefling those,
who were their role rivals. Secure of so powerful a concur-
rence, James ventured to proceed with greater boldnef. In
the firil heat of resentment, he had driven the earl of Angus
out of the kingdom ; and sensible that a person so far superior
to the other nobles in abilities, night create many obstacles,
which would retard, or render ineffeaual all his schemes, he
solemnly swore, that he would never permit hili to return into
Scotland, and, notwithstanding the repeated solicitations of the
king of England, he adhered to his vow with unrelenting ob-
Jlinacy. fe then proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edin-
burgh, Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his magazines

with

Boor L with arms and ammunition. Having taken these precautions
-i V _ by way of defence, he began to treat the nobility with the ut-

nmof coldness and reserve. Those offices, which they were apt,
from long poffeflion, to confider as appropriated to their order,
wee now bestowed on ecclesiastics, who alone pofleffed the
king's ear, andi together with a few gentlemen of inferior rank,
to whom he bad communicated his schemes, were entrusted
with the management of all public affairs. These ministers
were chosen with judgment; and cardinal Beatoun, who soon
became the most eminent among them, was a man of superior
genius. They served the king with fidelity, they carried on his
measures with vigour, with reputation, and success. James
no longer concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered
no opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences
were aggravated into real crimes, and punished with severity.
Every accusation against persons of rank was heard with plea-
sure, every appearance of guilt was examined with rigour, and
every trial proved fatal to those who were accused: the banish-
ing Hepbum Earl of Bothwell for reasons extremely frivolous,
the beheading the master of Sorbes without sufficient evidence
of his guilt, and the condemning lady Glanlis, a sifter of the
earl of Angus, to he burnt for the crime of witchcraft, of
which even that credulous age believed her innocent, are mo-
numents both of the king's hatred of the nobility, of the fe-
verity of his government, and of the stretches he made towards
absolute power. By these aes of authority, he tried the spirit
of the nobles, atd how much they were willing to bear. Their
patience increased his contempt for them, and added to the
ardour and boldness with which he pursued his plan. Mean
while they observed the tendency of his fchenes with concern,
end with resentment: but the king's ligacity, the vigilance of
hisminifters, and the want of a proper leader, made it dange-
rous to concert any measures for their defence, and impoflible
to at with becoming vigour. James and his counsellors, by a
false ftep which they took, presented to them, at length, an
advantage which they did not fail to improve.

Mo T V s, which are well known, had prompted Henry

VIII. to difelaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the reve-
nues of the regular clergy. His fytclin of reformation satisfied
none of his fubjecs. Some were enraged because he had pro-
ceeded so far, others murmured bccause he proceeded no far.
ther; and by his imperious temper, and alternate persecutions
of the zealots for popery, and the converts to the proteftani
opinions, he was equally formidable to both. Henry was
asi'aid that this general diffatisfaaion of his people might en-
courage his enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
Fie knew that both the pope and emperor courted the friendl-
ship of the king of Scots, and ordeavourd to engage him in

mil

an alliance against England. He resolved, therefore, to dif- BOOK. I.
appoint the effects of their negociations, by entering into a--v--
closer union with his nephew, and for that purpose rent ambaf-
fadors into Scotland, to propose a personal interview with him
at York. It was plainly James's interest to accept of this in-
vitation; the aflfilance of so powerful an ally, the high ho-
nours which were promised him, and the liberal subsidies he
might have obtained, would have added no little dignity to his
doneftic government, and muff have greatly facilitated the ex-
ecution ot his favourite plan. On the other hand, a war with
England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he rejected
Henry's offers to friendship, was inconsistent with all his views.
This would bring him to depend on his barons; an army could
not be raised without their afilftance : to call nobles incensed
against their prince into the field, was to unite his enemies, to
make them sensible of their own strength, and to afford them
an opportunity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was
not ignorant that all these consequences might follow a breach
with England, listened at first to Henry's proposal, and con-
sented to the interview at York. But the clergy dreaded an
union, which must have been eftabliflied on the ruins of the
church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse into his ne-
phew his own Sentiments concerning religion, and had fre-
quently tolicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the usurped
dominion of the pope, which was no less dilhonourable to
princes, than grievous to their fubjets. The clergy had hi-
therto, with great address, diverted the king from regarding
there solicitations. But, in an amicable conference, Henry ex-
pected, and they feared that James would yield to his intrea-
ties, or be convinced by his 'rguments. They knew that the
revenues of the church were an alluring object to a prince, who
wanted money, and who loved it ; that the pride and ambition
of ecclesiastics raised the indignation of the nobles; that their
indecent lives gave offence to the people; that the proteftanit
opinions were spreading salt throughout the nation ; and that an
universal defection from the eftablifled church, would be the
confcquence of giving the finalleft degree of encouragement to
these principles. For there reasons, they employed all their
credit with the king, and had recourse to every artifice and infi-
nuation, in order to divert him from a journey, which muff
have been so fatal to their interest. They endeavoured to in-
spire him with fear, by magnifying the danger to which he would
expose his person, by venturing so far into England, withoul
any security but the word of a prince, who having violated
every thing venerable and sacred in religion, was no longer to
be trusted ; and by way ofcompenfation for the funis which he
might havereceived from Henry, they offered an annual dona-
tion of 50,000 crowns; they promised to contribute liberally

towards

Booi I. towards carrying on a war with England, and flattered him
I-'VC*-. with the profpec of imnlenfe riches, arising from the forfeiture

of persons, who were to be tried and condemned as hereticks.
Influenced by there considerations, James broke his agreement
with Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had already
come to York; and that haughty and impatient monarch re-
sented the affront, by declaring war against Scotland. His
army was Coon ready to invade the kingdom. James was
obliged to have recourse to the nobles, for the defence of his
dominions. At his command, they assembled their followers
but with the fame dispositions, which had animated their ancef-
tors in the reign of James III. and with a full resolution of imi-
tating their example, by punisling those to whom they imputed
the grievances, of which they had reason to complain; and if
the king's ministers had not been men of abilities, superior to
thole of James III. and of considerable interest even with their
enemies, who could not agree among themselves what vi&ims
to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as remarkable
as that of Lawder, for the daring encroachments of the nobi-
lity on the prerogative of the prince. But though his ministers
were saved by this accident, the nobles had Coon another oppor-
tunity, of discovering to the king, their dissatisfaction with his
government, and their contempt of his authority. Scarcity of
provisions, and the rigour of the season having obliged the Eng-
liifs army which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James ima-
gined that he could attack them, with great advantage, in
their retreat; but the principal barons, with an obstinacy and
disdain, which greatly aggravated their disobedience, refused
to advance a ftep beyond the limits of their own country.
Provoked by this insult to himself, and suspicious ofa new con-
fpiracy against his ministers, the king inaiantly disbanded an
army, which paid so little regard to his orders, and returned
abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

A N ambitious and high-fpiritcd prince could not brook such

a mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rafli, and
his despair upon a difippoinrtlent was exceflive. He felt him-
self engaged in an unnecefiary war with England, which, in-
flead of yielding hin. the laurels and triumphs that he expected,
had begun with such circumfiar.ces, as encouraged the inlo-
lencc of his subjects, and exposed bini to the scorn of his ene-
mies. He law how vain and inclffecual all his projects to hum-
ble the nobles had been, and thar, though in tilles of peace,
a prince may endeavour to ltprers tlhepl, they will rifl, during
war, to their former importance and dignity. Impatience, re-
fentment, indignation filled his bolnni by turns. The violence
of there paflions altered his temper, and, p-rlhaps, impaired
his reaion. He became perfive, fullen, and retired. I-hr
seemed, through the day, to be swallowcd up in profound nme-

ditation,

ditation, and through the night, he was disturbed with thore BOOK 1.
visionary terrors, which make impreilion upon a weak under- ' -
standing only, or a disordered fancy. In order to revive the
king's spirits, an inroad on the weftem borders was concerted
by his ministers, who prevailed upon the barons in the neigh-
bouring provinces, to raise as many troops as were thought
neceflary, and to enter the enemy's country. But nothing could
remove the king's aversion to his nobility, or diminilh his jea-
lousy of their power. He would not even entrust them with
the command of the forces which they had assembled; that
was reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner
appeared to take poffefion of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and'indignation occasioned an universal mutiny in the
army. Five hundred English, who happened to be drawn up
in fight, attacked the Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the
king, and contempt of their general, produced an effect, to
which there is no parallel in history. They overcame the fear
of death, and the love of liberty; and ten thousand men fur-
rendered to a number so far inferior, without striking a single
blow. No man was desirous of a victory, which would have
been acceptable to the king, and to his favourite; a few en-
deavoured to save themselves by flight; the Englifl had the
choice of what prisoners they pleased to take; and almost
every person ofdiftin&tion, who was engaged in the expedition,
remained in their hands. This aftoniihing event was a new
proof to the king of the general disaffection of the nobility,
and a new discovery of his own weakness, and want of autho-
rity. Incapable of bearing these repeated insults, he found
himself unable to revenge them. The deepest melancholy and
despair succeeded to the furious transports of rage, which the
first account of the rout of his annnv occasioned. All the vio-
lent paflions, which are the enemies of life, preyed upon his
mind, and wafted and consumed a youthful and vigorous con-
flitution. Some authors of that age impute his untimely death
to poison; but the dlifeafcs of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal ; and the known cftccts of disappoint-
ment, anger, and refentmcnt upon a sanguine and impetuous
temper, sufficiently account for his unhappy fate. " His
death (fays Drummond) proved his mind to have been railed
to an high strain, and above mediocrity; he could die, hut
could not digest a disaster." Had James survivcd this misfor-
tune, one of two things must have happened: either the vio-
lence of his temper would have engaged him openly to nttack
the nobles, who would have found in Henry a willing and
powerful protector, and have derived the fame ailllifance from
him, which the malecontents, in the succeeding reign, did
from his daughter Elizabeth.; in that cafe, a dangerous civil
~warwould have been the certain confleuence. Or, perhaps,

neccllity

BooK 1. necessity might have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers,
'---v J and be reconciled to his nobility. In that event the church

would have fallen a sacrifice to their union, a reformation upon
Henry's plan, would have been eftablifihed by law, a great part
of the temporalities of the church would have been seized, and
the friendmhip of the king and barons would have been cemented
by dividing its spoils.

S UCH were the efforts of our kings, towards reducing the

exorbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended
with success, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they
were not conduced with prudence. Every circumltance seems
to have combined against the crown. Accidental events con-
curred with political causes, in rendering the best concerted
meafires abortive. The affaifination of one king, the sudden
death of another, and the fatal despair of a third, contributed
no less than its own natural strength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin.

AM IDST these ftrugglcs, the influence which our kings

possessed in their parliaments, is a circumstance seemingly in-
explicable, and which merits particular attention. As these
assemblies were composed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are
apt to imagine, must have dicated all their decisions ; but,

The extra- instead of this, every king found them obsequious to his will,
rd in ary and obtained such laws, as he esteemed necessary for extend-
influence ing his authority. All things were conduEed there with dif-
~ot the
Scottith patch and unanimity ; and, in none of our historians, do we
kings in find an inRfance of any opposition formed against the court in
pFliament. parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying through

the measures which were agreeable to the king. In order to
account for this singular fat, it is necessary to enquire into the
origin and constitution of parliament.
The rea- THE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its

s ot it. operations, produced the fame effeEts in finall, as in great

societies; and the territory of a baron, was, in miniature, the
model of a kingdom. He potffffed the right of jurifdiaion,
but those, who depended on him, being free men, and not
slaves, could be tried by their peers only ; and, therefore, his
vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to aflift both in
palsing and executing his sentences. When alrembled, on these
occasions, they eflablifled, by mutual content, such regula-
tions, as tended to the wcll'are of their finall society ; and often
granted voluntarily, such supplies to their fuprior, as his ne-
.ellities required. Change now a single name: in place of ba-
ron, substitute king, and we behold a parliament in its first ru-
dlinents, and observe the lirll exertions of those powers, which
its members now poflfls as judges, as legislators, and as dif-
penfern of the public re cvnues. Suitable to this idea, are the

ape

appellations of the king's court*, and of the king's great council, BooK I.
by which, parliaments were anciently diftinguiihed ; and suit- _-v
able to this, likewise, were the constituent members of which * Du
it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held cage
of the king in chief were bound, by the condition of theircari
tenure, to attend and to aflift in his courts. Nor was this
esteemed a privilege, but a service. It was exacted likewise
of bishops, abbots, and the greater ecclesiastics, who holding
vast pofleflions of the crown, were deemed subjee to the fame
burden. Parliaments did not continue long in this state. Ci-
ties gradually acquired wealth, a considerable lhare of the pub-
lic taxes was levied on them, the inhabitants grew into efti-
mation, and being enfranchised by the sovereign, a place in
parliament was the consequence of their liberty, and of their
importance. But as it would have been absurd to confer such
a privilege, or to impose such a burden on a whole community,
every burrough was permitted to choose one or two of its citi-
zens to appear in the name of the corporation; and the idea of
representation was firfi introduced in this manner. An innova-
tion, kill more important, naturally followed. The vassals of
the crown were originally few in number, and extremely pow-
erful; but as it is impoflible to render property fixed and perma-
nent, many of their pofleflions came, gradually, and by vari-
ous methods of alienation, to be split and parcelled out into
different hands. Hence arose the diftinaion between the
greater and the leer abarons. The former were those who re-
tained their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the new
and less potent vassals of the crown. Both were bound, how-
ever, to perform all feudal services, and, of consequence, to
give attendance in parliament. To the lesser barons, who
formed no inconsiderable body, this was an intolerable grie-
vance. Barons sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs re-
nounced their right of electing, charters were obtained, con-
taining an exemption from attendance ; ard the anxiety, with
which ou. ancestors endeavoured to get free from the obliga-
tion of fitting in parliament, is furpalled by that only, with
which their pqfterity solicit to be admitted there. In order to
accommodate both parties, and, at once, to secure io the
king a sufficient number of members in his great council, and
to save his vassals from an unnecessary burden, an easy expedi-
ent was found out. The obligation to pcrfonal attendance was
continued upon the greater barons, from which the lesser barons
were exempted, on condition of their electing, in each county,
a certain number of representatives, to appear in their name.
Thus a parliament became conlpleat in all its members, and was
composed of lords spiritual and temporal, of knights of the
Ihires, and of burgesses. As many causes contributed to bring
government earlier to perfection in England, than in Scotland ;

as

BOOR I. as the rigour of the feudal institutions abated fooncr; and its
v---. defects were supplied with greater facility in the one kingdom,

than in the other; England led the way in all these changes,
and burgesses, and knights of the shire appeared in the parlia-

A. D. nents of that nation, before they were heard of in ours. Bur-
13%6. geffes were first admitted into the Scottish parliaments by Ro-
Abtr- bert Bruce ; and in the preamble to the laws of Robert Ill.

cromby, they are ranked among the constituent members of that assem-
. 635. bly. The lesser barons were indebted to James I. for a statute

exempting them from personal attendance, and permitting them
to elet representatives ; the exemption was eagerly laid hold
on, but the privilege was so little valued, that, except one or
two inltances, it lay negleEted during 160 years; and James
VI. first obliged them to fend representatives regularly tdparlia-

§ Effavs en ment§.
Brit. Ar.- A Sc o T T S H Parliament then, consisted anciently of great
tl. Er. 11. barons, of ecclesiastics, and a few representatives of burroughs.
D2alrymp.
Hil. of 0Nor were these divided as in England, into two houses, but
Feud. composed one assembly, in which the lord chancellor presided f.
Prop. ch. 8. And, in rude ages, when the science of government was ex-

tremely imperfect, among a martial people, unacquainted with
the arts of peace, strangers to the talents which make a figure
in debate, and despising them, parliaments were not held in the
fame estimation as at present; nor did haughty barons love
those courts, in which they appeared with such evident marks
of inferiority. Parliaments were often hastily aflembled, arid
it was, probably, in the king's power, by the mannerin which
he issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those who were
averse from his measures. At a time when deeds of violence
were common, and the restraints of law and decency were
little regarded, no man could venture with safety to eppofe the
king in his own court The great barons, or lords of parlia-
ie:nt, were extremely few; even so late as the beginning of

.t And. the reign of Jame,: VI. t they amounted only to fifty three.
'o! v i IlThe eccclefinlics equalled them in number, and being devoted

r . implicitly to the crown, for reatlls which have been already

explained, rendered all hopes of victory in any struggle defpe-

rate.

+ In England the peers and commons eem early to have met in fep,-

rate houlic ; and James I. who wa\ fond of imitating the Englifl in all
their culluom, had probably an intention of introducing fu.ie considerable
dillinftinn between the greater .nd Iclfer barons in Scotland; at lear he
,detcrmined that their consultations fisould not be carried on under the
direction of the fame president; for by hit law, A. D. 1317. it id pro-
vided, " that out of the commifliners of all the (hires (hall be cholen a
wife and expert man, c.lllc the common speaker of the parliament, who
shall propol' all and f'urdry needs and caules, pertaining tn the commons
in the parliament or general council." No such speaker, it would I'em,
was ever choln ; and by a libl'eqenCt law the chancellor was dcflarcd
perpetual president of p lliamcot.

rate. Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious, as might be BOOK 1.
imagined, to prevent a:ts of parliament favourable to the royal - -'
prerogative; conscious of their own firength, and of the
king's inability to carry these a&s into execution without their
concurrence, they trusted either to elude, or to contemn them;
and the statute revoking the king's property, and annexing ali-
enatedjurifdicions to the crown, repeated in every reign, and
violated and despised as often, is a Itanding proof of the im-
potence of laws, when opposed to power. So many concur-
ring causes are sufficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant,
which our kings acquired in parliament. But without having
recourse to any of these, a single circunftance, peculiar to the
conititution of the Scottish parliament, the mentioning of
which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly explain this
faEt, Seemingly so repugnant to all our reasonings concerning the
weakness of the king, and the power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the conftitu-

tion of our parliaments, we find a committee, diftinguilhed by
the name of lords of articles. It was their business to prepare
and to digest all matters which were to be laid before the
parliament; every motion for a new law was first made there,
and approved or rejeAed by them at pleafiure; what they ap-
proved was formed into a bill, and presented to parliament;
what they rejected could not be introduced into the house.
This committee owed the extraordinary powers vested in it, to
the military genius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to sub-
mit to the drudgery of civil business, too impetuous to observe
the forms, or to enter into the details necessary in conduting
it, they were glad to leave that burden upon a small number,
while they themselves had no other labour than simply to give,
or to refute their fanclion to the bills, which were presented to
them. The lords of articles, then, not only direAed the whole
proceedings of parliament, but pofleffed a negative before de-
bate. That committee was chosen and constituted in such a
manner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the king's
hands. It is extremely probable, that the king once had the
sole right of nominating the lords of articles *. They came

after-

* It appears from authentic recordr, that a parliament was appointed

to be held March iz, 1566, and that the lords cf articles were cho'cn
and met on the 7th, five days befole the assembling of parliamcnt. If
they could be regularly elcEted so long before the meeting of parliamcnt,
it is natural to conclude, that the prince alone poffeired the right of eleet-
ing them. There are two different accounts of the manner of their
eleStion at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the archbilllol
of Glallwow. 1" We, accompanied with our nobility for the time, pals to
"the Talbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our parliament on the 7th day
" of this inltant, and elected the lords articulars." If we explain there
words, according to fric grammar, we mull conclude that the queen her-
self cle'ted them. It il, however, more probable chat Mary meant to

iay,

BooK I. afterwards to be eleed by the parliament, and consisted of an
^_V~ equal number out of each estate, and most commonly of eight

temporal and eight spiritual lords, of eight representatives of
burroughs, and of the eight great officers of the crown. Of
this body, the eight ecclesiastics, together with the officers of
the crown, were entirely at the king's devotion, and it was
scarce polfible that the choice could fall on such temporal lords
and burgeftes as would unite in opposition to his measures.
Capable either of influencing their election, or of gaining them
when eleted, the king commonly found the lords of articles
no less obsequious to his will, than his own privy council, and
by means of his authority with them, he could put a negative
upon his parliament before debate, as well as after it; and
what may seem altogether incredible, the moll limited prince
in Europe aaually poflefed, in one instance, a prerogative
which the most absolute could never attain .

To

fay, that the nobles then present with her, viz. her privy counsellors and
others, elefed the lords of articles. Keith's Hist. of Scotland, p. 331.
The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who exprefly affirms that the queen
herself eleaed them. Keith's Append. 1z6. Whether we embrace the
one or the other of these opinions, is of no consequence. If the privy coult-
fellers and nobles attending the court had a right to elet the lords of
articles, it was equally advantageous for the crown, as if the prince had
had the Cole nomination of them.

* H v N G deduced the history of the committee of lords of articles,

as low as the subjec of this preliminary book required, it may be agree-
able, perhaps, to some of my readers, to know the fubfcquent variations
in this singular inflitution, and the political use which our kings made of
there. When parliaments became more numerous, and more confider-
able by the admifion of the representatives of the tetfer barons, the pre-
terving their influence over the lords of articles became, likewise, an ob-
jcct ofgreater importance to our kings. James VI. on pretence that
the lords of articles could not find Icifure to confider the great multitude
of affairs laid before them, obtained an a&, appointing four persons to be
named out of each estate, who (hould meet twenty days before the com.

- Aft.. 'a.. mencement of parliament t, to receive all supplications, &c. and reje&-
P. 1594. i::g what they thought frivolous, liould engrols in a book what they

tiihugIlt worthy the attention of the lords of articles. No provision is
madt in the a& for the choice of this felc& body, and the king would, of
cour'c. .ave claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I. was be-
ginning o. introduce these innovations which gave so much cffence to the
nation, he dreaded the opposition of his parliament, and in order to trc-
vent that, an artifice was made ufc of to secure the lords of articles for the
crown. The temporal peers were appointed to choose eight bilhops, and
the biflops eight peers; there sixteen met together, and ele&ed eight
knights of the shire, and eight burgesses, and to these the crown officers
were added as usual. If we can only suppose eight persons of so nume-
rous a body, as the peers of Scotland were become, by that time, attach-
ed to the court, these, it is obvious, would lie the men whom the biflope
would choose, and of consequence, the whole lorda of articles were the
tools snd creatures of the king. This practice, so inconillent with liber-
ty, was abolilhed during the civil war ; and the tatute of James VI. was
repealed. After the refloration, parliaments became more 'ervile than
ever. What was only a temporary device, in the reign of Charles 1.

was,

To this account of the internal confRitution of Scotland, it BooK I.

will not be improper to add a view of the political state of Eu- --
rope at that period, where the following history commences. State of
A thorough knowledge of that general fyftein, of which every Uro'pe at
kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less requisite towards . .ein-
understanding the history of a nation, than an acquaintance tie 16th
with its peculiar government and laws. The latter may ena- century.
ble us to comprehend domeflic occurrences and revolutions,
but without the former, foreign tranfations muff be altogether
nyfterious and unintelligible. By attending to this, many
dark passages in our hillory may be placed in a clear light;
and where the bulk of historians have seen only the effect, we
may be able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in France, and

its declension in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a re-
markable alteration in the political state of Europe. Kingdoms,
which were inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out
among nobles, acquired firmness and strength, by being united
into a regular monarchy. Kings becamie conscious of their
own power and importance. They meditated schemes of con-
quest, and engaged in wars at a distance. Numerous armies
were raised, and great taxes imposed for their subsistence.
Considerable bodies of infantry were kept in coniftant pay;
that service grew to be honourable; and cavalry, in which the
strength of European armies had hitherto consisted, though
proper enough for the lhort and voluntary excursions of barons
who served at their own expence, were found to be unfit either
for making, or defending any important conquert.

Ir was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and

Spain and Germany firif appeared to make a trial of their new
strength. The division of that country into so many finall
itates, the luxury of the people, and their effeminate averlion
to arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an easy prey.
The Italians, who had been accustomed to mock battles only,
and to decide their quarrels by innocent and bloodless vitories,
were aftonifled at the fight of real war; and as they could not
rcfift the torrent, they suffered it to take its course, and to spend
its rage. Intrigue and policy supplied the want of strength;
and neceflity and felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to
the great secret of modern politics, by teaching them how to

balance

was, then, converted into a landing law. " For my rart," fay6 the au-
thor from whom I have borrowed many of there particulars, ' I ihould
's have thought it left criminal in our restoration parliament, to have
" openly befowed upon the king a negative before debate, than, in such
4 an underhand artificial manner, to betray their conflituents, and the
" nation." Etfays on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, from a
letter of Randolph's to Cecil, to Aug. 1560, printed in the appendix,
that this parliament had some appearance of ancient precedent to joanify
their unworthy conduat,

BOOK I. balance the power of one prince, by throwing that of anotier

' into the opposite scale. By this happy device, the liberty of

Italy was long preserved. The scales were poised by very (kil-
ful hands; the inalleft variations were attended to, and no
prince was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be dan-
gerous.

A s Y S T M of condut, pursued with so much success in

Italy, was not long confined to that country of political refine-
ment. The maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded
so much upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe
rendered it so necessary, that it soon became a matter of chief
attention to all wife politicians. Every siep any prince took was
observed by all his neighbours. Ambafladors, a kind of ho-
nourable spies, authorised by the mutual jealousy of kings, re-
fided almotf conltantly at every different court, and had it in
charge to watch all its motions. Dangers were foreseen at a
greater distance, and prevented with moxe ease. Confederacies
were formed to humble any power which rose above its due
proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer the only
causes of hostility, it became common to take arms out of po-
licy; and war, both in its commencement, and in its opera-
tions, was more an exercise of the judgment, than of the pas-
sions of men. Almost er:ery war in Europe became general,
and the molt inconsiderable fates acquired importance, because
they could add weight to either scale.

FRA NCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the

year 1515, and Charles V. who obtained the imperial crown
in the year 1519, divided between them the strength and assec-
tions of all Europe. Their perpetual enmity was not owing
either to personal jealousy, or to the caprice of private passion,
but was founded so much in nature and true policy, that it
subsisted between their posterity for several ages; and, not-
withstanding their present accidental and unnatural union, must
again revive. Charles succeeded to all the dominions of the
house of Austria. No family had ever gained so much by wife
and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind the
Austrian princes rose, in a short time, from obscure counts of
Hapfliourg, to be archdukes of Austria, and kings of Bohemia,
and were in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a fort of he-
reditary right. Besides these territories in Germany, Charles
was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions
which belonged to the house of Burgundy. The Burgundian
provinces engrosscd, at that time, the riches and commerce of
one half of Europe and he drew from them, on many occa-
sions, those immense Turns, which no people without trade and
liberty are able to contribute. Spain furniflhed him a gallant
and hardy infantry, to whose discipline he was indebted for all
his conqucfts. And at the fame time, by the discovery of the

new

new world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which all the BOOK I.
extravagance of ambition could not exhaust. These advan- --v.~.
tages rendered Charles the firt prince in Europe; but he wiifled
to be more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His
genius was of that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an unexpected
height and vigour. He possessed, in an eminent degree, the
characteriRic virtues of all the different races of princes to
whom he was allied. In forming his schemes, he discovered
all the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand-father;
he pursued them with that obstinate and inflexible perseverance
which has ever been peculiar to the Auitrian blood; and in ex-
ecuting them, he could employ the magnanimity and boldnefi
of his Burgundian ancestors. His abilities were equal to his
power, and neither of them would have been inferior to his
designs, had not providence, in pity to mankind, and in order
to preserve them from the word of all evils, universal monar-
chy, raised up Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His
dominions were less extensive, but more united than the empe-
ror's. His fubjets were numerous, active, and warlike, lovers
of glory, and lovers of their king. To Charles power was the
only objet of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless induitry. Francis could mingle pleasure and elegance
with his ambition, and though he neglected some advantages,
which a more phlegmatic or more frugal prince would have
improved, an acive and intrepid courage supplied all his de-
sects, and checked or defeated many of the emperor's designs.

TH E reit of Europe observed all the motions of these mighty

rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one fide, the Italians
saw the danger which threatened Christendom, and in order to
avert it, had recourse to the expedient, which they had often
employed with success. They endeavoured to divide the pow-
er of the two contending monarchs into equal scales, and by
the union of several small states, to counterpoise him, whose
power became too great. But, what they concerted with
much wisdom, they were able to execute with little vigour;
and intrigue and refinement were feeble fences against the in-
croachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the balance

with less delicacy, but with a fironger hand. He was the
third prince of the age in dignity and in power; and the ad-
vantageous situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity,
his immense wealth, and absolute authority rendered him the
natural guardian of the liberty of Eurcpe. Each of the rivals
courted him with emulation ; he knew it to be his interest to
keep the balance even, and to restrain both, by not joining in-
tirely with either of them. But he was seldom able to reduce
hisjdeas to practice; he was governed by caprice more than

Vor.. I.E by

BooK I. by principle; and the paflions of the man were an overmatch for
_.iV-' the maxims of the king. Vanity and resentment were the great

springs of all his undertakings, and his neighbours easily found
the way, by touching these, to force him upon many rash and
inconsistent enterprises. His reign was a perpetual series of
blunders in politics, and while he esteemed himself the wisest
prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who found
it neceflary, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto

wafted her strength in the quarrels between France and Eng-
land, emerged from her obscurity, took her station in the system,
and began to have some influence upon the fate of difant na-
tions. Her assistance was, frequently, of consequence to the
contending parties, and the balance was often so nicely ad-
justed, that it was in her power to make it lean to either fide.
The part assigned her, at this junEture, was to divert Henry
from carrying his arms into the continent. That prince, hav-
ing routed the French at Guinegat, and invested Terouenne,
France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging James VI.
in that unhappy expedition which ended with his life. For the
fame reason, Francis encouraged and aflifted the duke of Alba-
ny, to ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in
the interest of England, and would willingly have persuaded
the Scots to revenge the death of their king, and to enter into
a new war with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the emperor, it was the interest of
both kings, that the Scots should continue inactive; and a
long tranquillity was the effet of their union. Charles endea-
voured to break this, and to embarrass Henry by another in-
road of the Scots. For this end, he made great advances to
James V. flattering the vanity of the young monarch, by
electing him a knight of the golden fleece, and by offering him
a match in the imperial family; while, in return for these
empty honours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war against England. But James,
who had much to lose, and who could gain little by embracing
the emperor's proposals, rejeted them with decency, and keep-
ing firm to his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to a&
upon the continent with his whole strength.

HE N R Y himself began his reign, by imitating the example

of his ancestors with regard to Scotland. He held its power
in such extreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain his
friend hip; but on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation,
by reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown of England
to the sovereignty over Scotland. But his own experience, and
the example of his enemies, gave him a higher idea of its
importance. It was impolfible to defend an open and extensive
fiontier, against the incursions of an acive and martial people.

During

During any war on the continent this obliged him to divide the BOOK I
strength of his kingdom. It was necessary to maintain a kind '_
of army of observation in the north of England; and after all
precautions, the Scottish borderers, who were superior to all
mankind in the practice of irregular war, often made successful
inroads, and spread terror and desolation over many counties.
He fell, at last, upon the true secret of policy, with refpet to
Scotland, which his predecessors had too little penetration to
discover, or too much pride to employ. The situation of
the country, and the bravery of the people made the conquest
of Scotland impossible; but the national poverty, and the vio-
lence of facion rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to go-
vern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former design, and re-
solved to employ the utmost address in executing the latter. It
had not yet become honourable for one prince to receive pay
from another, under the more decent name of a subsidy. But,
in all ages, the fame arguments have been good in courts, and
of weight with ministers, factious leaders, and favourites.
What were the arguments, by which Henry brought over so
many to his interest during the minority of James V. we know
by the original warrants fill extant *, for remitting confidera- * Born.
ble fums into Scotland By a proper distribution of these, ma- Hit. Ref.
ny pertbns of note were gained to his party, and a faction v . p "
which held secret correspondence with England, and received
all its diretions from thence, appears henceforward in our do-
meftic contests. In the sequel of the history, we ihall find
Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland. His fuc-
ceflors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The as-
fairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their inte-
refts were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention al-
most equally between them, and the authority, which Ihe inhe-
rited in the one, was not greater than that, which file acquired
in the other.

E z THE

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

B O O K II.
BOOK II. x /ARY queen of Scots was born a few days before the

e_- MV death of her father James V. The situation in which
Dec. z4, he left the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men, with the profpea

IS42. of a turbulent and disastrous reign. A war against England
B th of had been undertaken without neceflity, and carried on without
Mary, and
Rate of the uccefs. Many persons of the first rank had fallen into the
kingdom, hands of the English, in the unfortunate rout near the firth of

Solway, and were f ill prisoners at London. Among the reft
of the nobles there was little union, either in their views, or
in their affetion; and the religious disputes, occasioned by the
opinions of the reformers, growing every day more violent,
added to the rage of those facions which are natural to a form
of government nearly ariftocratical.

TH E government of a queen was unknown in Scotland, and

did not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial peo-
ple. The government of an infant queen was still more
destitute of real authority; and the profpe& of a long and
feeble minority invited to faction by the hope of impunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy against the
disorders of a minority, by committing to proper persons the
care of his daughter's education, and the adminifration of as-
fairs in her name. Though he saw the clouds gathering, and
foretold that they would quickly burst into a storm, he was so
little able to disperse them, or to defend his daughter ind king-
dom against the imminent calamities, that, in mere defpalr, he
abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune, and left open to
every pretender, the office of regent, which he could not fix to
his own fatisfa&ion.

Pretenflons CA R D I N A L Beatoun, who had for many years been con-
of Cardinal fidered as prime minister, was the first who claimed that high
the regency. dignity; alnd in support of his pretensions, he produced a tesla-

Sadler'n mient*, wnich he himself had forged in the name of the late
Lett. 161. king; and without any other right, instantly aflumed the title

of regent. He hoped, by the afliftance of the clergy, the coun-

tenance

T H E H I S T O R Y, &e. 53

tenance of France, the connivance of the queen dowager, and BOOK II.
the support of the whole Popiih faction, to hold by force, what.-._v'"
he had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed power
too long to be a favourite of the nation. Those among the
nobles who wilhed for a reformation in religion dreaded his fe-
verity, and others confidered the elevation of a churchman to
the highest office in the kingdom as a depreflion of themselves.
At their instigation, James Hamilton earl of Arran, and next
heir to the queen, rouzed hinfelf from his inactivity, and was
prevailed on to aspire to that station, to which proximity of
blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who were asem- Earl of Ar
bled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on him the office ran chosen
of regent; and the public voice applauded their choice. regent.

N o two men ever differed more widely in disposition and Charaeer of

character, than the earl of Arran and cardinal Beatoun. The Beatoun.
cardinal was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long ex-
perience he had acquired address and refinement; and insolence
grew upon him from continual success. His high fiation in the
church placed him in the way of great employments; his abi-
lities were equal to the greatest of these; nor did he reckon
any of them to be above his merit. As his own eminence was
founded upon the power of the church of Rome, he was a
zealous defenderof that superstition, and for the fame reason an
avowed enemy to the doctrine of the reformers. Political mo-
tives alone determined him to support the one, or to oppose the
other. His early application to public business kept him unac-
quainted with the learning and controversies of the age; he
gave judgment, however, upon all points, in dispute, with a
precipitancy, violence, and rigour, which cotemporary hifto-
rians mention with indignation.

Tni E character of the earl of Arran, was, in almolt every of Arran,

thing, the reverie of Beatoun's. He was neither infected with
ambition, nor inclined to cruelty : the love of ease extinguifled
the former, the softness of his temper preserved him from the
latter. Timidity and irresolution were his predominant failings,
the one occasioned by his natural constitution, and the other
arising from a consciousness that his abilities were not equal to
his station. With there dispositions he might have enjoyed and
adorned private life ; but his public conduct was without cou-
rage, or dignity, or confifence. The perpetual slave of his
own fears, and, by consequence, the perpetual tool of those,
who found their advantage in praftifing upon them. But as no
other person could be set in opposition to the cardinal, with any
probability of success, the notion declared in his favour with
so general a consent, that the artifices of his rival could not
withstand its united strength.

TH E earl of Arran had scarce taken poflnefion of his new Schemec oF
dignity, when a negotiation was opened with England, which witlhnreVrd

gave to Scotland.

BooK II. gave birth to events of the molt fatal consequence to himrelf,
'-"v'=-' and to the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIlt.

was no longer afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his
designs against France; and immediately conceived hopes of
rendering this security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward
his only son with the young queen of Scots. He communica-
ted his intention to the prisoners taken at Solway, and prevailed
on them to favour it, by the promise of liberty, as the reward
of their success. In the mean time, he permitted them to re-
turn into Scotland, that, by their presence in the parliament
which the regent had called, they might be the better able to
persuade their countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A cause
entrusted to such able and zealous advocates, could not well
miss of coming to an happy issue. All those who.feared the
cardinal, or who desired a change in religion, were fond of an
alliance which afforded protection to the dotrine which they
had embraced, as well as to their own persons, againif the
rage of that powerful and haughty prelate.

111 ton- BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of
dted" by improving this favourable conjunaure. Address and delicacy

in managing the fears, and follies, and interests of men, were
arts with which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs
he had formed upon Scotland, were obvious from the mar-
riage which he had proposed, and he had not dexterity enough
to disguise, or to conceal them. Instead of yielding to the
fear or jealousy of the Scots, what time and accidents would
soon have enabled him to recover, he, at once, alarmed and
irritated the whole nation, by demanding that the queen's per-
son fiould be immediately committed to his cultody, and that
the government of the kingdom fliould be put in his hands dur-
ing her minority.

Odious to HE N RY could not have prescribcd more ignominious con-
the Scots, ditions to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were re-
though in jeted, with indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an
cptcd by alliance with England, at the price of their own liberty. Tho
them. parliament of Scotland, however, influenced by the nobles who

returned from England; dcfirous of peace with that kingdom;
March it. anddelivered, by the regent's confining the cardinal as a pri-

'543 floner, from any opposition to which he might have given rife;

consented to a treaty of marriage and of union, but upon fomc-
what a more equal footing. And after some dark and unfuc-
cefsful intrigues, by which his amlbaiador endeavoured to carry
off the young queen and cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
was obliged to give up his own proposals, and to accept of
theirs. On his fide, he confcntcd that the queen fliould con-
tinue to reside in Scolland, and himself remain excluded from
any flhare in the governuent of the kingdom. On the other
hand, the Scots agreed to fend their sovereign into England as

Coon

soon as ihe attained the full age of ten years, and instantly to BOOK II.
deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to be kept as hostages by '
Henry till the queen's arrival at his court.

T HE treaty was till so manifestly of advantage to England, Favoured

that the regent loft much of the public confidence by consent- y th re-
ing to it. The cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, wat-
ched for such an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did
not fail to cultivate and improve this to the utmost. He corn- Oppofd by
plained loudly, that the regent had betrayed the kingdom to thecardal.
its molt inveterate enemies, and sacrificed its honour to his own
ambition. He foretold the extinAion of true catholic religion,
under the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic; but above
all, he lamented to fee an ancient kingdom conrenting to its
own slavery, descending into the ignominious station of a de-
pendent province; and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery
of a single nlan surrendering everything for which the Scottish
nation had dtruggled and fought during so many ages. These
remonstrances of the cardinal were not without effect. They
were addressed to prejudices and paflions which are deeply root-
ed in the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient ene-
mies of their country, the fame jealousy of national honour
and pride of independence, which, at the beginning of the
present century, went near to prevent the Scots from consenting
to an union with England, upon terms of great advantage,
did, at that time, induce the whole nation to declare against
the alliance which had been concluded. In the one period, an
hundred and fifty years of peace between the two nations, the
habit of being fubjeted to the fame king, and governed by
the fame maxims, had considerably abated old animofities, and
prepared both people for incorporating. In the other, injuries
were till fresh, the wounds on both fides were open, and, in
the warmth of resentment, it was natural to seek revenge, and
to be averse from reconcilement. At the union in 1707, the
wisdom of parliament despised the groundless murmurs occa-
sioned by antiquated prejudices; but in 1543, the complaints
of the nation were better founded, and urged with a zeal and
unanimity, which it is neither just, nor safe to disregard. The
rage of the people rose to such an height, that the Englifll am-
baffador could hardly be protected from their insults. The
clergy contributed a great fum towards preserving the church
from the dominion of a prince, whose fyltemn of reformation
was so fatal to their power. The nobles, after having morti-
sied the cardinal, so lately, in such a cruel manner, were, now,
ready to applaud and to second him, as the defender of the
honour and liberty of his country. He excites

A a c Y L L, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful barons almon the

declared openly against the alliance with England. By their whole na-
aliftance, the cardinal seized on the persons of the young thE ,g^Engi.

queen

BOOK II. queen and her mother, and added to his party the splendor and
*-v*- authority of the royal name *. He received, at the fame time,
* Keith's a more real acceflion to his strength, by the arrival of Matthew
Hilft of Steward earl of Lenox, whose return from France he earnestly

S 3. solicited. The young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of

the house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon the regent,
and pretended a right to exclude him, not only from succeeding
to the crown, but to deprive him of the poffeflion of his pri-
vate fortune. The cardinal flattered his vanity, with the prof-
pet of marrying the queen dowager, and affected to treat him
with so much refpeEt, that the regent became jealous of him as
a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the abbot of

Paisley, who returned into Scotland some time before the earl of
Lenox, and ated in concert with the cardinal. He was a
natural brother of the regent, with whom he had great cre-
dit; a warm partizan of France, and a zealous defender of the
cftablilhed religion. He took hold of the regent by the proper
handle, and endeavoured to bring about a change in his senti-
ments, by working upon his fears. The desertion of the no-
bility, the difaffeation of the clergy, and the rage of the people;
the resentment of France, the power of the cardinal, and the
pretensions of Lenox, were all represented with aggravation,
and with their most threatning aspeCt.

MEA N while, the day appointed for the ratification of the

treaty with England, and the delivery of the hostages approach-
ed, and the regent was fill undetermined in his own mind. He
afted to the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence, which
is peculiar to weak men, when they are so unfortunate as to
have the chief part in the conduct of difficult affairs. On the

Obliges the z5th of August, he ratified the treaty with Henry, and pro-
regent to claimed the cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene-
ren°uned my to his country. On the third of September, he secretly
(hip with withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the cardinal at Callender,
England. renounced the friendship of England, and declared for the in-
* Sadler, tercfts of France *.
339, 356. HE N RY, in order to gain the regent, had not spared the

most magnificent promises. He had offered to give the princess
Elizabeth in marriage to his eldest son, and to constitute him
king of that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river
Forth. But upon finding his interelt in the kingdom to be less
corfiderable than he had imagined, the Englilh monarch began
to treat him with little rcfpect. The young queen was now in
the custody of his enemies, who grew every day more nume-
rous and more popular. They formed a Cepalate court at Stir-
ling, and threatened to elect another regent. The French king
was ready to afford them his protection, and the nation, out of
hatred to the Englifl, would have united in their defence. In

this

this situation, the regent could not retain his authority, with- BOOK IT.
out a sudden change of his measures; and though he endea- - ""''
voured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve the appearances of
good faith with England, he was obliged to throw himself into
the arms of the party, which adhered to France.

So o N after this sudden revolution in his political principles, And to

. . .~ .

. Y' perficule

the regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The he reo
spirit of controversy was then new and warm; books of that mert.
kind were eagerly read by men of every rank ; the love of no-
velty, or the conviction of truth, had led the regent to exprels
Preat esteem for the writings of the reformers; and having
been powerfully Supported by those who had embraced their
opinions, he, in order to gratify them, entertained, in his own
family, two of the most noted preachers of the Proteflant doc-
trine, and, in his first parliament, consented to an act, by
which the laity were permitted to read the scriptures in a lan-
guage which they understood. Truth needed only a fair hear-
ing to be an over-match for error. Absurdities, which had
long imposed on the ignorance and credulity of mankind, were
detected and exposed to public ridicule; and under the coun-
tenance of the regent, the reformation made great advances.
The cardinal observed its progress with concern, and was at the
utmost pains to obstruct it. He represented to the regent his
great imprudence in giving encouragement to opinions, so fa-
vourable to Lenox's pretensions; that his own legitimacy de-
pended upon the validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on
the pope's authority; and that by suffering it to be called in
question, he weakened his own title to the succession, and fur-
nilhed his rival with the only argument, by which it could be
rendered doubtful*. These insinuations made a deep impref-
sion on the regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpcc of
luch imaginary dangers, was as much startled as the cardinal
could have wished ; and his zeal for the Protestant religion was
not long proof against his fear. He publickly abjured the
doctrine of the reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling,
and declared not only for the political, but the rel gious opi-
nions of his new confidants.

THit Proteftlnt dotrine did not ruffer much by his apof-

tacy. It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that
no discouragement or fevcrity could cxtirpate it. The regent
indeed consented to every thing, that the zeal of the cardinal

thought

* THE pretension« of the earl of Lennx tn thie rucrnrfion were t hus

founded. Mary, thr daughter of Jarmes 1. Ivls married to lames LIor.t
Hamilton. Elizabeth, a daughter of that lmarriage, wai the wife ot
Matthew earl of Lenox, and the proelint earl wv:i helr ,randrill;,. The
regent was likewise the grandlbn of the princefis Mary. But hiu fathier
having married Janet Beatoun the regent's mother, alier he h:ld obtaincd
a divorce from Elizabeth Home his frrmer wife, Lcnox pretended that the
sentence of divorce wns unjust, and that the regent, brizig born while
Plizabeth Home was Rill ali':e, ou6hl to be confildced as illritirimac.
Crawf. Pccr, 19z.

Booi II. thought necessary for the preservation of the efRablified reli-
_c^o gion. The reformers were persecuted with all the cruelty,

which superstition inspires into a barbarous people. Many were
condemned to that dreadful death, which the church has ap-
pointed for the punishment of its enemies; but they suffered
with a spirit so nearly resembling the patience and fortitude of
the primitive martyrs, that more were converted, than terrified
by such speCtacles.

Beatoun THE cardinal, however, was now in pofleffion of every
engrcffes thing his ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority
the chief Of a regent, without the envy of the name. He had nothing
dirertion
of affairs. to fear from the earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy

forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one half of
the nation, and little trusted by the other. The pretensions of
the earl of Lenox were the only thing which remained to em-
barrafs him. He had very successfully made use of that noble-
man to work upon the regent's jealouly and fear, but as he no
longer stood in need of such an inftrunent, he was willing to
get rid of him with decency. Lenox soon began to suspect his
intention; promiies, flattery, and refpet were the only re-
turns he had hitherto received for substantial services; but at
last the cardinal's artifices could no longer be concealed, and
Lenox, instead of attaining power and dignity himself, saw
that he had been employed only to procure these for another.
Resentment and disappointed ambition pulhed him on to seek
revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his inte-
reli, had so ungenerously purchased the earl of Arran's friend-
ship. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and declared
for the party at enmity with the cardinal, which, with open
arms, received a convert, who added' so much lustre to their
cause.

TH E two factions which divided the kingdom were still the

fame, without any alteration in their views or principles; but,
by one of those strange revolutions, which were frequent in
that age, they had, in the course of a few weeks, changed
their leaders. The regent was at the head of the partizans of
France and the defenders of Popery, and Lenox in the fame fta-
tion with the advocates for the Englilh alliance, and a reformna-
tion in religion. The one laboured to pull down his own work,
which the other upheld with the fame hand, that had hitherto
endeavoured to destroy it.

LE N o 's impatience for revenge got the PCart of the car-

dinal's ataivity. He furprized both hin and the regent by a
sudden march to Edinburgl with a numerous army ; and might
easily have crufled them, before they could prepare for their
del'clce. Ilut he was weak enough to liften to proposals for
an accommodation; and the cardinal amused him so artfully,
and spun out the treaty to such a length, that the greater part

of

of the earl's troops, who served, as is usual wherever the feu- BooK II
dal institutions prevail, at their own expence, deserted him; ,
and in concluding a peace, instead of giving the law, he was
obliged to receive it. A second attempt to retrieve his affairs
ended yet more unfortunately. One body of his troops was
cut to pieces, and the reft dilperfed; and with the poor re-
mains of a ruined party, he must either have Submitted to
the conqueror, or have fled out of the kingdom, if the ap-
proach of an English army had not brought him a ihort relief.

H N R Y was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, Henry in-

with which he had been treated, both by the regent and par- vadcs
liament of Scotland, who, at the time when they renouncedSc°'ll
their alliance with him, had entered into a new and ftriter
confederacy with France. The rigor of the season retarded,
for Come time, the execution of his vengeance. But in the
spring, a cpnfiderable body of infantry which was destined for
France, received orders to fail for Scotland, and a proper num-
ber of cavalry was appointed to join it by land. The regent
and cardinal little expected such a visit. They had trusted that
the French war would find employment for all Henry's forces;
and, from an unaccountable security, were wholly unprovided
for the defence of the kingdom. The earl of Hartford, a lea-
der fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this army, and
landed it, without opposition, a few niles above Leith. He Msy 3.
was quickly mailer of that place, and marching directly to '544-
Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plundering
the adjacent country, the richest, and most open in Scotland,
he set on fire both there towns; and upon the approach of
Come troops gathered together by the regent, put his booty on
board the fleet, and with his land forces retired safely to the
Englifi borders, delivering the kingdom in a few days, from
the terror of an invasion, concerted with little policy, carried
on at great expence, and attended with no advantage. If
Henry aimed at the conqueR of Scotland, he gained nothing by
this expedition ; if the marriage he had proposed, was still in
his view, hc loft a great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the
earl of Huntly humorously called it, difgutLed the whole nation;
their aversion for the match grew into abhorrence; and exaf-
perated by so many indignities, the Scots were never, at any
period, more attached to France, or more alienated from Eng-
land.

TH E earl of Lenox alone, in spite to the regent and French

king, continued a correlpondence with England, which ruined
his own inrerefl, without promoting T-enry's. Many of his
own vassals preferring their duty to their country before their
affection to him, reftifed to concur in any design to favour the
public enemy. And after a few feeble and unluccefsful at-
tempts to disturb the regent's adnlinifiration, he was obliged to

fly

BOOK II. fly for safety to the court of England, where Henry rewarded
''Vo services which he had the inclination, but not the power to

perform, by giving him in marriage his niece the lady Margaret
Douglas. This unhappy exile, however, was destined to be
the father of a race of kings. He saw his son lord Darnley
mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual exclusion of
that rival who now triumphed in his ruin. And from that time,
his posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of
which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the other received
as a fugitive.

A peace ME A N while hostilities were continued by both nations,
concluded. but with little vigour on either fide. The historians of that

age relate minutely the circumstances of several skirmishes and
inroads, which as they did not produce any considerable es-
fedt, at this dif'ance of time, deserve no remembrance *. At
June 1546. last an end was put to this languid and inactive war, by a peace,

in

* Though this war was diftinguifled by no important or decisive a-ion,

it was, however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There still remain
two original papers, which give us some idea of the miferier, to which the
most fertile coun'ies in the kingdom were expo'ed, by the ludden and de-
llru&ive incursions of the borderers. The first seems to be the report made
to Henry by the Englilh wardens of the marches, for the year 1544, and
contains their exploits from the id of July, to the 17th of November.
The account it gives of thodifferent inroads, orforrays, as they are cal-
led, is very minute; and, ih-conclufion, the fum total of mischief they did
is thus computed:

TownS, towers, ftedes, harnekyns pary(he-

churches, baftel-houfcs calf down or burnt 192

Scots slain - - 403
Priloners taken - - - 81
Nolt, i. c. horned cas:ie, taken 10o,386
Sheep .- 1,492
Nags and geldings - - l,g6
Goats - - - - oo
Bolls of corn - . . 850
lnfiglt-gear, i, c. houliold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes slate papers, 43.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the carl of Hartford, be-

tween the 8th and z3d of September, 1545; the narrative is more gene-
ral, but it appears that he had burnt, razed and destroyed in the counties
of BeUwick and Roxburgh only,

MonaIerics and Friar-houfe 7
Catlhlr, t'wcr%, and piler - 16
Market towns - 5
Villages - - 43
M1iln - - - 13
Hospitals - 3

All there were can down or burnt. laynes 51. As the Scots were no
lefI f;ilful in the praaice of irregular war, we may conclude that the
damage which they did in England was not inconfiderablo. and that their
raids were no left waftefill, than theforrajt of the Englilt.

in which England, France, and Scotland were comprehended. BOOK II.
Henry laboured to exclude the Scots from the benefit of this'-
treaty, and to reserve them for that vengeance, which his at-
tention to the affairs of the continent had hitherto delayed.
But although a peace with England was of the last confe-
quence to Francis I. whom the emperor was preparing to at-
tack with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and he chose rather to pur-
chafe Henry's friendship with disadvantage to himself, than. to
leave them exposed to danger. By yielding Tome things to the
interest, and more to the vanity of that haughty prince; by
fubmiflion, flattery, and addrels, he, at length, prevailed to
have the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

A N event which happened a fllort time before the conclusion

of this peace, rendered it more acceptable to the whole nation.
Cardinal Beatoun had not used his power with moderation,
equal to the prudence by which he attained it. Notwithftand-
ing his great abilities, he had too many of the pafions and
prejudices of an angry leader of a fation, to govern a divided
people with temper. His refenennet against one party of the
nobility, his insolence towards the reft, his severity to the re-
formers, and, above all, the barbarous and illegal execution of
the famous George Wifhart, a man of honourable birth, and
of primitive fantity, wore out the patience of a fierce age,
and nothing but a bold hand was wanting to gratify the public
wifl by his deftrition. Private revenge, inflamed and fanci-
fled by a false eal for religion, quickly supplied this want.
Norman Lefly, the eldest son of the earl of Rothes, had been
treated by the cardinal with injustice and contempt. It was
not the temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. And as the profeflion of his adversary
screened him fiom the effecs of what is called an honourable
resentment, he resolved to take that satisfaction, which he
could not demand. This resolution deserves as much censure,
as the singular courage and conduct with which he put it in
execution excite wonder. The cardinal, at that time, resided
in the castle of Saint Andrew's, which he had fortified at great
expence, and in the opinion of the age had rendered it impreg-
nable. His retinue was numerous, the town at his devotion,
and the neighbouring country full of his dependents. In this
situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise his castle, and
to nflaflinate himself; and their fuccef was equal to the bold-
ness of the attempt. Early in the morning they seized on the
gate of the castle, which was set open to the workmen who
were employed in finifling the fortifications; and having placed
sentries at the door of the cardinal's apartment, they awakened
his numerous domestics one by one, and turning them out of
the castle, they without noise, or tumult, or violence of any

other

Boog II. other person, delivered their country, though by a mos un.
---1 jultifiable action, from an ambitious man, whose pride was in-
May 29, lupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and cunning were the

i546. great checks to the reformation.

The Re- His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and to the
gent t- French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued
'aln to among a great party in the nation, but when deprived of the
seine the genius and authority of so skilful a leader, was of finall confe-
murJe- quence. Nothing can equal the conrtemation which a blow so
erd. zunexpected occasioned among his adherents; while the re-

gent secretly enjoyed an event, which removed out of his way
a rival, who had not only eclipsed his greatness, but almost
extinguished his power. Decency, however, the honour of
the church, the importunity of the queen dowager and her
faction, his engagements with France, and, above all these,
the desire of recovering his eldest son, whom the cardinal had
detained for some time at S. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity,
and who, together with the castle, had fallen into the hands
of the conspirators, induced him to take arms in order to re-
venge thedeathof a man he hated.

HE threatned vengeance, but was unable to execute it.

One part of military science, the art of attacking fortified
places, was then unknown in Scotland. The weapons, the
discipline, and impetuosity of the Scots, rendered their armies
as unfit for sieges, as they were afive in the field. An hun-
dred and fifty men, which was the greateftRumber the con-
fpirators ever assembled, resifted all the efforts of the regent

* Epift. for five months , in a place, which a single battalion, with a
Reg. Scot. few battering cannon, would now reduce in a few hours. This
^1 379' tedious siege was concluded by'a truce. The regent under-

took to procure for the conspirators an absolution from the
pope, and a pardon in parliament; and upon obtaining these,
they engaged to surrender the castle, and to set his son at li-
berty.

I T is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this trea-

ty. On both fides, they fought only to amuse, and to gain
time. The regent had applied to France for afliftance, and
cxpected soon to have the conspirators at mercy. On the other
hand if Lefly and his associates were not at first incited by
Henry to murder the cardinal, they were, in the sequel, power-
fully supported by him. Notwithstanding the silence of co-
temporary historians, there are violent prefiuiptions of the for-
*- Keith. mer; of the latter there is undoubted certainty t. During the

6o. siege, the conspirators had received from England supplies both

of money and provisions; and as Henry was preparing to renew
his proposals concerning the marriage and the union he had
projected, and to second his negotiations with a numerous army,
they hoped, by concurring with him, to be in a fitutation, in

which

which they would no longer need a pardon, but might claim a BooK IL.
reward.

TH E death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It happened January

in the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater splendor 18, 547'
than true glory; bustling, though not aEtive; oppreflive in
domestic government, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this prince were more beneficial to mankind,
than the virtues of others. His rapacioufnefi, his profusion,
and even his tyranny, by deprefling the ancient nobility, and
by adding new property and power to the commons, laid the
foundations of the Britifi liberty. His other paflions contri-
buted no less towards the downfall of popery, and the eftablilh-
ment of religious freedom in the nation. His resentment led
him to abolish the power, and his covetoufnefi to seize the
wealth of the church; and by withdrawing these supports, made
it easy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole fabric of
superstition.

FR A N C I S I. did not longer survive a prince, who had been

alternately his rival and his friend ; but his fucceflor Henry II.
was not negleaful of the French interest in Scotland. He sent
a considerable body of men, under the command of Leon Troops

. arrive

Strozzi, to the regent's assistance. By their long experience in from
the Italian and German wars, the French had become as dex- France.
trous in the conduct of sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and
as the boldness and despair of the conspirators could not defend
them against their superior art, they, after a short refitance,
surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in the name of the king Force the
his master, for the security of their lives; and, as his prisoners, canle of

St. An-

transported them into France. The castle itself, the monu- drew's to
ment of Beatoun's power and vanity, was demolished, in obe- surrender.
dience to the canon law, which, with admirable policy, de-
nounces its anathemas even against the houses in which the
sacred blood of a cardinal happens to be fixed, and ordains
them to be laid in ruins *. Burn.

THE archbiflop of St. Andrew's was bestowed by the Hi. Ref.

regent upon his natural brother John Hamilton Abbot of 338.
Paisley.

To E delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators. New

Tlhoe ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief direcion of brech
affairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. conducted and.
themselves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their
late master, and resolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty,
which they had not abilities or address to bring about by any
other method.

B u T before we proceed to relate the events which their in-

vafion of Scotland occasioned, we fiall stop to take notice of
a-circumftance unobserved by cotemporary historians, but ex-
tremely remarkable for the discovery it makes of the sentiments

and

BOOK II. and spirit, which then prevailed among the Scots. The con-
t'-vs- i fpirators against cardinal Beatoun found the regent's eldest son

in the cafle of St. Andrew's; and as they needed the protec-
tion of the Englilli, it was to be feared that they might en-
Oeavour to purchase it, by delivering to them this important
prize. The presumptive heir to the crown, in the hands of
the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful profpet.
And in order to avoid it, the parliament fell upon a very extra-
ordinary expedient. By an aac made of purpose, they excluded

"the regent's eldest son from all right of fuccellion, public or
private, so long as he Ihould be detained a prisoner, and
fiibftituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their
seniority, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs

* EpiF. "to the regent *." Succession by hereditary right is an idea
eg. Scot. so obvious and so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to
s 3;9. make a breach in it, but in cafes of extreme neceffitv. Such a

neceflity did the parliament discover in the present situation.
Hatred to England, founded on the memory of past hoft.lities,
and heightened by the smart of recent injuries, was the national
parlion. This dictated that uncommon statute, by which the
order of lineal fucceflion was so remarkably broken. The
modern theories, which represent this right as divine and un-
alienable, and that ought not to be violated upon any confi-
deration whatsoever, seem to have been then altogether un-
known.

Sclotand Is the beginning of September, the earl of Hartford, now
invaded duke of Somerset, and protector of England, entered Scotland
ngli h. at the head of 18,ooo men, and, at the fame time, a fleet of

60 fllips appeared on the coast, to second hisland forces. The
Scots had for some time observed the storm gathering, and were
prepared for it. Their army was almost double to that of the
enemy, and posted to the greatest advantage on a rising ground,
above Muffielburgh, not far from the banks of the river Elke.
Both these circumstances alarmed the duke of Somerset, who
saw his danger, and would willingly have extricated himself
out of it, by a new overture of peace on conditions extremely
reasonable. But this moderation being imputed to fear, his
proposals were rejeted with that scorn, which the confidence
of success inspires; and, if the condut of the regent, who
commanded the Scottiflh army, had been in any degree equal to
his confidence, the deftru&ion of the Englilh muff have been
inevitable. They were in a situation, precisely similar to that
of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in the following
century. The Scots had chosen their ground o well, that it
was inipoflible to force then to give battle; a few days had
cxhaufted the forrage and provision of a narrow country ; the
fleet could only furnilh a Scanty and precarious subsistence; a
retreat therefore was necessary; but dilgrace, and perhaps ruin,
were the consequences of retreating.

ON

ON both there occasions, the national heat and impetuosity BooK If.

of the Scots saved the Englifli, and precipitated their own'" '~
country into the utmotl danger. The undificiplined courage of
the private men became impatient at the fight of an enemy.
The General was afraid of nothing, but that the Engliih
would escape from him by flight; and leaving his ftrongcainp,
he attacked the duke of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better
success than his ralhnefs deserved. The protector had drawn Battle of
up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had now the advan- Pinkey,
tage of ground on his fide. The Scottish army confided almost Septem-
intirely of infantry whose chief weapon was a long spear, and ber 'o,
for that reason their files were very deep, and their ranks close.47
Tlev advanced towards the enemy in three great bodies, and
as they passed the river, were considerably exposed to the fire
of the English fleet, which lay in the bay of Muffelburgh,
and had drawn near the shore. The English cavalry, flufled
with an advantage which they had gained in a Ikirmilh some
days before, began the attack with more imipetuofity, than
good conduct. A body so firm and compact as the Scots,
easily resifted the imprefiion of cavalry, broke them, and drove
them off the field. The English infantry, however advanced,
and the Scots were at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a
fire in flank from 400 foreign Fusileers who served the enemy,
and to their cannon which were planted behind the infantry, on
the highest part of the eminence. The depth and closeness of
their order making it iilpoflible for the Scots to stand long in
this situation; the earl of Angus, who commanded the van-
guard, endeavoured to change his ground, and to retire to-
wards the main body. But his friends unhappily mistook this
motion for a flight, and fell into ccnfufion. At that very in-
ftant, the broken cavalry having rallied, returned to the charge;
the foot pursued the advantage they had gained; the
profpeEt of victory redoubled the ardour of both: and, in
a moment, the rout of the Scottill army became universal,
and irretrievable. The encounter in the sEcld was not long, nor
bloody: but in the pursuit, the Englifli discovered all the rage
and liercenels, which national antipathy, kindled by long
eniulation, and infltnied by reciprocal injuries, is apt to infpiie.
'The purfilit was continuld for five hauls, and to a great dif-
tance. All the three roads, by which the Scots fled, were
Iliewed with spears and Iwords, and targets, and covered with
the Lodies of the slain. Above io,ooo men tell on this day,
one of the m(os faital Scotlannd had ever sen.a A few were
taken prilbners, and among there iin:c persons of ciftinction.
And the protector had it now in his power to become master of
a kingdIom, cut of which, not many hours before, he was al-
n;ol obliged to retire with infamy *.

Bur

* The following paf:afc in a curious and rare journal. of the proteor'r
xlpcdition ir.o Sc lridr(!, *..ilien by W. Patten, who wau joined in cornm
VOL. I. F mission

BOOK II. BUT this vicory, howevergrcat, was of no real utility, for

want of Ikill. or of leisure, to improve it. Every new injury

Their vic- rendered the Scots more averse from an union with England;
tl benefit and the protector neglected the only mneafure, which would
to the Eng- have made it necessary for them to have given their consent to
lifh. it. He aniufed himfilf in wafting the open country, and in

taking or building several petty castles; whereas by fortifying a
few places which were acceilible by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the Englifl, and in a fliort time, the Scots
must either have accepted of his terms, or have submitted to
his power. By such an improvement of it, his vitory at Dun-
bar gave Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle
of Pinkey had no other effet but to precipitate the Scots into
new engagements with France. The situation of the Englifli
court may, indeed, be pleaded in excuse for the duke of So-
merfet's conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which oc-
cafioned his tragical end, was already formed; and while he
triumphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his power and
credit at home. Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to
prefer his safety before his fame, and to return without reaping
the fruits of his vicory. At this time, however, the cloud
blew over; the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet ripe
for execution; and his presence suspended its effect for tome
time. The supreme power still remaining in his hands he em-

ployed

miion with Cecil, as judge marlhal of the army, and printed in 1548,
ueferves our notice; as it gives a jult idea of the military difcipli e or
the Scots at that time. " But what after I learned, rpecially t urhing
their order, their armour, and their manner as well of going t: offend,
as of s(anding to defend, I have thought necessary here to utter. 1-lack-
butters have they few or none, and appoint their fight molt ccrnmon!y
alwavys a-foot. They come to the field well furnishrd all with jack and
nkufl, .dagger anld buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceeding
gond temper, and univerlally so made to (lice, that as I never saw none lb
good, so think I it hard to devile the better. Hereto every man his pike,
atnd a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold,
but for cutting. In their array towards joining with the enemy, they
cling and thrust so near in the fore rank, h(oulder and Ihoulder twgether,
with their pikes in both their hands firaight afore them, and their fol-
lowers in that order so hard at their backs, laying their pikes over
their foregoers shoulders, that, if they do afrail undiscovered, no force can
well withlland them. Standing at defence they thiuft fhouldels likewise
so nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, (loop low before,
their fellows behind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in
their left their bucklers, the one end of the pike againfl their right fact,
and the other against the enemy breadf-high; their tollowers crolling their
pike points with them torward; andl thus each with other so nigh as space
;ind place will susser, through the wh le wardl, Ib thick, that as tefily
fliall a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry hedge hog, as any
encounter the front of their pikes." Other curious particulars are luund
in this journal, foom which Sir John Hayw. rd has borrowed his account ot
this expedition. Life of Edward VI. z79, &c.

The length of the Sco, pike or spear was appoiated by ait 44. P. 1471.
to be fix ell ; i. c. eighteen feet fix inches.

ployed it to recover the opportunity, which he had loft. A BooK II.
body of troops, by his command, .seized and fortified Hadding- '-
toun, a place, which, on account of its distance from the sea, April,
and from any English garrison, could not be defended without 1548.
great expence and danger.

ME A N while the French gained more by the defeat of their Forces the

allies, than the English did by their viEtory. After the death ofScots into
cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the queen dowager, took nion witlh
a considerable share in the direction of affairs. She was warmly France:
attached by blood, and by inclinations, to the French interest ;
and, in order to promote it, improved with great dexterity every
event which occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots
were broken at Pinkey; and in an assembly of nobles which
met at Stirling to consult upon the situation of the kingdom,
all eyes were turned towards France, no profpet of safety
appearing but in affillance from thence. But Henry II. being
then at peace with England, the queen represented that they
could not expect him to take part in their quarrel, but upon
views of personal advantage ; and that without extraordinary
conceflions in his favour no afliftance in proportion to their pre-
Iknt exigencies could be obtained. The prejudices of the na-
tion powerfully seconded these representations of the queen.
What often happens to individuals took place among the nobles
in this convention ; they were swayed entirely by their paflions,
and in order to gratify them, they deserted their former prin-
ciples, and disregarded their true interest. In the violence of
refentnient, they forgot that zeal for the independence of Scot-
land, which had prompted them to rejec the proposals of
I-enry VIII. and by offering, voluntarily, their young queen in And to of-
marriage to the dauphin, eldest son of Henry II. and which cr thei
was frill mlore, by proposing to fend her immediateiy into France Iaerriage
to be educated at his court, they granted, front a thirst ofto the
vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon any con-dauphin.
fideration of their own falety. To gain at once fulch a king-
donl as Scotland, was a matter of no fnmall consequence to
France. Henry, without hefilation, accepted the offers of the
Scottifi nnibafTadors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of
his new acqtiftion. Six tliouilcdl veteran lbldiers, under the
command oflMonfieur DelJf, afliiled by fime of the beld officers,
who were formed in the long wars ol Francis I. arrived at
Leith. They served two camnpaigns in Scotland, with a spirit
equal to their sorner fame. But their exploits were nrot con-
fiderable. The Scots loon bccame jealous of their designs, and
neglected to support them with proper vigour: and the cau-
tion of the Englilh, in aching wholly upon the defensive, pre-
vented them from attenlptirg any entcrprize of consequence,
and obliged them to exhiauft their }frength in tedious sieges, un-
dertaken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, however,

F 2 were

BOOK II. were not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling ti:e
'v-- -' English to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender fcvcral

fniall forts, which.they possessed in different parts of the king-
dom.

BUT the confequenccs of there operations of his troops

were still of greater importance to the French king. The di-
version which they occasioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne
out of the hands of the Englifl ; and the influence of his
army in Scotland obtained the concurrence of parliament with
the overtures made to him, by the assembly of nobles at
Stirling, concerning the queen's marriage with the dauphin,
and her education at the court of France. In vain did a few
patriots remonstrate against such extravagant conceflions, by

The treaty which Scotland was reduced to be a province of France; and
for that Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the kingdom; by
pnpluded. which, the friendfsip of France became more fatal than the

enmity of England ; and every thing was fondly given up to
the one, that had been bravely defended againfr the other. A
point of so much corfequence was hastily decided, in a par-
liament, assembled in the camp before Haddingtoun: the

June 5. intrigues of the queen dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and
1548. resentment against England, had prepared a great party in the

nation for such a ftep; the French general and ambaflador, by
their liberality and promises, gained ever many more. The re-
gent himself was weak enough to stoop to the offer of a pen-
sion from France, together with the title of duke of Chatel-
herault in that kingdom. A considerable majority declared for
the treaty, and the interest of a faction was preferred before the
honour of the nation.

Mary. sent HA V I N G hurried the Scots into this ra fl and fatal refolu-
to be edau tion, the source of many calamities to themselves and to their
cated in fbvereign, the French allowed them no time for refletion or

France repentance. The fleet which had brought over their forces,

was ftillin Scotland, and, without delay, convoyed the queen
into France. Mary was then fix years old, and by her educa-
tion in that court, one of the politelf, but most corrupted in
Europe, flhe acquired every accomplilhment that could add to
her charms as a woman, and contraced many of those pre-
judices, which occasioned her misfortunes as a queen.

F i o M the time that Mary was put into their hands, it was

the interest of the French to susser the war in Scotland to lan-
gufls. The recovering of the Boulonnois was the object
Henry had most at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was
lufficient to divide the attention and strength of the Englifll,
whose domestic factions deprived both their arms and councils
of their accustomed vigour. The government of England had
undergone a great revolution. The duke of Somerset's power
had been acquired with too much violence, and was exercised

with

with too little moderation, to be of long continuance. Many BooK Il.
good qualities, added to great loveofhiscountry, could not atone -
tbr his ambition in usurping the sole direction of affairs. Many
of the mofl entirent courtiers combined against him ; and the
earl of Warwick their leader, no lefI ambitious, but more art-
lul than Somerlct, conducted his meafiires with so much dex-
terity, as to raise hinifelf upon the ruins of his rival. With-
out the invidious name of protetor, he succeeded to all the
power and influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and
he quickly found peace to be neceflary for the eftablifllment
of his new authority, and the execution of the vass designs he
had conceived.

HE N I. Y was no stranger to Warwick's situation, and im- peace co:-

proved his knowledge of it to good purpose, in conduating the cluded.
negotiations for a general peace. He prescribed what terms he
pleated to the Englifhl miniffer, who fcripled at nothing, how-
ever advantageous to that monarch and his allies. England MlarJih 4,
contented to restore Boulogne and its dependencies to France, 1SQ'
and gave up all pretensions to a treaty of marriage with the
queen of Scots, or the conquest of her country. A few finall
torts, of which the Englifli troops had hitherto kept posses-
sion were razed: and peace between the two kingdoms was
eltablifhed on its ancient foundation.

B o T ti the Britiflh nations loft power, as well as reputation,

by this unhappy quarrel. It was on both fides a war of emu-
lation and relentment, rather than of interest ; and was car-
ried on, under the influence of national animositics, which
were blind to all advantages. The French, who entered into
it with greater coolness, conduCted it with more (kill ; and by
dextroufly availing themselves of every circuinftance which oc-
curred, recovered pofTelion of an important territory which
they had loll, and added to their monarchy a new kingdom.
The ambition of the Englilh minister betrayed to them the
former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots against their an-
cient enemies bestowed on them the latter; their own addrefis
and good policy merited both.

IMMEDIAT ELY after the conclusion of the peace the The Scot

French forces left Scotland, as much to their own satisfaction, Ibecome
as to that of the nation. The Scots soon found, that the jealous oi
calling to their assistance a people niore powerful than thenl- Frech.
selves, was a dangerous expedient. They beheld, with the
utmost impatience, those who had come over to protet the
kingdom, taking upon them to command in it, and on many
occasions they repented tile raih invitation they had given.
The peculiar genius of the French nation heightened this dif-
gult, and prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke before they
had well begun to feel it. The French were, in that age,
what they are in the present, one of the most polished nation?.

Iin

BOOK II. in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expeditions into
'-'v *-' foreign countries, whether towards the south or north, that

their manners have been remarkably incompatible with the
manners of every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of
their own customs, because they want knowledge and taste to
discover the reasonableness and propriety of customs which
differ from them. Nations, which hold the first rank in po-
litenefs, are frequently no less tenacious out of pride. The
Greeks were so in the ancient world ; and the French are the
fame in the moder. Full of themselves; flattered by the
imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed to confider their
own modes as the standards of elegance, they scorn to dif-
guise, or to lay aside the distinguishing manners of their own
nation, or to make any allowance for what may differ from
them among others. For this reason, the behaviour of their
armies has, on every occasion, been insupportable t" strangers,
and has always exposed them to hatred, and often to deftruc-
tion. In that age they over-ran Italy four several times, by
their valour, and loft it, as often, by their insolence. The
Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people, and who
of all nations, can least bear the most distant insinuation of con-
tempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pretensions of
such aflfuming guests. The symptoms of alienation were soon
visible; they seconded the military operations of the French
troops with the utmost coldness, and their disgust grew insen-
sibly to a degree of indignation that could hardly be restrained ;
and on occasion of a very flight accident, broke out with fa-
tal violence. A private French soldier engaging in an idle quar-
rel with a citizen of Edipburgh, both nations took arms, with
equal rage, in defence of their countrymen. The provost of
Edinburgh, his son, and, feverall citizens of diftinEtion, were
killed in the fray; and the French were obliged to avoid
the fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out of the
city. Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and the long intercourse of good offices between the
two nations, an aversion for the French took its rife at this
time, among the Scots, the elfeets whereof were deeply felt,

Progress of and operated poweriu.lly) through the fubfecquent period.
the refor- FR O M the death of cardiral Peatoun, nothing has been
rnation. slid of the slate of religion. Whiie the war with lEngland con-

tinued, the clergy had no leiftlre to rillcft the Protestants; and
they wcre not yet cor.ficrnhie enough to expca any thing more
than connivancc hnd i:npunity. Thie new doctrines were still
in their infancy ; bl; dlling rthis (l.iet interval of tranquillity,
they acquired fl'rcngrh, and advanced, by large and firm steps,
towards i futll cflabljhliment in the kingdom. The first prea-
chers against popery in Scotland, of whom se;veral had ap-
pearec during the rci n of James V. were more eminent tbr
.cal and pietv, rli:in ir c:i';ning Their acquaintance with

the

the principles of the reformation was partial, and at second BOOK II.
hand; onme of themn had been educated in England; all of -vJ
themn had borrowed their notions from the books publiflled there;
and, in the tirit dawn of the new light, they did not venture
far before their leaders. But, in a Ihort time, the doatrines
and writings of the foreign reformers became generally known ;
the inquilitive genius of the age pressed forward in quest of
truth ; the discovery of one error opened the way to others;
the downfall of one iinpollure drew many after it; the whole
fabric, which ignorance and fuperf:ition had ereced in times of
darkne's, began to totter; and nothing was wanting to c :m-
pleat its ruin, but a daring and active leader to direct the at-
tack. Such was the famous John Knox, who, with better
qualifications of learning, and more extensive views than any
of his predecessors in Scotland, possessed a natural intrepidityof
mind, which set him above fear. He began his public minitlry
at St. Andrew's in the year 1547, with that success, which
always accompanies a bold and popular eloquence. Instead of
amuling himself with lopping the branches, he firuck directly at
the root of popery, and attacked both the doctrine
and discipline of the established church, with a vehe-
mence peculiar to himself, but admirably suitable to the temper
and withes of the age.

A N adversary To formidable as Knox, would not have easily

escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and
progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. But, at
tirft, he retired for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and
while the conspirators kept pofileDlon of it, preached publickly
under their protection. The great revolution in England,
which followed upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no
less than the zeal of Knox, towards demolishing the popifl
church in Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of popery. The ministers of his son Ed-
ward VI. cast them off altogether, and eftabliflied the Pro-
teftant religion upon alnoft the fame footing, whereon it now
ifands in that kingdom. The influence of this example reached
Scotland, and the happy effets of ecclefialtical liberty, in the
one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of recover-
ing it. The reformers had, hitherto been obliged to conduc
thenfelves with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houses, and at a distance from court
they gained credit, as happens on the firt publication of every
new religion, chiefly among persons in the lower and middle
rank of life. But several noblemen of the greatest distinction,
having, about this time, openly espoused their principles, they
were no longer under the neceflity of acing with the fame re-
serve; and with more security and encouragement, they had
likewise greater success. The means of acquiring and spread-

ing

BooK II. ing knowledge became more common, and the spirit of in-
4'-v"-'novation, peculiar to that period, grew every day bolder and

more universal.

HAPPILY forthe reformation, this spirit was ftiil under

iome restraint. It had not yet attained firn:nefs and vigour,
sufficient to overturn a system, founded on the deepest policy,
and supported by the most formidable power. Under the prc-
sent clrcumftances, any attempt towards action lmuf have
been fatal to the Protestant doctrines; and it is no finall proof
of the authority, as well as penetration of the heads of the
party, that they were able to restrain the zeal of a fiery and
impetuous people, till that critical and mature juncture, when
every ftep they took was decisive and successful.

ME A N W H I LE their cause received reinforcement, from

two different quarters, whence they never could have expected
it. The ambition of the house of Guile, and.the bigotry of
Mary of England, hastend the fubverfion-ltf the'papal throne
in Scotland; and by a singular disposition of providence, the
persons who opposed the reformation in every other part of Eu-
rope with the fiercest zeal were made instruments for advancing
it in that kingdom.

The MA a Y of Guise possessed the fame bold and aspiring spirit,
queen which diftinguilhed her family. But in her it was softened by
dowiger the fmale character, and accompanied with greateer temper and
aspires to
the office address. Her brothers, in order to attain the high objects at
of regent, which they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures, as

suited their great courage Her designs upon the supreme power
were concealed with the utmost care, and advanced by address
and refinements more natural to her sex. By a dextrous ap-
plication of those talents, the had acquired a considerable in-
fluence on the councils of a n:tion, hitherto unacquainted with
the government of women; and without the finalleft right to
any /hare in the administration of affairs, had engrofled the
chief direction of them into her own hands. But flie did not
long reft satisfied with the enjoyment of this precorious power,
which the ficklcnefs of the Regent, or the ambition of thole
who governed him, might so ealily disturb ; and flhe began to
set on foot new intrigues, with a defi.7n of undermining him,
and of opening to herself a wav to licced hii in that high
dignity. Hler brothers entered , r'ir lv into this Cchenie,
and supported it with .ll their credit at the court of France.
The Frencl king wil!inglv concurred in a meaflire, by which
he hoped to bring Scotland entirely uinder Iininamgeimcnti, in any
future broil with England, to turn its whole fe

t prce oln that
kingdom.

1 order to arrive at the desired elevation, the qunen idrw-

ager had only one of two ways to choose; either violently to
wrest the power out of the hands of the recent, or to obtain

it

it by his consent. Under a minority, and among a warlike and BOOK II.
facious people, the former was a very uncertain and dangerous v-'
experiment. The latter appeared to be no less imprac-
ticable. To persuade a man voluntary to abdicate the fu-
preme power, to descend to a level with those, above whom he
was railed ; and to be content with the second place where he
hath held the first, may well pass for a wild and chimerical pro-
jet. This, however, the queen attempted; and the pru-
dence of the attempt was sufficiently justified by its fuc-
cess.

T H E regent's inconstancy and irresolution, together with the

calamities which had befallen the kingdom under his admi-
nifration, raised the prejudices both of the nobles and of the
people against him, to a great height; and the queen secretly
fomented these with much industry. All who wished for a
change met with a gracious reception in her court, and their Courts the
spirit of difaffeetion was nourished by such hopes and promises, retofmers.
as, in every age, impose on the credulity of the fatious. The
favourers of the reformation being the most numerous and
Spreading body of the regent's enemies, fie applied to them,
with a particular attention; and the gentlencfs of her dif-
position, and seeming indifference to the religious points in dif-
pute, made all her promises of protetion and indulgence pass O°1. '55.
upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of the nation
willing to fall in with her meafirces, the queen set out for
France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and took along
with her those noblemen, who possessed the greatell power and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the plealures of an
elegant court, flattered by the civilities of the French king,
and the caresses of the house of Guise, and influenced by the
seasonable distribution of a fi:w favours, and the liberal pro-
mise of many more, they were brought to approve of all the
queen's pretensions.

WH I L r flie advanced by there fl'ow hut fire }fhps, the re-

gent either did not foresee the danger which thrlclencd him, or
neglcEcd to provide againfi it. The lii'll discovery of the train
which was laid, came from Iwo no his own confidants, Car-
ncgie of Kinnaird, and Panter bifllnp of Rols, whom the queen
had gained over to her interes:, nnti then eniponvcd as the moll
proper instruments for obtaihin,, i; consent. The ovlerture was
made to him in the name of the i:incch king, enlor(cel I)v pro.
per threatenings, in order to wo.k upon his natural ltilitilty,
and sweetened by every proinife that could reconcile himn to :L
proposal To difareeablc. On the one h;ndl, the confirnlatio,
of his French title, together with a considerable pc::fion, the
parliamentary acknowledgment of his right of fticcrllion lt
the crown, and a public ratification of his conduct during hiii
regency, were offered him. On the other hand, the difplea-
sure of the French king, the p:)wcr and popularitty of the queen

diow;i gr

BooK II. dowager, the difaffeaion of the nobles, with the danger of an
- -v--' after-reckoning, were represented in the strongest colours.

IT was not poflible to agree to a proporal so extraordinary and

unexpetted, without some previous itluggle; and had the arch-
bidlop of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and
pafflive spirit of the regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejeted it with diliain. Happily for the queen, the glaacity
and ambition of that prelate could, at this time, be no ob-
firuaion to her views. He was lying at the point of death,
and, in his absence, the influence of the queen's agents on a
flexible temper counterbalanced several of the ftrongett pas-
sions in the human mind, and obtained his content to a voluntary
surrender of the fipreme power.
Dec. 1551. AFTER gaining a point of fucll difficulty, with so much

cafe, the queen returned into Scotland, in full expectation ot
taking immediate poffefnion of her new dignity. But, by this
time, the archbishop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that
distemper, which the ignorance of the Scottifl physicians had
pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to the afliftance of
the famous Carden, one of those irregular adventurers in phi-
lofophy, of whom Italy produced so many about this period.
A bold genius led him to some useful discoveries, which merit
the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild imagination en-
gaged hill in those chimerial sciences, which drew the admira-
tion of his cotenporaries. As a pretender to astrology and
magic, he was revered and consulted by all Europe; as a pro-
ficient in natural philosophy, he was but little known. The
archbiihop, it is probable, confidered him as a powerful ma-
gician, when he applied to hun for relief; but it was his
knowledge as a philofopler, which enabled him to cure his
disease .

To G E TH ER with his health, the archbiflop recovered

the entire government of the regent, and quickly persuaded
him to recall that diflonourable promise, which he had been
seduced by the artifices of the queen to grant. However great
her furpri-e and indignation were, at this fresh instance of his
inconftancv, flie was obliged to diflemble, that flie might
live leiftire to renew her intrigues with all parties; with the
prot ftants, whom flne favoured and courted more than ever;
with the nobles, to whom flne rendered herself agreeable by
various aits; and with the regent himself, in order to gain
whom, lle employed cvery argument. But whatever impref-
lions her emnilFnies might h.ave made on the regent, it was no

easy

* rnrdecn himftn w.a mane dlcfirous of being confidercd sn an afiro-

Inge r than a Ihduloiplcr; in his bork De Geniturir, we lind a calculation
. tll. lc::.illiv'p' h nalivitv fromt which he pretends boilt to have pre-

hiici;.d lIh lile.iLce, and t, hive cfeRefd hisC cure. He receivel, from the

arrhtilhirl, a rcwarld of 19o, crowns. A great I'um in that age. Di
1i5 a ]ua, p. 3j,

easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the archbishop. Un- BOOK IT.
der his management, the negotiations were spun out to a great ---
length, and his brother maintained his station with that addreis
and firinnefs, which its importance so well merited. The uni-
versal defection of the nobility, the growing power of the pro-
teltants, who all adhered to the queen dowager, the reite-
rated solicitations of the French king, and, above all, the
interposition of the young queen, who was now entering the
twelfth year of her age, and claimed a right of nominating
whom she pleased to be regent, obliged him, at last, to resign Prevail3 on
that high office, which he had held many years. He obtained, the regent
however, the fame advantageous terms for himself, which had to refi"
been formerly stipulated.

IT was in the parliament which met on the loth of April, She obtains

1554, that the earl of Arran executed this extraordinary re- the regen-
fignation; and at the fame time Mary of Guise was raised to cy.
that dignity, which had been so long the object of her wishes.
Thus, with their own approbation, a woman, and a firanger,
was advanced to the supreme authority over a fierce and turbu-
lent people, who seldom submitted, without reluctance, to
the legal and ancient government of their native mon-
archs.

WH IL E the queen dowager of Scotland contributed so Reformi-

much towards the progress of the reformation, by the pro- ion conti.
tection which lhe afforded it, from motives of ambition; the nues to
English queen, by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with makegreat
persons active in promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended
the throne of England, on the death of her brother Edward, July 6,
and soon after married Philip II. of Spain. To the pcrfe- 1553-
curing spirit of the Ronmifi superstition, and the fierceness of
of that age, fle added the private resentment of her own, and
of her mother's, sufferings, with which flue loaded the re-
tbrmed religion ; and the peevilhncfs and severity of her natu-
ral temper carried the acrinony of all there pallions to the ut-
most cxtrene. The cruclty of her periccltinon equalled the
deeds of thole tyrants, who have hien the greatcft reproach to
human nature. The bigotry of her cl rgy could scarce keep
pace with the impetuosity of her zeal. Evcn the unrelenting
Philip was obliged, on foine occasions, to ,mitinate the rigour
of her proceedings. Many among the mtll l eminent reformers
fuffcred for the doctrines which thre, haid liauight ; others fled
firon the ftori. To the greater part of ihel, Swil.erlani
and Germany opened a secure a!3'luil; and not a tew, out of
choice or necessity, fled into Scotland. WVhat they had flcil
and felt in England, did not abate the vwarith and zeal of thelir
indignation against popery. Their attacks were bnltlcr ;an
more successful than ever; and their do:trlincs made a rapll
progress among all ranks of men.

r c .1

BOOK II. 'IH E S E doctri,:es, calculated to reCtify the opinions, and to
'--v- r eform the manners of mankind, had hitherto produced no

other effets ; but they loon began to operate with greater vio-
lence, and proved the occasion, not only of subverting the
elrablilhed reiigion, but of fllaking the tlrone, and cndanger-

A view o- ing the kingdom. The causes which facilitated the intro-
thie Pclii duclion of tilefe new opinions into Scotland, and which dif-
cil cluses
which enlinated them so salt through the nation, merit, on that ac-
tontribut- count, a particular, and careful inquiry. The reformation is
ed toward: one of the greatest events in the history of mankind, and in
L:dht. whatever point of light we view it, is inftrucive and inter-

efting.

TH E revival of learning in the 5th and 16th centuries

rouzed the world from that lethargy, in which it had been
funk for many ages. The human mind felt its own Ifrength,
broke the fetters of authority by which it had been so long re-
trained, and venturing to move in a larger sphere, pulled its
inquiries into every fubjeEt, with great boldnufs, and lurprifing
success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercifng

their reason, than religion was one of the firl.i objects which
drew their attention. Long before Luther publilhed his famous
theses, which shook the papal throne, science and philof,)phy
had laid open, to many of the Ilalians, the impoflure and ab-
furdity of the eftabliflied fuperflition. That subtle and refining
people, satisfied with enjoying thol; discoveries in secret, were
little dfpofed to af'ume the dangerous character of reformers,
ard concluded the knowledge of truth to be the prerogative
of the wife, while vulgar minds must be overawed and go-
veried by popular errors. But, animated with a more noble
and disinterested zeal, the German theologian boldly erected the
Ifan!ard of truth, and upheld it with an unconquerable in-
trleiility, which meirits the admiration and gratitude of all fuc-
cecd.ilg ages.

''lt E occasion of Luther's being first disgusted with the

tenets ol the Romifii chturch, and how, from a finall rupture,
the iuarrel widened into an irreparable breach, is known to
Cv.-ry one who has been the lead( converl:ant in hiltory. Froli
the heart of GermCa:'v, his opinions spread, with altonifliing
rnpidiry, ail over Europe ; and wherever they came, cndang..nred
c,r ovcri-miitid tlle ancient but ill founded fylcmn. The vigi-
Iince ai,,l alidrels of the court of Rome, and the power anti
bigolry of the Aull;ian family, fiupprefsed these notions on their
firil :iap::i':.ce, in the fJuilhern kingdonil of Europe. But
Illc tiie; Ijii'ir o! the north, irritated by multiplied impositions,
coild n. i :;z. be mniilifi:d by lihe alme arts, nor subdued by the
silic j;b:.:; al.: encour;Lag.d by some princes from piety, and

by

by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble op- Boo. If.
position of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

Tit E fupertlilion of popery icenis to have grown to the moi

extravagant height, in thole countries whiih are situated to-
wards the different extremities of Lurope. The vigour of im-
agination, and f-nfibili!y of fiamne, peculiar to the inhabitants
of southern climates, rendered thenm ufceptiblL of the deepest
impressions of fuperlflitiois terror and credulity. Ignorance and
barbarity were no less favourable to the progress of the fame
lpirit, among the northern nations. 'They knew little, and
were dii)po't-d to believe every thiig. The nioft glaring ab-
lurdities did not ihock their gross underlilandings, and the moil:
improbable ficticns were received with ii.plicit ailcnt and
admiration.

ACCORDINo, Y. , that form of popery, which prevailed

in Scotland, was of the most bigoted and illiLb:al kind. Those
dotrines which are molt apt to llscck the hurian understanding,
and ithofe legends which farthcll exceed belief, were proposed
to the people without any attempt to palliate or disguise them ;
nor did they ever call in question the reasonableness of the one,
or the truth of the other.

Ta E power and wealth of the church kept pace with the

progress of filpertition ; for it is the nature of that spirit to
observe no bounds in its refpe- and liberality towards those,
whose character it eftcenis sacred. The Scottish kings early
ernconftrated how much they were under its influence, by their
valt additions to the immunities and riches of the clergy. The
prou.fe piety of David I. who acquired on that account the
name of Saint, transferred tlmoft the whole crown-lands,
which were at that time of great extent, into the hands of
ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous prince was imi-
tated by his successors. The spirit spread among all orders of
men, who daily loaded the priesthood with new pcfefiions.
The riches of the church all over Europe were exorbitant;
but Scotland was one of those countries, wherein they had
farthest exceeded the just proportion. The Scottish clergy
paid one half of every tax imposcd on land ; and as there is no
reason to think that, in that age, they would be loaded with
any unequal share of the burden, we may conclude, that, by
the time of the reformation, little less than one half of the
property of the nation had fallen into the hands of a fociely,
which is always acquiring, and can never lote.

Tn E nature, too, of a considerable part of their property

extended the influence ofthe clergy. Many etates, throughout
the kingdom, were held of the church ; church-lands, were let
1n Icafe at an cafy rent, and were poflcfled by the younger fbns,
and descendants of the best families*. The connexion be-$ Keih.
tweenJuipcrior and va/ial, between landlord and tenant, created l: I, '
.

depen- ().

BOOK II. dependencies, and gave rife to an union of great advantage to
'^v_' the church; and in estimating the influence of the popift cc-

clefiaftics over the nation, these, as well as the real amount of
their revenues, must be attended to, and taken into the ac-
count.

TH I s extraordinary share in the national property was ac-

companied with proportionable weight in the supreme council
of the kingdom. At a time, when the number of temporal
peers was extremely finall, and when the lesser barons and re-
presentatives of burroughs seldom attended parliaments, the
ecclesiastics formed a considerable body there. And it appears
from the ancient rolls of parliament, and from the manner of
choofing the lords of articles, that the proceedings of that
high court muf have been, in a great measure, under their

*Spot. direction*.
cHilr of the TH E reverence due to their sacred character, which was
ScO. 4Q. often carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards

the growth of their power. The dignity, the titles, and
precedence of the popifli clergy are remarkable, both as causes
and effects of that dominion, which they had acquired over the
reft of mankind. They were regarded by the credulous laiety
as beings of a superior species ; they were neither fubiejt to the
fame laws, nor tried by the fame judges. Every guard, that
religion could supply, was placed around their power, their
possessions, and their persons; and endeavours were used, not
without success, to represent them all as equally sacred.

TH E reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable,

was wholly engrofled by the clergy, added to the reverence
which they derived from religidh. The principles of found
philosophy, and of a just taste, were altogether unknown ; in
place of these, were fibftituted studies, barbarous and unin-
ftructive; but as the ecclesiastics alone were conversant in
them, this procured them esteem ; and a very little knowledge
drew the admiration of rude ages which knew nothing. War
was the sole profelfion of the nobles, and hunting theirchief
amusement ; they divided their time between there; unac-
quainted with the arts, and unimproved by science, they dif-
daincd any employment foreign fronl military affairs, or which
required rather penetration and address, than bodily vigour.
Wherever the former were neceffiay, the clergy were entrusted;
because they alone were properly qualified for the trull. Almost
all the high offices in civil government devolved, on this account,
into their hands. The lord chancellor was the first fubjecE in
the kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From the earliefr
ages of the monarchy, to the death of cardinal Beatoun, fifty-
four persons had held that high office; and of these, forty-

* CrIwf. three had been ecclesiastics *. The lords of f-flion were lu-
Stne. of preme judges in all matters of civil right j uand by its original

ctten-
Conl-

constitution, the president and one half of the senators in this BOOK II.
court were churchmen. _

To all this we may add, that the clergy being Separated

fiom the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy ; and undif-
trated by thole cares, and unincumbered with thole burdens
which occupy and oppress other men, the interell of their or-
der became their only objeEt, and they were at full leisure to
pursue it.

TH E nature of their function gave them access to all per-

sons, and at all seasons. They could employ all the motives
of fear and of hope, of terror and of consolation, which ope-
rate most powerfully on the human mind. They haunted the
weak and the credulous; they besieged the beds of the sick
and of the dying. They fiufered few to go out of the world
without leaving marks of their liberality to the church ; and
taught them to compound with the Almighty for their fins, by
bestowing riches upon those, who called themselves his ser-
vants.

WH E N their own induftrv, or the luperftition of mankind

failed of producing this effect, the ecclesiastics had influence
enough to call in the aid of law. Whoever died inteflate, was
prellumed to have destined his moveables to pious uses.
The church took poffeflion of them. The children, the
wife, the creditors of the persons deceased were often
excluded from any flare in what was esteemed a sacred
property 1-. As men are apt to trust to the continuance of life t EfT.ys
with foolifli confidence, and childiihly fiun every thing, that on Br;it
forces theim to think of their mortality, may die without set- Antiq.
tling their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the '74'
clclrg in this cafe, of which there are frequent vestiges in our
laws, though none in our historians, may be reckoned among
the most plentiful sources of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or testamentary cause

could be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by laws which the
clergy themselves had framed. The penalty, too, by which
the decisions of these courts were enforced, added to their au-
thority. A sentence of excommunication was no less formida-
ble than a sentence of outlawry. It was pronounced on nlany
occasions, and against various crimes: and besides excluding
those, upon whom it fell, from Christian privileges, it deprived
them of all their rights as men, or as citizens; and the aid of
the secular power concurred with the fuperflition of mankind,
in rendering the thunders of the church no less deftrucive than
terrible.

To these general causes may be attributed the immense

growth both of the wealth, and power of the popish church
and without entering into any more minute detail, this may
serve to difcovcr the foundations, on which a IfruEaure so flu-
pcndous was ereEed.

BUTv

BOOK II. BUT though the laiety had contributed, by their own super-
^-cV-- flition and profuseness, to raise the clergy from poverty and ob-

fcurity to riches and eminence, they began, by degrees, to feel
and to murmur at theirincroachments. No wonder haughty
and martial barons fliould view the power and poffeflions of
the church with envy; and regard the lazy and inaEtive cha-
rafter of churchmen with the utnoeft contempt. While, at
the fame time, tle indecent and licentious lives of the clergy
gave great and just offence to the people, aril corfiklra bly a-
bated the veneration, which they were accuflomed to v-! ld to
that order of men.

I M E N s E wealth, extreme indolence,. gross ignorance,

and, above all, the revere injuncricn of celibacy, had concurred
to introduce this corruption of morals amcng the clergy; who,
presuming too much upon the fubniifion of the people, were
at no pains either to conceal, or to difguif: their own vices.
According to the accounts of the reformers colifirimed by 1cvc-
ral Popifl writers, the most open and scandalous dissolution of
manners prevailed among the Scottifli clergy '. Cardinal Bca-
toun, with the fame public pon:p, which is due to a legiti-
mate child, celcbrated the marriage of his naturaldaughter
with the earl es Crawford's son r ; and, if we may believe
Knox, he publickly continued to the end of his days a criminal
correspondence with her mother who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more regular and ex-
emplary than their primate t.

M . N of such char:cters ought, in reason, to have been a-

lnrmed at the first clamours raised against their own morals, and
the doetrires of tle church, by the Protestant preachers ; but
the Pepifli ecclefiafllics, cither out of pride or ignorance, ne-
gleted the proper methods for silencing them. Inifead of re-
fr,rniirg their lives, or disguising their vices, they asserted to
despise the cerfures of the people. And while the reformers,
by their mortifications and austerity, endeavoured to resemble
the first propagators of Christianity, the Popifll clergy were

com-

* Winzet ap. Keith Append. zoz, 2o5. Lefl. de Reb. Gest. Scot.
32.

[- The manriage articles subscribed with his own hnnil, in which ie

calls her oy daughter, are nill extant. Keith, p. 41.

. A remarkable proof of the dirffllute mrnners of the clerpy is found

in the public records A greater number of letteis of legtiimatron war
grantcd during the fitn thirty years nfter thr reformatinn, than during the
v;hole period, that has elapled firte thut limr. Thcle were Ibtainel by
the fins of the PoFini clergy. The ecclcefiafnii, , ho v.eic anli.wcd to
retain their bcnefice., alienated them to their children ; who, v.hen they
ncquired wealth, were deirous that the fain ol illpitinltay n .hht no
longer remain upon their tamirics. In lierth's Cntairgre es tle SrIttiJb
.BiJls,, we lind fcveral instances or' l'ith ali;eatiuiit ol iuiiih landr, by
lrIe !1.o ifl incumrbents, to their n1at:;l;l clhildren.

4

compared to all those persons, who are mofl infamous, in his- BOOK II.
tory, for the enormity and scandal of their crimes. --v

O N the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or co-

louring over the absurdity of the eftabliffed dotrines; instead
of attempting to found them upon scripture, or to reconcile
them to reason, they left them without any other support or
recommendation, than the authority of the church, and the
decrees of councils. The fables concerning purgatory, the
virtues of pilgrimage, and the merits of the faints, were the
topics, on which they insisted in their discourses to the people;
and the duty of preaching being left wholly to monks of the
lowest and most illiterate orders, their compositions were till
more wretched and contemptible, than the fubjeds on which
they insisted. While the reformers were attended by crowded
and admiring audiences, the popiih preachers were either uni-
verfally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

TH E only device which they employed in order to recover

their declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith of
the people, was equally imprudent and unsuccessful. As ma-
ny doctrines of their church had derived their credit, at first,
from the authority of false miracles, they now endeavoured to
call in these to their aid *. But those lying wonders, which * Spots-
were beheld with unfufpicious admiration, or heard with im- wood, 59.
plicit faith, in times of darkness and of ignorance, met with a
very different reception, in a more enlightened period. The vi-
gilance of the reformers detected these impostures, and expo-
fed not only them, but the cause, which needed the aid of
flch artifices, to ridicule.

As the Popifl ecclesiastics became more and more the ob-

je6ts of hatred and of contempt, the discourses of the reform-
ars were lifened to as so many calls to liberty ; and betides the
pious indignation which they excited against those corrupt doc-
trines, which had perverted the nature of true Chritianity ;
besides the zeal, which they inspired for the knowledge of
truth, and the purity of religion ; they gave rife also among
the Scottish nobles, to other views and paflions. They hoped
to fliake off the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion, which they
had long felt to be oppreflive, and which they now discovered
to be unchristian. They expected to recover poffeflion of the
church revenues, which they were now taught to confider as
alienations made by their ancestors, with a profusion no less un-
discerning than unbounded. They flattered themselves, that a
check would be given to the pride and luxury.of the clergy,
who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine thenifelves
within the sphere, peculiar to their sacrcd character. An aver-
lion for the eftablified church, which flowed from so many
concurring causes, which was raised by considerations of reli-
gion, and heightened by motives of policy, spread fal through

VOL. 1. G ' th

1OOK II. the nation, and excited a spirit, that burst out at last with k-
'C*v_- resistible violence.

RE LE I G IUS considerations, alone, were sufficient to have

rouzed this spirit. the points in controversy with the church
of Rome were of so much importance to the happiness of
mankind, and so eflential to Chriltianity, that they merited all
the zeal with which the reformers contended in order to efta-
blifh them. But the reformation having been represented as
the effect of some wild and enthusiastic frenzy in the human
mind, this attempt to account for the eagerness and zeal with
which our ancestors embraced and propagated the Protestant
do&trines, by taking a view of the political motives, alone,
which influenced theil, and by fliewing how naturally there
prompted them to at with so much ardor, will not, perhaps, be
efteened an unnecessary digression. We now return to the
course of the history.

The queen's elevation to the office of regent seems to have

transported her, at first, beyond the known prudence, and mo-
deration of her charater. She began her administration, by

The queen conferring upon foreigners several offices of trust and of digni-
regent be- ty; a f ep, which both from the inability of strangers to dif-
gins her ad-
minitratiaon charge these offices with vigour, and from the envy which their
with rome preferment excites among the natives, is never attended with
unpopular good consequences. Vilmort was made comptroller, and en-
mcafures. trusted with the management of the public revenues; Bonot

was appointed governor of Orkney; and Rubay honoured with

Lefly, the custody of the great feal,;and the title of vice chancellor e;

de Reb. It was with the highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offi-
Gest. Scot. ces of the greatest eminence and authority, dealt.out among
389. strangers. By these promotions they conceived the Queen to

have offered an insult both to their understandings, and to their
courage; to the former, by supposing them unfit for those 1ta-
tions, which their ancestors had filled with so much dignity;
to the latter, by imagining they were tame enough not !.. t om-
plain of an affront, which, in no former age, would have neen
tolerated with impunity.

WH LE their minds were in this disposition, an incident

happened which inflamed their averfiun from French councils to
the highest degree. Ever since the famous contest between the
houses of Valois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuf-
tomed to embarrass rhe EngliGfl, and to divide their ftrengtl by
the sudden and formidable Incurmons of their allies, the Scots.
But as there inroads were seldom attended with any real advan-
tage to Scotland, and exposed it to the dangerous efentment of
a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow less tratable
than furmerly, and scrupled any longer, to serve an ambitious
ally at tihe price of their own quiet and security. The change,
too, which was daily introducing into the art of war, rcnder-

ed

ed the affifiance of the Scottish forces of less importance to BooK I.
the French monarch. For'thefe reasons, Henry having resolved -C-
upon a war with Philip II. and forefeeirig that the queen of
England would take part in her hulband's quarrel, was extreme-
ly solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the afliftance of some
troops, which would be more at his command than an nndifci-
plined army, led by chieftains who were almost independent.
In prosecution of this design, but under pretence of relieving
the nobles from the expence and danger of defending the bor-
ders, the queen regent proposed, in parliament, to register the
value of lands throughout the kingdom, to impose on them a
fmnall tax, and to apply that revenue towards maintaining a bo-
dy of regular troops, in constant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hath introduced into
almost every part of Europe, was unknown, at that time, and
seemed altogether inconsistent with the free and independent
spirit of the feudal government. Nothing could be more fllock1-
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the entrusting to
mercenary hands, the defence of those territories which had
been acquired, or preserved, by the blood of their ancestors.
They received this proposal with the utmost indignatiorr.
About 300 of the lesser barons repaired in a body to the queen
regent, and represented their sense of the intended innovation,
with that manly and determined boldness, which is natural to
a free people, in a martial age. Alarmed at a remonstrance
delivered in so firm a tone, and supported by fich formidable
numbers, the queen prudently abandoned a scheme, which she
found to be universally odious. As the queen herself was
known perfectly to understand the circumstances and temper
of the nation, this measure was imputed wholly to the fug-
geftions of her foreign counsellors; and the Scots were ready
to proceed to the moif violent extremities againfi them.

TH E French, instead of extinguishing, added fuel to the ttenmgag

flame. They had now commenced hostilities against Spain, the king-
and Philip had prevailed on the queen of England, to reinforce dorl in a
his army with a confiterable body of her troops. In order to wal with
deprive him of this aid, Henry had recourli, as he projected, England.
to the Scots; and attempted to excite them to invade En-
gland. But, as Scotland had nothing to dread froin a princes
of Mary's charater, who, far from any ambitious flheine of
disturbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in endeav'Jur-
ing to reclaim her heretical fubjcCts ; the nobles, who were
assembled by the queen regent at Newbottle, lifnened to the
solicitations of the French monarch wih extreme coldnes, and
prudently declined engaging the kingdom in an enterprize so
dangerous and unneceflary. What she could not obtain by
pertuiafion, the queen regent brought about by a stratagem,.
Notwithllanding the peace which subsisted between the two

G a kingdomo;,

BOOK II. kingdoms, she commanded her French soldiers to rebuild a
\'v-,s imall fort near Berwick, which was appointed, by the last

treaty, to be razed. The garrison of Berwick sallied out;
interrupted the work; and ravaged the adjacent country.
This insult rouzed the fiery spirit of the Scots, and their prompt-
ness to revenge the least appearance of national injury diffipa-
ted, in a moment, the wife and pacific resolutions which they
had so lately formed. War was determined, and orders in-
ftantly given for a numerous army. But before their forces
could assemble, the ardor of their indignation had time to cool,
and the Englifhl having discovered no intention to pufll the
war with vigour, the nobles resumed their pacific fyfteni, and
6 resolved to stand altogether upon the defensive. They march-

ed to the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions
of the enemy, and having done what they thought sufficient
for the safety and honour of their country, the queen could not
induce them, either by her intreaties, or her artifices, to ad-
vance another ftep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inativity, D'Oyfel,

the commander of the French troops, who possessed entirely
the confidence of the queen regent, endeavoured, with her
connivance, to engage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary
to the orders of the Scottiih general, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested Werk, a garrison of
the English. The Scots, initead of seconding his attempt,
were enraged at his presumption. The queen's partiality to-
wards France had long been fufpeted ; but it was now visible
that fle wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety of Scotland,
to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally. Under
the feudal governments, it was in camps, that subjeCts were
accustomed to address the boldest remonstrances to their fove-
reigns. While arms were in their hands, they felt their own
strength; and at that time all their representations of grievan-
ces carried the authority of commands. On this occasion, the
indignation of the nobles broke out with such violence, that the
queen, perceiving all attempts to engage then in ation to be
vain, abruptly dismissed her army, and retired with the utmost
ihame and disgust; having discovered the impotence of. her
own authority, without effeeing any thing which could be of
advantage to France.

IT is observable, that this first instance of contempt for the

regent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influ-
ence of the new opinions in religion. As the queen's pretenfi-
ons to the regency had been principally supported by those who
favoured the reformation, and as flie still needed them for a
counterpoise to the archbiflhop of St. Andrew's, and the parti-
zans of the house of Hamilton; they were now treated by
her with great refpest, and even admitted to no inconsiderable

fliare

fliare of her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and BOOK II.
the other surviving conspirators against cardinal Beatoun, were,'--I
about this time, recalled by her from banilhment; and, through
her connivance, the proteitant preachers enjoyed an interval of
tranquillity, which was of great advantage to their cause.
Soothed by these instances of the queen's moderation and hu-
manity, the protestants left to others the office of remonftrat-
ing; and the leaders of the opposite fation set them the firit
example of disputing the will of the sovereign.

As the queen regent felt how limited and precarious her au- Thequeen's

thority was, while it depended on the poise of these contrarymarriage
factions, file endeavoured to eftablilh it on a broader and morewith the
secure foundation, by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's Dauphi'
marriage with the dauphin. Amiable as the queen of Scots
then was, in the bloom of youth; and considerable as the ter-
ritories were, which flie would have added to the French mo-
narchy ; reasons were not wanting to difluade Henry from com-
pleating his first plan of marrying her to his son. The contta-
ble Montmorency had employed all his interest to defeat an al-
liance, which reflected so much lustre on the princes of Lor-
rain. He had represented the impoflibility of maintaining or-
der and tranquillity among a turbulent people, during the ab-
fence of their sovereign; and for that reason, had advised
Henry to beltow the young queen upon one of the princes of
the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might preserve that
kingdom an useful ally to France, which, by a nearer union to
the crown, would become a mutinous and ungovernable pro- * Melv
vince *. But, at that time, the constable was a prisoner inMem. i,5
the hands of the Spaniards, and the princes of Lorrain were
at the height of their glory; and their intluence, seconded by
the charms of the young queen, triumphed over the prudent,
but envious remonstrances of their rival.

THE French king accordingly applied to the parliament of

Scotland, which appointed eight of its members t to represent lec ,,(
the whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the queen. ;57.
Among the persons on whom the public choice conferred this
honourable character, were rome of the most avowed and zea-
lous advocates for the reformation; by which, may be efti-
mated the degree of refpet and popularity, which that party
had now attained in the kingdom. The inftru&ions of the
parliament to those commissioners still remain t:, and do honour Ketll
to the wildom and integrity of that aflembly. At the fame Append.
time that they manifested, with respect to the articles of mar- 13.
riage, a laudable concern for the dignity and interest of their
sovereign, they employed every precaution which prudence

could

' Viz. The archbifliop of Glasgow, the bishop of Rols, the bihlop of

Orkney, the carls of Rothes and Calfils, lord Fleming, lord Seton, the
prior of St. Andrew's, and John Erltinc of Dun.

BooK II. could diltate, for preserving the liberty and independence of

.sv's-J the nation, and for securing the fucceflion of the crown in the

house of Hamilton.

WITH regard to each of there, the Scots obtained whate-

Artifices of ver fatisfa&ion their fear or jealousy could demand. The
the French young queen, the dauphin, and the king of France ratified eve-
inahe tre mrly article, with the most folenin oaths, and confirmed them by
ty' deeds in form, under their hands and feals. But on the part

of France, all this was one continued scene of studied and ela-
borate deceit. Previous to these public tranfacions with the
Scottifi deputies, Mary had been persuaded to subscribe pri-
vately three deeds, equally unjust and invalid ; by which, fail-
ing the heirs of her own body, Ihe conferred the kingdom of
Scotland, with whatever inheritance or fucceflion might ac-
crue to it, in free gift upon the crown of France, declaring all
promnifes to the contrary, which the necellity of her affairs, and
the solicitations of her subjects had extorted, or might extort

DipCloat from her, to be void and of no obligation . As it gives
torn. v. Z us a proper idea of the character of the French court under
Keith, 73. Henry II. we may observe that the king himself, the keeper of

the great feals, the duke of Guise, and the cardinal of Lor-
rain, were the persons engaged in conducting this perfidious and
diflonourable proje&. The queen of Scots was the only inno-
cent ator in that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her inexperi-
ence, her education in a foreign country, and her deference to
her uncle's will, must vindicate her, in the judgment of every
impartial person, from any imputation of blame on that ac-
count.

TH I grant, by which Mary bestowed the inheritance of

her kingdom upon strangers, was concealed with the utmolt
care from her fubjeas. They seem, however, not to have
been unacquainted with the intention of the French to over-
turn the settlement of the ficceTion in favour of the duke of
Chatelherault. The zeal, with which the archbiflhop of St.
Andrew's opposed all the measures of the queen regent, evi-
dently proceeded from the fears and suspicions of that prudent
prelate, on this head t.

TH E marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp;

and the French, who had hitherto affeCted to draw a veil over
their designs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intenti-
ons without any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the de-
puties had agreed that the dauphin fiiould afiume the name of
king of Scotland. This they confidered only as an honorary

title;

t About this time, the Plenclh seem to have had lorn defiSn of reviv-

ing the earl nt r.eninx' piteeriionns to Lhe fucceirion, in order to :lirni-
date antd alarm the duk.e of Chatelhcrault. Hayne', 1, r19. Furbr:
Collca. v._1 i, io.

title ; but the French laboured to annex to it some solid priv- Boox 1t.
leges and power. They insisted that the dauphin's title fihould'-'-~
be publickly recognized ; that the Crown Matrimonial fllould be
conferred upon him ; and that all the rights pertaining to the
hulband of a queen fllould be vested in his person. By the
laws of Scotland, a person who married an heiress kept pof-
fellion of her estate during her whole life, if he happened to
survive her and the. children born of the marriage *. This was * Peg.
called the courtesy of Sco!land. The French aimed at applying Mi. lib.
this rule, which takes place in private inheritances, to the fuc-'ii 58
cession of the kingdom; and that seems to be implied in their
demand of the Crown Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the
Scottifl historians, and which they have negleced to explain.
As the French had reason to expeCt difficulties in carrying
through this measure, they began by founding the deputies who
were then at Paris. The Englifl, in the marriage articles be-
tween their queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example tO
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reTerve, with which a
foreigner fllould be admitted so near the throne. Full of the
fame ideas, the Scottilh deputies had, in their oath of allegi-
ance to the dauphin, exprefled themselves with remarkable cau-
tion *. Their answer was in the fame spirit, refpetful, but, Keigh,
firm; and discovered a fixed resolution of confent:ng to no-Append.
thing, that tended to introduce any alteration in the order ofio.
fucceflion to the crown.

F o U R of the deputies t- happening to die before they re-

turned into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to
the effects of poison, which was supposed to have been given
them by the emissaries of the house of Guise. The historians
of all nations discover an amazing credulity with reflpeEt to
flories of this kind, which are so well calculated to please the
malignityof some men, and to gratify the love of the marvel-
lous which is natural to all, that, in every age, they have been
swallowed without examination, and believed contrary to rea-
son. No wonder the Scots should easily give credit to a fufpi-
cion, which received such strong colours of probability, both
from their own resentment, and from the known chara&er of
the princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the justice of
the ends which they pursued, or of the means which they em-
ployed. For the honour of human nature, it must, however,
beobferved, that as we can difcoverno motive, which could
induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, To there appears
no evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Scots
of that age, influenced by nationalaniniofitics and prejudices,
were incapable of examining the circumstances of the cafe

with

+ The bislop of Orkney, the earl of Rothoe, the earl of Carlils, and
lord Fleming.

BooK I1. with calmnefi, or of judging concerning them with candour.

C-'rv @- All parties agreed in believing the French to have been guilty

of this detestable action; and it is obvious how much this
tended to increase the aversion for them, which was growing
among all ranks of men.

The Re- NOTWITHS TANDIN G the cold reception which their
ent pre- proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial met with from the
vails on Scottish deputies, the French ventured to move it in parlia-
the parlia- ment. The partizans of the house of Hamilton, suspicious
ment to of their designs upon the succession, opposed it with great zeal.
grat t. But a party, which the feeble and unsteady condut of their

leader had brought under much disputation, was little able to
withstand the influence of France, and the address of the
queen regent, seconded, on this occasion, by all the numerous
adherents of the reformation. Besides, that artful princess
drelIed out the French demands in a less offensive garb, and
threw in so many limitations, as seemed to render them of
iinall consequence. These either deceived the Scots, orre-
moved theirfcruples; and in compliance to the queen, they
pased an at, conferring the Crouwn Matrimonial on the dau-
phin; and, with the fondest credulity, trusted to the frail fe-
curity of words and statutes, againit the dangerous encroach-
ments of power *.

Continues TH concurrence of the protestants, with the queen re-
to court the gent, in promoting a measure so acceptable to France, while
ProtetRnts. the popilh clergy, under the influence of the archbiflhop of

St. Andrew's, opposed it with so much violence t, is one of
Melv. 47 those singular circumstances, in the conduct of parties, for

which this period is so remarkable. It may be ascribed, in
fomedegree, to the dextrous management of the queen, but
chiefly to the moderation of those who favoured the reformati-
on. The protestants were, by this time, almost equal to the
catholics both in power, and in number; and, conscious of
their own trength, they submitted with impatience to that ty-
rannical authority, with which the ancient laws armed the ec-
clefiaftics against them. They longed to be exempted from
this oppreflive jurifdicion, and publickly to enjoy the liberty of
profefling those opinions, and of exercising that worfloip, which
so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and to be acceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which
the whole weight of priestly authority was opposed, there were

only

* The aat of parliament is worded with the utmost care, vwifl a view

to puaid agaiilt any breiach of.thc order of furccefion. But the duke,
rot relying on this alone, enterecra f. lermn protcllation to f.cure his own
right. Keith, 76. It i; plain, that he lhul'peLed the French of hiving
loinu inltiltion to set aside his right of 'uccefliun, annl. indeed, if they
bad no design of that kind, the eagernel'r with which they urged their de.
ntind, was childish,

only two ways of obtaining. Either violence muff extort it BOOK II,
from the reluctant hand of their sovereign; or, by prudent -'
compliances, they might expec it from her favour, or her gra-
titude. The former is an expedient for the redrefi of grie-
vances, to which no nation has recourse suddenly; and sub-
jets seldom venture upon refifance, which is their last remedy,
but in cafes of extreme necelfity. On this occasion, the re-
formers wifely held the opposite course, and by their zeal in
forwarding the queen's designs, they hoped to merit her pro-
tection. This disposition the queen encouraged to the utmost,
and amused them so artfully with many promises, and some
conceflions, that, by their afliftance, she surmounted in parlia-
ment the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jealousy,
which would, otherwise, have swayed with the greater num-
ber.

AN TH E R circumstance contributed somewhat to acquire

the regent such considerable influence in this parliament. In
Scotland, all the bifhopricks, and those abbeys which confer-
red a title to a feat in parliament, were in the gift of the See Book
crown *. From the time of her acceflion to the regency, the I
queen had kept in her own hands almost all those which be-
came vacant, except such as were, to the great disgust of the
nation, bestowed upon foreigners. Among these, her brother
the cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and
Melrofi, two of the most wealthy foundations in the kingdom*. *

Len

By this conduc, ihe thinned the ecclesiastical bench t, which
was entirely under the influence of the archbishop of St. An-
drew's, and which, by its numbers and authority, usually had
great weight in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give, at that time, of little consequence.

TH E earl of Argyll, and James Stewart prior of St. An-

drew's, one of the inot powerful, and the other the most po-
pular leader of the protestants, were appointed to carry the
crown and other ensigns of royalty to the dauphin. But from
this they were diverted by the part they were called to aCt, in
a more interesting scene, which now begins to open.

BE F ORE we turn towards this, it is necefTary to observe, elizaheth
that, on the 17th of November, Mary of England, finished 'cceeds to

the crown

her short, and inglorious reign. Her fitter Elizabeth took pof~ of Eng laud.
lesion of the throne without opposition; and the protestant
religion was, once more, eftablifled by law in England. The
accefiion of a queen, who, under very difficult circuinfmances,
had given strong indications of those eminent qualities, which,
in the sequel, rendered her reign so illustrious, attraced the
eyes of all Europe. Among the Scots, both parties olfcrved

her'

fu It ppears from the roll, of this parliiment, which Leay cillt a very
fil one, that only seven bihlops and fixtecn abbots were prclfct.

BooK II. her first emotions with the utmost concern, as they easily fore-
1-y-- filaw that ihe would not remain long an indifferent fpeEtator of

their tranfacions.

UN D E R many difcouragenlents, and much oppreflion, the

reformation advanced towards a full eftabliflinent in Scotland.
All the low country, the most populous, and, at that time, the
most warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinctured with
the protestant opinions; and if the fame impreflions were not
made in the more distant counties, it was owing to no want of
the fame dispositions among the people, but to the scarcity of
preachers, whose most indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the
avidity of those, who desired their infiruCtions. Among a
people bred to arms, and so prone to mutiny as the Scots ; and
in an age, when religious pallions had taken fich strong pof-
fetiion of the human mind, and moved and agitated it with so
much violence; the peaceable, and regular demeanour of so
numerous a party is truly aftonifling. From the death of Mr.
Patrick Hamilton, the first who suffered in Scotland for the
protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed, and during so long
a period, no violation of public order or tranquillity had pro-
ceeded from that set* ; and though rouzed and irritated by the
most cruel excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in no in-
fance, transgress those bounds of duty which the law pre-
scribes to fubjeas. Besides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the protecion which the queen regent, from political mo-
tives, afforded them, the moderation of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That prelate,
whose private life cotempdrary writers tax with great irregula-

t Knox, rities'l, governed the church, for some years, with a temper
hui.hanan, and prudence of which there are few examples in that age. But
Keith, o8.' some time before the meeting of latl parliament, the arch-

bishop departed from those humane maxims, by which he had
hitherto regulated his condu&t; and whether, in spite to the
queen, who had entered into so close an union with the pro-
tcftants, or in compliance with the importunities of his clergy,
he let loose all the rage of persecution againit the reformed;
sentenced to the flames an nged priell, who had been conviEted
of embracing the proteflant opinions; and summoned feve-
ral others, iufclited of the fame crime, to appear before
a fyncd of the clergy, which was soon to convene at Edin-
burgh. '

N o -r t I N G could equal the horrorof the Protestants at this

unc pcccted and barbarous execution, but the zeal, with which
they e:poufed the delencc of a cause, that now seemed devoted
tu dllJuclion. They had immecdiate recourse to the queen re-

gent;

» Thie nmu!cr or cardinal Bcatnun wan occfioned by private revenge,

and being conieived a, d xecued by sixteen perfoin only, cannot, with
jullicc, be imputed to ihe whole Protestant party.

gent; and as her success in the parliament, which was then BOOK II.
about to meet, depended on their concurrence, Ihe not only -v
iheltered them from the impending storm, but permitted them
the exercise of their religion, with more freedom than they had
hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by
which they held their religious liberty, the Protestants laboured
to render their pofleflion of it more secure and independent.
With this view, they determined to petition the parliament for
some legal protection, against the exorbitant and oppressive ju-
rifdiction of the ecclesiastical courts, which, by their arbitrary
method of proceeding, founded in the canon law, were led to
sentences the mos flhocking to humanity, by maxims the most
repugnant to justice. But the queen, who dreaded the effects
of a debate on this delicate subject, which could not fail of ex-
citing high and dangerous passions, prevailed on the leaders of
the party, by new and more solemn promires of her protecion,
to desist from any application to parliament, where their num-
bers and influence would, in all probability, have procured them,
if not the entire redress, at least, some mitigation of their grie-
vances.

TH E Y applied to another affenlbly, to a convocation of the

Popiih clergy, but with the fame ill-fuccefs, which hath al-
ways attended every proposal for reformation, addrefred to that
order of men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lu-
crative error, are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals
has, on some occasions, offered to truth; but from any fbcicty
of men, no such effort can be expected. The corruptions of
a society, recommended by common utility, and jultified by
universal pracice, are viewed by its members, without shame
or horror; and reformation never proceeds from themlllves, but
is always forced upon them by itme foreign hand. Suitable to
this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was the behaviour of the
convocation in the present conjuncture. All the demands of
the Protcflants were rejeced with contempt; and the Pnpifh
clergy, far from endeavouring, by any prudent conccffions, to
sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body, aflerted the doc-
trines of their church, concerning Tome of the molt excep-
tionable articls, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new of-
fence *. * Keith,'.

Du R I N o the fitting of the convocation, the Proreftants firif

began to fufpecs tonic change in the regent's difpofitiio towards
them. Though joined with them for many years, by intcreft,
and united, as they conceived, by the Ifrongeft ties of alsec-
tion and of gratitude, fie discoverted, on this occasion, evident
symptoms, not only of coldness, but of a growing disgust and
averlion. In order to account for this, our historians do little 'il
more than produce the trite observations concerning the influence
of prosperity to alter the charneter, and to corrupt the heart

'he

BooK It. The queen, fay they, having reached the utmost point to wlicih

Lv---' her ambition aipired, no longer preserved her accullomled mo-
'559- deration, but, with an insolence ulilal to the fortunate, looked

down upon those, by whose aflTiance flie had been enabled to
rife To high. But it is neither in the depravity of the human
heart, nor in the ingratitude of the queen's disposition, that we
must search for the motives of her present conduct. These
were derived from another, and a more remote source, which,
in order to clear the subsequent tranfaetions, we shall endea-
vour to open with some care.

Ambitinus TH E ambition of the princes of Lorrain had been no less
mews of the flccefsful than daring; but all their schemes were diftinguiflied
,rinces of by being vat and unbounded. Though strangers at the court
Larrain. of France, their eminent qualities had raised them,' in a flort

time, to an height of power, superior to that of all other sub-
jects, and had placed them on a level even with the princes of
the blood themselves. The church, the army, the revenue,
were under their direction. Nothing but the royal dignity re-
mained untainted, and they were elevated to a near alliance
with it, by the marriage of the queen of Scots to the dauphin.
In order to gratify their own vanity, and to render their niece
more worthy the heir of France, they set on foot her claim to
the crown of England, which was founded on pretences not
unplaufible.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are

known to all the world. Moved by the caprices of his love,
or of his resentment, that impatient and arbitrary monarch had
divorced or beheaded four of the fix queens, whom he married.
In order to gratify him, both his daughters had been declared
illegitimate by act of parliament; and yet, with that fantaf-
tic inconsistence which distinguishes his characer, he, in his
last will, whereby le wasimpowered to fettle the order of fuc-
ceflion, called both of them to the throne, upon the death of
their brother Edward; and at the fame time, passing by the
posterity of his eldest sifter Margaret queen of Scotland, he ap-
pointed the line of fucceflion to continue in the descendents of
his younger fitcr, the dutchess of Suffolk.

IN consequence of this deltination, the valid'ty whereof was

admitted by the Englifl, but never recognized by foreigners,
Mary had reigned in England, without the lecnft comlplaint of
neighbouring princes. But the famne causes, which facilitated
her acceflion to the throne, were obltacles to the elevation of
her filler Elizabeth, and rendered her pofreflion of it precarious
.ind infccure. Rome trembled for the catholic faith, under a
Procftlant queen of such eminent abilities. The fame fiuperfti-
rnus fears alarmed the court of Spain. And France beheld,
*ith indignation, a throne, to which the queen of Scots could
blo flo lmany pretensions, occupied by a rival, whole birth, in

the

the opinion of all good catholics, excluded her from any legal BOOK II.
rightof fucceflion. The impotent hatred of the Roman pon- "
tiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have produced no '559
fildden or formidable etfet. The ardent and impetuous amb:-
tion of the princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, governed the
court of France, was more decisive, and more to be dreaded. They per-

fuade Mary

Instigated by them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary per- ,o uadclr
fuaded his daughter-in-law and her hluifandd to affulie the title the title of
of king and queen of England. They affeced to publish this queen of
to all Europe. They used that style and appellation in public E^l'lJad.
papers, folne of which still remain *. The arms of England ndr
were engraved on their coin and plate, and born by them on all Diplom.n
occasions. No preparations, however, were made to support Scot. No.
this impolitic and premature clainm. Elizabeth was already68 & 164.
feated on her throne ; she poflTeed all the intrepidity of £pirit,
and all the arts of policy, which were neceflary for maintaining
that station. England was growing into reputation for naval
power. The marine of France had been utterly neglected;
and Scotland remained the only avenue, by which the terri- Refove to
tories of Elizabeth could be approached. It was on that fide, iE.,ad.
therefore, that the princes of Lorrain determined to make their
attack *; and, by using the name and pretensions of the Scot- * Sorbes
tifi queen, they hoped to rouze the Englilh catholics, formi- Collea i.
dable at that time by their zeal and numbers, and exasperated 253' 277
to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the change
which fie had made in the national religion.

IT was vain to expect the atlifance of the Scottifl Protef- In order to

tants to dethrone a queen, whom all Europe efeemed the this, necef-
guardian and defender of the reformed faith. To break the fary to
power and reputation of that party in Scotland, became, for reotbrmatiom
this reason, a necessary Itep towards the invasion of England. in ScotlanJ.
With this the princes of Lonrain refilved to open their fchenle.
And as persecution was the only method for fupprefling reli-
gious opinions, known in that age, or dictated by the despotic
and sanguinary spirit of the Romnlili superstition, this, in its ut-
most violence, they determined to employ. The earl of Argyll,
the prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party,
were marked out by them for immediate deftruAion ' ; and tFObes i-
they hoped, by punilhing them, to intimidate their followers.
Inftrutions for this purpose were sent from France to the queen
regent. That humane and sagacious princess condemned a
measure, which was equally violent and impolitic. By long
residence in Scotland, fle had become acquainted with the
eager and impatient temper of the nation ; fle well knew the
power, the number, and popularity of the protestant leaders;
and had been a witness to the intrepid and unconquerable re-
solution which religious fervour could inspire. What then
could be gained by routing this dangerous rpirit, which, hither-

to,

BOOK II. to, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to retrain ? if

-V_--J) it once broke loose, the authority of a regent would be little
'559. capable to subdue, or even to moderate its rage.. And if, in

order to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give
the alarm to the whole nation, irritated already at the excessive
power which the French porfefled in the kingdom, and fufpici-
ous of all their designs. Anidft the shock which this might
occasion, far from hoping to exterminate the protestant doc-
trine, it would be well if the whole fabric of the eftabliihed
church were not shaken, and perhaps overturned from the
foundation. Thcfe prudent remonstrances made no imprellion
on her brothers, precipitant, but inflexible in all their refolu-
tions, they insisted on the full and rigorous execution of their
plan. Mary, passionately devoted to the interest of France,
and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions to the
inclinations of her brothers, prepared to execute their coin-

,Mel. 48. mands, with implicit fubmiflion ; and, contrary to her ownl
vlem. t'e judgment, and to all the rules of found policy, ihe became the
Caflsenau
,a. ebb. instrument of exciting civil commotions in 'Scotland, which
ol. ii. 446. ended with the ruin of French power, and of the popish reli-

gion in that kingdom.

rThe regent F R o M the time of the queen's competition for the regency
alters her with the duke of Charelherault, the popiflh clergy, under the
condua direction of the archbiffhop of St. Andrew's, had let themselves
with rgard in cppcfirion to all her ineafures. Her firit ftep towards the
teftans. execution of her new scheme, was to regain their favour.

Nor was this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The popifl
ecclesiastics, separated fron the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy, the boldest and nlof successful invention of human po-
licy; and combined among themselves in the closest and most
sacred union ; have been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice
all private and particular paflions to the dignity and interest of
their order. Delighted on this occasion, with the profpet of
triumphing over a faction, whose encroachments they had long
dreaded, and animated wiith the hopes of re-eftabliffling their
declining grandeur on a firmer basis; they, at once, can-
celled the memory of past injuries, and engaged to second the
qucen in all her attempts to check the progress of the reforma-
tion. The queen, being secure of their afiftance, openly ap-
proved of the decrees of the convocation, by which the prin-
ciples of the reormecrs were condemned ; and at the fame
time, flhe iffiijc a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe
the approaching teftival of Easter, according to the Ronifl
ritual.

As it was no longer poflible to mistake the queen's intentions,

the proteftnnts, v'ho lEaw the danger approach, in order to
avert it, en;ployed the earl of Glencairn, and fir H-Iugh Canmp-
bell of Louuoii, to expoflulate with her, concerning tlsis change,

towards

towards severity, which their former services had so little BOOK Ii.
merited, and which her reiterated promises gave them no rea- '--
son to expect. She, without disguise or apology, avowed to 155S
them her resolution of extirpating the reformed religion out
of the kingdom. And, upon their urging her former engage-
ments, with an uncourtly, but honest boldness, Hle so far for-
got her usual moderation, as to utter a fentiient, which, how-
ever apt those of royal condition may be to entertain it, pru-
dence Ihould teach them to conceal as much as poflible.
" The promises of princes, fays file, ought not to be too care-
fully remenibred, nor the performance of them enacted, unless
it suits their own conveniency."

TH F indignation, which betrayed the queen into this rafl Summons

expreflion, was nothing in comparilon of that, with which ffie Lcher
was animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the re- ,, appear
formed religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. before het.
At once, fle threw off the malk, and commanded all the pro-
teilart preachers in the kingdom to be fulmmoned to a court of
justice, which was to be held at Stirling on the tenth of May.
The protestants, who, from their union, began about this time,
to be diltinguilied by the name of the co R E G A r I o N',
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger; and instant-
ly resolved not to abandon the men, to whom they were in-
debted for the molt valuable of all bleflings, the knowledge of
truth. At that tine, there prevailed in Scotland, with refpec
to criminal trials, a custom, introduced, at first, by the inftitu-
tions of vassalage and clanfliip, and tolerated, afterwards,
under a feeble government; any person accused of a crime was
accompanied to the place of trial, by a retinue of his friends
and adherents, aflembled for that purpose, fiom every comer
of the kingdom. Authorised by this ancient practice, the re-
formed convened, in great numbers, to attend their pafors to
Stirling. The queen dreaded their approach with a train so nu-
merous, though unarmed, and in order to prevent them from
advancing, file empowered John Erskine of Dun, a person of
eminent authority with the party, to promise, in her name,
that Ih: would put a stop to the intended trial, on condition,
the preachers and their retinue advanced no nearer to Stirling.
Erskine, being convinced himself of the queen's sincerity, ferv-
cd her with the utmost zeal. And the Protestants, averse from
proceeding to any ad of violence, liltened with pleasure to lb
pacific n proposition. The preachers, with a few leaders of
the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had ga-
thered from different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and re-
tired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithstanding this solemn proinife, the queen, on Break, a
the tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who P"'' .

w, wntch they
had been fumnoned, and upon their non-appearance, the n- hd ic;ijd.

gour

BOOK II. gour of justice took place, and they were pronounced outlaws.
'.v~'- By this ignoble artifice, so incompatible with real dignity, and

'5S9- so inconsistent with that integrity which should prevail in all

tranfaEtions between sovereigns and their fubjeets, the queen
forfeited the efteein and confidence of the whole nation. The
Protetants, ihocked no less at the indecency, with which she
violated the public faith, than at the danger which threatened
themselves, prepared boldly for their own defence. Erlkine,
enraged at having been made the instrument for deceiving his
party, initantly abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Perth, ad-
ded to the zeal of his associates, by his representations of the
queen's inflexible resolution to suppress their religion.

This occa- TH E popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his re-
ions an in- presentations: He having been carried a prisoner into France,
furreion. together with the other persons taken in the catlfe of St. An-

P. drew's, soon made his escape out of that country; and refid-

ing fonetimes in England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at last,
been driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of the popish
clergy, and was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was
called by the leaders of the Protestants in Scotland; and, in
compliance with their solicitations, he set out for his native
country, where he arrived a few days before the trial appointed
at Stirling. He hurried instantly to Perth, to share with his
brethren in the common danger, or to assist them in promoting
the common cause. While their minds were in that ferment,
which the queen's perfidiousness and their own danger occa-
sioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue
againfi idolatry, inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage,
the indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox's ser-
mon, was preparing to celebrate mass, and began to decorate
the altar for that purpose, precipitated them into immediate ac-
tion. With tumultuary, but irresistible violence, they fell up-
on the churches in that city, overturned the altars, defaced
the pictures, broke in pieces the images; and proceeding next
to the monasteries, they, in a few hours, laid those sumptuous
fabrics almost level with the ground. This riotous insurreCtion
was not the effect of any concert, or previous deliberation;
censured by the reformed preachers, and publickly condemned
by the persons of most power and credit with the party, it
nluf be regarded merely as an accidental eruption of popular
rage *.

1 he regent BUT to the queen herself, these proceedings appeared in a
marches very different light. Besides their manifefl contempt for her
Againf authority, the protestants had violated every thing in religion,
Ithem. which she esteemed venerable or holy; and, on both these ac-

counts, fle determined to inflict the feverelf vengeance on the
whole party. She had already drawn the troops in French pay to

Stirling;
* Knox, Hill. i7», 18.

Stirling; with these, and what Scottiff forces flie could levy of BOOK II.
a sudden, she marched directly to Perth, in hopes of furprif- '-
ing the protestant leaders, before they could assemble their fol- '559'
lowers, whom, out of confidence in her disingenuous promises,
they had been raflily induced to dismiss. Intelligence of these
preparations and menaces was soon conveyed to Perth. The
protcetants would, gladly, have soothed the queen, by ad-
drefles both to herself, and to the persons of greatest credit in
her court; but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took measures for their own defence. Their adherents, ani-
mated with zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves in
so good a cause, flocked in such numbers, to Perth, that they
not only secured the town from danger, but, within a few days,
were in a condition to take the field, and to face the queen,
who advanced with an army 7000 strong.

NEI T H E a party, however, was impatient to engage. The

queen dreaded the event of a battle with men, whom the ser-
vour of religion raised above the fenle of fear, or of danger.
The protestants beheld with regret, the earl of Argyll, the
prior of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons of their
party, still adhering to the queen; and destitute of their aid
and council, declined hazarding an action, the ill success of
which might have proved the ruin of their cause. The pro-
speCt of an accommodation was for these reasons highly ac-
ceptable to both fides: Argyll and Prior, who were the queen's
commiffloners for conducting the negotiation, seem to have been
sincerely desirous of reconciling the contending factions; and
the earl of Glencaim arriving unexpecedly with a powerful re-
inforcement to the congregation, augmented the queen's eager-
nets for peace. A treaty was accordingly concluded, in which A treaty
it was tfipulated, that both armins flould be difhanded, and conoludd
the gates of Perth set open to the queen; that indemnity
/hould be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to all
others concerned in the late infurreEtion ; that no French gar-
rifon flould be left in Perth, and no French soldiers should ap-
proach within three miles of that place; and that a parliament
ihould immediately be held, in orderto conipofe whatever diffe-
rences might fill remain*. * Keith 89.

Tn E leaders of the congregation, distrustful of the queen's

sincerity, and sensible that conceflions, flowing not from incli-
nation, but extorted by the necessity of her affairs, could not
long remain in force, entered into a new association, by which May 19.
they bound themselves, on the firt infringement of the present
treaty, or on the least appearance of danger to their religion,
to reaflemblc their followers, and to take arms in defence of
what they etteemcd the cause of God, and of their coun-
try *. Kno'r,
VOL. I. 1 Tzr '38,

BOOK 1I. TH E queen, by her conduet, demonstrated, these prccau-
--v-' tions to be the result of no groundless or unneceflary fear. No

5'59. sooner were the protestant forces dismissed, than lhe broke every
Broken by article in the treaty. She introduced French troops into Perth,

fined some of the inhabitants, banifled others, removed the
magistrates out of office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, flte
left behind her a garrison of 600 men, with orders to allow the
exercise of no other religion than the Roman Catholic. The
situation of Perth, a place at that time of some strength, and
a town the most proper of any in the kingdom for the station of
a garrison, seems to have allured the queen to this unjustifiable,
and ill judged breach of public faith; which flie endeavoured
to colour, by alledging that the body of men left at Perth was
entirely composed of native Scots, though kept in pay by the
king of France.

TH E queen's scheme began gradually to unfold ; it was now

apparent, that not only the religion, but the liberties of the
kingdom were threatened ; and that the French troops were to
be employed as instruments for subduing the Scots, and wreath-
ing the yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the
Scots then was, the poverty of their country made it impof-
fible to keep their armies long aflembled; and even a very fniall
body of regular troops might have proved formidable to the na-
tion, tho' consisting wholly of soldiers. But, what number of
French forces were then in Scotland, at what times, and under
what pretext they returned, after having left the kingdom in
1550, we cannot, with any certainty, determine. Cotempo-
rary historians often fele&, with little judgment, the circum-
stances which they transmit to posterity; and, with re!pect to
matters of the greatest curiosity and importance, leave succeed-
ing ages altogether in the dark. We may conjecure however,
from some passages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
French pay, amounted at least to 300 men, under the command
of mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the houfr of Guise ; and they
were soon augmented to a much more formidable number.

TH E queen, encouraged by having so confiderahle a body of

well disciplined troops at her command, and instigated by the
violent counsels of D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we had observed,
to violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rafli aation, orce
more threw the nation into the most dangerous convul-

The Pro- sions. The earl of Argyll and prior of St. Andrew's instantly
teftants a- deserted a court, where faith and honour seemed to then to be
gain take no longer regarded. The barons from the neighbouring coun-
armr. tics repaired to them, the preachers rouzed the people to arms,

and wherever they came, the fame violent operations, which
accident had occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged out
of policy. The enraged multitude was let loose, and churches

'' ind

and inonafteries, the monuments of ecclesiastical pride and BooK II.
luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the queen, without losing a 'SS9

moment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the con-
gregation got the start, once more, of her vigilance and acti-
vity. In that warlike age, when all men were accuflomed to
arns, and on the least prospect of danger were ready to run to
them, the leaders of the protestants found no difficulty to raise
an army. Though they set out from St. Andrew's with a flen-
der train of an hundred hdrfe, crowds flocked to their standards
from every corner of the country through which they marched,
and before they reached Falkland, a village only ten miles
dillant, they were able to meet the queen with superior force*. KnoxI

TH E queen, furprized at the approach of so formidable a 14t

body, which was drawn up by its leaders in such a manner, as
added greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again rccourfe
to negotiation. She found however, that the preservation of
the protestant religion, their zeal for which had at firit rouzed
the leaders of the congregation to take anus, was not the only
objee they had now in view. They were animated with the
warmest love of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in
imminent danger, from the attempts of the French forces; Tt rdrfing
and these two paflions mingling, added reciprocally to each ivil as well
other's strength. Together w;'.h more enlarged notions in re- as religious
ligion, the refornation filld the human mlind with more liberal grievances.
and generous sentiments concerning civil government. The
genius of popery is extremely favourable to the power of
princes. The implicit fubmlilfion to all her decrees, which is
exacted by the Romilh church, prepares and breaks the mind
for political servitude; and the doctrines of the reformers, by
overturning the eftablifled system of fupeiftition, weakened the
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold spirit of en-
quiry, which led Imen to reject theological errors, accompanied
them in other sciences, and discovered every where the flmne
manly zeal for truth. A new study introduced at the fame
time, added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men be-
came acquainted with the Greek and Roman authors, who de-
fcribed exquisite models of free government, far superior to
the inaccurate and opprefive fyflenl eftablifled by the feu-
dal law; and produced such illultrious examples of public
virtue, as wonderfully suited both the circunmitances, and
spirit of that age. Many, almog the molt eminent reform-
ers, were thelmfclves considerable nmailers in acient learn-
ing; and all of them eagerly adopted ti:e maxims andt spirit
of the ancients, with regard to gov:e;iilicnt . The moftl ar-

H dent

e Thi exccflve adlmniration orancient policy was the occalion of Knox's

famous book cnnccrning the GovIrnmenr oe' Vonimn, wherein, conforrm-
ablc to the maxilia ol the ancinit lcgill.,tore, which modern oxpericnc.

himt

BooK lI. dent love of liberty accompanied the proteRant religion,

_--v-- throughout all its progress; and wherever it was embraced, it
. 559. rouzed an independent spirit, which rendered men attentive to

their privileges as fubjets, and jealous of the encroachments
of their sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers of the
reformation, infused generous fentinents concerning govern-
ment into the minds of their hearers, and the Scottish barons,
naturally free and bold, were prompted to 'afert their rights
with more freedom and boldness than ever. Instead of obey-
ing the queen regent, who had enjoined them to lay down their
arms, they demanded not only the redress bs their religious grie-
vances, but, as a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and fe-
curing its liberties, required the immediate expulsion of the
French troops out of Scotland. It was not in the queen's
power to make so important a conceflion, without the concur-
rence of the French monarch ; and as some time was requisite
in order to obtain that, flie hoped, during this interval, to re-
ceive such reinforcements from France, as would insure the ac-
complifhment of that design, which she had twice attempted
June 13. with unequal firength. Mean while fle agreed to a cessation

of arms for eight days, and before the expiration of these, en-
gaged to transport the French troops to the south fide of the
Forth; and to fend commissioners to St. Andrew's, who fliould
labour to bring alldifferences to accommodation. As fle hop-
ed, by means of the French troops, to over-awe the protef-
tants in the southern counties, the former article in the treaty
was punctually executed ; the latter having been inserted mere-
ly to amuse the congregation, was no longer remembered.

A second BY these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the
lYatd v
queen loft all credit with her adversaries; and no safety appear-

ing in any other course, they again took arms with more in-
flamed resentment, and with bolder and more extensive views.
The removing of the French forces had laid open to them all
the country situated between Forth and Tay. The inhabitants
of Perth alone remaining fubjeted to the insolence and exati-
ons of the garrison, which the queen had left' there, implored
the afliftance of the congregation for their relief. Thither they
marched, and having, without effe&, required the queen to
evacuate the town in terms of the former treaty, they prepared
-to besiege it in form. The queen employed the earl of Huntly
and lord Erikine to divert them from this enterprise. But her
wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated so often they
could deceive no longer and without listening to her offers,

the

Ins proved to be ill-founded, he pronounces the elevation of women to
the supreme authority, to be utterly deilruaive of good government.
His principleC, authorities, and examples were all drawn from ancient
writerq. The lame obfervatinn may be made with regard to Buchanan's
dialogue, De 7ure Regni apuil .rtor, It is founded not on ihe maxims
of feudal, but of ancient government.

the protestants continued the siege, and soon obliged the garri- BooK 11.
Ion to capitulate. -

AFr E R the loss of Perth, the queen endeavoured to seize 'Ss9-

Stirling, a place of some strength, and, from its command of Rap nd
the only bridge over the Forth, of great importance. But the iuccefs of
leaders of the congregation, having intelligence of her design, the Pro.
prevented the execution of it, by an hasty inarch thither, with teftants.
part of their forces. The inhabitants, heartily attached to the
cause, set open to them the gates of their town. Thence they
advanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edinburgh, which
the queen on their approach abandoned with precipitation, and
retired to Dunbar.

TH E protestant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread

the ardour of reformation, and the utioft excesses of violence
were committed upon churches and monasteries, the former
were spoiled of every decoration, which was then elteemed fa-
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at this dif-
tance of time, to condemn the furious zeal of the reformers,
and to regret the overthrow of so many stately fabrics, the mo-
numents of our ancestors magnificence, and among the noblest
ornaments of the kingdom. But, amidst the violence of a
reformation, carried on in opposition to legal authority, some
irregularities were unavoidable ; and perhaps no one could have
been permitted more proper to allure and interest the. multitude,
or more fatal to the grandeur of the eftabliihed church.
However absurd and ill-founded the speculative errors of po-
pery may be,, some inquiry and attention are requisite towards
discovering them. The abuses and corruptions, which had
crept into the public worflsip of that church, lay more open to
observation, and by striking the fenfsc, excited more universal
disgust. Under the long reign of heathenism, superstition
feenis to have exhausted its talent for invention, so that when
a superstitious spirit seized Christians, they were obliged to
imitate the heathens in the pomp and magnificence of their
ceremonies, and to borrow from them the ornaments and deco-
rationsof their temples. To the pure and simple worship of
the primitive Christians, they succeeded a species of fplcndid
idolatry, nearly resembling those pagan originals whence it had
been copied. The contrariety of such observances, to the
spirit of Christianity, was almost the firfl thing, in the Roiuilh
system, which awakened the indignation of the reformers, who
applying to there, the denunciations in the old tellanient
against idolatry, imagined that they could not endeavour al
fupprefling them, with too much zeal. No task could be more
acceptable to the multitude, than to overturn thole feats of
filperllition ; they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy
was the man whose hand was mot adventurous and tliccefstul
in executing a work eftecmed so pious. Nor did their leaders

laboru

Boo II. labour toreftrain this impetuous spirit of reformation. Irregu-
~-v* --' lar and violent as its sallies were, they tended direcAly to that
1559. end which they had in view; for by dcmolifhing the monafte-

r;es throughout the kingdom, and fctting at liberty their
wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render it impoflible ever to
rebuild the one or to re-afemble the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a circuinftance,

which does honour to the conduct and humanity of the leaders
of the congregation, deserves notice. They fb far restrained
the rage of their followers, and were able so to temper their
heat and zeal, that few of the Roman catholics were exposed

* Lefly. to any personal insult, and not a single man suffered death *.
31. AAT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with which

there great revolutions were effeted, how violently the current
of national favour ran towards the reformation. No more
than 300 men marched out of Perth under the earl of Argyll
+ Keitb,94. and prior of St. Andrew's t ; with this inconsiderable force they

advanced. But wherever they came, the people joined them
in a body, their army was seldom less numerous than 50oo
men; the gates of every town were thrown open to receive
them; and, without friking a single blow, they took poffeflion
of the capital of the kingdom.
June, e9. TH s rapid and aftonifiling success seems to have encou-

raged the reformers toextend their views, and to rife in their
demands. Not satisfied with their first claim of toleration for
their religion, they now, openly, aimed at establishing the
protestant dotrine on the ruins of popery. For this reason,
they determined to fix their residence at Edinburgh; and, by
their appointment, Knox and tome other preachers taking pof-
session of the pulpits, which had bPen abandoned by the as-
frighted clergy, declaimed againfl the errors of popery, with
such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining many prose-
lyres.

IN the mean time, the queen, who had prudently given

way to a torrent which flae could not refifl, observed with
plcafire, that it now began to subside. The leaders of the
congregation had been above two months in arms, and by the
expences of a campaign, protracted so long beyond the usual
time of service in that age, had exhausted all the money,
which a country, where riches did not abound, had been able
to supply The multiiude, dazleid with their fuccers, and
concluding the wcrrk to be already done, retired to their own
habitations. A few, only, of the nore zealous or wealthy
barons remained with their preaclers at Edinburgh. As intel-
ligence is procured in civil wars with little difficulty, whatev,'r
was tranfated at Edinburgh, was Coon known at Dunbar
And the queen, regulating her own conduc by the situation of
her adversaries, artfully amuli te them with the proneoc of an

immediate'

inmmediate accommodation ; while, at the fame time, the, by BOOK II.
studied delays, spun out the negotiations for that purpose, to -
such a length, that, in the end, the party dwindled to an in- 'SS59
conliderable number, and, as if peace had been already re-
etiablifhed, became careless of military discipline. The queen,
who watched for such an opportunity, advanced unexpetedly,
by a sudden march in the night, with all her forces, and ap-
pearing before Edinburgh, filled that city with the utmolt con-
itcrnation. The Proteetants, weakened by the imprudent dif-
perflon of their followers, durst not encounter the French
troops in the open field ; and were even unable to defend an ill
fortified town, against their assaults. Unwilling, however, to
abandon the citizens to the queen's mercy, they endeavoured,
by facing the enemies army, to gain time for collecing their
own aflbciates. But the queen, in spite of all their refilance,
would have easily forced her way into the town, if the season-
able conclusion of a truce had not procured her admiflion,
without the effusion of blood.

T H E 1 R dangerous situation easily induced the congregation A third

to liften to any overtures of peace ; and as the queen was treaty.
looking daily for the arrival of a itrong reinforcement from
France, and expeted great advantages from a cessation of
arms, iile also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions. To-
gether with a suspension of hostilities, from the 24th of July
to the oth of January, it was stipulated in this treaty, that,
on the one hand, the protestants ihould open the gates of
Edinburgh next morning to the queen regent; remain in duti-
ful subjection to her government; abstain from all future vioC
lation of religious houlies; and give no interruption to the
ellablifled clergy, either in the discharge of their functions,
or in the the enjoyment of benefices. On the other hand,
the queen agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or
professors of the protestant religion ; to allow no other form of
worlhip in Edinburgh but the reformed ; and to permit the free
and public exercise of it all over the kingdom. The queen,
by thcre liberal conccflions in behalf of their religion, hoped
to tooth the protestants, and expeEed, from indulging their
favourite passion, to render them more compliant with refpe&c
to other articles, particularly the expulsion of the French
troops out of Scotland. The anxiety which the queen ex-
pressed for retaining this body of men, rendered them, more
and more, the objeEts of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expulsion of then was therefore demanded a-new,
and with greater warmth ; but the queen, taking advantage
of the diflrefs of the adverse party, eluded the requelt, and
would consent to nothing more, than that a French garrison
fhlould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

'*T{ F

Boor. II. Ta z desperate tate of their affairs, imposed on the con-

' gregation the necessity of agreeing to this article, which, how.
t559. ever, was very far from giving them satisfaction. Whatever

apprehensions the Scots had conceived, from retaining the
French forces in the kingdom, were abundantly justified dur-
ing the late commotions. A small body of those troops, main-
tained in constant pay, and rendered formidable by regular
discipline, had checked the progress of a martial people, tho'
animated with zeal both for religion and liberty. The smalleR
addition to their number, and a considerable one was daily ex-
peEted, might prove fatal to public liberty, and Scotland might
beexpofed to the danger of being reduced from an independent
kingdom, to the mean condition of a province, annexed to the
empire of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent calamity, the

duke of Chatelherault, and earl of Huntly, immediately after
concluding the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs of
the congregation. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
that time in Scotland, were the leaders of the party which ad-
hered to the established church. They had followed the
queen, during the late commotions, and having access to ob-
serve more narrowly the dangerous tendency of her councils,
their abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing for their
country, surmounted all other considerations, and determined
them rather to endanger the religion which they professed, than
to give their aid towards the execution of her pernicious designs.
They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll, Glencairn,
and theprior of St. Andrew's, who were appointed to meet
them, that if the queen should, with her usual insincerity, vio-
late any article in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gratify the
withes of the whole nation, by dififlling her French troops,
they would, then, inthantly join with their countrymen, in
compelling her to a measure, which the public safety, and the

' Knox, preservation of their liberties, rendered necessary *.
134. ABOUT this time, died Henry II of France; just when
July 8. he had adopted a sysem with regard to the affairs of Scotland,

which would, in all probability, have restored union and tran-

t Melv. quillity to that kingdom -. Towards the close of his reign,
49. the princes of Lorrain began visibly to decline in favour, and

the conitable Montmorency, by the ariftlance of the dutcliher
of Valentinois, recovered that af:endant over the spirit of his
mailer, which his great experience, nd his faithful, though
often unfortunate services, feenied jully to merit. That pru
dent ninifter ilmputed the inlnirrcetions in Scotland wholly tn
the duke of Guise and crdinali of Lorrain, whole violence anl
precipitate councils could not fail of tranfpnrting, beyond an'i
bounds of moderation, men, whose minds were poffefled with
that jenloiufy, which is inli-paralle fitoi the love of civil li-

bi.'ri'.,

berty, or inflamed with that ardour which accompanies reli-BooK If.
gious zeal: and, in order to convince Henry, that he did not '"--'.
load his rivals with any groundless accusation, he prevailed to 'S59.
have Melvil*, a Scottish gentleman of his retinue, difpatchedt Tho a -
into his native country, with intrrucions to observe the motions mnemoir..
both of the regent, and of her adversaries; and the king
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by
Melvil's report.

DID history indulge herself in there speculations, it would

be amusing to enquire what a different direAion might have
been given by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to
what a different issue, Melvil's report, which would have set
the condut of the malecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conducted the public disorders. Perhaps, by gain-
ing poffeflion of this avenue, the French might have their
way into England, and, under colour of fulpporting Mary's
title to the crown, they might have re-eftabliflhed the Roman
catholic religion, and destroyed the liberties of that kingdom. -.
But, into this boundless field of fancy and conjecure, the hifto$.' '
rian muff make no excursions ; to relate real occurrences, aI' . '
to explain their real causes and effects, is his peculiar and on}'.-:.
province. .v

Tn E tragical and untimely death of the French monarch Acceffinn

put an end to all moderate and pacific measures, with regard of Francis
to Scotland. The duke of Guise, and the cardinal his bro- II to the
iher, upon the accellion of Francis II. a prince void of genius, cranc.f
and without experience, assumed the chief direction of French
affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of
their niece the queen of Scots with the young king, they now
wanted but little of regal dignity, and nothing of regal power.
This power did not long renain inactive in their hands. The
fame vast schemes of a:;bitin,, which they had planned out
under the former reign, were a::ain rcruimed;l and they were
enabled, by polfeiing such a:::;,: i:tho;'it, to prlle then)
with more vilir, and greater p:'h::rbiliry of fiiccefr. Th'ey
beheld, with Ir.tinitc regret. the protgrhis of the protcllant re-
ligion in Scotland ; and fcnfi.)e w'Li:t an inrurmiount.. le nbaa-
cle it would prove to their desig.ns, they bent all their litrcnlt!l
to check its growth, before it role to any ri eater height. FIor
this purpose, they carried on thicrI prcparalioi withi all p'o!i:'i:;
expedition, and encouragedte qu

the their lilcr, to cxpt.:l. ,1

a Ihort time, the arrival of an army, b poMwcrril, as tlie zal
of their adversarics, however derpcrat:, would not vemnure to
oppose.

No it were the lords of the conSgrecatin eirher ig::nrant of

tlhoe violent counfcls, which prevailed ill tile court of France.
since the death of Henry, or careless of providling against the
danger, which thrctiel'ccd theml fiom thal t quarter. T'le fci

ccl

BOOK II. cess of their cause, as well as their personal safety, depending
'----' entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their own resolutions,
'559. they endeavoured to guard against division, and to cement to-

gether more closely, by entering into a striCter bond of confe-
deracy and mutual defence. Two persons concurred in this
new aflociation, who brought a great acceflion both of repu-
tation and of power to the party. There were the duke of
Chatelherault, and his eldest son the earl of Arran. This
young nobleman, having resided iome years in France, where
he commanded the Scottifli guards, had imbibed the protestant
opinions concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of
youth, and the zeal of a proselyte, he had utteied sentiments,
with refpet to the points in controversy, which did not suit the
temper of a bigoted court, intent, at that juncture, on the
extincion of the protefiant religion; in order to accomplish
which, the greatest excesses of violence were committed. The
church was suffered to wreak its utmost fury upon all who were
fuipeCted of herely. Courts were erected in different parts of
France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by their fin-
tences, several persons of diftineion were condemned to the
flames.

B T, in order to inspire more universal terror, the princes of

Lorrain resolved to select, for a sacrifice, some person, whose
fall might convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor of
birth, nor eminence in fiation, could exempt from punishment,
those who flould be guilty of this unpardonable transgression.
The earl of Arran was. the person destined to be the unhappy

* Th-an. victim *. As he was allied to one throne, anti the presumptive
ib. x;xv heir to another; as he pofleffed the first rank in his own coun-
P. 46l.
F.iit. Fran- try, and enjoyed an honourable station in France; his condem-

. nation could not fail of making the desired impression on the

whole kingdom. But.the cardinal of Lorrain having let fall
some cxpreflions, which raised Arran's suspicions of the design,
he etcapcd the intended blow hv a timely flight. Indignation,
zeal, refentnient, all prompted hinm to ieek revenge upon these
persecutors of hilnfelf and of the religion which he professed
andt as he pafred through England, on his return to his native
colinlry, Elizabeth, by hlpes and promises, inflamed those
pallions, and lent hin back into Scotland, animated with the
Ilnie in placable avelfion to France, which pcltcfl'ed a grcat

El, ir' Ar- part of lis ccur.tiylnn. Ie quickly communicated there seen-
't,." ',

d tinllls to his tiater the duke of Chatclherault, who was al,
..ltanit,. ready extrca:liv difgulted with the nleafires carrying on in

SScni lnil; aln as it was the site of that nobleman to be go-
vtrlned, iin every inltance, by tlhoe about him, he now suffered
hirillnll' to L,c drawn rronm Il!e c(ueen regent; and having joined
the c.mn regntion, was cunlidered, from that time, as the head
of the party.

Bur

Bu T with refpet to him, this diftineion was merely nomi- BOOK II.

nal. James Stewart, prior of St. Andrew's, was the person - -'
who moved and actuated the whole body of the protestants, '559-
among whom, he poffefied that unbounded confidence, which
his strenuous adherence to their interest, and his great abilities,
so justly merited. He was the natural son of James V. by a
daughter of lord Erskine; and as that amorous monarch, had
left several others a burden upon the crown, they were all de-
ftined for the church, where they could be placed in stations
of dignity and affluence. In consequence of this resolution,
the priory of St. Andrew's had been conferred upon James:
but, during so busy a period, he soon became disgusted with
the indolence and retirement of a monaltic life ; and his en-
terprifing genius called him forth, to at a principal part on a
more public and conspicuous theatre. The scene, in which he
appeared, required talents of different kinds : military virtue,
and political discernment, were equally necessary in order to
render him illustrious. These he poffcffed in an eminent de-
gree. To the most unquestionable personal bravery, he added
great skill in the art of war, and in every enterprize his arms
were crowned with success. His sagacity and penetration in
civil affairs enabled him, amidit the reeling and turbulence of
factions, to hold a prosperous course. While his boldness in
defence of the reformation, together with the decency, and
even severity of his manners, secured him the reputation of
being sincerely attached to religion, without which it was im-
possible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the queen dreaded the en-

mity of a man, so capable to obftrut her designs. And as
fie could not, with all her address, make the Icaft imprefiion
on his fidelity to his aflociates, fle endeavoured to leiren his
influence, and to scatter among tlhemn the feeds of jealutfy and
diltruft, by infinuaring that the anl)ition oF the prior, aspired
beyond the condition of a fubjcCt, anld aiend at nothing less
than the crown itself.

A N accuf.-tion so improbable gaincd but little credir.

Whatever thoughts of this kind, the prritnption of unex-
pected success, and his elevation to the hilheft dignity in the
kingdom, may be alleoed to have inspired, at any lilhfrtquentr
period, it is certain thalt, at this iunciiAre, he could form no
luch vast design. To dethroll an ,Ilcn, who was lineal heir
to an ancient race of mnonarchsl ; v.io I ad been guilty of no,
action, by which Ihe could !orfeit the elct;l: and atfictlonl (.t
her fubjets ; who could employ, in defence of her r r!lit, tri
forces of a Icingdom, much more powerful than her o'.rn ; a:ld
to substitute, in her place, a per;)n, whom the illeritimacy of
his birth, by the practice of all civilized nation:;, rendered il;ca-
pable of any inleritance, either public or privat. ; w;i. n pri,.-

jct,

BOOK II. jeA, To chimerical, as the most extravagant ambition would

J- ~ ficarce entertain, and could never conceive to be practicable.
'159. The promise, too, which the prior made to Melvil, of refid-

ing conltantly in France, on condition the public grievances

' Melvil. were redressed *; the confidence reposed in him by the duke of
54. Chatelherault and his son, the presumptive heirs to the crown ;

and the concurrence of almost the whole Scottifl nobles, in
promoting the measures, by which he gave offence to the
French court, go far towards his vindication from those illegal
and criminal designs, with the imputation of which, the queen
endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

Troop? ar- TH E arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in
nrie from some degree, for the loss which the queen sustained by the
France an defection of the duke of Chatelherault. These were, imme-
Leith. diately, commanded to fortify Leith, in which place, on ac-

count of its commodious harbour, and its situation in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a plentiful country, the
queen resolved to fix the head quarters of her foreign forces.
This unpopular measure, by the manner of executing it, was
rendered still more unpopular. In order to bring the town en-
tirely under their command, the French turned out a great part
of the ancient inhabitants, and taking pofleflion of the houses,
which they had obliged them to abandon, presented, to the
view of the Scots, two obje&s equally irritating and offensive;
on the one hand, a number of their countrymen expelled their
habitations by violence, and wandering without any certain
abode; on the other, a colony of foreigners, fettling, with
their wives and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing in-
to ftrcngth by daily reinforcements, and openly preparing a
yoke, to which, without some timely exertion of national fpi-
rit, the whole kingdom niuff, ofneceffity, submit.

The Pro- IT was with deep concern that the lords of the congrega-
ftinllts re- tion beheld this bold and decisive fecp, taken by the queen re-
anil"Ci Sgent: nor did they hesitate a moment, whether they flould

t:. employ their whole ttrength, in one generous effort, to rescue

their religion and liberty from impending deftruftion. But, in
order to justify their own conduct, and to throw the blame
entirely on their adverli1ries, they resolved to preserve the tp-
pearances of decency and reflpeA towards their superiors, and
to have no recourfle to arns, without the moil urgent and ap-
cr.t 29. parent lecclity. They joined, with this view, in an addrels

to the regent, representing, in the ftrongcft terms, their diffla-
tis!'action with the cieaflres flie was pursuing, and beseeching
her to quiet the fears a!,d jealousies of the nation, by deisting
fi',i! fu!tiiying Leith. The queen, conscious of her present
:t. ailtn'.gouis situation, and elated with the hopes of fiefl
iuccours, was in no diliofition for liitening to demands, utterly

incon-

inconsistent with her views, and urged with that bold inportu- BOOK If.
nity, which is so little acceptable to princes.

TH suggestions of her French counsellors contributed. '559.

without doubt, to alienate her Rill farther front any scheme of Tte re-
accommodation. As the queen was ready, on all occasions, to .rtid their
discover an extraordinary deference for the epinions of herrimon-
countrymen, her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation ltrallces.
of the violent measures the y were driving on, took care to
place near her fiuch persons, as betrayed her, by their infinua-
tions, into many acions, which her own unbiaffed judgment
would have highly condemned. And as their success in the
present juncture, when all things were hastening towards a
crisis, depended entirely on the queen's firninefs, the princes of
Lorrain did not trust wholly to the influence of their ordinary
agents; but, in order to add the greater weight to their coun-
cils, they called in aid the minifers of religion ; and, by the
authority of their sacred character, they hoped effeEually to
recommend to their sifter, that system of severity which they
had espoused *. With this view, but under pretence of con- * Lefly,
founding the protestants by the frill of such able matters in 2 5. Car-
controveriy, they appointed several French divines to reside in telna. al.
Scotland. At the head of these, and with the character ofii. 4,6,
legate from the pope, was Pelleve bishop of Amiens, and as- 473.
terwards archbishop and cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot, t t Davila,
servilely devoted to the house of Guise, and a proper in- rantome.
lirument for recommending or executing the most outrageous
n ieafures.

AMID S r the noise and danger of civil arms, there doctors

had little opportunity to display their address in the use of their
theological weapons. But they gave no finall offence to the
nation by one of their actions. They persuaded the queen to
Ieize the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained
ever since the late truce, in the hands of the protestants; and
having, by a new and solemn consecration, purified the fabric
from the pollution, with which they supposed the profane mini-
ftrations of the protestants to have defiled it, they, in direc
contradition to one article in the late treaty, re-established
there the rites of the Romish church. This, added to the
indifference, and even contempt, with which the queen receiv-
ed theirremonftrances, convinced the lords of the congrega-
tion, that it was not only vain to exped any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely ncceflary to take arms
in their own defence.

TH . eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as They take

every consideration of good poHlcy, prompted them to take arnis in
this bold ftep without delay. It was but a small part of the lt'n i
French auxiliaries which had as yet arrived. The fortifications
of Leith, though advancing fast, were still far from being

conlpleat.

BOOK II. conlpleat. Under these circumstances of disadvantage, they
'--^--- conceived it poflible to furprize the queen's party, and, by one

S559- sudden and decisive blow, to prevent all future bloodfied and

contention. Full of these expectations, they advanced rapidly
6 towards Edinburgh with a numerous army. But it was no easy

matter to deceive an adversary, so vigilant and attentive as the
queen regent. With her usual Cagacity, she both foresaw the
danger, and took the only proper course to avoid it. Instead
of keeping the field against enemies, superior in number, and
formidable on a day of battle, by the ardour of their courage,
fle retired into Leith, and determined patiently to wait the
arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinifled as the
fortifications of that town then were, she did not dread the
efforts of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon, nor
with military stores, and utterly ignorant of the method ot
attacking any place fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, ereced all over the kingdom, il defence of private
property again: the incursions of banditti.

No R did the queen, mean while, negle& to have recourse

to those arts, which file had often employed, to weaken or
divide her adversaries. By private solicitations and promnifes,
flte flhook the fidelity, or abated the ardor of Come. By
open reproach and accusation, she blasted the reputation, ard
dininifhed the authority of others. Her emissaries were everr
where at work, and, notwithstanding the zeal for religion and
liberty, which then animated the nation, they seem to have
laboured notwithout success. We find Knox, about this pe-
riod, abounding in complaints of the lukewarm and languid

* Knox, spirit, which had begun to spread among his party . But ii
80o. their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a momentary inter-

miflion, it Coon blazed up with frefli vigour, and rose to a
greater height than ever.

Renew THE queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply
their re- which she made to a new remonstrance from the lords of
nc an. the congregation. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once

more represented to her the dangers arising from the increase
of the French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other
nicalures, which they conceived to be deftrucive to the
peace and liberty of the kingdom; and in this address, they
lpoke in a firmer tone, and avowed more openly than ever,
their resolution of proceeding to the utmost extremities, il

But with- order to put a flop to such dangerous encroachments. To
rout fucccs. a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so much bold-

ness, the queen replied in terms no less vigorous and ex-
plicit. She pretended that flie was not accountable to the
confederate lords for any part of her conduc ; and upon no
reprefontation of theirs, would flhe either abandon measures,

which

which flie deemed necefl'ary; or difinifs forces, which flheBOoK If.
found ufefil ; or demolith a fortification, which might prove
of advantage. At the fame time, fle required the!n, on pain 559
of treason, to disband the forces which they had affembied.

Tin I s haughty and imperious flile founded harfily to Scot-

tifli nobles, impatient from their national character, of the
slightest appearance of injury; accufomned, even from their
own monarchs, to the ioft respectful treatment; and poflefling,
under an ariflocratical form of government, fich a Ihare of
power as equalled, at all times, and often controlled that
of the sovereign. They were sensible, at once, of the
indignity offered to theinfelvcs, and alarmed with this plain
declaration of the queen's intentions; and as there now re-
mained but one ftep to take, they wanted neither public 1pirit
nor resolution to take it.

B u T, that they might not frem to depart from the cfta- Deliberate

bliflied forms of the constitution, for which, even amidfl their . c"crni g
most violent operations, men always retain the grcateft rever- which they
ence, they assemblcd the whole peers, barons, and reprefenta-ought to
tives of burroughs who adhered to their party. These formed lake
a convention, which exceeded in number, and equalled inO' 1 '
dignity, the usual meetings of parliament. The leaders of the
congregation laid before them the declaration which the queen
had given in answer to their remonstrance ; represented the una-
voidable ruin, which the measures, file therein avowed and jufti-
fled, would bring upon the kingdom; and requiring their direction
with regard to the obedience due to an administration so unjust
and oppreflive, they fubiuitted to their decision, a question, one
of the iloft delicate and intererfing that can poflibly fall under
the confideraiion of subjects.

TH is -,1ifn-1ly proceeded to decide, with no less dispatch,

than unanii: ;.'. Strangers to those forms, which protrat
business s; unacquainted with the arts, which make a figure in
debate; ard mluch more fitted for action, than discourse; war-
like people always haften to a conclusion, and bring their de-
liberations to the fhortefl issue. It was the work but of one
day, to examine and to resolve this nice problem, concerning
the bel:aviour of subjects towards a ruler who abuses his power.
But, however abrupt their proceedings may appear, they were
not destitute of solemnity. As the determnination of the point
in doubt, was conceived to be no less the office of divines, than
of laymen, the former were called to aflif with their opinion.
Knox and Willox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
without hesitation, both from the precepts and examples in
fcripturle, that it was lawful for tubjects not only to refill tyran-
nical princes, but to deprive them of that authority, which,
in their hands, becomes an instrument for dcftroying thole,
whom the Almighty ordained them to protct. The decifioa'

of

BOOK II. of persons revered so highly for their sacred character, but more
~'_-v-1 for their zeal and their piety, had great weight with the whole

' 559 affcmbly. Not satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner

prhey le of signifying consent, every person present was called in his turn
Qiieen of the to declare his sentiments, and rising up in order, all gave their
oilice of suffrages, without one dissenting voice, for depriving the queen
regent. of the office of regent, which she had exercised so much to

Knox, the detriment of the kingdom*.

The rights TH is extraordinary Sentence was owing no less to the love
oi their of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In the a& of deprivation,
t~.ndlut. religious grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous

incroachments of the queen upon the civil constitution are
produced by the lords of the congregation, in order to prove
their conduCt to have been not only julp, but necefiary. The
introducing foreign troops into a kingdom, at peace with all
the world; the seizing and fortifying towns in different parts of
the country; the promoting strangers to offices of great power
and dignity: the debasing the current coin*; the subverting
the ancient laws the imposing of new and burdensome taxes ;
and the attempting to subdue the kingdom, and to oppress its
liberties, by open and repeated aEts of violence, are enumerated
at great length, and placed in the strongest light. On all
accounts, the congregation maintained that the nobles, as
counsellors by birth-right to their monarchs, and the guardians
and defenders of the constitution, had a right to interpose;
and therefore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the king
and queen, and with many expreflions of duty and fubmiiiion
towards them, they deprived the queen regent of her office,
and ordained, that, for the future, no obedience flould be
given to her commands --.

VI L E N T as this action may appear, there wanted not

principles in the confiitution, nor precedents in the history of
Scotland, to justify and to authorize it. Under the ariftocratical
form of government eflablifled among the Scots, the power of
the Sovereign was extremely limited. The more considerable
nobles were themselves petty princes, poieffing extensive jurif-

ditions,

* Ti flandards of money in Scotland was continually varying. In

the ,6th of James V. A. D. 1519, a pound weight of gold, when coined,
produced a08 I, of current money. But under the queen regent's admi-
nitration, A. D. 1536, a pound weight of gold, although the quantity
of alloy was considerably encreafed, produced 1441. current money. 11u
1519, a pound weight of silver, when coined, produced 91. is.; but in
1556, it produced 131. current money. Ruddim. Prefat. ad Anderl.
Diplomat. Scotre p. 80, 81, from which it appears, that this complaint,
which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether defitute of
foundation.

1 M. Caflcnan, after condemning the dangerous councils of tl'e princes

of Lorrain with regard to the affairn of Scotlantl, acknowledges, with
his usual candour, that the Scots declared war againlt the queen regent,
rather from a delire of vindicating their civil liberties, than from any mu-
tive of religion. NMem. ,146.

dictions, almost independent of the crown, and followed by BOOK If.
numerous vafials who, in every contelt, espoused their chieftain's ~. ,
quarrel, in opposition to the king. Hence the many inltances 1559.
of the impotence of regal authority, which are to be found in
tile Scottifl history. In every age, the nobles hot only claim-
ed, but exercifid the right of controlling the king. Jealous
of their privileges, and eager to take the field in defence of
them, every error in administration was observed, every encroach-
ment upon the rights of the aristocracy, excited indignation,
and no prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries, which
the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting refiRance,
which fliook, or overturned his throne. Encouraged by the
spirit of the constitution, and countenanced by the example of
their ancestors, the lords of the congregation thought it in-
cumbent on them, at this juncture, to inquire into the mal-
administration of the queen regent, and to preserve their coun-
try from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of the
power to execute such a pernicious scheme *.

* The ae of deprivation, and a letter from the lords of the congrega-

tion to the queen regent, are fill extant, Knox, 184. They discover not
only, that masculine and undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of so
bold a resolution; but are remarkable for a precifon, and vigourof ex-
prcffion, which we are furprized to meet with in an age so unpolifhed.
The fame oblervation may be made with refpe& to the other public pa-
pers of that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the
compositions us authors by profeflion oblcure, or affected, or absurd; bur
the language of business in nearly the lame at all times; and where-ever
men think clearly, and are thoroughly interelted, they express chemfelvcs
:iith perlpicuity and force,

V Ri.. t [ THE

# BOOK III.

T H E
HISTORY

0 F
SCOTLAND.

B O O K III.
BOOK ITI. H E lords of the congregation Coon found, that their

v-- [ zeal had engaged thenm in an undertaking, which it was
559. beyond their utmost ability to accomplifli. The French gar-

The cons rifon, despising their numerous, but irregular forces, refused to
involvedin surrender Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were
difficulties. they sufficiently (kilful in the art of war to reduce the place by

force, or poffefled of the artillery or magazines, requisite for
that purpose; and their followers, though of undaunted cou-
rage, yet being accustomed to decide every quarrel by a battle,
were hangers to the fatigues of a long campaign, and Coon be-
came impatient of the severe and constant duty which a siege
requires. The queen's emissaries, who found it easy to mingle
with their countrymen, were at the utmoif pains to heighten
their disgust, which discovered itself at first in nurmurs and
complaints, but on occasion of the want of money for paying
the army, broke out into open mutiny. The mot eminent lea-
ders were scarce secure from the unbridled insolence of the
1oldiers; while some of inferior rank, interposing too rafllly in
order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage. Dif-
cord, coniternation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the
reformers. The duke, their general, funk, with his usual
timidity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered
the manifest symptoms of repentance for his rafinefs, in efpou-
sing such a desperate cause.

Apply to IN this situation of their affairs, the congregation had re-
Elizabcth course to Elizabeth, from whose protection they could derive
for anil. their only reasonable hopes of success. Some of their more
ac,' sagacious leaders, having foreseen that the party might probably

be involved in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a
resource in any such exigency, by entering into a secret cor-

rel-

refpondence with the court of England*. Elizabeth, aware ofBoor III.
dangerous designs which the princes of Lorrain had formed a---, .
gainft her crown, was early sensible of how much importance 559'
it would be, not only to check the progress of the French in Hilt Ref.
Scotland; but to extend her own influence in that kingdom - ; 3. Append.
and perceiving how effectually the prcfent infurretions would 278.Keith,
contribute to retard or defeat the schemes formed against Eng- Append.
land, she listened with pleasure to these applications of the 's,,
malecontents, and gave them private assurances of powerful Append.
support to their cause. Randolph , an agent extremely proper No. 1.
for conducting any dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scotland, t Keith,
and residing secretly among the lords of the congregation, oh- Append.
terved and quickened their motions. Money feeleed to be te
only thing they wanted at that time: and it was owing to a
feafonabie remittance from England §, that the Scottilh nobles § K1nox
had been enabled to take the field, and to advance towards114' Keit
Leith. But as Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and 44.
studious to preserve appearances with France, her subsidies were
beltowed at first with extreme frugality. The fubfiftance of an
anny, and the expences of a siege, soon exhausted this penu-
rious supply, to which the lords of the congregation could make
little addition from their own funds; and the ruin and dif-
perfion of the party must have instantly followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormiiton was sent, She rende

with the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and them friall
castle of Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town money,
of greatest importance on the Scottish frontier, fir Ralph Sadler
and fir James Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were em-
ployed to command there, and were entrusted with a dif-
cretionary power of supplying the Scottifi mnalecontents, ac-
cording to the exigency of their affairs. From theln Cockburn
received 4000 crowns, but little to the advantage of his party.
The earl of Bothwell, by the queen's initigation, lay in wait which is
for him on his return, dispersed his followers, wounded him and illtercpted,
carried off the money.

TH i s unexpected difappointinent proved fatal to the parry.

In meer despair, fomle of the more zealous atrniiip': to aftault
Leith, but the French beat them l-ick wi'll ii, rnce, seized
their cannon, and purfiing them to the gates of Edinburgh,
were on the point of entering along with themn. Ail the ter-
ror and confusion, which the prolpe&c of pillage or maflacre
can excite in a place taken hy ftorll, tilled the city on this oc-
cafion. The inhabitants fled f;l'ai the eneimCy hy the opposite
gate; the forces of the ':ongrcgation were irrcfilute i d dif-
mayed; and the queen's partizans in the town openly : 'lted
both. At lift, a fetw of the nobles ventured to face the
who, after plundering foine houles in the fububs, . .ucd

1 z with

BOOK II. with their booty, and delivered the city from this dreadful

-Y alarm.
59. A s CO ND fklirmilih, which happened a few days after,

wasno less unfortunate. The French Gent out a detachment
to intercept a convoy of provisions which was designed for
Edinburgh. The lords of the congregation, having intelli-
gence of this, marched in all hafle with a considerable body of
their troops, and falling upon the enemy between Reftalrig and
Leith, with more gallantry than good conduct, were aliloft
surrounded by a second party of French, who advanced in older
to support their own men. In this situation a retreat was the
only thing which could have raved the Scots; but a retreat
over marfliy ground, and in the face of an enemy superior in

They retire number, could not long be conduced with order. A finall body
from Leith of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell into the
inconfufion. utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing to the caution of

the French, that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the congrega-

tion funk altogether. They did not think themselves secure.
even within the walls of Edinburgh, but inflantly determined
to retire to some place at a greater distance from the enemy.
In vain did the prior of St. Andrew's and a few others oppose
this cowardly and ignominious flight. The dread of the pre-
sent danger prevailed over both the sense of honour, and zeal
Nov. 6. for the cause. At midnight, they set out from Edinburgh, in

great confusion, and marched without halting till they arrived at
Stirling.

Du R I N G this last infurreaion, the great body of the Scot-

tifl nobility joined the congregation. The lords Seton and
Borthwick were the only persons of rank who took arms for the

* Keith queen, and aflifted her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly
Append. 3 . favoured her cause, but resided at his own house. The earl of

Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy which diftinguiflies
his character, amused the leaders of the congregation, whom
he had engaged to assist, with many fair promises, but never

t Keith, joined them with a single man t. The earl of Mlorton, a mlenl-
Append. er of the congregation, fluctuated in a state of irresolution,
33. Knox' and did not at heartily for the common cause. Lord Erskine,

governor of Edinburgh castle, though a protestant, maintain-
ed a neutrality, which he esteemed becoming the dignity of his
office; and having been entrusted by parliament with the com-
mand of the principal fortress in the kingdom, he resolved
that neither fation fhculd get it into their hands.

Maitland A F E w days before the retreat of the congregation, the
revolts queen suffered an irreparable loTs by the defection of her princi-
from the pal secretary, Williami, Mairland of Lethington. His zeal for
queen the reformed religion, together with his warm remionftlances
dowager. against the violent measures which the queen was carrying on,

cxpoeled

expofcld him so much to hter resentment, and to that of herBooK IL.
French counsellors, that he, suspecting his life to be in danger,
w;thdrew secretly from Lcith, and fled to the lords of the '559.
congregation ; and they, with open arms, received a convert, Knox,
.-hotl abilities added both strength and reputation to their cause. '9z'
Mairland had early applied to public business admirable.natural
talents, improved by an acquaintance with the liberal arts;
and, at a tine of life, when his countrymen of the fame
quality were following the pleasures of the chafe, or serving as
adventurers in the armies of France, he was admitted into all
the secrets of the cabinet, and put upon a level with persons of
the niofl confuminate experience in the management of affairs.
He pofleffed, in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which
delights in pursuing bold designs, and was no less inafter of that
pulitical art and dexteriy which is necessary for carrying them
on with fuccels. But these qualities were deeply tinctured with
the neighbouring vices. His address sometimes degenerated
into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon excess of subtlety
and refinement; his invention, over-fertile, suggested to him,
on some occasions, chimerical systems of policy, little suitable
to the genius of the age; and his enterprising spirit engaged
hini in projects vast and splendid, but beyond his utmost power
to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever faction
they belong, mention him with an admiration, which nothing
could have excited but the greatest superiority of penetration
and abilities.

TH E precipitate retreat of the congregation incrcared, to

such a degree, the terror and confulion which had seized theml
at Edinburgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army
dwindled to an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox,
however, still remained undaunted and erect, and having
mounted the pulpit, he addressed to his desponding hearers, an
exhortation which wonderfully animated and revived them.
The heads of this discourse are inserted in his history , and as- * Knovx,
ford a striking example of the boldness and fieedom of reproof 193.
assumed by the firfl reformers, as well as a specimen of his own
Ikill in choofing the topics inoft fitted to influence and rouze his
audience.

A M r. E Tr I N of the leaders being called, to confider what The lord-

course they should hold, now that their own resources were all of th'! con
cxhaufted, and their deltruction appeared to be unavoidable, ge;Ltai
without foreign aid ; they turned their eyes once more to Eng- tolilizabeth.
land, and resolved to implore the alfiftance of Elizabeth to-
wards finishing an enterprize, in which they had so fatally
experienced their own weakncfs, and the fircngtb of their ad-
verfarics. Maitland, as the iimoft able negotiator of the party,
was employed in this embafiy. In his absence, and during the
inactive season of the year, it was agreed to difinifs their fol-

lowers,

BooK III. lowers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign, which had (c
1-v-*»- far exceeded the usual time of service. But, in order to pre-

1559. serve counties most devoted to their interest, the prior of

St. Andrew's, with part of the Icaders, retired into Fife.
The duke of Chatelherault, with the ref, fixed his refidcnce at
Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's address or
eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his country under her
protetion. She observed the prevalence of the French counsels,
and the progress of theirarms in Scotland, with great concern;
and as Ihe well foresaw the dangerous tendency of their
schemes in that kingdom, fihe had already come to a
resolution with regard to the part flle herself would a&, if their
power there ihould grow still more formidable.

Motives IN order to give the queen and her privy council a full and
which de- diifinót view of any important matter which might come be-
termined fore them, it seems to have been the pratice of Elizabeth's
her to flii mninifters to prepare memorials, in which they clearly itated the

th point under deliberation, laid down the grounds of the con-

dua, which they held to be most reasonable, and proposed a
method for carrying their plan into execution. Two papers of

f Barn.vol. this kind, written by fir William Cecil with his own hand, still
iii. Append. remain ; they are intitled, " A flhort difcullron of the weighty
283. Keith, c" matter of Scotland," and do honour to the industry and pe-
Append. 24. netration of that great minister. The motives, which deter-

mined the queen to espouse so warmly the defence of the con-
gregation, are represented with perspicuity and force; and the
consequences of suffering the French to eftablilh themselves in
Scotland, are predicted with great accuracy and difcemment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both

of God and of nature, that every society hath a right to de-
fend itself, not only from present dangers, but from fuich as
may probably ensue; to which, he adds, that nature and rea.
son teach every prince to defend himself by the fame means,
which his adversaries employ to diRfrefs hlimi. Upon thefr
grounds, he eftabliflhs the right of England to interpose in the
affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the conquest of that king-
dom, at which the French openly aimed. The French, he
observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of England
Hostilities had lbbfillcd between the vwo nations for many
centuries. No treaty of peace, into which thec entered, had
ever been cordial or fincerc. No good effW.& was therefore to
be expeaedr from the peace lately agr'cd li)on, which being
extorted by present necefli:y, v.'culd be negligenlly observcd,
and broken on tle slightest prctenccs. In n very short tinic,
France would recover its former opulence c and though no'..
drained of men and money by a tedious and unfuccefriful war.
it would quickly be in a condition for acing, and the rcftll.,'
and martial genius of the people would render action nececfarv.
'The princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, had the entire di-

rection

reaion of French affairs, were animated with the molf virulentBOOK IIl
hatred against the Engliih nation. They openly called in quest-'"
tion the legitimacy of the queen's birth, and by advancing the '55'
title and pretcnfions of their niece the queen of Scotland,
tfudied to deprive Elizabeth of her crown. With this view,
they had laboured to exclude the English from the treaty of
Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a separate
peace with Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to aufume the title and arms of queen of
England and even since the conclusion of the peace, they had
solicited at Rome, and obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's
birth to be illegitimate. And though the wisdom and modera-
tion of the constable Montmorency, had, for some time, checked
their career, yet these restraints being now removed by the
death of Henry II. and the disgrace of his minister, the ut-
most excefles of violence were to be dreaded from their furious
ambition, armed with sovereign power. Scotland is the quarter,
whence they can attack England with most advantage. A war
on the borders of that country exposes France to no danger,
but one unsuccessful action there may hazard the crown, and
overturn the government of England. In political conduct, it
is childish to wait till the designs of an enemy be ripe for
execution. The Scottifli nobles, after their utmost efforts,
have been obliged to quit the field; and far from expelling
the invaders of their liberties, they behold the French power
daily increasing, and mufl at last cease from itruggling any
longer in a contest so unequal. The invading of England will
immediately follow the reduction of the Scottish malecontents,
by the abandoning of whom to the .mercy of the French,
Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the heart of her
own kingdom, and cxpofe it to the calamities of war, and the
danger of conquest. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a distance from England, and by sup-
porting the congregation with a powerful army, to render Scot-
land the theatre of the war, to crufl the designs of the princes
of Lorrain in their infancy, and, by such an early and un-
expected effort, to expel the French out of Britain, before their
power had time to take root, and grow up to any formidable
height. But as the matter was of as much importance, as any
which could fall under the consideration of an Englifli mon-
arch, wisdom and mature counsel were necessary in the sirs:
place, and afterwards vigour and expedition in conduEt; the dan-
ger was urgent, and, by losing a tingle moment, might become
unavoidable*.

Tll ES

* The arguments which the Scots employed, in order to obtain Eliza-

belh's afliftancc, are urged with grcet force, in a paper of Maitland'=.
See Appundix, No, II.

BoOK III. TH E s E arguments produced their full effect upon Elizabel h,
'..'v'",J who was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to

1 559 her crown, and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and

happiness of her subjects. From these motives fle had aced,
in granting the congregation an early supply of money; and
from the fame principles she determined, in their exigency, to
afford them more effectual aid. One of Maitland's attendants
was instantly dispatched into Scotland with the Itrongelt aflu-
rances of her protecion, and the lords of the congregation wore
desired to fend commifloners into England, to conclude a treaty,
and to fettle the operations of the campaign, with the duke ot

* Keith. Norfolk *.
114. ME A N while, the queen regent, fiomn whom no motion of
The the congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the success
dowager of this negotiation with the court of England, and foreiaw
meanwhile how little Ihe would be able to refiti the united efforts of the
fends her two kingdoms. For this reason fle determined, if poflible, to
trench get the fart of Elizabeth ; and by venturing, notwithifanding
troainop the inclemency of the winter eafon, to attack the malecon-
them, tents in their present dispersed and helpless situation, flie hoped

to put an end to the war, before the arrival of their Englifli
allies.

A c oN s lD E R A B L E body of her French forces, who were

augmented, about this time, by the arrival of the count de
Martigues, with a thousand veteran foot, and olme cavalry,
were commanded to march to Stirling. Having there crossed
the Forth, they proceeded along the coast of Fife, deltroying
and plundering, with excessive outrage, the houses and lands
of those whom they efReemcd their enemies. Fife was the molt
populous and powerful county in the kingdom, and noflo devot-
ed to the congregation, who had hitherto drawn from thence
their mofl considerable supplics, both of men and provisions
and therefore, besides punilling the cilafftcion of the inh;!h..
tants, by pillaging the country, the Frcnch propolcd to l;. z
and fortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a garrifun ft.iici.;1
to bridle the mutinous spirit of the province, and to keep pot-
fefiion of a port fituatcce on the main occa,i.

B UT or this occanion, the p;inr of St. Andrew's, loi..l

Ruthven, Kirkaldy oi Grange, and a few o, the iloil acliv'
leaders of the congregation, pei roriniel, hi their bravery and
good concdite, a flrvice of tie iiino, inmportance to the;i
party. Having afrneuhle.d fix hnndril holi'e, they inveltcd the
French with continual i;i:curfion, brit pt thei r quarters, iatcr-
cepted their conv'n s of pro\ifins, cut eS their fliagglir
parties, and so haorrif;. l thei wit! pcrl'pital alarils, tilit
they prevented tlicnih tr miore rlihn Ihrce v.eckls floni advanlc-

nox, p ,

n con nd

'cZ. ' '
't la't thell p;io',l vwitlh Ili '.';:'!,: palr, wa, conltraincd (1

rl'eiIC,

letire, and the French fct out from Kirkaldy, and began to Bool ;I.
move along the coast towards St. Andrew's. They had ad- ---
vanced but a few miles, when, from an eminence, thev delcried 560.
a powerful fleet fleering its course up the Firth of Forth. As January
rhey knew that the marquis D'Elbeuf was, at that time, pre- '3.
paring to fail for Scotland with a numerous arny, they haltily
concluded that thele flhips belonged to hin, and gave way to
the most immoderate tranrports of joy, on tile prospect of this
long-expeCted succour. Their great guns were already si!ed to
welcome their friends, and to spread the tidings and terror of
their arrival among th!cir enemies, vwhen a finall boat fiom the
opposite coast landed, and blaitcd their premature and fliort- The fEng-
lived triumph, by inflrming thenl, that it was the fleet oflilh fieet
England which was in fight, i'tended for the aid rs the con- :r~i:'
gregation, and was soon to be foilowed by ;a formidable land tiilance
army t. tnox,

TH o u G H OUT her whole reign, Elizabelthl was cautious, o03.

but decisive ; and by her promptitude in executinig her ri!olu-
tions, joined to the deliberation wir ih

hi e t r)lid Ihenl,

her adniniftration became remarka!;le. no less for its vigour,
than for its wisdom. No sooner did the determine to affodl her
protection to the lords of the congregation, than they cxpe-
rienced the afcivity, as well as the extent of her pov,'r. The
season of the year would nor permii her land army to tike the
tiekl ; but left the French flould, in the nl:an timnc, rtceive
new reinforcements, flie instantly ordereid a ftrrm'.r l;.lu.Iron to
cruize in the Firth of Forth. She fiecil, hy her in liri'iionst to
Winter her admiral, to have lcen delfirns of prclelrving the ap-
pearances of fricndllhip towards the French *. But thele were * Keiih,
only appearances ; if any French fleet fliould attempt to land, Apl'end.
he was commanded to prevent it, hy cv\'ry act of holtliiv and 45
violence. It was the fight of this lila!ron, w!ich occnfioned
at firllt o much joy among the Fr. '!, bur v.,icil soon in-
spired them with ilch terror, as ftave.l I'if from 4he efle'cs or
their vengeance. Apprehensive of ht'inr cut off frnom their
companions on the opposite flin,,, thl., retricalc' towards Stir-
ling with the utinof precipitntion, and, in a dreardfil I eafnn,
and through roads; alnolt in!pa!ho i l, :.rri\ed at l.,cith, hairrafed
and exhaulted with fatigue t. 1
*I,1,,,

TH E Englifl fleet call ancihor in 1tic rond of L.ith, and l'3

continuing in that ftatinn till the coiiciifion of peace, hntlli pre-
vented the garrison of Lceilh floin rCeciI'ini linccoairs of llny
kind, aitd colliderably lacilitaird tlhe opelarlonl.l of thei,' own
forces by land.

SO o N after tile arrival (f the Englii1 I' liia.ldin, tlhe coan- 'rll .1-.

miilioners of the congregation rtpnuird to letwlwck, tid c;) -':'1 a
eluded with the duke of Noriolik, a r,. 'y, the b)nd of that i.';!:i,;
union with Elizabeth, ,which w.as; of lb rc.it advl:n;tag to the 1'Pi. 7.

cnll;'.

BOOK III. caufc. To give a check to the dangerous and rapid progrers of
1.--v -' the French arms in Scotland, was the professed design of the

'S60. contracting parties. In order to this, the Scots engaged never

to fuirr any closer union of their country with France; and to
defend themselves to the uttermost against all attempts of con-
quest ; and for their aflitance, Elizabeth promised to employ,
in Scotland, a powerful army, which the Scots undertook to
join with all their forces; no place in Scotland was to remain
in the hands of the Englifhi ; whatever flould be taken from
the enemy was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at
their choice ; if an invasion should be made upon England, the
Scots were obliged to aflift Elizabeth with part of their forces;
and to ascertain their faithful observance of the treaty, they
bound themfelvc3 to deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the
march of her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots
made many protestations of obedience and loyalty towards their
own queen, in every thing n-ot inconsistent with their religion,

* Knox, 'and the liberties of their country *.
117. TH E Englifl army, consisting of fix thousand foot, and two
The Eng- thousand horse, under the command of lord Grey of Wilton,
(1h army entered Scotland early in the spring. The members of the con-
ia2'. siege
to Leith. gregation assembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their
Apiil a. new allies; and having joined them with great multitudes of

their followers, they advanced together towards Leith. The
French were little able to keep the field againit an enemy lo
much superior in number. A itrong body of troops, destined
for their relief had been scattered by a violent ftorni, and hlad
either perified on the coast of France, or with difficulty had

f Mern. de recovered the ports of that kingdom -. But they hoped to be
C&t4l. able to defend Leith, till the princes of Lorrain flould make
450, good the magnificent promiles of aflftance, with which they

daily encouraged them ; or till scarcity of provisions should
conltrain the Englith to retire into their own country. In order
to halten this latterevent, they did not neglect the usual though
barbarous precaution for diltreiEing an invading eneny, by burn-

nx,,,, ing and laying waste all the adjacent country *. The zeal,
3;5. however, of the nation fruftratdc their intentions; eager to

contribule towards removing their oppressors, the people pro-
duced their hiiddien tolcs to support their fiiends; the neigh-
b(loing counties supplied every thing necelsary, and far froin
wanting tfubfilltencc, tile Englifll found in their camp, aJl forts
,l' provafions, at a cheaper rare, than had for some time been

t Krni , kr.r vin in that part of i he kingdom 't.
iblt. (x t!he appronch of ti, Enl.nliil army, the queen regent re-

tired into the earlle of Edi:!lurgh. Her health was now in a
declining i(ate, and her tm\ilud broken and depressed by the mil-
I'C:iunlcs of her admuiniliation. To avoid the danger and fa-
t.u: of a sicee, fle colilmitted herself to the protection of

lord

lord Erskine. This nobleman frill preserved his neutrality, and BOOK III
by his integrity and love of his country, merited equally the -- -'
efleem of both parties. He received the queen herself with S160.
the utnoft honour and respect, but took care to admit no such
retinue, as might endanger his command of the castle A. t Forbes's

A F E w days after they arrived in Scotland, the Englilh in- Colia

vested Leith. The garrison, fliut up, within the town, was Keith,
almost half as numerous as the army which fat down before it, Izz.
and by an obstinate defence protraced the siege to a great length. April 6.
The circumstances of this siege, related by cotemporary hifto-
rians, men without knowledge or experience in the art of war,
are often obscure and imperfect, and at this distance of time
are not considerable enough to be entertaining.

AT first the French endeavoured to keep pofTeflion of the

Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far distant from the town, but
were beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the firious April 15.
attack of the Scottilh cavalry. Within a few days, the French
had their full revenge; having sallied out with a strong body,*
they entered the English trenches, broke their troops, nailed
part of their cannon, and killed at least double the number they
had loft in the former fkirmilh. Nor were the Englifli more
fortunate in an attempt which they made to take the place by
afault; they were met with equal courage, and repulsed with
considerable loss. From the detail of these circumitances by May 7.
the writers of that age, it is easy to observe the different cha-
racters of the French and English troops. The former, trained
to war, under the aaive reigns of Francis I. and Henry II.
defended themselves not only with the bravery, but with the
Ikill of veterans. The latter, who had been more accultomed
to peace, still preserved the intrepid and desperate valour pecu-
liar to the nation, but discovered few narks of military geniu:;,
or of experience in the pratice of war. Every misfortune or
difappointnent during the siege mutt be imlputed to manifefl
errors in condut. The success of the beficgcd in their sally
was owing entirely to the security and negligence of the Eng-
lilh: many of their officers were absent ; their loldiers had left
their trations; and the trenches were alimoft without a guard.
The ladders, which had been provided ior the afThult, wanted
a great deal of the necessary length ; and the troops employed
in that service were ill liipportcd. The trenches were opened,
at first, in an improper place; and as it was found expedient to
change the ground, both time and labour were ltll. The
weakness of their own generals, no less than the strength of the
French garrison, rcnderef! theprogres ns' ith Englill woldlr.-
fully flow. The length, however, of the liege, andl the lo'.
of part of their nmagazines by an accidentil fire, re(huced tl:;
French to extreme distress, which the profpedt of relief made
them bear with admirable fortitude.

Wa i 1..

BooK III. WHr i t. E the hopes and courage of the French protrat:.: i

- the fiegc so tar beyond expectation, the leaders of the congre-
1j60. gation were not idle. Bv new aflociations and confcderaci:.c,

they laboured more perfectly to unite their party. By publickly
ratifying the treaty concluded at Berwick, they endeavoured t)
render the alliance with England firm and indissoluble. Amiong
the subscribers of thele papers, we find the earl of Huntly, and
foine others who had not hitherto concurred with the congrega-
tion in any of their measures *. Several of these lords, parti-

Buin. culariy the earl of Hunt!l, still adhered to the popifl church;

-°ol. l

2 but on this occasion, neither their religious sentiments, nor
Knox, 2. their former cautious maxims, were regarded ; the torrent of

national refc ntn!ent and indignation againfl the French hurried
them on '.

Death and TH . queen regent, the instrument, rather than the cause
chaileaaci, of involving Scotland in those calamities, under which it
t:e queen groaned at that time, died during the height of the siege.
iJune 16. No princess ever pofeeffed qualities more capable of rendering

her adminiltration illustrious, or her people happy. Of much
discernment, and no less address, of great intrepidity, and c-
qual prudence ; gentle and humane, without weakness ; zea-
lous for her religion, without bigotry ; a lover of justice, with-
out rigour. One circumstance, however, and that, too, the
excess of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all these
great qualities, ard rendered her government unfortunate, and
her name odious. Devoted to the intcreft of France, her na-
tive country, and attached to the princes of Lorrain her bro-
thers, with most passionate fondness ; fie departed, in order to
grat'iy them, from every maxim, which her own wisdom or
hunianil would have approved. She outlived, in a great mea-
flue, that reputation and popularity, which had finoothed her
way to the highelt station in the kingdom ; and many exam-
ples of falloood, and feme of fcverity, in the latter part of her
adn:iniftration, totally alicnated from her the affections of a
people, who had once placed in her an unbounded confidence
But, even by her enemies, these unjustifiable actions were i;i-
puied to the facilily, not to the nialignity of her nature ; ari!
while thcy taxed ler lbrotilcs, and French counsellors wit!;i

raflnci;

*- Tl'he lic rl rs tl:e Il onrh p"wvcr lii, on man)y rcnrf:nr, furmolrt

the: ral, 'hiith the Catho;ic notble. h;nal ioi th eir rcligiun. Ielide. li.
t, uii-, ' 0. *-vii rlin. I;ir thl arilin fr I'rtn llic m rncmoial m,.ntionel Iy

.iirt, r, I-l'll r':. ..r i!.(' t! lit, inM, v l I. iii. St1 , an11 puljlilled by hlili,
Ai;'. 1 . 7l: tie il ill 'ti r'. r.t' Ili:':tlirih to Randolph her agent. put It.
L. ', ,,:.1 i: i; d' u.i, tII:i t

i v t* .il'ui papill., thug;ht ilte alliance w ilh l'n-

glidrori t c, il ti lor pr-rl " il th- liberly >sd initlpenelrrcc ot ihe
l,;:,.1l'in. tI: il, j8S. HIntily) hi:nlililf begRn a corlc pon(n lencc wi\t
li'.labcih' nmilin .ii , blt,,lr ' itel Ina(l of the lFirlliil arnm y into St-:
latld. I-.y)r.c.'; ilate Papri ., 6si, .t63, Sec Applelld. N Ill.

rafliiefs and cruelty; they still allowed her the praise of pru-BOOK B lr.
dence and of lenity *. A few dalys before her death, lie de- --v
lired an interview wit:h the prior of St. Andrew's, the earl of 1,60.
Argyll, and other chiefs of tlhe congregation. To theml she * BuchAn
laniehted tile fatal issue of those violent councils, which /he 3'4'
had been obliged to'follow; and, with the candouri natural to
a generous milnd, confeflcd the errors of her own adinilitrati-
on, and begged forgiventfs of thloi-, to wlionl ii ty had been
hutitful; but, at thl faile time, Ilie warned theni, ailidlt their
liruggles for liberty, and the Ihock of arnis, not to lolf fight of
the loyalty and fubicEtion, which vas due: to their fuvereign t. + I.'n', ,le
The remainder of her time, Ihe cmplyved in religious ledi- RLbU (;el.
tations and exercises. She cven ivited the attendance of
Willox, one of the inoft cmine:nt among the reformed preach-
ers, listened to his inftru&ions w'ilh reverence and attention , t, K nc,
and prepared for the approach of death with a decent forti- "S.
tude.

NoT H I t C. could now save tile French troops, lhut up in

Leith, but the ilmmediate conclitfion of a peace, or the arrival Motivcs o:
of a powerful army from the continent. The princes of Lor- the 'rL.uh
rain ainufed their party in Scotland, with continual expectations a pcace.
of the latter, and had thereby kept alive their hopes and their
courage. But at last, the situation of France, rather than the
terror of the Englilh arms, or the remonstrances of the Scot-
tilh malecontents, con:trained them, though with relucance,
to turn their thoughts towards pacific councils. The protef-
tants in France were, at that time, a party formidable by
their number, and more by the valour and enterprising genius of
their leaders. Francis II. had treated themn with extreme ri-
gour, and discovered, by every ftep he took, a fettled reoblu-
tion to extirpate their religion, and to ruin those who profcffcd
it. At the profpeEt of this danger to themfclves, and to their
cause, the protestants were alarmed, but not terrified. Ani-
mated with zeal, and inflamed with rcfentinent, they not only
prepared for their own defence, but resolved, by tonie bold ac-
tion, to anticipate the schemes of their enemies ; and as the
princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of all the king's
violent meafurcs, they marked them out, to be the first viCtinis
of their indignation. Hence, and not from any diflovalty to Marl, i
the king, proceeded the famous conspiracy of Aniboill ; and
though the vigilance and good fortune of the princes of Lor-
rain discovered and disappointed that design, it was easy to ob-
serve new tormis gathering in every province of the kingdom,
and ready to burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil
war. In this situation, the ambition of the hlouli of Lorrain
was called off fiom the thoughts of foreign conquefis, to de-
fend the honour and dignity of the French criwn, and inflead
of fending new rcinforcements into Scotland, it becalime necell

fary

BOOK III. fary to withdraw the veteran troops already employed in that
_- v--'c kingdom *.

56o. I r order to conduct an affair of so much importance and

* Lefly, delicacy, the princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc bishop
The nego- of Valence, and of the fieurde Randan. As both these, es-
tiations for pecially the former, were reckoned inferior to no persons of
that pur- that age, in address and political refinement, Elizabeth opposed
purf. to them ambassadors of equal abilities; Cecil her prime mini-

fter, a man perhaps of the greatest capacity who had ever held
that office; and Wotton dean of Canterbury, grown old in
the art of negociating under three successive monarchs. The
interests of the French and Englilh courts were soon adjusted
by men of so great dexterity in business ; and as France easily
consented to withdraw those forces, which had been the chief
occasion of the war; the other points in dispute, between that
kingdom and England, were not matters of tedious, or of dif-
ficult difcuflion.

THE grievances of the congregation, and their denland:

upon their own sovereigns for redress, employed longer tinle,
and required to be treated with a more delicate hand. Aftel
so many open attempts, carried on by command of the king
and queen, in order to overturn the ancient constitution, and to
suppress the religion which they had embraced, the Scottilli
nobles could not think themselves secure, without fixing fomi
new barrier against the future encroachments of regal power.
But the legal steps towards accomplilhing this were not so obvi-
ous. The French ambafladors confidered the entering into any
treaty with the fubjeas, and with rebels, as a condescension
unworthy the dignity of a sovereign; and their scruples on
this head might have put an end to the treaty, if the impati-
ence of both parties for peace had not suggested an expedient,

Artic;es of which seemed to provide for the security of the subjea, without
the treaty. derogating from the honour of the prince. The Scottish no

bles agreed on this occasion, to pass from the point of right
and privilege, and to accept the redress of their grievances, as
a matter of favour. Whatever additional security their anxi-
ety for personal safety, or their zeal for public liberty, prompt-
ed them to demand, was granted in the name of Francis and
Mary, as aas of their royal favour and indulgence. And left
conceflions of this kind fliouid seem precarious, and liable to
be retraced by the fame power, which had made them, the
French ambassador agreed to insert them in the treaty with E-

* Keith, lizabeth, and thereby to bind the king and queen inviolably to
134, &c. observe then *.

IN relating this tranfaclion, cotemporary historians ha\c

founded the conceflions of Francis and Mary to the Scotliih
fubjeEts, with the treaty between France and England; the
latter, besides the ratification of former treaties betwccr

the

the two kingdoms, and stipulations with regard to the time and BOOK I1I.
manner of removing both armies out of Scotland, contained'"-V '
an article, to which, as the source of many important events, '
we Ihall often have occasion to refer. The right of Elizabeth
to her crown is, thereby, acknowledged in the strongest terms;
and Francis and Mary fblemnly engage, neither to alfumne the
title, nor to bear the alns of king and queen of England in
any time to come.

H N O U R A B L E as this article was for Elizabeth hcrfelf,

the conditions file obtained for her allies the Scots were no
less advantageous to them. Monluc and Randan, consented,
in the name of Francis and Mary, that the French forces inJulY6
Scotland should initantly be sent back into their own country,
and no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into tile king-
dom, without the knowledge and content of parliament; that
the fortifications of Leith and Dunbar flould imniediately be
razed, and no new fort be erected without the perniflion of
parliament ; that a parliament fliould be held on the firlt day
of August, and that assembly be deemed as valid, in all re-
fpe&ts, as if it had been called by the express commandment
of the king and queen; that, conformable to the ancient
laws and cufioms of the country, the king and queen flould
not declare war, or conclude peace, without the concurrence
of parliament; that, during the queen's absence, the admini-
ftration of government mhould be vested in the council of
twelve persons, to be chosen out of twenty-four named by
parliament, seven of which council to be elected by the queen,
and five by the parliament; that hereafter, the king and
queen ihould not advance foreigners to places of trust or dig-
nity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices of treasurer or
comptroller of the revenues upon an ecclefiaflic; that an ac
of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and memory of all offences.
committed since the 6th of March, 1558, flould be passed in
the ensuing parliament, and be ratified by the king and queen;
that the king and queen flould not, under colour of punish-
ing any violation of their authority during that period, seek
to deprive any of their fubjeas of the offices, benefices, er cf-
tates which they now held; that the redress due to church-
men, for the injuries which they had fullained during the late
infurrecions, flmould be left entirely to the cognizance of parli-
ament. With regard to religious controversies, the anibafia-
dors declared that they would not presume to decide, but per-
mitted the parliament, at their firlt mieeting, to examine the
points in difference, and to represent their sense of them to the
king and queen *. KeI t

To such a memorable period, did the lords of the congrc- rh, t'.fs,
gation, by their courage and perseverance, conduht an cnter-,f it.

prize,

BOOK III. prize, which, at first, promised a very different issue. From
'-.V-.- beginnings extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party

156:. girew by degrees to great power; and being favoured by ma-

ny tortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of their own
queen, aided by the forces of a more considerable kingdom.
The sovereign authority was, by this treaty, transferred whol-
ly into the hands of the congregation : that limited preroga-
tive, which the crown had hitherto poflffed, was alnoft en-
tirely annihilated; and the ariftocratical power, which al-
ways predominated in the Scottifhl government, became fu-
prel'e and incontroulable. By this treaty, too, the influence
or France, which had long been of much weight in the as-
fairs of Scotland, was greatly diminifled, and not only were
the present incroachnients of that ambitious ally rcftraincd,
but, by confederating with England, protection was provided
against any future attempt from the fame quarter. it the
lame tine, the controversies in religion being left to the confi-
deration of parliament, the protestants might reckon upon ob-
taining whatever decision was most favourable to the opinions
which they professed.

A F E w days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the

French and Englifhl armies quitted Scotland.
wcat held, THI E eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned to-

wards the approaching parliament. A meeting, summoned in
a manner so extraordinary, at fiuch a critical junaure, and to
deliberate upon matters of so much consequence, was expected
with the utinolt anxiety.

A Sc o TT I SH parliament suitable to the ariftocratical ge-

niusof the government, was properly an assembly of the no-
bles. It was composed of bishops, abbots, barons, and a few
commiflioners of burroughs, who met altogether in one house.
The lesser barons, though possessed of a right to be present,
either in person, or by their representatives, seldom exercised it.
The expence of attending, according to the faihion of the
times, with a numerous train of vassals and dependants ; the
inattention of the age, to any legal or regular system of go-
vernment; but above all, the exorbitant authority of the
greater nobles, who had drawn the whole power into their
own hands, made this privilege of so little value, as to be al-
nloft neglected. It appears from the ancient rolls, that dur-
ing times of tranquillity, few commissioners of burroughs, and
alnmoft none of the lesser barons, appeared in parliament. The
ordinary adminiltration of government was abandoned with-
out scruple or jealousy, to the king and to the greater barons.
But in extraordinary conjuncures, when the struggle for li-
berty was violent, and the spirit of opposition to the crown
rose to an height, the burgesses and lesser barons were roused
from their inactivity, and stood forth to vindicate the rights of

their

their country. The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex- BOOK III.
amples in proof of this observation *. The public indignati- -v
on againit the rafl designs of that weak and ill-advifed prince, ' S6.
brought into parliament, besides the greater nobles and pre- Keilt
lates, a considerable number of the lesser barons. 47

TH E fame causes occasioned the unusual confluence of all

orders of men to the parliament, which met on the firfl of Au-
gult. The universal paflion for liberty, civil and religious,
which had seized the nation, suffered few persons to remain un-
concerned fpeEtators of an assembly, whose a&s were likely to
prove decisive with refpet to both. From all corners of the
kingdom, men flocked in, eager and determined to aid, with
their voices in the senate, the fame cause, which they had de-
fended with their swords in the field. Besides a full conventi-
on of peers, temporal and Spiritual, there appeared the repre-
fentatives of almost all the burroughs, and above a hundred
barons, who, though of the lesser order, were gentlemen of
the first rank and fortune in the nation *. * Keit'h,

TH E parliament was ready to enter on bufiners with the 146.

utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started concerning the law-
fulness of the meeting. No commiflioner appeared in the
name of the king and queen, and no signification of their con-
sent and approbation was yet received. These were deemed,
by many, essential to the very being of a parliament. But,
in opposition to this sentiment, the express words of the treaty
of Edinburgh were urged, by which this affenbly was declared
as valid, in all refpeas, as if it had been called and appointed
by the express command of the king and queen. As the ad-
herents of the congregation greatly out-numbered their adver-
saries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and
those of most approved zeal, were chosen to be lords of the
articles, who formed a committee of ancient use, and of great
importance in the Scottifli parliament. The deliberations of
the lords of the articles were carried on with the most unani-
mous and a&ive zeal. The act of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, entrusted
with supreme authority, was to be elected ; and every other
thing prescribed by the late treaty, or which seemed neceflary
to render it effeetual, pafred without dispute or delay. The
article of religion employed longer time, and was attended
with greater difficulty. It was brought into parliament by a Itsproceed.
petition from those who had adopted the principles of the re- ings wit*<
formation. Many doEtrines of the popilh church were a con- regard to
tradition to reason, and a disgrace to religion ; its discipline rcligton
had become corrupt and oppreifve ; and its revenues were both
txorbitant and ill applied. Againll all there, the protestants
renonftrated with the utmost severity of tile, which indignati-
VOL. 1. K on

BOOK III. on at their absurdity, or experience of their perr cious tenden-
'--'v- cy could inspire; and, encouraged bythe number and zeal of

1560. their friends, to improve such a favourable juncture, they aim-

ed the blow at the whole fabric of popery ; and besought the
parliament to interpose their authority for refcifying these multi-

+ Knox, plied abuses ".
237. SE v E R A L prelates, zealously attached to the'ancient fu-

perftition were present in this parliament. But during these vi-
gorous proceedings of the protestants they stood confounded,
and at a gaze, and persevered in a silence which was fatal to
their cause. They esteemed it impoflible to resist or divert
that torrent of religious zeal, which was still in its full strength ;
they dreaded that their opposition would irritate their advcrfa-
ries, and excite them to new aas of violence ; they hoped
that the king and queen would soon be at leisure to put a stop
to the career of their insolent subjects, and that, after the rage
and havock of the present storm, the former tranquillity and
order would be restored to the church and kingdom. They
were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the doctrine, and even the
power of the church, in order to insure the safety of their own
persons, and to preserve the pofleflion of thole revenues, which
were fcill in their hands. From whatever motives they aacd,
their silence, which was imputed to the consciousness of a bad
cause, afforded matter of great triumph to the protestants.

* Knox and encouraged them to proceed with more boldness and
253. alacrity *.

TH E parliament did not think it enough to condemn those

docrines mentioned in the petition of the protestants ; they,
moreover, gave the fanaion of their approbation to a confefi-
- Id. ibid. on of faith presented to them by the reformed teachers t, and

composed, as might be expected from such a performance at
that jun"cure, on purpose to expose the absurd tenets and prac-
tices of the Romifli church. By another act, the jurifdltilon
of the ecclefiafical courts was abolilhed, and the causes, which
formerly came under their cognizance, were transferred to the

t Keilh, decision of civil judges t. By a third statute, the exercise of
z52. religious worflhip, according to the rites of the Romifli church,

was prohibited. The manner in which the parliament inforced
the observation of this law discovers the zeal of that assembly;
the first tranfgrefion fubjecled the offender to the forfeiture of
his goods, and to a corporal puniflment, at the discretion of
the judge; baniflhment was the penalty of a second violation
of the law; and a third ac of disobedience was declared to

§ Knox, be capital §. Such frangers were men, at that time, to the
2;54. spirit of toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and with

such indecent haste did the very persons, who had just efcped
the rigour of ecclefiatical tyranny, proceed to imitate tho'e

exanples

examples of severity, of which they themselves had io jutslyBooK tI.
complained. -_r

TH E vigorous zeal of the parliament overturned, in a few iS60.

days, the ancient fyfRem of religion, which had been eftablili- -'th re-gd
ed ib many ages. In reforming the do&rine and discipline ofvenues of
the church, the nobles kept pace with the ardor and expectati-the church.
ons even of Knox hiifelf. But their proceedings, with respect
to these, were not more rapid and impetuous, than they were
flow anid dilatory when they entered on the consideration of ec-
clefiaftical revenues. Among the lay members, rome were al-
ready enriched with the spoils of the church, and others de-
voured in expe&ation the wealthy benefices which fill remain-
ed untouched. The alteration in religion had afforded many
of the dignified ecclesiastics themnelves, an opportunity of gra-
tifying their avarice or ambition. The demolition of the mo-
nafteries, having set the monks at liberty from their confine-
ment, they instantly difperfedall over the kingdom, and com-
monly betook themselves to fomle secular employment. The
abbot, if he had been so fortunate as to embrace the prin-
ciples of the reformation from convition, or'fo cunning as to
espouse them out of policy, seized the whole revenues of the
fraternity, and, except what he allowed for the subsistence of
a few Superannuated monks*, applied them entirely to his* Keith,
own use. The proposal, made by the reformed teachers, for496.
applying there revenues towards the maintainance of ministers, ppeo d
the education of youth, and the support of the poor, was e-9 '9
qually dreaded by all these orders of men. They opposed it
with the utmost warmth, and by their numbers and authority,
easily prevailed on the parliament to give no ear to such a difa--t See Ap.
greeabledemand. . Zealous as the first reformers were, andpend. No.
animated with a spirit superior to the low consideration of in- V.
tereif, they beheld these early f3,rnptoms of felfifhnefs and ava-
rice among their adherents, with indignation; and we find
Knox exprefling the utmost sensibility of that contempt, with
which they were treated by many, from whom he expeted a
more generous concern for the success of religion, and the ho-
nour of its miiniflers t.

A D I F 1 c u .V. Y halth been started, with regard to thc:t Kno"'r

acs of this parlialent, concerning religion. This difitculty,39,' vSli.
frivolous in itself, and at this difonce of time of no import-dity of this
ance, is founded on the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. Pa, liamen
By that, the parliament was perinited to take into confiderationcllcd in
the Rate of religion, and to signify their fentilnents of it to theluc'n'
king and queen. But, instead c(f prfrenting their d'esires to
their sovereigns, in the humble form of a lupplication or ad-
drcfs, the parliament converted them into so many aCts; which,
although they never received the royal afient, obtained all over
thc kingdom,h the weight and authority of laws. In compli-

K z ance

BOOK III. ance with their injuncions, the eftablifled fyfiem of religion

was every where overthrown, and that recommended by the
i56o. reformers introduced in its place. The partiality and zeal of.

the people overlooked or supplied any defect in the form of
these ats of parliament, and rendered the observance of then
more universal than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the
moss regular or constitutional assembly. By those proceedings,
it must, however, be confefled, that the parliament, or rather
the nation, violated the last article in the treaty of Edinburgh,
and even exceeded the powers which belong to fubjecs. But
when once men have been accustomed to break through the
common boundaries of fubjetion ; and their minds are inflam-
ed with the paflions which civil war inspire ; it is mere pedan-
try or ignorance to measure their condut by those rules, which
can be applied, only where government is in a state of order
and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to employ such ex-
traordinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of
every thing which can promote this great end; and the ne-
ceflity of the cafe, and the importance of the object, justify
any departure from the common and established forms of the

Ambaffa- Conifitution.
dors sent by IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by
the parlia- the ordinary forms of business, it became necessary to lay the
ment o proceedings of parliament before the king and queen. For

this purpose, Sir James Sandilands of Calder lord St. John,
was appointed to repair to the court of France. After hold-
ing a course so irregular, the nobles had no reason to flatter
themselves that Francis and Mary would ever approve their
conduct, or confirm it by their royal assent. The reception of
their ambassador was no other than they might have expected.
He was treated by the king and queen with the utmost cold-
ness, and dismissed without obtaining the ratification of the
parliament's proceedings. From the princes of Lorrain and
their partizans, he endured all the scorn and insult, which it
was natural for them to pour upon the party he represent-

* Knox, ed '.
s55. Buch. TH oUGH the earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland
3d z7 E of Lethington, the ambassadors of the parliament to Elizabeth
And to E-
lizabeih. their protectress, met with a very different reception; they

were not more successful in one part of the negotiation in-
trusted to their care. The Scots, sensible of the security
which they derived from their union with England, were de-
firous of rendering it indissoluble. With this view, they em-
powered these eminent leaders of their party, to tefify to Eliz-
abeth their gratitude for that seasonable and effetual aid which
The bad afforded them, and at the fime time, to beseech her
to render the friendflip between the nations perpetual, by con-
descending to marry the earl of Ainan, who, though a subject,

was

was nearly allied to the royal family of Scotland, and, after BOOK III
Mary, the undoubted heir to the crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Elizabeth listened 156'°

with the utmost fatisfadion, and encouraged the Scots, in any
future exigency, to hope for the continuance of her good offi-
ces; with regard to the latter, the discovered those sentiments
to which she adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse
from marriage, as some pretend through choice, but more pro-
bably out of policy, that ambitious princess would never ad-
mit any partner to the throne; but delighted with the entire
and uncontrolled exercise of power, the sacrificed to the en-
joyment of that, the hopes of tranfinitting her crown to her
own posterity. The marriage with the earl of Arran could
not be attended with any such extraordinary advantage, as to
llake this resolution ; fle declined it, therefore, but with ma- r Burn. 3.
ny exprellions of good will towards the Scottilh nation, and Append.
of repect for Arran himself . 308. Keih

TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, diftinguiihed by s5 h4 &.

so many remarkable events, there happened one of great im- of Francis
portance. On the 4th of December, died Francis II. a prince II.
of a feeble constitution, and of a mean underffanding. As he
did not leave any issue by the queen, no incident could have
been more fortunate to those, who, during the late commo-
tions in Scotland, had taken part with the congregation.
Mary, by the charms of her beauty, had acquired an entire
ascendant over her husband, and as the transferred all her in-
fluence to her uncles the princes of Lorrain, Francis followed
them implicitly in whatever track they were pleated to lead
him. The power of France, under such direction, alarmed
the Scottiff malecontents, with apprehensions of danger, no
less formidable, than well founded. The intestine disorders
which raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of
England in behalf of the congregation, had hitherto prevented
the princes of Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scot-
land into execution. But under their vigorous and decisive ad-
ministration, it was inpoflible that the commotions in France
could be of long continuance, and many things might fall in
to divert Elizabeth's attention for the future, from the affairs
of Scotland. In either of these events, the Scots would lland
exposed to all the vengeance, which the resentment of the
French court could inflict. The blow, however long suspend-
ed, was unavoidable, and must fall at last with redoubled
weight. From this prospeCt and expetation of danger, the
Scots were delivered by the death of Francis; the ancient con-
federacy of the two kingdoms had already been broken, and
by this event, the only bond of union which remniined was dif-
solved. Catherine of Medicis, who, during the minority of

Charles

BooK IIT. Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the entire direEtion of
k-v-'-/ the French councils, was far from any thoughts of vindicat-

i56o. ing the Scottish queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had

been rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and had
contended for the government of that weak and unexperienced
prince ; but as the charms of the wife easily triumphed over the
authority of the mother, Catherine could never forgive such a
disappointment in her favourite passion, and beheld now, with

Miry re- secret pleaiure, the difficult and perplexing scene, on which
tires frm her daughter-in-law was about to enter. Mary, overwhelmed
he court o with all the sorrow which so fad a reverse of fortune could oc-

cafion, flighted by the queen mother ; and forsaken by the
tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the sunshine of prosperitv,
retired to Rheims, and there, in solitude, indulged her grief,
or hid her indignation. Even the princes of Lorrain were ob-
liged to confrac their views; to turn them from foreign to
domestic objects j and instead of forming vail projets with
regard to Britain, found it neceflary to think of acquiring, and
eflablifhing an interest with the new administration.

IT is impoflible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on

all these accounts, the death of the French monarch excited
among the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which
could give firmness and flability to that system of religion and
government, which was now introduced ; and it is no wonder
cotetnporart hiftoriaris should ascribe it to the immediate care
of Providefice, which, by unforefcen expedients, can secure
the peace and happiness of kingdoms, in those situations, where

* Knox, human prudence and invention would utterly despair*.
a59. An o u T this time, the Protestant church in Scotland began
EtTlibtfl- to afl'ume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fanc-
prefbvterian tion of public authority, and sone fixed external policy became
church nccrcfary for the government ard preservation of the infant lb-
cover. ciety. The model introduced by the reformers, differed ex-

tremely from that, which had been so long eftabliflhcd. The
motives, which induced them to depart so far from the ancient
fynerm, deserve to he explained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at sirs', excited the indigna-

tion of mankind, and rouzed that Spirit of enquiry, wTich
proved so fatal to the whliole Popifl Il}tem ; as this disgust at the
vices- oF ecclesiastics was focn trans:f:rcd to their persons, and
ihifting from them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on
the offices which they enjoyed ; the cffecs of the reforinmlion
would naturally have extended not only to the doarine, but ro
the government of the Popifl church; and the fame siit
which abolished the formler, would hive overturned the lnttil
Rut, in a great part of Geirany,fl in England, and in the noi
themc kingdoms, its operations were checked by the power an',

* HIcna:, 303. C.iaen. .!: .

policy of their princes ; and the ancient epircopal jurifdition, BOOK III.
under a few limitations, was still continued in those churches. '-
The episcopal hierarchy appears to be more conformable to the iSo,
pratice of the church, since chgiftianity became the eltabliflied
religion of the Roman empire. The ecclesiastical government
was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil; the first not
only borrowed its form, but derived its authority from the lat-
ter; and the dioceses and jurisdictions of patriarchs, archbi-
ihops, and bishops, corresponded with the division and confti-
tution of the empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries,
the nature of the government allowing full scope to the genius of
the reformation, all pre-eminence of order in the church was
destroyed, and an equality eftabliflled more suitable to the spirit
of republican policy. The situation of the primitive church
suggested the idea, and furnifled the model of the latter sys-
tein, which has since been called Prejbyterian. The first Chris-
tians, opprefl¢d by continual persecutions, and obliged to hold
their religious aflemblies by stealth, and in corners, were con-
tented with a form of government extremely iniple. The in-
fluence of religion concurred, with the sense of danger, in
extinguishing among them, the spirit of ambition, and in pre-
serving a parity of rank, the effect of their sufferings, and the
cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were
received, among the Protestants of that age, with incredible
fubmifion, was the patron and restorer of this scheme of ec-
clefiaftical policy. The church of Geneva, formed under his
eye, and by his dire&ion, was esteemed the most perfect model
of this government; and Knox, who, during his residence in
thatcity, had Itudied, and admired it, warmly recommended
it to the imitation of his countrymen.

AM 0 N G the Scottiih nobility, some hated the persons, and

others coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abo-
lilhing that order of men, the former indulged their resentment,
and the latter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, in-
flamed with the most violent aversion to popery, and approving,
of every scheme that departed farthest from tie practice of the
Romifi church, were delighted with a fytlein, so admirably
suited to their predominant paflion. While the friends of civil
liberty beheld, with pleasure, the protestant clergy pulling down,
with their own hands, that fabric of ecclesiastical power, which
their predeceflors had reared with so much art and industry;
and flattered themselves, that, by lending their aid to strip
churchmen of their dignity and wealth, they might entirely de-
liver the nation fiom their exorbitant and oppreflive jurifdidtion.
The new mode of government easily made its way among men,
thus prepared, by their various interests and patfions, for its
reception.

BUT,

BOOK MIL. BUT, on the firit introduction of his system, Knox did not
R-v -' deem it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient form *.

560. Instead of bishops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve super-
Spots-
wSood, 58. intendants in different parts of the kingdom. These, as the

name implies, were impowered to infpe& the life and dotrine
of the other clergy. They presided in the inferior judicatories
of the church, and performed several other parts of the epilt
copal funcion. Their jurifdition, however, extended to fa-
cred things only ; they claimed no feat in parliament, and pre-
tended no right to the dignity, or revenues, of the foraer bi-
shops.

TH number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of paro-

chial duty could be committed, was still extremely small; they
had embraced the principles of the reformation at different
times, and from various motives 1 during the public commo-
tions, they were Scattered, merely by chance, over the different
provinces of the kingdom; and, in a few places only, were
Dec. . mformed into regular classes or Societies. The first general as-

fembly of the church, which was held this year, bears all the
marks of an infant and unformed society. The members were
but few in number, and of no considerable rank ; no uniform or
confitent rule seems to have been observed in electing them.
From a great part of the kingdom no representatives appeared.
In the name of some entire counties, but one person was pre-
sent; while, in other places, a single town or'church sent' fe-
veral members. A convention, so feeble and irregular, could
poflefs no great authority; and conscious of their own weak-
ness, the members put an end to their debates, without ven-

* Keith, turing upon any decision of much importance .
498. I N order to give greater strength and consistence to the pref-

1561. byterian plan, Knox, with the afliftance of his brethren, com-

posed the first book of discipline, which contains the model or

j- Spotfw. platform of the intended policy t. They presented it to a con-
5S2. vention of estates, which was held in the beginning of this
Jan. 15 yyear. Whatever regulations were proposed with regard to ec-

clefiaftical discipline and jurifdic&ion, would have ealily obtained
the fanAtion of that alTembly ; but a design to recover the pa-
trimony of the church, which is there insinuated, met with a
very different recept;on.

N. vain did the clergyv display the advantages which would

accrue to the public, by a proper application of ecclcfiaftical
revenues. In vain did they propose, by an impartial distribution
of this fund, to promote true religion, to encourage learning,
and to support the poor. In vain did they even interningle
rhreatnings of the divine displeasure, iagainit the unjust Je-
tuiners ot what was appropriated to a sacred ife. The nobles
held fall the prey, which they had sized ; and bestowing upon
the proposal, the nmodc of a dlevowu imni/giatio, they asseted to

confidcr

confider it, as a projec altogether visionary, and treated it with BooK III.
the utmof: scorn T.

TH s convention appointed the prior of St. Andrew's to '56l.

repair to the queen, and to invite her to return into her native Kaox
country, and to afTume the reins of government, which had Thequeen.
been too long committed to other hands. And though some invited to
of her fubjees dreaded her return, and others forelaw dange- return into
rous consequences with which it might be attended ", the bulk Scotland.
of them desired it with so much ardour, that the invitation was pendix,
given with the greatest appearance of unanimity. But the zeal No. V.
of the Roman Catholics got the start of the prior in paying
court to Mary; and Lefly, afterwards bifliop of Ross, who
was commissioned by them, arrived before him at the place of
herrefidence t. Lefly endeavoured to infuse into the queen's t Lefly,
mind suspicions of her protestant fiubjects, and to persuade herb7'
to throw herself entirely into the arms of thole who adhered to
her own religion. For this purpose, he insisted that fle should
land at Aberdeen ; and as the protestant dotrines had made no
considerable progress in that part cr the kingdom, he gave her
afrurance of being joined, in a few days, by 2o,ooo men ; and
flattered her, that with such an army, encouraged by her pre-
fence and authority, flie might easily overturn the reformed
church, before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

B u T at this junature, the princes of Lorrain were not dif-

pored to liten to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. In-
tent on defending themselves against Catherine of Medicis,
whole insidious policy was employed in undermining their ex-
orbitant power, they had no leifiure to attend to the affairs of
Scotland, and wished their niece to take poffillion of her king-
dom, with as little disturbance as poflible. The French of-
ficers, too, who had served in Scotland, difuaded Mary from
all violent meaiurcs ; and, by reprcf;:nting the power and numl-
ber of the protestants to be irrefiltible, deternnined her to court
them by every art; and rather to employ the leading men of
that party as her ministers, than to provoke them, by a fruit-
less opposition, to become her enemies *. Hence proceeded the * Melv 61.
confidence and affction, with which the prior of St. Andr.w'
was received by the queen. His itprefentation of the slate of
the kingdom gained great credit ; and Lefly beheld, with
regret, the new channel in which court favour was likely to
run.

AN o T H E R convention of Estates a.s lheld in May. The

arrival of an amnbaflbdor from France, teens to have been the
occasion of this meeting. He was inftrluied to solicit the Scots
to renew their ancient alliance vitlh France, to break their new
confederacy with England, and to restore tle popili ecclcfiallics
to the pofln'fion of their revenues, andl the cxercife of their
functions. It is no easy matter to fbrwl any conjetlure con,

ctwing

BooK III. cerning the intentions of the French court, in making there ex-
'v__-' traordinary and ill-timed propositions. They were rejcteed with

1561. that scorn, which might well have been expected from the telm-
Inox, per of the nation !.
a69, 273.

I s this convention, the protestant clergy did not obtain a

more favourable audience than formerly, and their profped of
recovering the patrimony of the church fill remained as distant
and uncei tain as ever. Rut with regard to another point, they
found the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The book
of discipline seemed to require, that the monuments of popery,

t Spotl- which ftill'remained in the kingdom, fllould be demolilhed I;
wood, 153. and, though neither the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame

ungovernable rage of the people, remained to justify or excuse
this barbarous havock, the convention, confidering every reli-
gious fabric as a relick of idolatry, passed sentence upon them
by an aft in form; and persons, the most remarkable for the
acivity of their zeal, were appointed to put it in execution.
Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, and even the
sepulchres of the dead, perifled in one common ruin. The
first storm of popular infurrction, though impetuous and ir-
resistible, had extended only to a few counties, and soon spent
its rage; but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleated
the devaltation of every thing, venerable and magnificent, which

wnPd, 74 had escaped its violence *.
Mary be- IN the mean time, Mary was in no haRfe to return into Scot-
Fins to prc- land. Accustomed to the elegance, splendor, and gaiety of a
pare for it. polite court, fle still fondly lingered in France, the scene of all

these enjoyments, and contemplated with horror, the barba-
rifnl of her own country, and the turbulence of her fiubjeAs,
which presented her with a very different face of things. The
impatience, however, of her people, the persuasions of her
uncles, but above all, the tiudied and mortifying neglec, with
which fle was treated ly the queen Mother, forced her to
-i tRan- think of beginning this disagreeable voyage {- But while she

r , was preparing for it, there were sown between her and Eliza-
I. herih, thle ft.eds of that personal jealousy and discord, which

iilbittertd the lie, and thortened the days of the Scottifl
que n.

Orrinn of '1'H p r railiciainn of the late trcaty of Edinburgh was the
*is' "i 't; iniimciaite occafrion of this fatal animcfity; the true caures of
C, :,,,1 it lay much deeper. A/\tltolt every article, in that treaty, had

1' ,,ic. heen ec.i ttllcd by hoth parties, with a fcrtupulouis exacinefs.

'I' . flitilicalionls of Lcilh v.,'re demoliflled, au;d the armlies of
l'ralrce aind Eiilir.h:d wi ll:drawn within the appointed time.
'I'he grievances of the tiottilh nlalecontents were redrfetld,
and( tlhe had obtaiir.cd wnatL.vcr they could demand for their
fu:ure itcuii:y. With regard to all thcfe, Mary could have
little reason to decline, or Eiizabeth to urge, the ratification of
the treaty.

Tit E

T E sixth article remained the only source of contefl and Boor li.

difficulty. No minilter ever entered more deeply into the 'v
schemes of his sovereign, or pursued then with more dexterity '561
and success than Cecil. In the conduct of the negotiation at
Edinburgh, the found understanding of this able politician had
proved greatly an overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intri-
gue, and had artfully induced the French ambafladors, not only
to acknowledge that the crowns of England and Ireland did of
right belong to Elizabeth alone, but also to promnife, that, in
all times to come, Mary flould abstain from using the title, or
bearing the arms of those kingdoms.

TH E ratification of this article would have been of the most

fatal consequence to Mary. The crown of England was an
object worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her
great dignity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By
many, her title was efteened preferable to that of Elizabeth.
Among the Englilh themselves, the Roman Catholics, who
formed, at that time, a numerous and active party, openly
espoused this opinion; and even the Protestants who supported
Elizabeth's throne, could not deny the queen of Scots to be
her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to avail herself of
all these advantages, could not, in the course of things, be
far distant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring this op-
portunity nearer than was expeCted. In these circumfiances,
Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute, would have loft that
rank which she had hitherto held among the neighbouring
princes; the zeal of her adherents mnuf have gradually cooled;
and she might have renounced, from that mnonlent, all hopes of
every wealing the Englifl crown.

NONE of these beneficial consequences escapcd the pene-

trating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reatin, had recourse to
every thing, by which lie could hope either to sooth or fiighten
the Scottii queen into a compliance with her demands ; and
if that princess had been so unadvised as to ratify the ralh con-
cellions of her ambaflitdors, Elizablth, by that deed, would
have acquired an advantage. which, under her management,
mufl have turned to great account. By fucli a renunciation.
the question, with regard to the right of 'ucceffion, would
have been left altogether open andl unrtdcidcd ; and, by nmeans
of that, Elizabeth might either have krpt licr rival in perpe-
tual anxiety and dependance, or, by the authority of her par-
liament, she might have broken in upon the order of lineal
fuccetfion, and transferred the crown to loime other descendant
of the royal blood. The tormlcr conldut file obfrercd towards
James VI. whom, during his whole reign, llie held in perpe
tual fear and fubjcetion. The lattcr, and more rigorous llK'
thod of proceeding, would, in all pro!)ability hliar been en

ptI'' l I

BooK III. ployed against Mary, whom, for many reasons, ffie both envied
'- v-J- and hated.

1561. No a was this ftep beyond her power, unprecedented in the

history, or inconsistent with the constitution of England.
Though fuccelfion by hereditary light be an idea so natural and
so popular, that it has been eftablifled almost in every civilized
nation, yet England affords many memorable instances of
deviations from that rule. The Crown of that kingdom hav-
ing once been seized by the hand of a conqueror, this invited
the bold and enterprising in every age to imitate such an il-
luftrious example of fortunate ambition. From the time of
William the Norman, the regular course of descent had fel-
dom continued through three liicceflive reigns. Those princes,
whose intrigues or valour opened to them a way to the throne,
called in the authority of the great council of the nation to con-
sinn their dubious titles. Hence parliamentry and hereditary
right became in England of equal consideration. That great
assembly claimed and actually possessed a power of altering the
order of regal succession; and even so late as Henry VIII. an
a. of parliament had authorized that capricious monarch to
fettle the order of succession at his pleasure. The Englifih,
jealous of their religious liberty, and averse from the dominion
of strangers would have eagerly adopted the paflions of their
sovereign, and might have been easily induced to exclude the
Scottish line from the right of succeeding to the crown. These
seem to have been the views of both queens, and these
were the difficulties which retarded the ratification of the treaty
of Edinburgh.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no

higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words
of it, might have brought the present question to an amicable
ilrue. The indefinite and ambiguous expreflion, which Cecil
had inserted into the treaty, might have been changed into one
nore limited, but more precise ;and Mary, instead of promising
to abstain from bearing the title of queen of England in all
times to come, night have engaged not to assume that title,
during the life of Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful pof-
terity.

Sucit an amendment, however, did not suit the views of

either queen. Though Mary had been obliged to suspend, for
Ifone time, the profccution of her title to the Englilh crown,
file had not, however, relinquished it. She determined to re-
vive her claim, on the first profpe& of success, and was un-
villing to bind herself, hv a politive engagement, not to take
advantage of any such fortunate occurrence. Nor would the
alteration have been more acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by
agtee;ng to it, would have tacitly recognized the right of her
rival to afcnd the tdror.c after her decease. But neither the

Scottifil

Scottish nor Englilh queen durst avow these secrets sentiments of BOOK ll.
their hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to disturb '-v
the tranquillity of England, or to wrest the sceptre out of 'S61.
Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any
suspicion of a design to alter the order of fuccellion, and to
let aside the claim of the ScottiSh queen, would have exposed
Elizabeth to much and deserved cenfilre, and have railed up
against her many and dangerous enemies. There, however
carefully concealed, or artfully disguised, were, in all pro-
bability, the real motives which determined the one queen to
solicit, and the other to refute the ratification of the treaty, in
its original form; while neither had recourse to that explication
of it, which to an heart unwarped by political interest, and
sincerely desirous of union and concord, would have appeared
so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occasioned this

rupture between the Briti/h queens, rivalfhip of another kind
contributed to widen the breach, and female jealousy increased
the violence of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
extraordinary qualities, by which she equalled or furpalled such
of her sex, as have merited the greatest renown, discovered an
admiration of her own person, to a degree, which women of
ordinary understandings either do not entertain, or prudently
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress, her solicitude
to display her charms, her love of flattery, were all exceflive.
Nor were these weaknelfes confined to that period of life, when
they are more pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the
wisest woman of that, or perhaps of any other age, wore the
garb, and asseted the manners of a girl *. Though Elizabeth
was as much inferior to Mary, in beauty, and gracefulness of
person, as she excelled her in political abilities, and in the arts
of govern.cnt, fl/e was weak enough to compare herself with
the Scottilh queen*; and as it was impoflible fle could be , Mlvi!,
altogether ignorant how much Mary gained by the comparison, 98.
ile envied and hated her as a rival, by whom The was eclipsed.
In judging of the condut of princes, we are apt to afcribc too
much to political motives, and too little to the paflions which
they feel in common with the reft of mankind. In order to
account for Elizabeth's present, as well as her subsequent con-
dut towards Mary, we must not always confider her as a queen,
we mult sometimes regard her as a woman.

E L I z A n E T H, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties with

refpeEt to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated ap-
plications, to ratify itt. Mary, under various pretences, flill t Kelth,
contrived to gain time, and to elude the request. But while &c7 60
the one queen solicited with persevering importunity, and the

other

* Johnston Hid. Rer. Bidtan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 699. Caita
oguce of Royal and Noble Authorn, Artidle Eflx,

BoOK III. other evaded with artful delay, they both fludied an extreme
'-, /--. politeness of behaviour, and loaded each other with profellions

X561. of sisterly love, with reciprocal declarations of unchangea-

ble efleeni and amity.

Eti abcih It was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among
recuind princes, thele expreffionsof friendihip are commonly far distant

"ilt"Y l tfrom the heart. In failing front France to Scotland, the course
., Zt. lies along the Englifl coast. In order to be safe from the in-

fults of the Englilh fleet, or in cafe of tenlpeftuous weather,
to secure a retreat in the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent
M. D'Oyfel to demand of Elizabeth a safe conduct during her
voyage. This request, which decency alone obliged one prince
to grant to another, Elizabeth rejeted, in such a manner, as
gave rife to no flight suspicion of a design, either to obstruct

* Keith, the pafiage, or to intercept the person of the Scottifl queen-.
71.I THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled Mary with
See Ap-n indignation, but did not retard her departure from France. SIhc
pcndix, was accompanied to Calais, the place where the embarked,
No. VI. in a manner suitable to her dignity, as the queen of two pov-
Mary be- erful kingdoms. Six princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many
: voyge of the most eminent among the French nobles, were in her

retinue. Catherine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure.
graced it with every circumstance of magnificence and refpet.
After bidding adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad
heart, and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left that kingdom, the
short, but only scene of her life, in which fortune fiiiled upon
her. While the French coast continued in fight, flIe intently
gazed upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful posture, on that
height of fortune whence flie had fallen, and presaging, perhaps,
*the disasters and calamities which imbittered the remainder of
her days, she sighed often, and cried out, " Farewel, France'
" Farewel, beloved country, which I fiall never more be-
hold !" Even when the darkhefs of the night had hid the land
from her view, she would neither retire to the cabin, nor taftc
food, but commanding a couch to be placed on the deck, flhe
there waited the return of day, with the utmost impatience.
Fortune soothed her on this occasion; the galley made little
way during the night. In the morning, the coast of France
was still within fight, and flie continued to feed her melancholy
with the profpet ; and as long as her eyes could diftinguifl it,
to utter the fame tender expreflions of regret -. At last
briik gale arose, by the favour of which for onle days, and as
terward under the cover of a thick fog, Mary escaped the Eng

. ,oodal. lill fleet, which lay in wait to intercept her *; and on the
vol. i. 175. i9th of August, after an absence of near thirteen years, landed
Caftcln. safely at Leith in her native kingdom.
455. M it v
Arrives in
Si.:otland. ' Bnrantorme, 483. He hitin.lf was in the fime galley with the lquccl

MA Rv was received by her fubjcts with fiouts and accla- BOOK IlT.

mations of joy, and with every demonstration of welcome and
regard. But as her arrival was unexpected, and no suitable pre- 'j61.
paration had been made for it, they could not, with all their
efforts, hide from her the poverty of the country, and were
obliged to conduCt her to the palace of Holyrod-lloufe with
little pon)p. The queen accullomed fromn her infancy to
splendor and magnifictiice, and fond of them, as was natural
at her age, coulu not heip obi-rving tie change in her situation,
and'feenied to be deeply affectel with it t-. + Bra.nt.

NEVER did any prince ascend the throne at a junaure 484.

which called for more wisdom in council, or more courage and the kil
steadiness in a&ion. The rage of religious controversy wasdom atthat
still unabated. The memory of past oppreflion exasperated the time.
proteltants; the finat of recent injuries rendered the papists
desperate ; both were zealous, fierce, and irreconcileable. The
ablcnce of their sovereign had accuflomed the nobles to inde-
pendence; and during the late commotions, they had acquir-
ed such an increase of wealth, as threw great weight into the
scale es the aristocracy, which stood not in need of any acceflion
of power. The kingdom had long been under the government
of regents, who exercised a delegated jurifdi&ion, attended
with little authority, and which inspired no reverence. A state
of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last years, without
a regent, without a supreme council, without the power, or
even the form of a regular government *. A licentious spirit, * Keith,
unacquainted with subordination, and disdaining the restraints Appead.
of law and justice, had spread among all ranks of men. The
influence of France, the ancient ally of the kingdom, was
withdrawn or despised. The English, of enemies become con-
federates, had grown into confidence with the nation, and
had gained an ascendant over all its councils. The Scottill
monarchs did not derive more splendor or power from the
friendflip of the former, than they had reason to dread injury
and diminution from the interposition of the latter. Every con-
fideration, whether of interet, or of felf-prefervation, obliged
Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to
create the prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the spirit
of difaffetion among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the admi-

nifl:ration fell into the hands of a young queen, not nineteen
years of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws of her
country, a stranger to her fub.jec's, without experience, with-
out allies, and almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find some circum-

stances, which, though they did not balance there difadvan-
tages, contributed, however, to alleviate them; and, with
Ikilful management, might have produced great effc&s. Her

fubjets,

BooK III. fubjeas, unaccustomed so long to the residence of their prince,

were not only dazzled by the novelty and splendor of the royal
1561. pretence, but inspired with awe and reverence. Besides the

places of power and profit bestowed by the favour of a prince,
his protection, his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer ho-
nour and win the hearts of men. From all corners of the
kingdom, the nobles crowded to testify their duty and affetion
to their sovereign, and studied, by every art, to wip3 out the
memory of palt nuifconduct, and to lay in a stock of future
merit. The amusements and gaiety of her court, which was
filled with the nmot accomplished of the French nobility, who
:ad attended her, began to soften and to polish the rude man-
nmrs of the nation. Mary herself possessid many of these qua-
lifications, which raise affection, and procure esteem. The
beauty and gracefulness of her person drew universal admira-
tion, the elegance and politeness of her manners commanded
general refpec. To all the charms of herown sex, she added
many of the accomplishments of the other. The progress
ihe had made in all the arts and sciences, which were then
esteemed necessary or ornamental, was far beyond what is
commonly attained by princes; and all her other qualities were
rendered more agreeable by a courteous affability, which,
without lessening the dignity of a prince, steals on the hearts
of subjeCts with a bewitching insinuation.

F R o M there circumstances, notwithstanding the threatning

aspec of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithstanding
the clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer
would have predited a very different iflue of her reign; and
whatever sudden guss of faaion he might have expeEted, he
would never have dreaded the defrucive violence of that
ltorm which followed.

WHIL E all parties were contending who fliould discover

the most dutiful attachment to the queen, the zealous and
impatient spirit of the age broke out in a remarkable inRfance.
On the Sunday after her arrival, the queen commanded mars
to be celebrated in the chapel of her palace. The first ru-
mour of this occasioned a secret murmuring among the pro-
tcftants who attended the court; complaints and threatnings
soon followed; the servants belonging to the chapel were in-
fulted and abused ; and, if the prior of St. Andrew's had not
seasonably interposed, the rioters might have proceeded to the
v Know, utmost excesses*.

:^8l IT is impoilible, at this distance of time, and under circum-

stances so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal
against popery, which then poffefled the nation. Every in-
stance of condescension to the papists was esteemed an aa of
apoftacy, and the toleration of a single mass pronounced to be
more formidable to the nation than the irvafion of ten thou-

farnd

sand armed men e. Under the influence of there opinions, BOOK IlI.
many protestants would have ventured to go dangerous '----
lengths; and, without attempting to convince their sovereign '56'
by argument, or to reclani her by indulgence, would have g o"'x
abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
manner, which alone the thought acceptable to him. But
the prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, not
only reiftained this impetuous spirit; but in spite of the mur-
murs of the people, and the exclamations of the preachers,
obtained for the queen and her domestics the undisturbed ex-
ercife of the catholic religion. Near an hundred years after
this period, when the violence of religious animofities had be-
gun to subside, when time and the progress of learning had
inlarged the views of the human mind, an Englilh house of
commons refused to indulge the wife of their sovereign in the
private use of the nafs. The protestant leaders deserve, on
this occasion, the praise both of wifdonm and of moderation
for conduct so different. But, at the fame time, whoever re-
flets upon the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of popery,
will be far from treating the fears and caution of the more
zealous reformers as altogether imaginary, and destitute of any
real foundation.

TH E protestants, however, by this compliance with the

queen's prejudices, obtained a proclamation highly favourable
to their religion. The reformed docarine, though established
all over the kingdom, had never received the countenance or
lantion of royal authority. On this occasion, the queen de-
clared any attempt towards an altercation or subversion of it to Aug. 2f.
be a capital crime*. Keith,

TH E queen conformable to the plan which had been con- she cm-

certed in France, committed the adminiltration of affairs en- ploys only
tirely to the protestants. Her council was filled with the most Protefants
eminent persons of that party; not a single papist was admitted in the ad-
into dny degree of confidence --. The prior of St. Andrew's initra
and Maitland of Lethington seemed to hold the first place in f Knox,
the queen's affection, and pofeflied all the power and repu- 28s,
tation of favourite miniiters. Her choice could not have fallen
upon persons more acceptable to her people; and, by their
prudent advice, Mary conducted herfell with so imuch mode-
ration and deference to the fentimcnts of the nation, as could
not fail of gaining the affection of her subjects [, the firmest t Lefy,
foundation of a prince's power, and the only genuine source of t35'
his happiness and glory.

A CORDIAL reconcileinent with Elizabeth was another Attempts

obje& of great importance to Mary; and though file seems to gain E.
to have had it much at heart, in the beginning of her admini. iilbtch'a
fration, to accomplilh fiich a desirable conjunction, yet many tvour.
events occurred to widen, rather than to clone the breach.

VOL 1. L The

BOOK III. The formal offices of friendship, however, are seldom neglctred

r-'v-" among princes, and Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly
1561' to obftrua the queen's voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a

few days after her arrival, to command Randolph to congra-
tulate her safe return. Mary, that file might be on equal
terms with her, lent Maitland to the English court, with ma-

§ Keith, ny ceremonious expressions of regard for Elizabeth §. Both
581» &c. the ambassadors were received with the utmost civility; and

on each fide, the profeflions of kindness, as they were made
with little sincerity, were listened to with proportional credit.

BOTH were intrusted, however, with something more than

mere matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, with frefl
importunity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland en-
deavoured to amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
conduCt of his mistress with regard to that point. The multi-
plicity of public affairs since her arrival in Scotland, the im-
portance of the question in dispute, and the absence of many
noblemen, with whom flie was obliged in decency to consult,
were the pretences offered in excuse for her conduc ; the real
causes of it were those, which have already been mentioned.
But in order to extricate herself out of these difficulties, into
which the treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary was brought
to yield a point, which formerly ihe seemed determined never
to give up. She instructed Maitland to signify her willingness
to disclaim any right to the crown of England, during the life
of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity ; if, in failure of

C imden, there she were declared next heir by act of parliament *.
37 uch. R E A s o A B L E as this proposal might appear to Mary,

9 who thereby precluded herself from disturbing Elizabeth's pof-

session of the throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with
Elizabeth's interest, or more contradictory to a paflion, which
predominated in the character of that princess. Notwithftand-
ing all the great qualities which threw such lufre on her reign,
we may oblerve, that file was tinctured with a jealousy of her
right to the crown, which often betrayed her into mean and
ungenerous actions. The peculiarity of her situation heighten-
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not infuse this passion.
It descended to her from Henry VII. her grandfather, whom,
in several features of his character, she nearly resembled. Like
him fie suffered the title by which she held the crown, to re-
main ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit it to
parliamentary discussion, or derive any addition to her right,
from such authority. Like him, fle observed every pretender
to the fuccefflion, not only with that attention, which pru-
dence prescribes; but with that aversion which suspicion in-
spires. The present uncertainty with regard to the right ot
fucceflion, operated for Elizabeth's advantage, both on her
fubjeCls, and on her rivals. Among the former, every lover

o.

of his country regarded her life as the great security of the BOOK 1I.
national tranquillity; and chore rather to acknowledge a title -v -
that was dubious, than to search for one that was unknown. '561;
The latter, while nothing was decided, were held in depen-
dence, and obliged to court her. The manner in which fle
received this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish queen, was no
other than might have been expected. She reje&ed it in a
peremptory tone, with many expreflions of a resolution never
to permit a point of so much delicacy to be touched.

ABOUT this time, the queen made her public entry into Sept. r.

Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing was negleCted, which
could express the duty and affection of the citizens towards
their sovereign. But aiidft these demonstrations of regard, the
genius and sentiments of the nation discovered themselves, in a
circumstance, which, though inconsiderable, ought not to be
overlooked. As it was the mode of the times to exhibit many
pageants at every public solemnity; most of there, on this oc-
cafion, were contrived to be representations of the vengeance
which the Almighty hath inflicted upon idolaters . Even * Keitb,
while they studied to amuse and to flatter the queen, her sub- 189-
jeCts could not refrain from testifying their abhorrence of that
religion which she professed.

To restore the regular administration of justice, and to re- Retrains

form the.internal police of the country, became the next objectC thet' br-
of the queen's care. The laws enacted for preservation ofderers.
public order, and the security of private property, were nearly
the fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized country. But
the nature of the Britilll conftiiution, the impotence of regal
authority, the exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of
faction, and the fierce manners of the people, rendered the
execution of these laws feeble, irregular, and partial. In the
counties which border on England, this defect was molf ap-
parent; and the consequences of it mol: sensibly felt. The
inhabitants, ftrangcrs to induftrv, averse from labour, and un-
acquainted with the arts of peace, subsisted intirely by spoil
and pillage, and being confederated in septs or clans, cionmit-
ted these excesses not only with impunity, but even with ho-
nour. During the unsettled state of the kingdom from the
death of James V. this dangerous license had grown to an un-
usual height; and the inroads and rapine of those freebooters
were become no less intolerable to their own countrymen, than
to the Englifli. To refrain and punifl these outrages, was
an action equally popular in both kingdoms. The prior of
St Andrew's was the person chosen for this important service,
and extraordinary powers, together with the title of the queen's
lieutenant, were veiled in him for this purpose.

NoTHI N o can be more surprising to men, accustomed to
regular government, than the preparations made on this occa-

L 2 flon.

BooK III. sion. They were such as might be expected in the rudefi and
-v--I mods imperfet state of society. The freeholders of eleven

156i. several counties, with all their followers completely armed,

were summoned to afift the lieutenant in the discharge of his
office. Every thing resembled a military expedition, rather

* Keith, than the progress of a court of justice *. The prior executed
198. his commiflion with such vigour and prudence, as acquired

him a great increase of reputation and popularity among his
countrymen. Numbers of the banditti suffered the punishment
due to their crimes; and, by the impartial and rigorous admi-
niftration of justice, order and tranquillity were restored to that
part of the kingdom.

The pa- DURING the absence of the prior of St. Andrew's, the
pifts at- leaders of the popifl faction seem to have taken some steps
veaimnto get towards insinuating themselves into the queen's favour and con-
into favour fidencet. But the archbishop of St. Andrew's, the most re-
with her. markable person in the party for abilities and political address,
Ibid. z03. was received with little favour at court; and whatever secret

partiality the queen might have towards those who professed
the fame religion with herself, ihe discovered no inclination,
at that time, to take the administration of affairs out of the
hands, to which she had already committed ir.

TH E cold reception of the archbishop of St. Andrew's was

owing to his connection with the house of Hamilton; from
which the queen was much alienated. The duke of Guise
and the cardinal could never forgive the zeal, with which the
duke of Chatelherault and his son. the earl of Arran had es-
poufed the cause of the congregation. Princes seldom view
their successors without jealousy and distrust. The prior of
St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the duke as a rival in power.
All there causes concurred in infusing into the queen's mind an
aversion for that family. The duke, indulging his love of re-
tirement, lived at a ditlance from court, without taking pains
to insinuate hinfelf into favour; and though the earl of Ar-
ran openly alpired to marry the queen, he, by a most unpar-
donable aft of imprudence, was the only nobleman of diftinc-
tion who opposed Mary's enjoying the exercise of her religion;
and by raflily entering a public proteltation against it, entirely

* Keith, forfeited her favour *. At the fame time, the fordid parsimony
Kor, 04. of his father obliged him either to hide himself in some retire-
Knox, $86. ment, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as first

prince of the blood, or his high pretensions as fultor to the

t Keith, queen t. His love, inflamed by disappointment, and his im-
z96. patience, exasperated by neglect, preyed gradually on his rea-

(on; and, after many extravagancies, broke out at last in un-
governable frenzy.
Dec, o. T o w A D s the end of the year, a convention of oftates

was held chiefly on account of ecclesiastical affairs. The as-

fembly

fembly of the church, which fat at the fame time, presented BooK III.
a petition, containing many demands with refpet to the (up- -v-J
prefling of popery, the encouraging the protestant religion, and a'6i.
the providing for the maintenance of the clergy . The last Keith
was a matter of great importance, and the rteps taken to- °'
wards it deserve to be traced.

THnOUGH the number of protestant preachers was now A lew re

considerably increased, many more were till wanted in every concerning
corner of the kingdom. No legal provision having been made the reve-
for them, they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious Tub- nues of the
fiftence from the benevolence of their people. To susser the church.
ministers of an established church to continue in this fate of
indigence and dependence, was an indecency equally repugnant
to the principles of religion, and to the maxims of found po-
licy; and would have justified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the reformation was then loaded by its enemies.
The revenues of the popiih church were the only fund, which
could be employed for their relief; but during the three last
years, the state of these was greatly altered. A great majority
of abbots, priors, and other heads of religious houses, had,
either from a sense of duty, or from views of interest, re-
nounced the errors of popery; and, notwithianding this
change in their sentiments, they retained their ancient revenues.
Almost the whole order of bifliops, and several of the other
dignitaries, still adhered to the Romiih fuperfrition: and though
debarred from every spiritual function, continued to enjoy the
temporalities of their benefices. Some laymen, especially
those who had been ative in promoting the reformation, had,
under various pretences, and amidif the license of civil wars,
got into their hands possessions, which belonged to the church.
And thus, before any part of the ancient eccleflaRical reve-
nues could be applied towards the maintenance of the pro-
teftant ministers, many different interests were to be adjusted;
many claims to be examined; and the prejudices and pallions
of the two contending parties required the application of a
delicate hand. After much contention, the following plan
was approved by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in even
by the popifli clergy themselves. An exact account of the va-
lue of ecclesiastical benefices throughout the kingdom was ap-
pointed to be taken. The present incumbents, to whatever
party they adhered, were allowed to keep pofTefion: two
thirds of their whole revenue were reserved for their own use,
the remainder was annexed to the crown; and out of that,
the queen undertook to assign a fuflicient maintenance for the
protefRant clergy*. Kci(th,

As most of the bifliops and several of the other dignitaries A7".nd

were frill firmly attached to the popifl religion, the extirpation Knox, r.4.
of the whole order, rather than an at of such extraordinary

indul-

BooK Ill. indulgence, might have been expeced fiom the zeal of the
'._-.v 1 preachers, and from the spirit which had hitherto animated the

z56r. nation. But, on this occasion, other principles obftruted the

operation of such as were purely religious. Zeal for liberty,
and the love of wealth, two pafflons extremely opposite, con-
curred in determining the protestant leaders to tall in with this
plan, which deviated so nianifeftly from the maxims, by which
they had hitherto regulated their condut.

IF the reformers had been allowed to a& without controul,

and to level all distinctions in the church, the immense reve-
nuesannexed to ecclesiastical dignities could not, with any co-
lour of justice, have been retained by those in whose hands they
now were; but muff either have been distributed among the
protestant clergy, who performed all religious offices, or muds
have fallen to the queen, from the bounty of whole ancestors,
the greater part of them was originally derived. The former
Tcheme, however suitable to the religious spirit of many among
the people, was attended with manifold danger. The popifli
ecclesiastics had acquired a ihare in the national property,
which far exceeded the proportion that was confifent with the
happiness of the kingdom; and the nobles were determined to
guard against this evil, by preventing the return of those vast
poffeflions into the hands of the church. Norwas the latter,
which exposed the constitution to more imminent hazard, to
be avoided with lets care. Even that circumscribed preroga-
tive, which the Scottihl kings poffefled, was the object of jea-
lousy to the nobles. If they had allowed the crown to seize
the spoils of the church, such an increase of power muff have
followed that acceflion of property, as would have raised the
royal authority above controul, and have rendered the most li-
mited prince in Europe the most absolute and independent. The
reign of Henry VIII. presented a recent and alarming example
of this nature. The wealth which flowed in upon that prince,
from the suppression of the monhaeries, not only changed the
maxims of his government, but the temper of his mind , and
he who had formerly submittcd to his parliaments, and courtcd
his people, dictated, from that time, to the former, with in-
tolerable insolence; and tyrannized over the latter with unpre-
cedented severity: and if his policy had not been extremely
short-sightcd, if he had not squandered what he acquired, with
a profusion equal to his rapaciousness, and which defeated his
ambition, he might have eftabliflcd defpotifrn in England, on
a basis so broad and trong, as all the efforts of the subject
would never have been able to illake. In Scotland, where the
riches of the clergy bore as great a proportion to the wealth of
the kingdom, the acquisition of church-lands would have been
of no leTs importance to the crown, and no lels fatal to the arif-
tocracy. The nobles, for this reason, guarded against such

ain

an increase of the royal power, and thereby secured their own BOOK III.
independence. v-_ _

Av A R I C E mingled itself with their concern for the intereftl 16.

of their order. The re-uniting the poffeflions of the church
to the crown, or the bestowing them on the protestant clergy,
would have been a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had,
by fraud or violence, seized part of there revenues, and to those
abbots and priors who had totally renounced their ecclesiastical
character. But as the plan, which was proposed, gave
lbme fanAion to their usurpations, they promoted it with their
unolt influence. The popish ecclesiastics, though the lopping
off a third of their revenues was by no means agreeable to
them, consented, under their present circumfances, to facri-
fice a part of their poffeflions, in order to purchase the secure
enjoyment of the remainder; and after deeming the whole ir-
recoverably lolt, they confidered whatever they could retrieve
as so much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were men
of noble birth ; and as they no longer entertained hopes of re-
storing the popish religion, they wished their own relations,
rather than the crown, or the protestant clergy, to be enriched
with the spoils of the church. They connived, for this rea-
son, at the encroachments of the nobles; they even aided
their avarice and violence; they dealt out the patrimony of the
church among their own relations, and by granting fees and
perpetual leafes of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of
their power, some colour of legal poffeflion, to what was for-
merly mere usurpation. Many vestiges of such alienations still
remain . The nobles, with the concurrence of the incum- * Keith,
bents, daily extended their encroachments, and gradually so7.
stripped the ecclesiastics of their richest and most valuable pof- Sptfw.'
fellions. Even that third part, which was given up in order to '17'
silence the clamours of the protestant clergy, and to be some
equivalent to the crown for Its claims, amounted to no confi-
derable fum. The thirds due by the more powerful nobles,
especially by such as had embraced the reformation, were al-
most universally remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent
metals; by estimating the corn, and other payments in kind,
at an under value ; and by the connivance of collecors; great-
ly diminilled the charge against themselves --: and the nobles I Ktitl,
had much reason to be satisfied with a device which, at so Append.
small expence, secured to them such vas poffelions. 188.

No R were the protestant clergy considerable gainers by this SpU Lw.

new regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to The Pro-
kindle zeal, than to extinguifls avarice. Those very men, tefant
whom formerly they had swayed with absolute authority, were Clrgy no
now deaf to all their remonstrances. The prior of St. An- gainr by
drew's, the earl of Argyll, the earl of Morton, and Maitland,
all the most zealous leaders of the congregation, were appoint-

ed

BOOK III. ed to aflign, or as it was called, to modify their stipends. An
--,/*--' hundred merks Scottish was the allowance which their libera-
i61. lity afforded to the generality of ministers. To a few three

* Knox, hundred merks were granted *. About twenty-four thousand
301' pounds Scottish appears to have been the whole fum allotted

for the maintenance of a national church established by law,
and esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church of

+ Keith, God t. Even this fium was paid with little exaanefs, and the
Apnend. ministers were kept in the fame poverty and dependance as lor-
s88. merly.

TH E gentleness of the queen's administration, and the cle-

Dissentions gance of her court, had mitigated, in fonle degree, the fcro-
among the city of the nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildness
nobles. and humanity; while, at the fame time, her presence and au-

thority were a check to their factions and tumultuary spirit.
But, as a slate of order and tranquillity was not natural to the
feudal aristocracy, it could not be of long continuance; and
this year became remarkable for the moti violent eruptions of
intestine discord and animosity.

AM o N G the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a

monarch could possess little authority, and exercise no extensive
or rigorous jurifdition. The interfering of interest, the un-
fettled state of property, the frequency of public commotions,
and the fierceness of their own manners, sowed among the
great families, the feeds of many quarrels and contentions.
These, as we have already observed, were decided not by law,
but by violence. The offended Baron, without having recourse
to the monarch, or acknowledging his superior authority, as-
fembled his own followers, and invaded the lands of his rival
in an hostile manner. Together with his estate and honours,
every nobleman transmitted some hereditary feud to his pofte-
rity, who were bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it
with the fame inveterate rancour.

S u c H a dissention had subsisted between the house of Hamil-

ton and the earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual

i Keth, injuries during the late commotions*. Both the earl of Arran
215. and Bothwell happening to be in waiting at the fame time,

their followers quarrelled frequently in the fireets of Edinburgh,
February. and excited dangerous tumults in that city. At last, the me-

diation of their friends, particularly of Knox, brought about
a reconcilement, but an unfortunate one to both there noble-

' Knox, men t.
305. A F E v,: days after, Arran camne to Knox, and with the ut-

molt terror and confusion, confelled firlt to him, and then to
the prior of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole di-
retion of affairs, Bothwell and his kinfinen the Hamiltons, had
cnnfpired to murder the prior, Maitland, and the other fa-
vourites of the queen. The duke of Chatelhcrault regarded

the

the prior as a rival, who had supplanted him in the queen's BooK Ill.
favour, and who filled that place at the helm, which he irma-
gined to be due to himself, as first prince of the blood. Both- 56
well, on account of the personal injuries which he had received
from the prior during the late commotions, was no less exafpe-
rated againit him. But whether he and the Hamiltons had
agreed to cement their new alliance, with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in the
frantic and disordered imagination of the earl of Arran, it is
impoflible, amidst the contradicion of historians, and the de-
fe&ivenefs of records, positively to determine. Among men in-
flamed with resentment, and impatient for revenge, rash ex-
preflions might be uttered, and violent and criminal expedients
proposed; and on that foundation, Arran's distempered fancy
might rear the whole fuiperftrucure of a conspiracy. All the
persons accused, denied their guilt with the utmost confidence.
But the known charaters of the men, and the violent spirit of
the age, added greatly to the probability of the accusation, and
abundantly justify the conduA of the queen's ministers, who
confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ringleaders, in
separate prisons, and obliged the duke to surrender the firong
catle of Dunbarton, which he had held ever since the time of
his resigning the office of regent*. Knox,

T H E designs of the earl of Huntly against the prior of St. 3°07 308.

Andrew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and .Keith,
more tragical events. George Gordon earl of Huntly, hav- Huntly's
ing been one of the nobles who conspired against James III. enmity to
and who raised his son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a the queen's
great share in the confidence of that generous princes: By minirer.
his bounty, great acceflions cf wealth and power were added Officers of
to a family, already opulent and powerful. On the death of State, 56.
that monarch, Alexander the next earl, being appointed lord
lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left the other nobles
to contend for offices at court; and retiring to the north, where
his estate and influence lay, residcd there, in a kind of princely
independence. The Chieftains in that part of the kingdom
dreaded the growing dominion of filch a dangerous. neighbour,
but were unable to prevent his encroachments. Some of his
rivals he secretly undermined, others he fibluecl by open force.
His estate far exceeded that of any other fubjcct, and hisfit-
periorities and jurifdi&ions extended over many of the northern
counties. With power and poffeflions so ilnimenfe, under two
long and feeble minorities, and nmidft the ihock of civil conl-
motions, the earls of Huntly might have indulged the motR
elevated hopes. But happily for the crown, an aEtive and
enterprising spirit was not the characteristic of that family, and
whatever objeCt their ambition might have in view, they chore

IatherI'

BOOK III. rather to acquire it by political address, than to seize it openy,

%-v- and by force of arms.
z56s. TH E conduct of George the present earl, during the late

commotions, had been perfectly suitable to the charaater of the
family, in that age, dubious, variable, and crafty. While the
success of the lords of the congregation was uncertain, he
aliifted the queen regent in her attempts to crush them. When
their affairs put on a better aspea, he pretended to join them,
but never heartily favoured their cause. He was courted and
feared by each of the contending parties; both connived at his
encroachments in the North; and, by artifice and force, which
he well knew how to employ alternately, and in their proper
places, he added every day to the exorbitant power and wealth
which he possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and authority of the

prior of St. Andrew's, with the greatest jealousy and concern,
and confidered him as a rival who had engrossed that fliare in
the queen's confidence, to which his own zeal for the popifl
religion seemed to give him a preferable title. Personal in-
juries soon increased the misunderstanding occasioned by rival-
fllip in power. The queen having determined to reward the
services of the prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an earl,
she made choice of Mar, as the place whence he should take
his title; and, that he might be better able to support his new

Veb. ,o. honour, bestowed upon him, at the fame time, the lands of that

Crawf. name. These were part of the royal demesnes , but the
Peer. 197. earls of Huntly had been permitted, for several years, to keep
. Buch. poffeflion of them t. On this occasion, the earl, not only com-
334. plained, with fomen reason, of the loss which he sustained, but had

real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable neigh-
bour into the heart of his territories, who might be able to
rival his power, and excite his opprefled vassals to shake of his
yoke.
June 17. A N incident, which happened soon after, encreafed and con-

firmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son,
and lord Ogilvie, had a dispute about the property of an estate.
This dispute bccame a deadly quarrel. They happened un-
fortunately to meet in the streets of Edinburgh, and being both
attcleied w'ith armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in which lord
Ogilvie was dangerously wounded by fir John. The magistrates
fcized both the offenders, and the queen commanded them to
be strictly confined. Under any regular government, such a
Lreach of public peace and order would expose the person
offending, to certain puniflinent. At this time, omne severity
waIs nccelIhry, in ordel to vindicate the queen's authority front
an insult, the nioll heinous which had been offered to it, since
her return into Scotland. But in an age accustomed to licenle
and anarclhy, even this uioderate exertion of her power in order-

ing

ing them to be kept in custody, was deemed an aft of intolera- BooK IIl.
ble rigour; and the friends of each party began to convene
their vaflals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to fruf- x56z.
trate the decisions of justice*. Mean while, Gordon made his ,Keit
cfcape out of prison, and flying into Aberdeenfhire, complained 23.
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated; and
as all the queen's aftions were, at this juncture, imputed
to the earl of Mar, this added not a little to the resent-
ment, which Hluntly had conceived against that noble-

nman.

AT the very time when these paflions fermented, with theAugt.

utmost violence, in' the minds of the earl of Huntly and his
family, the queen happened to set out on a progress into the
northern parts of the kingdom. She was attended by the earls
of Mar and Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party.
The presence of the queen, in a country where no name greater
than the earl of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power
superior to his had been exercised, for many years, was an
event, of itself, abundantly mortifying to that haughty noble-
man. But while the queen was entirely under the diretion of
Mar, all her acions were more apt to be milreprefented, and
construed into injuries; and a thousand circuniftances could
not but occur to awaken Huntly's jealousy, to offend his
pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidst the agitations
of so many violent paflions, some eruption was unavoida-
ble.

ON Mary's arrival in the North, Huntly employed his wife,

a woman capable of executing the commiifion with abundance
of dexterity, to sooth the queen, and to intercede for pardon
to their son. But the queen peremptorily required, that he
flould again deliver himself into the hands of justice, and rely
on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to do So ; and being
enjoined by the queen to enter hinllelf prisoner in the castle of
Stirling, he promised likewise to obey that command. Lord
Erlkine, Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this
fort. The queen's severity, and the place in which flie ap-
pointed Gordon to be confined, were interpreted to be new
marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented the hatred of the
Gordons against him.

ME A N time, fir John Gordon set out towards Stirling ; but Sept I.

instead of performing his promise to the queen, made his escape
from his guards, and returned to take the conlniand of hii 1f;l-
lowers, who were rising in arms, all over the north. There
were destined to second and improve the blow, ly which his
father proposed secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton,
and Maitland, his principal adversaries. The time and place
for perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently appointed ; but
the executing of it was wonderfully prevented, by toine of thoie

unfore-

BooK IIL. unforeseen accidents, which so often occur to disconcert the

_L^ --_ S schemes, and to intimidate the hearts of altallins*. His own
1562- house at Strathbogie was the last and most convenient scene,
Kei", appointed for committing the intended violence. But, on
230. her journey thither, the queen heard of young Gordon's

flight and rebellion, and refusing, in the first transports of her
indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by that unfortunate

f Knox, expression of her rcfentment, saved her ministers from unavoida-
318. ble deftrution t.
Take arms TH E ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipi-
sainft the tated Huntly into open rebellion. As the queen was entirely
uecen. under the direction of his rivals, it was impollible to work their

ruin, without violating the allegiance which he owed his
sovereign. On her arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer
in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut the gates against her.
Mary was obliged to lodge in the town, which was open and

Craw.f defenceless; but this, too, was quickly surrounded by a mul-

Officers o titude of the earl's followers t. The utmost confemration
State, 87, seized the queen, who was attended by a very slender train.
88. She every moment expeted the approach of the rebels, and

some ihips were already ordered into the river to secure her
escape. The loyalty of the Monroes, Frazers, Mackintoshes,
and rome neighbouring clans, who took arms in her defence,
saved her from this danger. By their assistance, Ihe even for-
ced the castle to surrender, and inflicted on the governor the
puniflhment which his insolence deferred.

T I s open as of disobedience was.the occasion of a mea-

sure more galling to Huntly than any the queen had hitherto
taken. Lord Erlkine, having pretended a right to the earldom
of Mar, Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame
time Mary conferred upon him the title of earl of Murray, with

CrawF. the estate annexed to that dignity, which had been in the
r'.r- 359. poffEllion of the earl of Huntly since the year i 548 . From

this he concluded that his family was devoted to destruction;
and dreading to be stripped, gradually, of those poffeflions,
which, in reward of their services, the gratitude of the crown
had hcftowed on himself or his anceftots, lie no longer disguised
his intentions, but, in defiance of the queen's proclamation,
openly took arms. Inflead of yielding those places of lsrength,
which Mary required him to surrender, his followers disperscd

t Knox, or cut in pieces the parties which flie dispatchcd to take pof.
' 9. fcflrion of thien.I-; and he hinfeclf, advancing with a con-

fiderable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place the
queen was now rcturncd, filled her finall court with confterna-
; Ic.th, tion. Murray had oly) a lhandful of men in whom he could

) confide .. In order to form the appearance of an army, lie

was obliged to call in the afliftance of the neighbouring barons;
but as most of these either favoured Iluntly's designs, or flood

in

in awe of his power, from them no cordial or effectual iervice BOOK III.
could be expelted. _

WITH these troops, however, Murray, who could gain '56z

nothing by delay, marched briskly towards the enemy. He Oaober .8
found them at Corrichie, polled to great advantage ; he com-
manded his northern aflociates instantly to begin the attack;
but on the first motion of the enemy, they treacherously turned
their backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing aside their
spears, and breaking their ranks, drew their swords, and rulh-
ed forward to the purfuiti It was then, that Murray, gave He iE de-
proof both of steady courage, and of prudent conduc. He the earl of
Rood immoveable, on a rising ground, with the filall but Murray.
truty body of his adherents, who prefenring their spears to the
enemy, received them with a determined resolution, which
they little expected. The Highland broad sword is not a
weapon fit to encounter the Scottish spear. In every civil com-
motion, the Superiority of the latter has been evident, and has
always decided the contest. On this occasion, the irregular at-
tack of Huntly's troops was easily rcpulfed by Murray's firm
battalion. Before they recovered from the confusion occasioned
by this unforeseen refiltance, thole who had begun the flight,
willing to regain their credit with the victorious party, fell up-
on them, and compleated the rout. Huntly himself, who was
extremely corpulent, was trodden to death in the pursuit. His
sons, Sir John and Adam, were taken, and Murray returned
in triumph to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

TH E trial of men taken in aetual rebellion against their so-

vereign was extremely short. Three days after the battle, Sir
John Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam
was pardoned on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who
had been privy to his father's designs, was seized in the south ;
and, upon trial, found guilty of treason; but, through the
queen's clemency, the punifllnent was remitted. The firfl
parliament proceeded againfl this great family, with the utmost
rigour of law, and reduced their power and fortune to the
lowelf ebb '.

As

* This conspiracy of the earl of Huntly is one of the molt intricate

Ind myrterious paftagcs in the Scottith hilnory. As it was a tranfaclion
purely domellic, and in which the Englifl were little interefled, few
original papers concerning it have been found in Cecil's Collcion, the
great Rtorehoufr of evidence and information with regard to the affairs of
this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a dcfign about this time, of

deflroying Murray, and of employing the power of the earl of Huntly
for this purpose. But his account of this whole tranfaclion appears to be
so void of truth, and even of probability, as to deserve no lfrious exami.
nation. At that time, Mary wanted power, and teems to have had no
inclination to commit any a&t of violence upon her brother.

Two

BOOK III; As the fall of the earl of Huntly is the most important event

'i--* - of this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the nar-
156z. rative, by taking notice of lesser tranfalions, which may now

be related with equal propriety.

An i:ter- IN the beginning of lummner, May, who was desirous of
view he- entering into a more intimate correspondence and familiarity
tween Eli- with Elizabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal inter-
zabeth and view with her, somewhere in the North of England. As this

p0ro- ppropofal could not be rejeced with decency, the time, the

place, and the circumstances of the meetingwere instantly a-
greed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent enough not to admit
into her kingdom, a rival, who outfione herself, so far, in
beauty, and gracefulness of person ; and who excelled so emi-
nently, in all the arts of insinuation and address. Under pre-
tence of being confined to London, by the attention which ffie

was

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this mat.
ter ; but they appear to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the queen's journey to the noih

was a scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the earl of Huntly.
v. Huntly had resided at court almost ever since the queen's return,
Keith, 198. Append. 175, &c. This was the proper place in which
to have Seized him. To attack him in Aberdeenfhire, the feat of his pow-
er, and in the midst of his vaffrls, was a proje6t equally absurd and ha-
zardous. 2. The queen was not accompanied with a body of troops, ca-
pable of attempting any thing againt Huntly by violence; her train was
not more numerous, than was usual in times of greatest tranquillity,
Keith, 230. 3. There remain two original letters with regard to this
conspiracy, one from Randolph the English resident, and another from
Maitland, both direted to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as no-
torioufly treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated attempts to allfaf
tinate Murray, &c. No hint is given of the previous resolution, formed
by Maty's ministers, to ruin Huntly and his family. Had any such de-
sign ever exilted, it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it; nor
would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the English secretary.
Keith, 229, 232.

II. To suppose that the earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing

the queen, and her minifers, seems to be no less improbable. I. On
the queen's arrival in the North, he laboured, in good earnet, to gain
her favour, and to obtain a pardon for his Ion. Knox, 318. 2. He met
the queen, firt at Aberdeen, and then at Rothemay, whither he would
not have ventured to come, had he harboured any such treasonable refolu-
tion. Knox, 318. 3. His conduc was irresolute and wavering, like
that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one execut-
ing a concerted plan. 4. The moil considerable peroons of his clan sub-
mittcd to the queen, and found surety to obey her commands. Keith,
226. Had the earl been previously determined to rife in arms againlt the
queen, or to seize her ministers, it is probable he would have imparted it
to his principal followers, nor would they have deserted him in thiy
manner.

For there reafors, we have, on the one hand, vindicated the earl ol

Murray from any deliberate attention of ruining the family of Gordon
and on the other hand, we have imputed the violent conduA of the ear
of Huntly, to a sudden Ilart of refentmuent, without charging him witt
any premeditated purpjfc of rebellion.

was obliged to give to the civil wars in France, the put offBooK llf.
the interview for that season , and prevented her lubjesvts -
from feeing the Scottish queen, the charms of whose ap- 1562'
pearance, and behaviour, fle envied, and had Come reason to, Keil'
dread.

Du a I N G this year, the afTfmbly of the church met twice. June a.

In both there meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the Deceimb.
poverty and dependence of the church; and many murmurs 25.
against the negligence or avarice of thoie, who had been ap-
pointed to colic&, and to distribute the fimall fi;d, appropria-
ted for the maintenance of preachers .. A petition, craving t Kirlo,
redress of their grievances, was presented to the queen ; but ji" 3:-3
without any effect. There was no reason to expect that Mary
would discover any forwardness to grant the requests of such
Aupplicants. And as her ministers, though all nioft zealous
protestants, were thenfelves growing rich on the inheritance of
the church, they were equally regardless of the indigence and
demands of their brethren.

MA R Y had now continued above two years in a state of '563.

widowhood. Her gentle administration had secured the hearts Neg(l wih
of her subje&s, who were impatient for her marriage, and regard to
wified the crown to descend in the right line from their ancient the queen's
monarchs. She herself was the most amiable woman of the mar3iac.
age, and the fame of her accomplishments, together with the
favourable circuniftance of her having one kingdom already in
her poffeflion, and the profpe& of mounting the throne of ano-
ther, prompted many different princes to solicit an alliance so
illultrious. Scotland, by its situation, threw so much weight
and power into whatever scale it fell, that all Europe waited
with Solicitude for Mary's determination; and no event in that
age excited stronger political fears and jealouses ; none inte-
relied more deeply the paflions of several princes, or gave life
to more contradictory intrigues, than the marriage of the Scot-
tifli queen.

TH E princes of the house of Austria, remembered what vafi She is

projects the French had founded on their former alliance with Ilicited
the queen of Scots ; and though the unexpeced death, first ofby. d:fc
Henry and then of Francis, had hindered the e from taking
effect, yet if Mary Should again make choice of a hulband a-
mong the French princes, the fame defgns might be revived
and prosecuted with better success.

IN order to prevent this, the emperor entered into a negotia- By the

tion with the cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposed to marry archduke
the Scottifl queen to the archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third Charles.
son. The matter was communicated to Mary ; and Melvil,
who, at that time, attended the eleEtor palatine, was com-
manded to enquire into the characer and situation of the arch-
duke *. P ILIP

* Melv. 63, 65. Keith, 139. Sec AFPcnd. No. VII.

BOOK III. Pt I L IP II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's falling
---v-'- once more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdi-

1563. nand the acquisition of so important a prize; and as his own

By Don insatiable ambition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he
Spin. f employed his ambalfador at the French court, to follicit the

princes of Lorrain in behalf of his son Don Carlos, at that
time, the heir of all the extensive dominions, which belonged

+ Cafteln. to the Spanish monarchy *.
461. CA T H E R 1 N E of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the
LAddit. marriage of the Scottish queen with any of the Austrian prin-
50o, 503. ces, which would have added so n;uch to the power and pre-
By the tensions of that ambitious race. Her jealousy of the princes
duke of of Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an alliance, which,
A"'Jo. by securing them the protection of the emperor or king of Spain,

would give new boldness to their enterprising spirit, and enable
them to set the power of the crown, which they already ri-
valled, at open defiance: And as she was afraid that these
splendid proposals of the Austrian family would dazzle the
young queen, ihe instantly dispatched Caftlenau into Scotland,
to offer her in marriage the duke of Anjou, the brother of
her former huffand, who soon after mounted the throne of

c Cafteln. France t-

461. M RY attentively weighed the pretensions of so many ri-
Mary's de- vals. The archduke had little to recommend him but his high
liberation birth. The example of Henry VIII was a warning against

concerning as wn

4
,i. contracting a marriage with the brother of her former hufhand;

nor could /he bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a
rank inferior to that which she had formerly held in that king-
dom. She listened, therefore, with partiality, to the Spanifli
propositions, and the profpe& of such vast power and domini-
ons flattered the ambition of a young and aspiring princess.

TH R EE several circumstances, however, concurred to di-
vert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

TH E first of these was the murder of her uncle the duke of

Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had in-
volved his country in a civil war ; which was conducted with
furious animosity, and various success. At last the duke laid
siege to Orleans, the bulwark of the protestant cause; and he
had reduced that city to the last extremity, when he was as-
faflinated by the frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved
fatal to the queen of Scots. The young duke was a minor;
and the cardinal of Lorrain, though subtle and intriguing,
wanted that undaunted and enterprising courage, which ren-
dered the ambition of his brother so formidable. Catherine in-
tead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering the pretenfi-
ons of her daughter-in-law, took pleasure in mortifying the
one, and in disappointing the other. In this situation, and
without fnch a protctor, it became neceflary for Mary to con-

traa

traa her views, and to proceed with caution; and whatever BOOK II.
profpea of advantage might allure her, she could venture upon -
no dangerous or doubtful measure. 1563.

TH E second circumstance, which weighed with Mary, was Toe vi.a-w

the opinion of the queen of England. The marriage of the beth.
Scottish queen interested Elizabeth more deeply than any other
prince ; and she observed all her deliberations concerning it
with the most anxious attention. She herself seems early to
have formed a resolution of living unmarried, as the discovered
no small inclination to impose the fame law on the queen of
Scots. She had already experienced what use might be made
of Mary's power and pretensions, to invade her dominions, and
to disturb her poffeflion of the crown. The death of Francis
H. had happily delivered her from this danger, which she de-
termined to guard against for the future, with the utmost care.
As the restless ambition of the Austrian princes, the avowed
and bigoted patrons of the Catholic superstition, made her, in
a particular manner, dread their neighbourhood, she inftru&ed
Randolph, to remonstrate, in the strongest terms, against any
alliance with them ; and to acquaint Mary, that as The her-
self would confider such a match to be a breach of the per-
fonal friendship, in which they were so happily united; so
the English nation would regard it, as the dissolution of that
confederacy which now subsisted between the two kingdoms:
That, in order to preserve their own religion and liberties, they
would, in all probability, take some ftep prejudicial to her
right of fucceflion, which, as she well knew, they neither
wanted power nor pretences to invalidate, and set aside. This
threatning was accompanied with a pronife, but expressed in
very ambiguous terms, that if Mary's choice of a hulband
should prove agreeable to the Englilh nation, Elizabeth would
appoint proper persons to examine her title to the fucceflion,
and, if well founded, conmmand it to be publickly recognized.
She observed, however, a mysterious silence concerning the
person on whom she wilhed the choice of the Scottish queen
to fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved for some fu-
ture negociation. Mean while the threw out some obscure
lints, that a native of Britain, or one not of princely rank,
would be her fafet and most inoffensive choice *. An advice * Keith,
offered with such an air of superiority and command, mortified, 2z41 145.
no doubt, the pride of the Scottifi queen. But, under her
present circumstances, fle was obliged to bear this indignity.
Ielfitute of all foreign assistance, and intent upon the Englill
fucceflion, the great object of her wishes and ambition, it be-
came necessary to court a rival, whom, without manifest im-
prudence, she could not venture to offend.

Ti F. inclination of her own subjects was another, and notThe s eni-
the lead considerable circumstance, which called for Mary'.; lmt own

Vo L I M attention laieq-.

BooK III. attention at this conjuncture. They had been taught, by the

- fatal experiment of her former marriage, to dread an union
1563. with any great prince, whose power might be employed to op-

press their religion and liberties. They trembled at the thoughls
of a match with a foreigner; and if the crown should be
strengthened by new dominions or alliances, they foresaw that
the royal prerogative would soon be stretched beyond its anci-
ent and legal limits. Their eagerness to prevent this could
scarce fail of throwing them into the arms of England. Eliza-
beth would be ready to afford them her aid, towards obftnuc-
ing a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas easy for them
to seize the person of the sovereign. By the affliftance of the
Englifli fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign prince
to land in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an incon-
fiderable party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the
e.rl of Huntly, could give no obftrution to their designs. To
what violent extremes, the national abhorrence of a foreign
yoke might have been carried, is manifest from the tranfadions
both previous, and subsequent to the present period.

F o R these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time, all thoughts

of foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own anl-
bition, in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to
quiet the fears of her own fubjeds.

A parlil. TH E parliament met this year, for the first time, since the
ment held queen's return into Scotland. Mary's administration had hi-
May 26. therto been extremely popular. Her ministers pofleffed the

confidence of the nation; and, by consequence, the proceed-
ings of that assembly were conduted with perfect unanimity.
The grant of the earldom of Murray to the priorof St. An-
drew's was confirmed ; the earl of Huntly, and several of his
vassals and dependants, were attainted: the attainder againtt
Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of his accomplices in the mur-

* Knox, der of cardinal Beatoun, was reversed * : the aC of oblivion,
330' mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the royal fanc-

tion. But Mary, who had determined never to ratify that trea-
ty, took care that this fan&ion flould not be deemed any ac-
knowledgment of its validity ; fle granted her consent merely
in condescension to the lords in parliament, who, on their knees,
besought her to allay the jealousies and apprehensions of her

- spotfl fiubjets, by such a gracious law t.
wood, 188. No attempt was made, in this parliament, to procure the
Nothing queen's assent to the laws cftabliffling the protcftant religion.
with regard Her ministers, though zealous protestants themselves, were a-
to religion. ware that this could not be urged without manifest danger and

imprudence. She had consented, through their influence, to
tolerate and protee the reformed dotrine. They had even
prevailed on her to imprison and prosecute the archbishop of
St. Andrew's, and prior of Whithorn, for celebrating mass

contrary

contrary to her proclamation t. Mary, however, was iill BOOK Il.
pafflionately devoted to the Romifil fiuperftition ; and though, v'
from political motives, she had granted a temporary protection '563.
to opinions, which ihe disapproved, there were no grounds to 1 Keith,
hope that file would agree to eftablifl them for perpetuity. 39
The moderation of those who professed it, was the best me-
thod for reconciling the queen to the protestant religion. Time
might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices might wear off gra-
dually, and at last ihe might yield to the wiflies of her peo-
ple, what their importunity or their violence could never have
extorted Many laws of importance were to be proposed in
parliament; and to defeat all there, by such a fruitless and ill-
lilned application to the queen, would have been equally in-
jurious to individuals, and detrimental to the public.

TH zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all there Which of-

considerations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked no fends the
delay: Severe and inflexible, it would condescend to no corn- clergy
pliances. The leading men of that order infilted, that this op-
portunity of establishing religion by law, was not to be ne-
gleced. They pronounced the moderation of the courtiers
apoftacy ; and their endeavours to gain the queen, they rec-
koned criminal and servile. Knox solemnly renounced the
friendflip of the earl of Murray, as a man devoted to Mary,
and so blindly zealous for her service, as to become regardless
of those objects which he had hitherto esteemed moit sacred.
This rupture, which is a strong proof of Murray's sincere at-
tachment to the queen at that period, continued above a year
and an half*. * Knor.

TH E preachers being disappointed by the men in whom 331'

they placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indigna-
tion in their pulpits. These echoed more loudly than ever,
with declarations againit idolatry ; with difinal presages con-
cerning the queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with bit-
ter reproaches against those, who, fron interested motives,
had deserted that cause, which they once reckoned it their ho-
nour to support. The people, infl:aled by such vehement de- And occu-
clamations, which were dictated by a zeal more lincere than sions a tu-
prudent, proceeded to rash and uijufltifiable acts of violence. mog the
During the queen's absence, on a progress into the weft, mars people.
continued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holy-rood house. August.
The multitude of those who openly resorted thither, gave great
offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from
the restraint which the royal presence impoled, alemblcd in a
riotous manner, interrupted the fervicc, and filled such as
were present, with the utnlofl: conflernation. Two of the
ringleaders in this tumult were seized, and a day appointed for
theirl trial *I Knor,

M . KN ox, 335.

BOOK III. K ox, who esteemed the zeal of these persons laudable,

_-\ -

a and their conduct meritorious, confidered them as sufferers in

'S63 a goodcaufe ; and in order to screen them from danger, he

Knox tried issued circular letters, requiring all who profeTed the true reli-
count, hut gion, or were concerned for the preservation of it, to assemble
acquitted. at Edinburgh on the day of trial, that, by their presence, they
OAobe, 8. might comfort and allift their distressed brethren t. One of
t Ibid. 36. these letters fell into the queen's hands. To assemble the sub-

je&s without the authority of the sovereign, was construed to
be treason, and a resolution was taken to prosecute Knox for

Decemb. that crime, before the privy council. Happily for him, his
15. judges were not only zealous protestants, but the very men,

who, during the late commotions, had openly refilled, and set
at defiance the queen's authority. It was under precedents,
drawn from their own conduct, that Knox endeavoured to
shelter hinifelf. Nor would it have been an easy matter for
there counsellors to have found out a diftir&tion, by which
they could censure him, without condemning themselves. As-
ter a long hearing, he was unanimously acquitted. Sinclair bi.
fhcp of Ross, and president of the court of session, a zealous
papist, heartily concurred with the other counsellors in this de-

t Knox, cifion 1 ; a remarkable fad, which shews the unsettled state
343. of government in that age; the low condition to which regal

authority was then funk; and the impunity with which fubjeAs
might invade those rights of the crown, which are now held
sacred.

1564. THE marriage of the Scottinl queen continued fill to be

Negotiati- the object of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even
ons with while ihe wiflied to direct Mary, treated her with a disgustful
regard to reserve; though she kept her, without necessity, in a state of
the queen's
mnarriage. furpence; and hinted often at the person, whom she defined

to be her hulband, without directly mentioning his name; yet
Mary framed all her actions to express such a prudent refped
for the Englilh queen, that foreign princes began to imagine ihe

* Keith, had given herself up implicitly to her direction *. The prof-
48. peEt of this union alarmed Catherine of Medicis. Though

Catharire had taken pleasure, all along, in doing ill offices to
the queen of Scots; though soon after the duke of Guise's
death, flie had put upon her a niof mortifying indignity, by
stopping the payment of her dowry, by depriving her subjea
the duke of Chatelberault of his pension, and by betlowing
Id. 144. the command of the Scottifhl guards on a Frenchman +; flic

resolved, however, to prevent this dangerous conjuncion of
the British queens. For this purpose, flAe now employed all

t See Ap- her art to appease Mary I, to whom flie had given so many
pend'lII causes of offence. The arrears of her dowry were instantly

paid ; more punctual remittances were promised for the future;
and offers made, not only to restore, but to extend the privile-

geS

ges of the Scottish nation in France. It was easy for Mary BooK Ir.
to penetrate into the motives of this sudden change ; She well - - '
knew the charater of her mother-in-law, and laid little stress 1564·
upon profeflions of friendship, which came from a princess of
such a false and unfeeling heart.

TH E negotiation with England, relative to the marriage,

suffered no interruption from this application of the French
queen. As Mary, in compliance to her fubjets, and pressed
by the firongeft motives of interest, determined speedily to March:
marry, Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable si- Elizabeth
lence, which {he had hitherto asseted. The secret was dif- recom- .
closed, and her favourite lord Robert Dudley, afterwards earl celtr to
of Leicester, was declared to be the happy man, whom the had her for a
chosen to be the husband of a queen, courted by so many hufb nd.
princes , Keih,

ELI Z AB E T H' wisdom and penetration were remarkable 25'

in the choice of her ministers; in distinguishing her favourites,
those great qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced
in two cafes so opposite, by merit of very different kinds.
Their capacity for business, their knowledge, their prudence,
were the talents to which alone she attended, in choofing her
ministers; whereas beauty and gracefulness of person, polilhed
manners, and courtly address, were the accomplishments on
which she bestowed her favour. She ated in the one cafe
with the wisdom of a queen, in the other she discovered the
weakness of a woman. To this Leicetler owed his grandeur.
Though remarkable neither for eminence in virtue, nor fupe-
riority of abilities, the queen's partiality distinguished him on
every occasion. She raised him to the highest honours, lhe
bestowed on him the most important employments, and mani-
fested an affection so disproportionate to his merit, that, in
the opinion of that age, it could be accounted for only by the
power of planetary influence f. tf Cnmden,

TH a high spirit of the Scottifl queen could not well bear 549.
the firtl overture of a match with a subjet. Her own rank, Mary f-

Iended aG

the splendor of her former marriage, and the solicitations, at hi,.
this time, of so many powerful princes, crowded into her
thoughts, and made her sensibly feel how humbling and difre-
fpectful Elizabeth's proposal was, She difleillblcd, however,
with the English reident; and though fle declared in strong
terms, what a degradation she would deem this alliance,
which brought along with it no advantage, that could juflify
such neglect of her own dignity, she mentioned the earl of
Leicetler, notwithstanding, in terms full of refpe& *. * Keilh,

ELtIZ A ETH , we may presume, did not wifl that the z52.

r, "zlizabetlh't

proporal should be received in any other manner. After the viewl in
extraordinary marks she had given of her own attachment to recom-
Leicefler, and while he was till in the very height of favour, mending

it him.

BOOK III. it is not probable fihe could think seriously of bestowing h;im
L -.' upon another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade, but only to

564. amuse Maryt. Almost three years were elapsed since her
' Melvil, return into Scotland; and though solicited by her fubjets, and

5courted by the greatest princes in Europe, she had hitherto

been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of Eli-
zabeth. And if, at this time, the Englifli queen could have
engaged Mary to liften to her proposal in favour of Leicester,
her power over this creature of her own would have enabled
her to protrac the negotiation at pleasure ; and by keeping hl
rival unmarried, hlie would have rendered the prospect of her
fucceflion less acceptable to the English.

L E c E ST E R's own situation was extremely delicate, and

embarrassing. To gain pofTefion of the noft amiable woman
of the age, to carry away this prize from so many contending
princes, to mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might
have flattered the ambition of a subjeCt, much more confider-
able than he. He saw all these advantages, no doubt; and,
in secret, they made their full impreflion on him. But, with-
out offending Elizabeth, he durst not venture on the most dif-
tant discovery of his sentiments, or take any ftep towards faci-
litating his acquisition of objects so worthy of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him,

* Melv. which he was at no pains to conceal*, might inspire him with
93; 94. hopes of attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illus-

triousthan Scotland. Elizabeth had often declared, that no-
thing but her resolution to lead a tingle life, and his being born
her own subjeCt, would have hindered her from choofing the
earl of Leicester for a hulband. Such considerations of pru-
dence are, however, often surmounted by love ; and Leicester
might flatter himself, that the violence of her affeaion would
at length triumph both over the maxims of policy and the fcru-
ples of pride. These hopes induced him, now and then, to
conclude the proposal of his marriage with the Scottifl queen
to be a project for his deftrufion ; and he imputed it to the
malice of Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of doing
him honour, intended to ruin him in the good opinion both of
T Ib:i. Elizabeth and Mary I.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one queen, who

dreaded its success; listened to by another, who was secretly
determined against it ; and scarce desired by the man himsel,
whose interest and reputation it was calculated, in appearance,
to promote ; could not, under so many unfavourable circum-
stances, be brought to a fortunate ifliue. Both Elizabeth and
Mary continued, however, to aCt with equal diflimulatio.l
The former, notwithfianding her fears of losing Leicester,
solicitcd warmly in his behalf. The latter, though flie beglnl
about this time to calt her eyes upon another subject of Eng-

lil!;,

land, did not, at once, venture finally to reject Elizabeth's fa-BoOK III.
vourite.

'1 HE person towards whom Mary began to turn her '564.

thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldest son of theMerataY,
earl of Lenox. That nobleman, having been driven out of thoughts
Scotland under the regency of the duke of Chatelherault, had of marry-
lived in baniflhient for twenty years. His wife, lady Marga- i"e lord
ret Douglas, was Mary's imoft dangerous rival in her claim Danly.
upon the Englilh fuccelfion. She wa, :' daughter of Marga-
let, the elde:l filler of Henry VIII. by the earl of Angus,
whom that queen married after the death of her husband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of succession was
not fettled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the decision of almost every cafe that can poflibly happen, have
at lalt introduced certainty into matter, which, naturally, is
subject to all the variety, arising from the caprice of lawyers,
guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady Le-
nox, though born of a second marriage, was one degree nearer
the royal blood of England, than Mary. She was the daugh-
ter, Mary only the grand-daughter of Margaret. This was not
the only advantage over Mary which lady Lenox enjoyed.
She was born in England, and by a maxim of law in that coun-
try, with regard to private inheritances, " whoever is not born
in England, or at leaf of parents, who, at the time of his
birth, were in the obedience of the king of England, cannot
enjoy any inheritance in the kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, * Carte,
an Englili lawyer, produced in a treatise, which he published Hilt. of
at this time, and endeavoured to apply it to the right of fuc- 1ig.^LV'O
cellion to the crown. In a private cause, these pretexts might
have given rife to a long and doubtful litigation; where a
crown was at stake, such nice disputes and subtleties were to
be avoided with the utmost care. If Darnly should happen to
contrat an alliance with any of the powerful families in Eng-
land, or flould publickly profess the protestant religion, these
plausible and popular topics might be so urged, as to prove fa-
tal to the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a papilt.

MA a Y was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any

danger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a
friendly correspondence with the family of Lenox. In the year
1562 , both the earl and the lady Margaret were taken into * Cam,
custody by Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a 389.
secret correspondence with the Scottish queen.

FR oM the time that Mary became sensible of the dinicul- Elii.abcth

ties, which would attend her marrying a foreign prince, fle secretly
entered into a fill closer connexion with the earl of Lenox l, pltealdi;,
and invited him to return into Scotland. This fl(e endeavoured 1t i. I 96.
to conceal from Elizabeth; but a tranfation of so much im-
portance did not escape the notice of that discerning princess.

She

BoK IIn. She observed, but did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in

more perfetly with her views, concerning Scottilh affairs. She
'564. was pleated to fee the pride of the Scottilh queen stoop, at

las, to the thoughts of taking a subject to her bed. Darniy
was in no situation to excite her jealousy, or her fears. His
father's estate lay in England, and by means of this pledge,
'he hoped to keep the negotiation entirely in her own hands, to
play the fame game of artifice and delay, which she had plan-
ned out, if her recommendation of Leicester had been more fa-
vourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no subjet of one

kingdom could pass into the other without the permiflion of
both sovereigns , no sooner did Lenox, under pretence of pro-
fecuting his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her license to go into Scotland, than he obtained
it. Together with it, {he gave him letters, warmly recom-
mending his person and cause to Mary's friendship and protec-
Keith, tiont. But, at the fame time, as it was her manner to in-

volve all her transactions with regard to Scotland, in Come de-
gree of perplexity and contradiction; she warned Mary, that
this indulgence to Lenox might prove fatal to herself, as his
return could not fail of reviving the ancient animosity between
him and the house of Hamilton.

TH is admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from

her an angry reply, which occasioned, for some time, a total

Keith interruption of all correspondence between the two queens *.
clv .. - Mary was not a little alarmed at this; She both dreaded the es-

fes of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly the difadvan-
tage of being excluded from a free intercourse with England,
where her ambassadors had, all along, carried on, with some
success, secret negotiations, which increased the number of her
partizans, and paved her way towards the throne. In order to
remove the causes of the present difficulty, Melvil was Cent ex-
press to the court of England. He found it no difficult mat-
ter to bring about a reconcilement; and soon re-established the
appearance, but not the confidence of friendfhlip, which was
all that had subsisted, for fore rime, between the two queens.

Du l N G this negotiation, Elizabeth's profclions of love to

Mary, and Melvil's replies in the name of his mistress, were
made in the language of the warnmet and most cordial fiiend-
ship. But what Melvil truly obifeves, with rcfpeet toEliza-
beth, may be extended without injufftice to both queens.
" There was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but

*I. Mclv. great dilimulation, envy and fear t."
104. LE N o X, however, in consequence of the license which he
Len": had obtained, lct out for Scotland, and was received by the
rrives i queen, not only with the refpec due to a nobleman, so nearly

allicd to the royal family, but treated with a diltinguifhled fami-

liarity,

liarity, which could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated BooK Ill'
hopes. The rumour of his son's marriage to the queen began -v*
to spread over the kingdom ; and the eyes of all Scotland were '564.
turned upon him, as the father of their future master. The
duke of Chatelherault was the sirs: to take the alarm. He
confidered Lenox, as the ancient hereditary enemy of the house
of Hamilton; and, in his grandeur, law the ruin of himself
and his friends. But the queen interposed her authority to pre-
vent any violent rupture, and employed all her influence to bring
about an accommodation of their differences *. * Keitb,

TH C powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lenox's '59-

return, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom
of Angus out of their hands. But the queen, who well knew
how dangerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other great
men of that name, prevailed on Lenox to purchase their fnend-
ship, by allowing his lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus
to drop t. + Id. 26R.

AS T E these preliminary steps, Mary ventured to call a Not. (b)

meeting of parliament. The aEt of forfeiture, pased against Decemb.
Lenox in the year I 545, was repealed, and he was publickly
restored to the honours and estate of his anceftorst. t See Ap-

THE ecclesiastical tranfacions of this year were not con- pendix,

fiderable. In the assemblies of the church, the fame com- N IX.
plaints of the increase of idolatry, the fame representations con- Jece z5.
cerning the poverty of the clergy, were renewed. The reply
which the queen made to there, and her promises of redress, The cler.
were more satisfying to the protestants, than any they had gy fufpici-
hitherto obtained*. But, notwithstanding her declarations inqof, the
their favour, they could not help harbouring many fiupicions zeal for
concerning Mary's designs against their religion. She had never Popery.
once contented to hear any preacher of the reformed doctrine. * Keith,
She had abated nothing of her bigoted attachment to the 533, 539
Romifl faith. The genrus of that fuperftirion, averfc, at all
times, from toleration, was, in that age, fierce and unrelent-
ing. Mary had given her friends on the continent repeated
assurances of her resolution to re-eftahlinl the catholic church*. * Cirte.
She had indu(trioufly avoided cvcry opportuni:y of ratifving the vol. ii'
acts of parliament of 156o, in favour of the reformation. 415.
Even the protection, which, ever since her retuin, fihe had as-
forded the protestant religion, was merely temporary, and de-
clared by her own proclamation to be <of torce, only " till fle
should take rome final order in the mattr ors reliioln (." The t 1eit.
vigilant zeal of the preachers was inattcnrive to none of thef 5S4' 51"
circumstances. The coldness of their principal leaders, who
were, at this time, entirely devoted to the court, tadded to their
jealousies and fears. Thele they uttered It) the people, in
language which they ceteemed suitable to the necellity of the
times, wlich the queen reckoned dilrclpcCtlul, and insolent.

In

BooK III. In a meeting of the general assembly, Maitland publickly ac-
»'-v~-' cufed Knox of teaching seditious docrine, concerning the right

5S64. of fubjecEs to refill those sovereigns, who trespass against the

duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward
to juilify what he had taught. And upon this general doarine
of refiltance, Co just in its own nature, but so delicate in its ap-
plication to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which
admirably displays the talents and character of both the dif-
putants; the acuteness of the former, embellifled with learn-
ing, but prone to subtlety, the vigorous understanding of the

t Knox, latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and superior to all feart.
3496 T w o years had already been confunied, in fruitless negotia-
Diflnula- tions concerning the marriage of the Scottifl queen. Mary
ltin boh had full leisure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit
ot lliza- of all Elizabeth's proceedings, with relpec to that affair. But,
heth and in order to set the real intentions of the English queen in a
Mary,
with re- clear light, and to bring her to fime explicit declaration of her
gard to her sentiments, Mary, at last, intimated to Randolph, that, on
mArriage. condition her right of fucceflion to the crown of England was
Feb. .S publickly acknowledged, site was ready to yield to the folicita-
f Keith, tions of his miffrefs in behalf of Leicester t. Nothing could
'69. be farther than this from the mind and intention of Elizabeth.

The right of succession was a myffery, which, during her
whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched, and unexplained.
She had promised, however, when fle first began to interest
herself in the marriage of the Scottili queen, all that was
now demanded. How to retreat with decency, how to elude
her former offer, was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

Tlt E facility, with which lord Darnly obtained permiflion

to visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability,
to that embarraffinent. From tle time of Melvil's. embassy,
Ilad Lcnox had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Eliza-
beth was no stranger to the ambitious hopes, with which that
vount nobleman flattered himself She had received repeated
advices froml her inilifters, of the sentiments, which Mary be-
+ :il1, gan to entertain in his favour . It was entirely in her power,

: > to prevent his stirring out of London. In the present conjunc-

tur'e, however, nothing could be of more advantage to her,
than Darnly's journey into Scotland. She had already brought
one actor upon the stage, who, under her management, had,
for a long time, anmufed the Scottifli queen. She hoped, no
lets abfolutelv, to direc the motions of Darnly, who was like-
wil:e her fubjcct; and again to involve Mary in all the tedious
i!'ricacics of negotiation. These motives determined Eliza-
beth and her nminiffers to yield to the solicitations of lady
Lenox.

B u i this deep laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted.
Such unexpected events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love,

are,

are, at some times, really produced by that paflion. An affair, BOOK II[
which had been the obje& of so many political intrigues, and - <
had moved and interested so many princes, was at lalt decided 1565
by the sudden liking of two young persons. Lord Darnly, was, Darnly ar-

rives in

at this time, in the firlt bloom and vigour of youth. In beau- Scotland.
ty, and gracefulness of person, he furpafled all his cotempo-
raries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts as add ease and ele-
gance to external form, and which enabled it not only to dazzle,
but to please. Mary was of an age, and of a temper, to feel Gains hie
the full power of there acconmplilhments. The imprellion queen's
which lord Darnly made upon her, was visible, from the time heart.
of their first interview. The whole business of the court was
to amuse, and entertain this illustrious guest * ; and in all those * Knox,
scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge- 369.
ther iuperficial and flowy, appeared to great advantage. His
conquelt of the queen's heart became compleat; and inclina-
tion now prompted her to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts
of which had been suggested by considerations merely poli-
tical.

ELIZA BETH, contributed, and perhaps not without de-

sign, to increase the violence of this passion. Soon after Darnly's
arrival in Scotland, file, in return to that meflage, whereby
Mary had signified her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave
an answer in such terms, as plainly unravelled her original in-
tention in that intrigue f- She promised, if the Scottish queen's t K eith.
marriage with Leicester should take place, to advance him to 270.
great honours ; but with regard to her title to the English fuc- Append.
ceflion, file would neither susser any legal enquiry to be made 158.
concerning it, nor permit it to be publicly recognized, till flie her-
self should declare her resolution never to mary. Notwith-
standing Elizabeth's former promises, Mary had reason to expec
every thing contained in this reply i her high spirit, however,
could not bear, with patience, such a cruel dilcovcry of the
contempt, the artifice, and mockery, with which, under the
veil of friendship, ile had been so long abuscd. She burst into
tears of indignation, and expressdd, with the utmost bitterness,
her sense of that disingenuous craft, which had been employed
to deceive her *. * Keith,

TH E natural efftea of this indigilation was to add to the Appc1d.

impetuosity with which flie pursued her ow:: ic hemle. Blinded '59'
by resentment, as well as by love., fle ohliieved no defets in
the man, whoLm nfe had chosen; and began to take the nc-
celfary steps towards accomnplifiling her dcfign, with all the
impatience natuial to those pallions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the queen, the canon

law made it necessary to obtain the pope's difipenfation, before
tihe celebration of the marriage. For this purpose, flhe early set
on fQot a negotiation with the court of Rome 1. Camd.

S E 396.

BOOK rIr. Ss E was busy at the fame time, in procuring the consent of
- v--*' the French king and his mother. Having communicated her

S65. design, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caf-
TFch telnau the French ambassador, she employed him, as the most

French

curt pa- proper person, to bring his court to fall in with her views.
prove of Among other arguments to this purpose, Caftelnau mentioned
the match. Mary's attachment to Darnly, which he represented to be so vio-

lent and deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her power to

t Caftla. break off the match I. Nor were the French ministers back-
464. ward in encouraging Mary's paflion. Her pride would never

stoop to an alliance with a subjec of France. By this choice,
they were delivered from the apprehensions of a match, with
any of the Austrian princes, as well as the danger of so close an
union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly professed the Roman Ca-
tholic religion, this suited the bigoted schemes which that court
had adopted.

Darnly WH I L E Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts
drgurfts to a measure which she had so much at heart; Darnly, and
the nobles. his father, by their behaviour, were raising up enemies at home,

to obftrut it. Lenox had, during the former part of his life,
discovered no great conpafs of abilities, or political wisdom ;
and appears to have been a man of a weak underfanding, and
violent pafflons. Darnly was not superior to his father in un-

* Keith, derftanding, and all his passions were still more impetuous *
721, 273- To these, he added that insolence, which the advantage of

external form, when accompanied with no quality more va-
luable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the queen's favour,
he began already to assume the haughtiness of a king, and to
put on that imperious air, which majesty itself can scarce ren-
der tolerable.

Particu- IT was by the advice, or at least with the conlent of Murray,
larly Mur- and his party, that Lenox had been invited into Scotland ;
ra. and yet, no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that king-
f K"nox, dom, than he began to enter into secret cabals with those no-
367. Keith, blemen, who were known to be avowed enemies to Murray,
174. and with regard to religion, to be either neutrals, or favourers
t Keith, of popery ;. Darnly fsill more imprudent, allowed rome rash
272. expreflions concerning those favours, which the queen's bounty
§ Id. 274. had conferred upon Murray, toefcape him §.

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly culti-

vated with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the
suspicion and difgufi of the nobles.

Tn low birth, and indigent condition of thisman, placed

him in a tation, in which he ought naturally to have remained
unknown to pofterily. But wnat fortune called him to aet,
and to fuffcr in Scotland, obliges history to descend from its
dignihy, and to record his adventures. He was the son of a
niulician in Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmontefe

arbaf-

ambaflador into Scotland, gained admission into the queen's fa- Boor III.
nmily, by his Skill in music. His servile condition had taught him -*-
fipplenefs of spirit, and insinuating manners.. He quickly crept i565.
into the queen's favour, and her French secretary happening to
return at that time into his own country, was preferred by her
to that office. He now began to make a figure in court, and to
appear as a man of weight and consequence. The whole train
of suitors and expeaants, who have an extreme f.gacity in dif-
covering the paths, which lead most directly to success, ap-
plied to him. His recommendations were observed to have great
influence over the queen, and he grew to be confidered, not
only as a favourite, but as a minister. Nor was Rizio careful to
abate that envy, which always attends such an extraordinary
and rapid change of fortune. He studied, on the contrary, to
display the whole extent of his favour. He affcted to talk often,
and familiarly, with the queen in public. He equalled the grea-
test and most opulent fubjccts, in richness of dress, and in the
number of his attendants. He discovered, in all his behaviour,
that assuming insolence, with which unmerited prosperity inspires
an ignoble mind. It was with the utmost indignation that the
nobles beheld the power; it was with the utmost difficulty, that
they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy minion. Even in
the queen's presence they could not forbear treating him with
marks of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power alone,
which exasperated the Scots. They confidered him, and not
without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the protestant reli-
gion, and fufpeaed that he held for this purpose, a secret cor-
refpondence with the court of Rome *. * Buch.

IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of 340.

this man, who, by flattery and afliduity, easily gained on his Darnly's
vanity, and inexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the queen conneeion
was employed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, with him.
towards establishing him more firmly in her affections I. But t Melv.
whatever benefit he might reap from his patronage, it did not 1I-
counterbalance the contempt, and even the infamy, to which
he was exposed, on account of his familiarity with such an
upstart.

TH o UH Darnly daily made progress in the queen's assec-

tions, the conducted herself, however, with such prudent re-
serve, as to impore on Randolph the Engliflh resident, a man
otherwise fllrewd and penetrating. It appears from his letters
at this period, that he entertained not the least fiifpicion of the
intrigue which was carrying on; and gave his court repeated
aflurances, that the Scottiffi queen had no design of nmanying
Darnly T. In the midst of his security, Mary dispatched Mait- l Keith,
land to signify her intention to Elizabeth, and to solicit her 73, 'n
content to the marriage with Darnly. This embafly was the Append.
first thing, which opened the eyes of Randolph. 59

ELIZABETR

BOOK Ill. ELIZABETH affected the greatest furprize at this sudden
L-----' efoluticn of the Scottish queen, but without reason. The

565. train was laid by herself, and flie had no cause to wonder when

A.lPr''l. it took effet. Sheexpreffed, at the fame time, her difappro-
declares a- ;ation of the match, in the strongest terms; and pretended to
gaiall the foresee many dangers and inconveniencies arising from it, to
lqueen' both kingdoms. But this, too, was mere affecation. Mary
mar.ige harLd often and plainly declared her resolution to marry. It was
Dainly. inpoflible flie could make any choice more inoffensive. The

danger of introducing a foreign interest into Britain, which
Elizabeth had so justly dreaded, was entirely avoided. Darnly
though allied to both crowns, and pofiefFed of lands in both
kingdoms, could be formidable to neither. It is evident from all
thele circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of danger
could not possibly be serious; and that, in all her violent decla-
rations against Darnly, there was much more of grimace than
of reality *.

TH E RE were not wanting, however, political motives of

much weight, to induce that wife princess to put on the appear-
ance of great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might
perhaps delay her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to ob-
firust with a weakness that little suited the dignity of her mind,
and the elevation of her character. Besides, the tranquillity of
her own kingdom was the great objet of Elizabeth's policy ;
and by declaring her dissatisfaCtion with Mary's conduc, she
hoped to alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached to
the Englifli interest, and to encourage such of the nobles, as
secretly lifapproved the match openly to oppose it. The feeds
of discord would, by this means, be scattered through that
kingdonm. Intetine commotions might arise. Amidst these,
Mary could form none of tho'e dangerous schemes, to which
the union of her people might have prompted her. Elizabeth
would become the umpire between the Scottiflh queen, and her
contending fubjeats. And England might look on, with fe-
curity, while a storm, which fle had raised, wafted the only
kingdom, which could poflibly disturb its peace.
May i. I N prosecution of this scheme, flie laid before her privy

council the mnefage from the Scottish queen, and consulted
them with regard to the answer lhe flould return. Their de-
termination, it is ealy to conceive, was perfectly conformable
to her secret views. They drew up a remonstrance against the
intended match, full of the imaginary dangers, with which

that

* EvF., the hifiorians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of

the Scottilit queen with a ulil.je.l wa far from being difagreenhlle to E11za-
beth, Knox, 369, 373. Blchan, 339. Cafelnli.t, who, at that time,
war eull iacluainited with the inttigues of both the nritili l courts, asserts,
upon groundm of great probability, that the match was wholly llizabeth's
own wolk ; Cateln. 462. and that fie rejoiced at the nccimplifliment of
it, appear frorn the letters of her own ambaffadora. Keith, l80, 288.

that event threatened the kingdom *. Nor did flie think it Boo III'
enough, to signify her disapprobation of the meafiure, either by --v-
Maitland, Mary's ambaflador, or by Randolph, her own refi- 5.65-
dent in Scotland; in order to add more dignity to the farce which Keith

" 74.

flle chore to act, file appointed fir Nicholas Thrognorton her see Ap-
ambassador extraordinary. She commanded him to declare in pendix
'the strongest terms, her diffatisfaftion with the ftep which Mary No X.
proposed to take; and, at the fame time, to produce the de- Sends
termination of the privy council, as an evidence that the senti- morton to
ments of the nation were not different from her own. Not obftru& it.
long after, file confined lady Lenox as a prisoner first in her own
house, and then sent her to the Tower t. t Keith,

IN T E L L I c E N c E of all this reached Scotland, before the Append,

arrival of the English ambassador. In the first transports of her I6
indignation, Mary resolved, no longer to keep any meafufes with
Elizabeth; and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied
Throgmorton, to return instantly to the Englilh court, and, in
her name to declare to Elizabeth, that after having been amused
so long to so little purpose; after having been fooled, and inl-
posed on so grossly by her artifices; she was now resolved to
gratify her own inclinations, and to ask no other content, but
that of her own fubjecs, in the choice of an husband. Mait-
land, with his usual sagacity, foresaw all the effects of such a
raih and angry meflage, and ventured rather to incur the dif-
plealure of his mistress, by disobeying her commands, than to
be made the instrument of tearing asunder, so violently, the
few remaining ties, which flill linked together the two queens *. l. 1 o.

MA R Y herself soon became sensible of her error. She re-

ceived the English ambaflador with refpe:· justified her own
condu6t with decency; and though unalterable in her resolution,
file affected a wonderful Solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the
measure; and even pretended, out of compliance towards her,
to put off the conrummation of the marriage for some months t. +. Keith,
It is probable, however, that the want of the pope's difpenfa- Append.
tion, and the profpe& of gaining the content of her own. ub- 278.
jects, were the real motives of this delay.

TH Is consent Mary laboured with the utmost industry to Murray's

obtain. The earl of Murray was the person in the kingdom, averlion to
whole concurrence was of the greatest importance; but fie had Darnly.
reason to fear that it would not be procured without extreme
difficulty. From the time of Lenox's return into Scotland,
Murray perceived that the queen's affections began gradually to
be estranged from him. Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court
favourites, combined againfl him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which his former ser-
vices had so little merited. He retired into the country, and
gave way to rivals, with whom he was unable to contend ;. Id. 277,
The return of the earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, whop4p'end.

had 159.

Boon III. had been accused of a design upon his life, and who had resided

c-v'-' for some time in foreign countries, obliged him to attend to his
S565. own safety. No intreaty of the queen could persuade him to a

reconcilement with that nobleman. He insisted on having him
brought to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity, to
have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durn not appear in opposition
to a man, who came to the place of trial attended by 5000 of
his followers on horseback. He was once more constrained to
leave the kingdom; but, by the queen's command, the fen-
tence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appearance, was
not pronounced against him .

* Keih, MA R Y, sensible at the fame time, of how much importance
ibid. 16o. it was, to gain a subjeA so powerful and so popular as the earl
May 8. of Murray, invited him back to court, and received him with

many demonstrations of refpea and confidence. At last she de-
fired him to set an example to her other subjeCts by subscribing
a paper, containing a formal approbation of her marriage with
Darnly. Murray had many reasons to hefirate, and even to
withhold his afient. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the queen, but discovered, on every occasion, a rooted
aversion to his person. By consenting to his elevation to the
throne, he would give him such an acceflion of dignity and
power, as no man willingly bestows on an enemy. The un-
happy consequences which might follow upon a breach with
England were, likewise, of considerable weight with Murray.
He had always openly preferred a confederacy with England,
before the ancient alliance with France. By his means chiefly,
this change in the yftemn of national politics bad been brought
about. A league with. England had been established; and he
could not think of sacrificing, to a rash and youthful paflion,
an alliance of so much utility to the kingdom; and which he
and other nobles were bound, by every obligation, to main-

*. Keith, tain t. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this oc-
16. ' cafion. Mary, though surrounded by protestant counsellors,

had found means to hold a dangerous correspondence with so-
reign catholics. She had even courted the pope's protection,

1ld. 195. who had sent her a subsidy of 8000 crowns t. Though Mur-
Molv. 1'14 ray had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the reformed

clergy, and to set the queen's condut in the mot favourable
light, yet her obstinate adherence to her own religion, could
not fail of alarming him, and by herrefolution to marry a papist,
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained, was for
ever cut offL Each of there considerations had its influence on
Murray, and all of them determined him to decline comply-

May 1.1, ing, at that time, with the queen's requefl.
A conof T- a convention of nobles, which was affeinbled a few
vention of
the noblrg days after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the queen.
UrproveC Many of. them, withouthefitation, exprefed their approbation
>'f thlie of
mTarl iagr.

of the intended match ; but as others were startled at the fame BOOK II.
dangers which alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his ex--
ani.ple, to refuse their content, another convention was ap- '565.
pointed at Perth, in order to deliberate more fully concerning . eith
this matter '.

ME A N while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own in- § Knot,

c!ination, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar 373.
to the royal family. The opposition fle had hitherto met with,
and the many contr vances employed to thwart and disappoint
her inclination, produced their usual effec on her heart, they
confirmed her pallion, and increased its violence. The fin-
plicity of that age imputed an affection, so excessive, to the
influence of witchcralt f-. It was owing, however, to not Keith'
other charm, than the irresistible power of youth and beauty, L83
over ayoung and tender heart. Darnly giew giddy with his
prosperity. Flattered by the love of a queen, and the applause
of many among her fubje'ts, his natural haughtiness and info-
lence became insupportable, and he could no longer bear ad-
vice, far less contradition. Lord Ruthven, happening to be
thefir.t person who infcrmed him that Mary, in order to sooth
Elizabeth, had delayed, for some time, creat'.ig him duke of
Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempt-
ed to tiab him *. It requ red all Mary's attention, to prevent Keilh,
iiis falling under that contempt, to which such behaviour de- Appen.
fcrvedly exposed him.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address mole Mary's

remarkably displayed. Love Iharpenrd her invention, and imade address in
her study cvery method of gaining her fLthjzcts. Mary of the gaining
nobls fnie won by her address, and mcre by her promlfes. On r.ru
some ifhe befowed lands, to others sh1e g ve new titles of ho-
nour [. S:ic even condefcerded to court thle protefinant clergy ; t Ibid,
and having irvited threc of their fiperintendarts ti Stilling, hle z83.
declared, in strong t'rn:s, lh r ref'lution to prct..ct their religion,
expr-frid her wiliingt:fs to bepref'nt al a cf r'Lr'1'ce utic: the
poi.rt in d-cr'lec wiiicih w\v-r dilit.! : d hc:v,:.e,!i the prloteiants
and papi:ts, and vw' rit f, far a' i tlhw l'.i: dt;lilc t, lcer ich
of t.eir pr-achersi, as iwc:' e i;cit rLn:!; ''. ;: 1. , r ni.t .la; ion t Knor,
By these arts, i!he ucoien gai:;.,! v.'c'rl.' upn pe ople, 73,
w:o. unlcfs thtii. j ,t:l.;:;:Y I. rn. :;

J . n :rl ir jirics, ale al-

ways rca.:y to I ilw the ac.;crs of tli.:' li.;'.::i with an indul-
genr cye.

ON the other !';.,ad, Murray ar;lt ,ls naT. iates were plainly

the dupes of Eiizabeth's Foiicy. Sl:e t;:i :.d in )l; high a strain,
of her difplcafi:re at tlie iilrnd!.d n: .h!; fl.e trcatcd lady
Lenox witi so much rigur ; fle wroe to the Scotlifli queen in
such lIrong terns ; flie recalled tt.e eorl of Le:ox ar.d his son,
in such a pcrenptoray manner, and wih 11 lich revere denuncia-
.tions of her vengeance, if thes should prufunle to disobey §; § Keith,

V O L. I. N tllat a8e,, 28i

BooK III. that all these expreflions of aversion fully persuaded them of her

- sincerity. This belief fortified their scruples with refpet to
1565. the match, and encouraged them to oppose it. They began

with forming among thenifelves bonds of confederacy and mu-
tual defence ; they entered into a secret correspondence with
the English resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's ailiftance,

* Keith, when it fliould become needful * ; they endeavoured to fill the
189, z92, nation with such apprehensions of danger, as might counterba-
298. lance the influence of those arts, which the queen had em-

ployed.

BE S ID E s there intrigues, there were secretly carried on,

by both parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and

i566. more suitable to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of

Schemes that opposition, which he imputed wholly to Murray, and re-
of Darnly
and Mur- solving at any rate to get rid of such powerful enemy, formed a
ray against plot to afaffinate him, during the meeting of the convention at
each Perth. Murray, on his part, despairing of preventing the mar-
other. riage by any other means had, together with the duke of Chatel-

herault, and the earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing
Damly, and carrying him a prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this con-

vention might have been attended with consequences extremely
tragical; but both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or
good fortune of those againit whom they were formed. Mur-
ray, being warned of his danger by some retainers to the
court, who till favoured his interest, avoided the blow, by
not going to Perth. Mary, receiving intelligence of Mlunay's
enterprize, retired with the utmost expedition, along with
Darnly, to the other fide of Forth. Conscious, on both fides,
of guilt, and inflamed with resentment, it was impossible they
could either forget the violence, which themselves had medi-
tated, or forgive the injuries, intended against them. From
that moment, all hope of reconcilement was at an end, and
their mutual enmity burit out with every symptom of implaca-
ble hatred *.

ON

* THE reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given occalinn to

many disputes and much contradiction. Some deny that any design was
formed against the life of Murray ; othcrs call in queflion the truth of the
conspiracy against Darnly. There seem, however, to be good rcalons for
believing both ; though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added
to each, many exaggerated circumstances. The following arguments
render it probable, that fume violence was intended again(t Murray.

1. This is positively asserted by Buchanan, 341. i. The Englifl ref-

dent writes to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly informed that a dcfign
was laid to murder him at Perth, and dclcribes the manner in which ihi.
plot was to have been executed. Keith, 187. 3. Murray himself con-
flantly and publicly affirmed, that such a design was formed againli his
life. Keith, App. 1o8. And though he wan called upon by the queen to
bring legal evidence of his arfertion, and a fate conduc offered him, while
he came to court for that purpose, ibid. yet whoever confiders Murray'.

fituatioun

ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, lhe summoned her vafials BooK Ill.

by proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair I-r"
thither in arms, for the protetion of her person against her 1566.
foreign and domestic enemies*. She was obeyed with all the mo, her
promptness and alacrity, with which fubjeats run to defend a vltils to
mild and popular adm niftration. This popularity, however, take arms
flie owed in a great measure to Murray, who had directed her againf

i '. , ur!rayo

administration with great prudence. But the crime of opposing Keith,
her marriage, obliterated the memory of his former services ; :98.
and Mary, impatient of contradiation, and apt to confider

N z those

fiLaation, and the spirit of thole who ruled in court at that time, will
scarce deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not choose to rilk his
perlon on such security. 4. The furious paflions of Da-nly, the fierceness
oF his resentment, which scrupled at no violence, and the rtmanners of the
age, render the imputation of such a crime leli improbable.

11. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize Darn!y's per-

son appears with fli;l greater certainty; i. From the exprels testimony of
Melvil, tz. although Buchanan, P. 341, and Knox, p 377, affect,
without any realbn, to represent this as an idle rumour. ab The question
was put to Randolph, whether the governor of Berwick would receive
Lenox and his son, if they were carried priloners to that place. Thir
plainly fllews, that some such design was in hand, and Randolph did not
discourage it by the anliver which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The preci-
pitati. n, with which the queen retired, and the reason (he gave for this
ludden fight, are mentioned by Randolph. Keith, 291. 4. A gre t part
of the Scottith nobles, and among there the earls of Argyll and Rothes,
who were themselves privy to the design, aftert the reality of the confpi-
racy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All there circumnfances leave little room to doubt of the truth of both

conspiracies. But we may observe how far lhis proof, though drawn
from public records, fall (hort, on both fides, of legal alid formal evi-
dence. Buchanan anl Randolph, in t-.eir account, of the conspiracy
againlt Murray, differ widely in almuft every circumlfanee. The ac-
counts of the attempts upon Darnly, are not more confillent. Melvil al-
ledges, that the design of the con!firatora was tn carry Darnly a prisoner
into England ; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran..
dolph stys, that they intended to carry the quern to .t. Andrew's, and
Dainly tro Cafle Camphell. The l.ord., in their decla ation, affim the
delign of the conspirators to have been to mu:der Darnly and his father,
to confine the queen in Lochleven during lile, and to ulurp the go-
vernment. To believe implicitly, hatlver th-y find in an aci, nt pa-
pe:, is a folly to which antiquaries are extremely prnne. Ancient pa-
pers, however, often contain nothing more than the nanders of a party,
and the lie of the day. The declaration of the n.ble. leferred to, is of
this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of facion.
Many things asserted in it, are evide.tly sale, or rxnggerated. Let Mur-
ray a.d his confederates he as ambitious as we can Iupplfc, they mufl have
had rome pretences, and plausible ones too. hefo'l they could venture to
imprison their Covereign for life, and to seize Ihs reil:, of go ernment;
but at that time, the queen's conduc had aff.,rded lno clnurablr excuse
for proceeding to wuch extrelities. It if, Ikewifi, emaltlible, that in
all the proclamrtionq ngai.fl Murray, ot which I;n many ase published in
Keith, Appendix 1o8, &c. neith-r :he vi-lent nrenlpit upon D.rnly, nor
that wh'ch he i. alledged to have formed againeC. the qucca berfelf, are
ever once mentioned.

BOOK III. those who disputed her will, as enemies to her person, deterinin-

V--V- ed to let him feel the whole weight of her vengeance. For this
'566. purpose ffe summoned him to appear before her upon a short

warning, to answer to such things as should be laid to his

ceith, charge *. At this very time, Murray, and the lords who ad-
Append. hered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to deliberate what

course they should hold, in such a difficult conjunature. But
the current of popular favour ran so f1ronely against them; and,
notwithstanding some fears and jealoufles, there prevailed in
the nation such a general disposition to gratify the queen, in a
matter which so nearly concerned her, that, without con;ing
to any other conclusion, than to implore the queen of England's
prote&ion, they put an end to their incffectual confultatir.s,
and returned every man to his own house.

TO G E T H R with this discovery of the v.eaknefs of her

enemies, the confluence of her subje&s from all corners of the
kingdom, afforded Mlary an agreeable proof of her own
strength. While the queen was in this prosperous situation, flie
determined to bring to a period, an affair, which had so long

Celebrates engrossed her heart, and occupied her attention. On the 29th
her mar-it of July, ihe married Lord Darnly. The ceremony was per-
riage with
Dirnly. formed in the queen's chapel, according to the rights of the

Romifni church; the pope's bull, dispensing with their mar-

t Keith, riage, having been previously obtained . She issued, at the
307. fame time, proclamations, conferring the title of king of

Scots upon her husband, and commanding that henceforth all

$ Ander- writs at law flould run in the joint names of king and queens.
Ibn, i. 33. Nothing can be a furonger proof of the violence of Mary's
See A p-
pendix, love, or the weakness of her councils, than this last ftep.
No. XI. Whether the had any right to choose a husband, without con-

sent of parliament, was, in that age, a matter of some dif-

Buchan. pute §; that she had no right to confer upon him, by her
341- private authority, the title and dignity of king; or Iby a imnple

proclamation, to raise her hufuand to be the mafler of her
people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Francis TI. indeed.
bore the fame title. It was not, however, the gift of the
queen, but of the nation; and the content of parliament was
obtained, before he ventured to affunme it. Darnly's condition,
as a subject, rendered it still more neceflary to have the con-
currence of the supreme council in his favour. Such a violent
and unprecedented ftietch of prerogative, as the substituting :
proclamation in place of an ad of parliament, might havc
justly alarmed the nation. But the queen possesscd so entirely
the confidence of her fibijeEts, that, notwithstanding all the
clamours of the malecontents, no symptoms of general dill
content appeared on that account.

EVE :

Ev E N amidst that scene of joy, which always accompanies BOOK II.

successful love, Mary did not susser the course of her vengeance -v
against the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days S66.
after the marriage, Murray was again summoned to court,
under the feverell penalties, and, upon his non-appearance, the
rigour of jultice took place, and he was declared an outlaw * Keith,
At the fame timne, the queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, 3°9 310
who ever since his father's infurre&ion in the year 1 562, had
been detained a prisoner; ihe recalled the earl of Sunderland,
who, on account of his concern in that conspiracy, had fled
into Slanders; and flhe permitted Bothwell to return again into
Scotland. The first, and last of these, were among the nmofi
powerful fiubjets in the kingdom, and all of them animated
with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they esteemed the
enemy of their families, and the author of their own fulferings.
This common hatred became the foundation of the ftriaelt
union with the queen, and gained them an ascendant over all
her councils. Murray himself confidered this confederacy with
his avowed enemnies, as a more certain indication than any
measure fle had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms*. Marchce
But the queen having ordered her fubjers to march against again

Murray and

them, they were driven to the last extremity. They found his affoci.
themselves unable to make head against the numerous forces, ates.
which Mary had af'embled; and fled into Argylefhire, in ex-
peEtation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they had secretly
dilpatched a messenger, in order to implore her immediate
assistance t-. - Keitil

ME A N while, Elizabeth endeavoured to cmbarrafs Mary, 3' 3.

by a new declaration of disgust at her condut. She blamed Elizabch
both her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with iintrp,,.
which lhe had concluded the marriage. She required Lenox ill their
and Damly, whom ihe still called her fubjees, to return into flavo"t
England ; and at the fame time, flhe warmly interceded in be-
half of Murray, whose behaviour fle represented to be not on-
ly innocent, but laudable. This message, so mortifying to the
pride of the queen, and so full of contempt for her hulband,
was rendered till more insupportable, by the petulant and
saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the person who delivered it t. t CII1J.'i
Mary vindicated her own conduEt with warmth, but with great 398'
lfrength of reason; and rejected the interceflion in behalf of

Murray,

* After their fiuitlers conflllttion in Stirling, the Lords retircd to their

own houses. Keith 3.4. Murray was (lill at St. Andrew's on July iz.
Keith, 306. By the places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhbitants
o' the different counties, Aueuft 4, it appcars that the quecn's intention
was to march into Fife, the county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy,
and other chiefs of the malecontents ricrlcd. Kcith, 310. Their flight
into the well, Keith, 312, prevented this expedition, and the former rcn.
dlczvous was altcrcd, Kclih, 31o.

BOOK III; Murray, not without signs of resentment at Elizabeth's pre-

_-.-~» tending to intermeddle in the internal government of her king-
z 566. dom §.

A/Kendh SHE did not, on that account, intermit, in the lead, the
99Ap d. ardour, with which she pursued Murray and his adherents '.

They now appeared openly in arms; and having received a

t Knox, small supply in money from Elizabeth t, were endeavouring to
380. raise their followers in the wefftem counties. But Mary's vigi-

lance hindered them from aftembling in any considerable body.
All her military operations, at that time, were concerted with
wisdom, executed with vigour, and attended with success.
In order to encourage her troops, she herself marched along

$ Keith, with them, rode with loaded pistols t, and endured all the
Append. fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. Her alacrity in-

ipired her forces with an invincible resolution, which, together
with their superiority in number, deterred the malecontents
from facing them in the field; but having artfully pafled the
queen's army, they marched with great rapidity to Edinburgh,
and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of that city to arms.
Ang. 31. The queen did not susser them to remain long unmolested;

and, on her approach, they were forced to abandon that place,
II Id. 3t5. and retire in confusion towards the western borders J.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout they had ta-

ken, Mary employed that interval in providing for the security
of the counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seized the
places of strength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged
the considerable barons in those shires, which The most fufpeEt-

§ Keith, ed, to join in associations for her defence §. Having thus left
APSend. all the country behind her in tranquillity, she, with an army

18,ooo ftrorg, marched towards Dumfries, where the rebels
then were. During their retreat, they had sent letters to the
queen, from almost every place where they halted, full of iib-
mission, and contairing various overtures towards an accor.-

They are modalion. But Mary who determined not to flip such a fa-
obliged to vourable cpporrunily of crushing the mutinous spirit of her
retire into / , - with A
England. lub.jtls, rejeted tlem with disdain. As me advanced, tie
s· See Ap- n alecontents retired alld, having received no effetual aid
pend. No. from Elizabeth t, they despaired of any other means of safety,
Xll. Xlll. fled into Ergland, and put themselves under the protection of

the earl of Bedford, warden of the marches.

No T H I N
N., which Bedford's personal friendship for Mur-

they meet ray could fupp!y, was wanting to render their retreat aeccable.
with unex- r t e

tmU c ite

petted ill But Elizabeth herself treated them with extreme neglect. S'le
treatment. had
from lliza.
be'.. * The rnft confilcrable plerfonw vho jn;ned Murray, were the duke

of Chitelherault, tl:e earls us Arpylc, C;tlncAirn, Rothes; Lord Boyd
and Ochdllce; t, laird, or (Gr:Ilcg, Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Car-
mylie, L.awerR, RBr, I)rrGI.or.J, Pilttrrow C.mptruller, and the Tutor ot
Pitcur. Knox, 3 2.

had fully gained her end, and, by their means, had excited BOOK III.
such discord and jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all '
probability, long diftraA and weaken Mary's councils. Her '566
business now, was to save appearances, and to jufltify herself to
the ministers of France and Spain, who accused her of so-
menting the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. The expe-
dient ie contrived for her vindication, firongly displays her
own character, and the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign prince. Murray, and Hamil-
ton, abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fugi-
tives to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that wel-
come reception which was due to men, who, out of confi-
d nce in her promises, had hazarded their lives and fortunes,
could not even obtain the favour of an audience, until they
had meanly consented to acknowledge, in the pretence of the
French and Spanish ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given
them no encouragement to take arms. No sooner did they
make this declaration, than ihe aflonifhed them with this re-
ply, " You have declared the truth ; I am far from setting an
example of rebellion to my own fubjets, by countenancing
those who rebel againfl their lawful prince. The treason, of
which you have been guilty, is detestable; and as traitors I
banish you from my presence *." NotwithRianding this scene * Melt.
of farce and of falfhood, so dishonourable to all the persons L'
who ated a part in it, Elizabeth permitted the malecontents
peaceably to reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly with
money, and renewed her interceflion with the Scottish queen
in their favour t. t Kno3 ,

TH E advantage flhe had gained over them did not satisfy 38

Mary; flie refoved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party,
which Ihe dreaded, from ever recovering any footing in the
nation. With this view, she called a meeting of parliament;
and in order that a (entence of forfeiture might be legally pro-
nounced against the banished lords, flhe summoned them, by Deccrnb. i.
public proclamation, to appear before it §. § Keith,

TH E duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, 30o

obtained a Ceparate pardon; but not without difficuliy, as the
king violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave
the kingdom, and to resde for some time in France t. t Knox,

TH E numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, 389.

the vigour with which she aaed, and the length of time flhe
kept them in arms, resemble the efforts of a prince with reve-
nues much more considerable than those which she possessed.
But armies were then levied and maintained by princes at finall
charge. The vassal followed his superior, and the superior
attended the monarch, at his own expence. Six hundred
horfeinen, however, and three companies of foot, besides her
guards, received regular pay from the queen, This extraor-

dinary

BOOK I. diny charge, together with the difburf:,-ents occasioned by
-'-r- ' her marriage, exhaulied a trcafury, which was far from being
1566. rick In this exigency, mary devices were fallen upon for

raising money. Fines were levied on the towns of St. An-
drew's, Perth, and Dundee, which were fufpeaed of favour.
ing the malecontents. An unusual tax was imposed on the
boroughs throughout the kingdom; and a great fum was de-
mandedof the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan. This
urprecedented exation alarmed the citizens. They had re-
course to delays, and farted difficulties, in order to evade it.
These Maly construed to be ads of avowed disobedience, and
inftan:ly co.nmitted fLveral of them to prison. But this feve-
rity did not subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, which pre-
vailed among the inhabitants. The queen was obliged to
mortgage to the city, the fiuperiorily of the town of Leith,
383, 3'. by which fle obtained a considerable fum of money *. The

thirds ofecclefialtical benefices proved another source, whence
the queen derived some supply. About this time, we find the
protestant clergy con'plaining more bitterly than ever of their
poverty. The army, it is probable, exhausted a great part

ftMaif. oof that fund, which was apprrpriated for their maintenance t.
Edinburgh Tt s afiemnblies of the church were not unconcerned spec-
27. tators of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meet-
Church as- ing, June 24, several of the malecontent nobles were present,
f~irs. and feemn to have had great influence on their decisions. The

high firain in which the alllembly addrefe-d the queen, can be
imputed only to those fears and jealousies, with regard to re-
ligion, which they endeavoured to infuse into the nation. The
assembly complained, with fime bitterness, of the stop which
had been put to the progress of the reformation by the queen's
arrival in Scotland ; they required not only the total fiippreflion
of the p':pil1l worlhip throughout the kingdom, but even in
the queen's own chapel; and hefides the legal eftabllfhrent
of the protellant r:liion, they demnarded that Mary herself
fllould publicly enilr,icc it. 'Th queen, after some delibera-
tion, replied, ilin n,:ith,:r her cGifci-ncc, nor her intereit,

ould pct:lriir her to rt!.. ilch a itep. The former would for

ever r:.proach h::r so :. cliatgeL, vliich proceeded from no in-
ward :onviti;on ; thti lattr wuould iuIfer Iy the offennce, which
her apotl(acy ji.uu! .ix.' lo trle k'mi' ui' Fiance, and herother
", 6 ijlic;: o1i 1I1 c:tilirlIc(:li i.

I r is iciiairk:tl.,, I hlit h the prj,.i u. fitimtion of the queen's

affa:irs, during ti' yt" ", Il.' i!n o wink fniCme cJlLnge in fa-
vour of her reIliiujn. 'l' ;, -:il; r!4 Lcnox, Athol, and Caf-
rlls, openly aI.il cnd lla;lr; ;li. I;.rlcl;' afordtd the catholics
a InJrec avowcdu pii l;.r.l ilii lh iirmlly ; and, by her per-
nifrl(,i llte olf tlc anci,'.it l.JiiL: ; vucr.iur;d to pr',ccil pub-
1' d. 119, lickjto t ire people I-

Tr
' E

# BOOK IV.

THE

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

0 F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IV.
A S the day appointed for the meeting of parliament ap- BooK IV.

proached, Mary and her ministers were employed in de-

liberating concerning the course which it was noft proper to 566.
hold with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted 41.ry', (de-
her to rat no bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecon- liberations
tents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her interest con- the exiled
ipired with her pareons in rendering dear to her; they were the nobles.
leaders of a party, whose friendl hip she had been obliged to
court, while Ihe held their principles in abhorrence; and they
were firmly attached to a rival, whom flhe had good reason both
to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty considerations

might be urged. The noblemen, whole fate was in suspense,
were among the noft powerful subjects in the kingdoml; their
wealth great, their connections extenive ; and their adherents
numerous. They were now at mercy, the objelts of com-
paflion, and suing for pardon with the mnoft humble fubmif-
son.

IN those circumftanccs, an aCt of clemency would exalt the

queen's charater, and appear no less fpiendid among foreigners,
than acceptable to her own lilbjects. Mary herlelt, though
highly incensed, was not inexorable ; but the king's rage was
implacable and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of
the fugitives, from various quarters. M,)rton, Ruthven, Mait-
land, and all who had been inelmbers of the congregation, were
not forgetful of their ancient union with Murray, and his fel-
low-fufferers; nor neglectful of their safety, which they
efeemed of great importance to the kingdolm. Mclvil, who at
that time poffelfed the queen's confidncei, f;conded their soli-
citations. Ard Murray, having ituopedl I. low as to couot
Rizio, that favourite, who wvasd udfiruli ofl i'cur.inr his pro-

n'tlotJ

BooK IV. teC.ion againt: the king, whose displeasure he had lately incur-
t-.--. red, seconded the interceflions of his other friends with

1566. the whole of his influence *. The interposition of fir
Me'vil, Nicholas Throgmorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's
115' anbaffador in Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of

more weight than all these, and attended with more fuccef,.
ThrogJnorton, out of enemity to Cecil, had embarked deeply
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the Englifls court,
in order to undermine the power and credit of that rninifler.
He espoused, for this reason, the cause of the Scottilh queen,
towards whose title and pretensions the other was known to
bear little favour; and ventured, in the present critical junc-
ture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the most salutary
advices with regard to her conduct. He recommended the
pardoning of the earl of Murray and his associates, as a nlea-
sure no less prudent than popular. An action of this nature,
fays he, the pure effec of you majesty's generosity, will spread
the fame of your lenity and moderation, and engage the Eng-
lif to look towards your accession to their throne, not only
without prejudice, but with desire. By the fame means, a
perfect harmony will be restored among your own fubjets,
who, if any rupture should happen with England, will serve

Melt. you with that grateful zeal, which your clemency cannot fail
re"9.s of inspiring*.
tS trehti s THESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, to which
them with his reputation for wildom, and known attachment to the queen,
clemency. added great authority, mnade a deep impression on her spirit.

Her courtiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed on
her, notwithstanding the king's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her
· Id. 125. own private efentmnent to the interceflion of her fubjets, and

the wihles of her friendss-. With this view, the parliament,

C;nool. which had been called to meet on the 4th of February, was
·vol. . 124. prorogued to the 7th of April t; and in the mean time, flie

was bury in confidering the manner and form in which flie
fliculd extend her favour to the Lords who were under dif-

ls diverted grace
from th:is grace.
rculutiin T H o U G HI Mary discovered, on this occasion, a mind natu-
y the soli- rally prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, flie wanted
citatiolnsof irnlnels, however, to resist the influence, which was fatally
Fr3aiLe, and employed to disappoint the efflcts of this amiable disposition.
her z1al for About this time, and at no great dillance from each other,
Frb. 3. two envoys arrived fiom the French king. The former was

intrusted with matters of mere ceremony alone ; he congratu-
lated the queen on her marriage, and invested the king with
tlh cnfigrs of the order of St. MIichael. The inftruEtions of
the latter related to matters of more importance, and produced
}§ Ka;ih, agreater clfccss §.

iA A interview between Charles IX. and his sifter the queen of

Sl.;; i i ;.i bcen cf;cn p rpo:d ; and after many obstacles arising

from

from the opposition of political interest, was at las appointed BOOK IV.
at Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the '- -J
duke of Alva attended his mistress. Amidst the scenes of pub- 566.
lic pomp and pleasure, which seemed to be the role occupation
of both courts, a scheme was formed, and measures concerted,
for exterminating the Hugonots in France, the protestants in the
low countries, and for fupprefling the reformation throughout
all Europe*. The active policy of pope Pius IV. and the* Thua.
zeal of the cardinal of Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged lib. 37-
dispositions, so suitable to the genius of the Romilh religion, and
so beneficial to their own order.

IT was an account of this holy league which the second

French envoy, brought to Mary, conjuring her, at the fame
time, in the name of the king of France, and the cardial of
Lorrain, not to restore the leaders of the protestants in her king-
dom to power and favour, at the very tine when the catholic
princes were combined to destroy that set, in all the countries
of Europe t. Mclv.

PoP E RY is a species of false religion, remarkable for the I'6.

strong possession it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of
deep infight into the human character, and improved by the
experience and observation of many fucceflive ages; it arrived
at last to a degree of perfection, which no former system of
superstition had ever attained. There is no power in the un-
derftanding, and no passion in the heart, to which it does not
present objects, adapted to route and to interest them. Nei-
ther the love of pleasure, which, at that time, prevailed in
the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which oc-
cupied the court of Spain, had secured them from the dominion
of bigotry. Laymen and courtiers, were agitated with that
furious and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as
peculiar to ecclefiafrics ; and kings and ministers thought them-
lelves bound, in confcicnce, to extirpate the protcflantdoArine.
Mary herself was deeply tinEtured with all the prejudices of
popery; a pafiionate attachment to that superstition is visible
in every part of her charaacer, and runs through all the scenes
of her life : she was devoted, too, with the utmost submission
to the princes of Lorrain, her uncles; and had been ac-
cuftonied, front her infancy, to liften to all their advices, with
a filial'refpec. The profpec of restoring the public cxercifi
of her own religinn, the plcafure of coii!plying with her uncles,
and the hopes of gratifying the French monarch, whom the
present situation of her alfairs in England maide it neccefary
to court, counterbalanccd all the prudent confidcrations which
had formerly weig'hed with l;cr. She inflantly joindl the con-
federacy, which iad been formend fnr the dcelelrutinn of the pro-
teftants, and altered the whole plan n!' her cenrid:;t, with rc- * see Ap-
gard to Murray and his adhlcrnts ' prcn!iy,

T o ;o. X.V.

BoOK IV. To this fatal refulution mnay be imputed all the fubfequcnt
'-v --' calamities of Mary's life. Ever fincc her return into Scotland,

i566. fortune may be laid to hi':ve been propitious to her, rather than

adveril ; and if her pr;afpcrity did not rile to any great height,
it had, however, fuffcrcd no considerable interruption. A
thick and fettled cloud of adversity, with few gleams of
hope, and none of real enjoyment, covers the remainder of
her days.

TH E effcts of the new system, which Mary had adopted,

were soon vifiblc. The time of the prorogation of parliament
was filortened ; and by a new proclamation, the i zth of March

t Keith, was fixed for its meeting t. Mary resolved, without any fur-
3.6. ther delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel lords, and,

at the fame time, determined to take some ftep toward the re-
eftablifhmcnt of the Romifih religion in Scotland S. The lords
of the Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the business
which was to come before the parliament. They were all per-
sons in whom the queen could confide, and bent to promote
her dtfigns. The ruin of Murray and his party feelned now
inevitable, and the danger of the reformed Church imminent,

And pre- when an event unexpeCtedly happened, which saved both. If
vented we regard either the barbarily of that age, when such acts of
the confpi- violence were common, or the mean condition of the unhappy
racy againtl
Rizio." 1 person who suffered, the event is little remarkable; but if we

reflit& upon the circumstances with which it was attended, or
upon the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely
mnemorable ; and the raise and progress of it deserve to be traced
with great care.

Darnly lSec DA R N .Y'S external accomplifliments had excited that fud-
t!ic querl's den and violent paJlion which raised him to the throne. But
affrt:o. tihe qualities of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of

his ptrfon. Of a weak understanding, and without experience,
cnlceited at the fame time of his own abilities, and ascribing
l.is extraordinary fuccef entirely to his diftinguiflied merit. All
the queen's favour made no impreflion on such a temper. All

her

t It it n-t on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the queen

with thc defirmn of re-ellablifiing the Roman Catholic religion. He, in-
deed, alTfre. Ihat the alltair, which llould have been ireacd in the clurch
of St. Giles, wcic alicady provilied, 394. i. Mary herself, in a letter
to the arcihliill.op of Glaltvow her ambassador in Fiance, acknowledlige,
' that intlh tl:': irli:nenit, flie intended to have done some good, with r':l-
pe to rcilloiing thie old religiun." Keith, 331. 2. Thel piritual lordJ,
i. r. the popilh cclefiltics, had, by her authority, resumed their ancient
place in il:at ;lTi:mrl ly,, ibid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bay-
onnr, Keith, \l'pend. 167. 4. She allowed mass to be celebrated in dif-
frenlt pati; <t e tliLi kt;.Jlotn, ibidl. and declared tlat (fie woulll have mals
flee I', :tii mrni who woul:l hear it, Cod. vol. i. 27.1. . B hlckwooll,
who t.a. tlsnililed by :!te arcllililhop of Glilgow with materials tfir wri-
itil! hi .I.rt)lre de .' .rie, afTirms that the queen intended to have pro-
crllle, il thi. 'iarnrt r, il not the re-eflablinlment of the catholic re-
lili,,, a! I.lr,lt icrncil.ili lor the eall of catholics. ebb. vol. ii. 104.

her gentleness could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable BOOK IV.
Ipirit. All her attention to place about him pcrfons capable of '----,-
direcing his conduct, could not prelcrve him fiom raflh and s566-
imprudent actions *. Fond of all the aiiulfciicnts, and even vo i. '.
prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by degrees, care-
less of her person, and a stranger to her company. To a wo-
man, and a queen, fiich belhavioiu was i!trler:eblc. The lower
she had stooped in order to raise him, his behaviour appeared
the more ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion to the
strength of her firit affection, was the violence with which her
disappointed pafiion now operated. A tiew months after the
marriage, their donlefic quarrels began to be obfl-\rvd. The
extravagance of Darnly's amibition gave rill to t!hi:e. Inirtad
of being satisfied with a share in tih adninirilration of govern-
ment, or with the title of !;-g, whichl Ma.rv, by an unprece-
dented firetch of power, had conferred on liinl, he delmanded
the crown matrimonial with most inrolent iii:portutiity'. And I Keith,
though Mary alledged that this gift was beyond her pwrr, and 3 9
that the authority of parlianlcnt nmut be interposed to bci.ow K'''x, 4c4.
it, he wanted either underllanding to comprehend, or te:n-
per to admit so just a defence; and often rncewed and urged
his request.

Ri z I o, whom the king had at firfl taken into great con- Surceets

fidence, did not humour hlim in these follies. By this, he in- Rizio to be
curred Henry's displeasure; and as it was impoflible for Mary tiL caui:
to behave towards her husband with the fame affetion which dif- ot I'
tinguifled the firfl: and happy days of their union, he imputed
this coldncfs, not to his own behaviour, which had so well
merited it, but to the irfinuations of Rizio. Mary's own con-
duEt confirmed and strengthened these fifpicions. She treated
this stranger with a familiarity, and admitted hini to a fliare in
her confidence, to which neither his first condition, nor the
office fie had lately befiowtd upon him, gave him any title.
le v ns perpetually in her presence, intermneddled in every bufi-
ness, and, together with a few favourites, was the companion
of all her private amfenien ts. The iauglhty fiirit of Dnrnly
could not bear the intrusion of such an upstart i and impatient
of any delay, and unreltrained by any scruple, he instantly re-
lolved to get rid of him by violence.

A T the fame time, another design, which took its rife fronm Pi7.i *. tc

very different motives, was carrying on againlc ihe life of Rizio. by the
Morton, Ruthven, Lindlay, and Maitland, were the contrivers s'ien'. of
of it. In all former commotions they had been Il'iily united nIleit
with Murray, though in the late infurrecrion they had cdeerted
him, for various reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the
family of Angus, and during the minority of the nreflet earl,
ated as chief of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married
to the king's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood.

.R,1

BoOK IV. All there had warnly concurred with the queen in promoting a
^--h ' marriage, which did so much honour to the house of Douglas,

5'66. ond naturally expeced, that under a king of their own blood,

t;:e chief management of affairs would be committed to them.
Miaitiand, with his usual sagacity, foresaw that Murray's op-
p!'fition to the match would prove dangerous and ineffectual;
r;:t whoever ruled at court, he hoped, by his dexterity and
l.lents to render himself necessary and of importance. They
v'crrc all equally diflppointed in their expectations. The king's
hcadftrong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The
queen could not help distrusting men who had been so long
and so intimately connected with Murray, and gave herfclf up
iltircly to such counfellcrs as complied with all her inclinations.
The return of that nobleman and his followers was therefore
the only event which could restore Morton, Aiaitland, and their
afTociates to their former ascendant over the queen's councils.
For this reason, nothing could be more mortifying to them,
than the resolution which Mary had taken to treat the exiles
with rigour. This they imputed to Rizio, who, after he had
engaged to aid Murray with all his interest, was now the most
active instrument in promoting the measures which were con-
certed for the ruin of that nobleman. This officious zeal
compleated the disgust which they had conceived against
him, and inspired them with thoughts of vengeance, in
no wife suitable to juf'ice, to humanity, or to their own dig-
nity.

Thy corn- WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, the
bine in or- king communicated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to
t.r tornur- Icrd Ruthven, and implored his affifance, and that of his
fl" bir, friends, towards the execution of this design. Nothing could

be more acceptable to them than this overture. They saw at
ence all the advantages they would reap, by the concurrence
of fucli an afrociate. Their own private revenge upon Rizio
would pats, they hoped, for an act of obedience to the king;
and they did not despair of obtaining the restoration of their
Laniflled friends, and security for the protestant religion, as the
price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henly was no less fickle, than ralh, they hesitated

for tioee time, and determined to advance no farther, without
taking every pollible precaution for their own fafcty. They did
not, in the mean time, susser the king's resentment to abate.
Morton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing age, in
all the arts of insinuation and address, took the young prince
under his management. Ie wrought upon his ruling passion,
ambition to obtain the matrimonial crown. He represented
Rizio's credit with the queen to be the chief and only obitncle
to his fucccfs in that demand. This minion, alone, he said,
possestd her confidence; and out of complaiifnce to him, her

fubjeas,

fubjees, her nobility, and even her hufliand, were excludedBooK IV.
from any participation of her secret councils. Under the ap- '--./
pearance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated, and l566.
the king perhaps believed, that a familiarity of quite a different
and of a very criminal nature might be concealed*. Such
various and complicated pafions raged in the king's boson, with
the utmost fur)t. He became more impatient than ever of any
delay, and even threatened to strike the intended blow with his
own hand. At last, preliminaries were setti'd on both fides,
and articles for their mutual security agreed upon. The king
engaged to prevent the attainder of the baniflied lords, to con-
sent to their return into Scotland, to obtain for thenm an ample
remiflion of all their crimes, and to support to the utnioft of his
power, the religion which was now eltablilhed in the kingdom.
On their parts, they undertook to procure the crown Imatrimonial
for Henry, to secure his right of fuccellion, if the queen
should die before him, and to defend that right to the utter-
most, against whatever person flnould prefuine to dispute it ; and
if either Rizio, or any other person, iliould happen to be killed
in prosecuting of the design, the king pronifed to acknowledge
himself to be the author of the enterprize, and to proteEt those
who were embarked in it *.

No TH I N G now remained but to concert the plan of opera- * Good.
tion, to choose the afors, and to afilgn them their parts in vol. ra66

.* t'_n i Perretrate

perpetrating this detestable crime. Every circumstance here that crime
paints and characterizes the manners and men of that age, and in the
fills us with horror at both. The place chosen for committing queen's

such palace.

* Of all our historians, Buchanan alone avowedly acecues Mary of a

criminal love for Rizio. 340, 344. Knox slightly insinuates that luch a
suspicion was enteltaineo, 391. Melvil, in a conversation with the queen,
intimates that he was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to
mifconflrution, 11o. The king himself feemr, both by Melvil's account,
and by his expoftu!ation with the queen, which Ruthvn mentions, to
have given credit to there furpiLions, Melv. i17. Keith. appendix, 113,
124. That the king's sus[picions were strong is lilewife evident from the
piper publilhed, Append. No XV. But, in opposition to these fliuficions,
and they are nothing more, we may observe that Raulet the queen's French
fecrctary was dismissed from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office
in December ,564. Keith 268. It was in consequence of this prefer-
ment, that he acquired his great credit with the queen, Melv. o7. Darnly
arrived in Scotland about two months after, Keith, 269. The queen im-
mediately conceived for him a paflion, which had all the lynptoms of
genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this paflion, and promoted the mar-
riage with all his intercft, Mclv. .

1 l. During l'me months after the

marriage, the quern's fondnefr for Darnly c,,ntiiuued. She soon proved
with child. Frm this enumeration of circumltancet, it appears almoll
impofliblc that the queen, urlefs we fippolde her to have been a woman
utterly abandoned, could carry on any climinal intrigue with Rizio. But
the silence of Randolph the lnglifli refidenr, a man abundantly ready to
mention, and to aggravate Mary's faults, and who does not once insinuate
that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is in itl'cf a
sufficient vindication of her innocence.

Bo : IV.fuch a deed, was the queen's bedchamber. Though Mary

- was now in the sixth month of her pregnancy, and though
a c66. Rizio might have been seized elsewhere, without any difficulty,

the king pitched upon this place, that he might enjoy the ma-
licious pieafure of reproaching Rizio with his crimes before the
queen's face. The earl of Morton, the lord high chancellor
of the kingdom, undertook to direEt an enterprize, carried on
in defiance of all the laws of which he was bourd to be the
guardian. The lord Ruthven, who had been confined to his
bed for three months, by a very dangerous difelllper, and who
was still so feeble that he could scarce walk, or bear the weight
of his own armour, was entruffted with the executive part;
and while he himself needed to be supported by two men, he
came abroad to commit a murder in the presence of his fove-
reign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the

palace with an hundred and sixty men ; and without noise, or
meeting with any refinance, seized all ther gales. While the
queen was al supper with the countess of Argyle, Rizio, and a
few cdomefl;cs, the kin. suddenly entered the apartment, by a
private paffagc. At his back, was Ruthven, clad in con:plete
armour. an:id with that ghastly and horrid look which long sick-
ness had given him. Three or four of his most trufly ac-
conplices followed him. Such an unusual appearance alarmed
those who were present. Rizio initantly apprehended that he
was the victim at whom the blow was aimed ; and in the
Ltn!oft consternation retired behind the queen, of whom he
laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person might
prove fore proteRion to him. The conspirators had proceeded
too far to be relfrained by any consideration of that kind.
Nurnbcrs of armed men rulhed into the chamber. Ruthven
drew l:is da'gger, and with a furious mien and voice, com-
lar.;ded Rizio to leave a place of which he was unworthy, and
which he had occupied too long. Mary employed tears, and
entreatics, and threatenirgs, to save her favourite. But not-
w;t! ;l;i.ing all thctc, he was torn from her by violence, and
helt'rc I:c could be dragged through the next apartment, the
r., ?e of' 'ii enemcies put an end to his life, piercing his body with

S e Ap-' fii t fix wcuni!ds.

,,'.Ai, A\r ii o ., T-untly, Bothwell, and other confidants of the
X v e Iui:..- h
vwho Ic.clgcd in the palace, were alarned at the uproar,

::;.l !il!cd wv:h the utnioft terror on Ihcir own account ; but
cit!!i r. ) vioicnce was intended againfl them, or the conlipira-
tcr" dn:fl not ilei(; the :Iollcft blood in the kingdn.m, in the
s:i;!, i!e'.ti.l ;I irner wh;h which they had ventured to take the
liie of : llalngcr. Some of them were dlinififd, and othert
naude hicir cfc.ape.

T E

Tn E conspirators, in the mean time, kept poflefllon of the BOOK IV.

palace, and guarded the queen with the utmost care. A pro-
clamation was published by the king, prohibiting the parlia- 1566.
ment to meet on the day appointed ; and meafiures were taken fine thel
by him for preventing any tumult in the city . Murray, queen her-
Rothes, and their followers being informed of every ftep taken lelf.
against Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was * Keith,
graciously received both by the king and queen. By the former, Ap61
on account of the articles which had been agreed upon be-
tween them ; by the latter, because fie hoped to prevail on him,
by gentle treatment, not to take part with the murderers of
Rizio. Their power she still felt, and dreaded; and the in-
fult which they had offered to her authority, and even to her
person, so far exceeded any crime she could impute to Murray,
that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance on them, she became
extremely willing to be reconciled to him. The obligations,
however, which Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded
their lives, on his account, engaged him to labour for their
safety. The queen, who scarce had the liberty of choice left,
was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruthven into her pre-
fence, and to grant them the promise of pardon in what-
ever terms they should deem neceflary for their own fecu-
rity.

TH E king, mean while, stood affoniflied at the boldness Buints e

and success of his own enterprize, and uncertain what course king, and
to hold. The queen observed his irresolution, and availed her- makes her
self of it. She employed all her art to disengage him from his escape.
new afrociates. His consciousness of the insult which he had
offered to so illustrious a benefatrefs, inspired him with un-
common facility and complaisance. In spite of all the warnings
he received to difRruft the queen's artifices, she prevailed on
him to difminis the guards which the conspirators had placed on
her person ; and that fame night he made his escape along with
her, attended by three persons only, and retired to Dunbar. March la;
The fchenle of their flight had been connmunicated to Huntly
and Bothwell, and they were quickly joined by them, and
several other of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crowded to tLcir chief,
in such numbers, as soon enabled the queen to let the power of
the conspirators at defiance.

TlI i s sudden flight filled them with inexprclTible conftema- Is recon-

tion. They had obtained a promlie of pardon ; and it now ilell to tho
appeared fioml the queen's conduct, trlht nothlinO mlore was in- bile n
tended by this promise, than to ainUifcl theli, and to gain time.
They ventured, however, to dcl:irnd rli acconlplil-llient of
it; but their lme.iT:: '!r was detained a pri bner, and the queen
1: i:'ncing towards Euiijburgh, at t:e head of 8000 mlen,
!:;ked in the higlicf lirain of refcntment anid revenge. She
V U. I. I had

BOOK IV. had the address, at the fame time, to separate Murray and his
^v- ' associates from the conspirators against Rizio. Sensible that

1566. the union of these parties would fornl a confederacy, which

might prove formidable to the crown, ihe exprefled great wil-
lingnefs to receive the former into favour; towards the latter,

March 19. lhe declared herself inexorable. Murray and his followers were
Thi con- no less willing to accept of pardon, on her terms. The con-
gafirn Ri- fpirators against Rizio, deprived of every resource, and in-
7io fly into capable of resistance, fled precipitately to Newcastle, having
Engiaad. thus changed situations with Murray and his party, who left

that place, a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning as

the earl of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate enter-
prize. Deferred basely by the king, who now denied his know-
ledge of the conspiracy, by public proclamations; and aban-

* Melv. doned ungenerously by Murray and his party *, he was obliged
:3o. to fly from his native country, to resign the highest office, and

to part with one of the most opulent fortunes in the king-
dom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed against

those concerned in the murder of Rizio with the utmost rigour
of law. But, in praise of her clemency, it must be observed,

K Kcith, that only two persons, and these of no considerable rank, sus-

Appcnd. sered for this crime *.
130, 334. IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance, which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the con-
federacy between the king and the conspirators the real intention
of which was assassination, the preserving of the reformed
church is, nevertheless, one of the most considerable articles;
and the fame men who were prepating to violate one of the
first duties of morality, affected the highest regard for religion.
History relates there extravagancies of the human mind, with-
out pretending to justify, or even to account for them; and
regulating her own opinions by the eternal and immutable laws
of justice and of virtue, points out such inconsistencies, as
features of the age which flie describes, and records them for
the inftruetion of ages to come.

An account As this is the second instance of deliberate faffanation
of the fre- which has occurred, and as we shall hereafter meet with many
quency of
falrrinati- other infrances of the fame crime, the causes which gave rife
on, in that to a practice so fliocking to humanity, dererve our particular
age, attention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife reasons, one

of the strongest paflions in the human mind. The natural de-
mand of this passion is, that the person who feels the injury
fliould himself inflic the vengeance due on that account.
The permitting this, however, would have been deflrutive to
society ; and punishment would have known no bounds, either
in severity or in duration. For this reason, in the very infancy

e

of the social fiate, the sword was taken out of private hands, BOOK IV.
and committed to the magistrate; But, at firit, while laws' v
aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the principle of 566.
revenge. The earliefl and most simple punilhment for crimes
was retaliation; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life
for life. The payment of a compensation to the person in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former institution. In
both these, the gratification of private revenge was the obje&
of law; and he who suffered the wrong, was the only person
who had a right to pursue, to exact, or to remit the puniJh-
ment. While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge of
one party, the interests of the other were not neglected. If
the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full proof, or
if he reckoned himself to be unjustly accused, the person to
whom a crime was imputed had a right to challenge his adver-
fary to single combat, and on obtaining the vitory, vindicated
his own honour. In almost every considerable cause, whether
civil or criminal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of
the innocence, or the property of the parties. Justice had fel-
dom occasion to use her balance; the sword alone decided
every contest. The paflion of revenge was nouriflied by all
these means, and grew, by daily indulgence to be incredibly
strong. Mankind became habituated to blood, not only in
times of war, but of peace ; and from this, as well as other
causes, contracted an amazing ferocity of temper, and of man-
ners. This ferocity, however, made it neceflary to difcou-
rage the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of compenfa-
tions in criminal cafes ; and to think of Ibme milder method
of terminating disputes concerning civil rights. The punish-
ments for crimes became more feverc, a.;nd the rcegulations con-
cerning property more fixed; but the princes, whose province
it was to inflit the one, and to entfrce the other, pofre'cd
little power. Great olfcnders dcfpifed their auiboriv ; linaller
ones fieltered themselves under the jurildiiction of tlofc, friom
whose protecion they expected i !pit'y. The administration
of jultice was extremely feeble- and dilatory. An attempt to
pinlillh the crimes of a clli, atin, or ct. n of' is vafrals, often
excited rebellions and civil wars. ''o nobles, haughty and
independent, among wlhon the carfi;s of dillcorl were many and
unavoidable, who were quick in dilccrning an injury, and im-
patient to revenge it; who c:l-eenicd it ii.'a.nirus to lubmit to
an enemy, anid cowarv r, to lrgiv' hii ; viho confidered the
right of punirliing thlc .rha Ihad is.jurd :iie:n. as a privilege
cl their order, and a mn: .c!; of indpr,=J,.;..'e ;. liUcll s.ow pro-
ccdin;l.. were c::tren!(lv liir;nti:;i;c:irr'v l'he blood of their
advcrlarv was, in t;;c.' (,pinion, the rnly thing which could
:''11i aniay an aliiarn; Vwher that was not lhed, their re-
v'ne': v.as disappointcd, their cujraenr becaie fulpcetcd, and a

{0 :stain

BOOK IV. Rain was left on their honour. That vengeance, which the

sv---' impotent hand of the magistrate could not inflict, their own
1566. could easily execute; under governments so feeble, men as-

fumed, as in a state of nature, the right of judging, and re-
drefling their own wrongs. And thus afafuination, a crime of
all others the most deftruative to society, came not only to be
allowed, but to be deemed honourable.

THE history of Europe, during the lath and 15th centu-

ries, abounds with detestable instances ot this crime. It pre-
vailed chiefly among the French and Scots, between whom
there was a close intercourse at that time, and a surprising re-
semblance in their national characters. In 1407, the only
brother of the king of France was murdered publickly in the
streets of Paris ; and so far was this horrible action froml meet-
ing with proper puniflmuent, that an eminent lawyer was allow-
ed to plead in defence of it before the peers of France, and
avowedly to maintain the lawfulness of affaflination. In
1417, it required all the eloquence and authority of the famous
Geribn to prevail on the council of Constance to condemn this
proposition, " That there are some cafes in which affaflination

L'Enfant. is a virtuc more meritorious in a knight than in a (quire, and
Hit. Conc. more meritorious in a king than in a knight*." The number of
de Coast. eminent persons who were murdered in France and Scotland,

on account either of private, or political or religious quarrels,
during the 1 5th and i6th centuries, is almost incredible. Even
after those causes, which sirs gave rife to this barbarous prac-
tice, were removed ; after the jurisdiction of magistrates, and
the authority of laws were better established, and become more
universal; after the progress of learning and philosophy had
polified the manners, and humanized the minds of men, this
crime continued in some degree. It was towards the close of
the 17th century before it disappeared in France. The additi-
onal vigour, which the royal authority acquired by the acceffi-
on of James VI. to the throne of England, seems to have put
a stop to it in Scotland.

TH E influence, however, of any national custom, both on

the understanding and on the heart, and how far it may go to-
wards perverting or extinguifling moral principles of the
greatest importance, is remarkable. The authors of those
ages have perfectly imbibed the sentiments of their cotempo-
raries, with regard to affaflination; and they, who had lei-
sure to reflec, and to judge, appear to be no iore shocked at
this time, than the persons, who committed it during the heat
and impetuosity of paflion. Buchanan relates the murder of
cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without exprefling those feel-
ings which are natural to a man, or that indignation which be-

B u-lnn. came an historian 1. Knox, whose mind was fiercer and nlore
;95, 345. unpolilhed, talks of the death of Beatoun and of the duke of

Guile,

Guise, not only without censure, but with the utmost exulta- BooK IV.
tion *. On the other hand, the biihop of Ross mentions the -,
alfafiinatlon of the earl of Murray, with some degree of ap- 'S66.
plause t. Blackwood dwells upon it, with the inoft indecent ,nox,
triumph, and ascribes it directly to the hand of God T. Lord 3
Ruthven, the principal actor in the conspiracy against Rizio,
wrote an account of it some short time before his own death, t Anders.
and in all his long narrative there is not one exprelion of re- · 84.
gret, or one symptom of compuntion for a crime no less dif- 63e-*
honourable than barbarous §. Morton, equally guilty of the § Keith,
fame crime, entertained the fame sentiments concerning it; Append.
and in his last moments, neither he himself, nor the miniters " 9.
who attended him, seem to have confidered it as an ation
which called for repentance; even then he talks of David's
Ilaughter as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commend-
able deed 11. The vices of another age astonish and shock us ; Crawf.
the vices of our own become familiar, and excite little horror. Appemd
I return from this digreflion to the course of the history.

THE charm, which had at first attached the queen to Thequeen':

Darnly, and held them for some time in an happy union, was hatred to
now entirely diflolved; and love no longer covering his follies Darnly in.
and vices with its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their creares.
full dimension and deformity*. Though Henry published a Sce Ap.
proclamation, difclaining any knowledge of the conspiracy pend. No.
against Rizio, the queen was fully convinced, that he was not XVI.
only acceflbry to the contrivance, but to the commission of that t Keith,
odious crime t. That very power, which with liberal and un- 3S50
fuipicious fondness, she had conferred upon him, he had em-
ployed to insult her authority, to limit her prerogative, and to
endanger her person. Such an outrage, it was niipoflible any
woman could bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret diltruft,
frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports of as-
feaion and confidence. The queen's favours were no longer
conveyed through his hands. The crowd of expe&tants ceased
to court his patronage, which they found to avail so little. A-
mong the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others com-
plained of his perfidiousness; and all of them despised the
weakness of his understanding, and the inconstancy of his
heart. The people themselves observed some parts of his
conduc, which little suited the dignity of a king. Addi&ed
to drunkenness, beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular paflions, which even the licenti-
oufnefs of youth could not excuse, he, by his indecent beha-
viour, provoked the queen to the utmoll; and the pallions
which it occasioned, often forced tears for her eyes, both in
public and in private '. Her aversion for him increased every , Keit,
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was often absent 3
from court, appeared there with little splendor, and was trusted

with

BOOK IV. with no power. Avoided equally by thole who endeavoured to
»_. J-..» please the queen, who favoured Morton and his aflociates, or

!566. who adhered to the house of Hamilton, he was left almost
Melv. alone in a negleaed and unpitied solitudes.

The rife of AB o U T this time a new favourite grew into great credit
Bothwell's with the queen, and soon gained an ascendant over her heart,
favour. which encouraged his enterprising genius to form designs that

proved fatal to himself, and the occasion of all Mary's fubfe-
quent misfortunes. This was James Hepburn earl of Both-
well, the head of an ancient family, and by his extensive pof,
fellions and numerous vassals, one of the molt powerful noble-
men in the kingdom. Even in that turbulent age, when so
many vast projeEts were laid open to an aspiring mind, and in-
vited it to aftion, no man's ambition was more daring than
Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or more singular expedi-
ents for obtaining power. When almost every person of dif-
tinction in the kingdom, whether papist or protestant, had
joined the congregation in opposing the dangerous encroach-
ments of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he,
though an avowed protestant, adhered to the queen regent,
and acted with vigour on her fide. The success which at-
tended the arms of the congregation having obliged him to re-
tire into France, he was taken into the queen's service, and
continued with her till the time. of her return into Scotland*.
From that period, every ftep of his conduct towards Mary was
remarkably dutiful; and amidst all the lhiftings of faction, we
scarcely ever find him holding any course which could be of-
fenfive to her. When Murray's proceedings with regard to
her marriage gave umbrage to the queen, she recalled Both-
well from that banifhnent into which she had with relutance
driven him, and confidered his zeal and abilities as the most
powerful supports of her authority. When the conspirators
against Rizio seized her person, he became the chief inftru-
ment of recovering her liberty, and served her, on that occa-
sion, with so much fidelity and success, as made the deepest
impreflion on her mind, and greatly increased the confidence

t

Ib. i. which she had hitherto placed in him -. Her gratitude loaded
9z, 93. him with marks of her bounty ; fle raised hin to offices of pro-

fit and of trust, and transaCted no matter of importance without

Melv. his advice t. By complaifancc, and afliduitv, he confirmed
Kao3, 396. and fortified thcfe dispositions of the queen in his favour, and

insensibly paved the way towards that vast project, which his
immoderate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of many difficulties, and at the expence of ma-
ny crimes, he at las accomnplifhed.

THE hour of the queen's delivery now approached. A.

her palace was defended only by a slender guard, it fecmeed
imprudent to cxpofe her person, at this time to the insults ihe

might

might susser in a kingdom torn by faetions, and prone to muti- BOOK IV.
ny. For this reason, the privy council advised the queen to '-v" .
fix her residence in the cattle of Edinburgh, the ftrongcft for- '566.
trefs in the kingdom, and the most proper place for the security
of her person '. In order to render this fccurity more perfect, * Keith
Mary laboured to cxtinguifli the domestic feuds which divided 335*
some of the principal nobles. Murray and Argyll were exaf-
perated against Huntly and Bothwell, by reciprocal and repeat-
ed injuries. The queen, by her authority and intreaties, es-
feEted a reconcilement among them, and drew from them a
promise to bury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This re-
concilement Mary had so much at heart, that Ihe made it the
condition on which she again received Murray into favour t. - Ibid.

ON the i9th of June, Mary was delivered of her only son 336; Ap"

James, a prince whose birth was happy for the whole island, Birtlh of
and unfortunate to her alone. His acceflion to the throne of Jamns VI.
England united the two divided kingdoms in one mighty mo-
narchy, and established the power of Great Britain on a firm
foundation. While she, tor early fiom her son by the cruelty
of her fate, was never allowed to indulge those tender paflions,
nor to taste those joys which fill the heart of a mother.

ME L v I L was instantly dispatched to London with an ac-

count of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at firlt, in a sensible
manner; and the advantage and superiority which her rival
had acquired by the birth of a Ton, forced tears from her eyes.
But before Melvil was admitted to audience, lhe had so far
recovered the command of herself, as to receive him not only
with decency, but with excessive cheerfulness; and willingly
accepted the invitation which Mary gave her, to stand godmo-
ther to her son r. * Mel.

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, flie resolved to 138.

celebrate the baptifim of the young prince with great pomp;
and for that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to the
French king, and to the duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
husband.

TaE queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her The queen

sentiments with refpea to the kingt. The death of Rizio, cOt"i"M
and the countenance he had given to an acion so insolent and Darnly
unjustifiable, wereftill frcfh in her memory. She was frequent- with int;f-
lypenfive and dejected t. And though Henry sometimes at- fcrcnce aaO
tended at court, and accompanied her in her progresses through neglceO.
different parts of the kingdom, he met with little reverence from p

en P

the nobles, while Mary treated him with the grearetl reserve, No. XVf.I
and did not fuffcr him to possess any authority ,. The breach t lb. 143.
between them became every day more apparent§. Attempts II Keith,
were made toward a reconcilement, particularly byCaftelnau 35c. _
the French ambassador: but after such a violent rupture, it lecithlt
was found no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new ; and Append.

though 169,

Boor IV, though he prevailed on the king and queen to pars two nights

*-v'- rtogether t, we may, with great probability, pronounce this

it66. appearance of union, to which Caftelnau trusted, not to have

t Keidb, been sincere; we know with certainty that it was not lasting.
s 69. Bo T H W L L, all this while, was the queen's prime con-
Her it. fidant. Without his participation no business was concluded,
tachment and no favour bestowed. Together with this ascendant over
to Both- her councils, Bothwell, if we may believe the cotemporary
cwell 'i- historians, acquired no lets sway over her heart. But at what

precise time, this ambitious lord sirs allowed the sentiments of
& lover to occupy the place of that duty and respect which a
fubje& owes his sovereign; or when Mary, instead of gratitude
for his faithful Services, felt a paflion of another nature rising
in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine. Such delicate
transitions of pafion can be discerned only by those, who are ad-
initted near the persons of the parties, and who can view the
secret workings of the heart with calm and acute observation.
Neither Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed there advantages. Their
tumble station allowed them only a distant access to the queen
and her favourite. And the ardour of their zeal, and the vio-
lence of their prejudices, render their opinions rash, precipi-
tate, and inaccurate. It is by the effects of this reciprocal
pafflon, rather than by their accounts of it, that subsequent
liftorians can judge of its reality.

ADV E N T U a o US as Bothwell's projeEt to gain the queen

may appear, it was formed and carried on under very favour-
able circumstances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She
possessed great sensibility of temper, and was capable of the
utmost tenderness of affe&ion. She had placed her love on a
very unworthy object, who requited it with ingratitude, and
treated her with neglect, with insolence, and with brutality.
All there {he felt, and resented. In this situation, the atten-
tion and complaisance of a man, who had vindicated her au-
thority, and proteted her person; who entered into all her
views, who toothed all her passions, who watched and improv-
ed every opportunity of insinuating his design, and recommend-

t Anders. ing his pa sion *, could scarce fail of making an impression on
I. 939 94. a heart of such a frame as Mary's.
The king THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and
refolvea to accustomed to command, could not bear the contempt under
leave cortland. which he had now fallen, and the state of insignificance to

which he saw himself reduced. But in a country, where he
was univcrfally hated or dcfpifed, he could never hope to form
a party, which would frcond any attempt he might make to re-
cover power. He addrefled himufelf, therefore, to the pope,
and to the kings of France and Spain, with many profellions
of his own zeal for the catholic religion, and with bitter com-
plaints against the queen, for neglcting to promote that inte-

reft

wis *: and soon after, he took a resolution, equally wild and Boo K IV.
defpcrate, of embarking on board a ship, which he provided, 'v
and of flying into foreign parts. It is almost impoflible to ,566.
form any fatisfaaory conjecture concerning the motives which Kno3
influence a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped, perhaps,
to recommend himself to the catholic princes on the continent,
by his zeal for religion, and that they would employ their inte-
reft towards reinstating him in the poefrfion of that power
which he had loft. Perhaps, he expected nothing more than
the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now
fallen, among .trangers, who had never been witnesses of his
former prosperity.

HE communicated the design to the French ambaflador Le His capri-

Croc, and to his father the earl of Lenox. They both endea- ciou be-
voured to dissuade him from it, but without success. Lenox, haviour.
who seems, as well as his son, to have loft the queen's confi-
dence, and who, about this time, was seldom at court, in-
ftantly communicated the matter to her by a letter. Henry, who
had refused to accompany the queen from Stirling to Edinburgh,
was likewise absent from court. He arrived there, however,
on the fame day Ihe received the account of his intended flight.
But he was more than usually wayward and peevish; and
scrupling to enter the palace, unless certain lords who attended
the queen were difiniffed, Mary was obliged'to meet him with-
out the gates. At lalt he suffered her to conduct him into her
own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from him the rea-
sons of the strange resolution which he had taken, and to di-
vert him from it. In spite, however, of all her arguments
and intreaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the
privy council, by her direction, expoftulated with him on the
fame head. He persisted, notwirhltanding, in his sullenness
and obstinacy; and neither deigned to explain the motives of
his conduCt, nor signified any intention of altering it. As he
left the apartment, he turned towards the queen, and told her,
that flie ffould not fee his face again, for a long time. A few
days after, he wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as
grounds of his difgufl. She herself, he flidk, no longer admit-
ted him into any confidence, and had deprived him of all
power; and the nobles, after her example, treated himi with
open neglect, so that he appeared in every place without the
dignity and splendor of a king.

No ' it rN c. could be more mortifying to Mary, than this Mary en-

intended flight of the king's, which would have fpreld the 'lIcaours
infamy of their domestic quarrcl all over Europe. Compassion i,a3 irena-
for a monarch who would then appear to be forced into exile ed flilht.
by her negleCt and ill usage, might have dilpofed mankind to
entertain sentiments concerning the causes of their discord,
little to her advantage. In order, therefore, to prepoftlef the

minds

BOOK 1V. minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation from any cen-
--yv--' sure with which Darnly might endeavour to load it, the privy
1566. council transmitted a narrative of this whole tranfacion, both

to the king, and to the queen mother of France. It is drawn
v.ith great art, and sets Mary's conduc in the most favourable

* eith, point of light *.
345, 347 A o u T this time, the license of the borderers called for

redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court ofjuftice at Jed-
burgh, the inhabitants of several adjacent counties were fum-

t lb. 353. moned to attend their sovereign in arms, according to custom t.
Good. vol. Bothwell was, at that time, lieutenant or warden of all the
'. 30,' marches, an office among the most important in the kingdom;

and though usually divided into three diftint governments,
bestowed by the queen's favour upon him alone. In order to
display his own valour and activity in the discharge of this
trust, he attempted to seize a gang of banditti, who, lurking
among the marshes of Liddefdale, infeired the reft of the
a '16. country. But while he was laying hold of one of those def-

perado's, he was wounded by him in several places, so that
his followers were obliged to carry him to Hermitage castle.
Mary instantly flew thither, with an impatience which strongly
marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a
queen *. Finding that Bothwell was threatened with no dan-
gerous symptom, she returned that fame day to Jedburgh.
The fatigue of such a journey, added to the anguish of mind
fle had suffered on Bothwell's account, threw her next morn-

t Keith, ing into a violent fever f. HeIr life was despaired of, but her
35'1 352 youth, and the vigour of her constitution, resifted the malignity

of her disease. During the continuance of the queen's illness,

t Ibid. the king, who resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh t ;
Append. and when he afterwards thoughtfit to make his appearance there,
133- he met with such a cold reception, as did not encourage him
* Knox, to make any long fay *. Mary soon recovered strength enough
400. to return along the eattern borders to Dunbar.

Wn I L (fle resided in this place, her attention was turned

towards England. Elizabeth, notwithstanding her promise,
and even proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but

encouraged

* The diltnce between J(edbutgh and mermitage is 18 Scottish miles,

throuih a country almost Inpairtble. The 'leiafn of the yea, was far
advanced. Bothwell l;ems to have been wounded in a fcufie, occasioned
by t e despair of a single man, rather than any open inlurreEtion of the
Lotl{erers. It does not appear that the Jueen was atLendcd thither by any
c,,nfil(rable train. HadI any military oprration been neceff.ry, as is sup-
piCJ, Good. vol. i. 304. it woull have been extremely imp;rnper to
rit;ue the queen's per;l in an expediltin againfl thieves. So soon as
the queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, fie iniantly returned; and
atit.r this we hear no more of the inliurrltlion, nor have we any proof
that the rioters took refuge in Englandl. No other reason but that which
we t.,' produced, fecine furlicicnt to account for the queen's conduit,

encouraged Morton and his associates to remain in England +. BooK IV.
Mary, on the other hand, afforded her protection to several -'-^ ~
English fugitives. Each queen watched the motions of thet 'S66.
other with a jealous attention, and secretly countenanced the t olii d.'
practices, which were carrying on, to disturb the adminiftra-
tion of her rival.

So R this purpose, Mary's ambafrador, Robert Melvil, and

her other emissaries, were extremely active and fucceisful.
We may impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that The Eng.
spirit which appeared in the parliament of England, and which liln parlia.

ment fa-

railed a storm that threatened Elizabeth's domestic trnquillity, yours NM-
more than any other event of her reign, and required all her ry's pre-
art and dexterity to allay it. tensions to

EL I Z A B E T H had now reigned eight years, without disco- the lucce-

vering the least intention to marry. A violent distemper, with sion
which she had lately been seized, having endangered her life,
and alarmed the nation with the prospect of all these calamities
which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious fucceflion; a
motion was made, and eagerly listened to in both houses, for
addressing the queen, to provide againfl any such danger in
times to come, either by signifying her own resolution to mar-
ry, or by consenting to an aa establishing the order of fuccef-
sion to the crown f. Her love to her fubjets, her duty to the t D'Erwes
public, her concern for posterity, it was pretended, not only Journ. of
called upon, but obliged her to take one of there steps. The Parl os.
insuperable aversion which she had all along discovered for
marriage, made it improbable that fle would choofs the for-
mer ; and if she complied with the latter requcll, no title to
the crown could, with any colour of justice be let in opposition
to that of the Scottifl queen. Elizabeth vwas sagacious enough
to fee the remotest confequc;ces of this nmotion, and ob-
served them with the grcatcll a!:,;icty. Mary, by refusing so
often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly inti-
mated a design of embracing the first promlifing opportunity for
prosecuting her right to the Englillh crown; and by her fe-
cret negotiations, fle had gained many to favour her title . * Melv.
All the Roman Catholics ardently wifllcd for her fucceflion. 136.
Her gentleness and humanity had rcinovcd many of those ap-
prehensions which the protcllants entertained on account of her
religion. The court fittion, which envied the power of Ce-
cil, and endeavoured to wrcft the nidliniflration out of his
hands, advanced the prctenfions of the Scottilh queen in op-
position to him. The union of the two kingdoms was a deli-
rable objeEt to all wife men in both nations; and the birth of
the young prince was a fecurily for the continuance of this blef-
sing and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

UN DE R there circuniftanccs, and while the nation was in T ii.il)etli'
such a temper, a parliamentary dcclaration of Mry's title would pe'rplexty

mvcn tho t ac-
ilavecol,

BOOK IV. have been highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present un-

-v ~ fTlettled slate of the fucceflion left much in her power. Her re-
1566. fentment alone might have gone far towards excluding any of

the competitors from the crown; and the dread of this had
hitherto restrained, and overawed the ambition of the Scottilh
queen. But if this check should be removed, by the legal ac-
knowledgment of her title, Mary would be at full liberty to pur-
fuc her dangerous designs, and to a& without fear or reserve.
Her partizans were already meditating schemes for infurreaions

* Meiv. in different parts of the kingdom * ; and an ac of parliament,
147. recognizing the rights of that princess, whose pretensions they

favoured, would have been nothing less than a signal to arms;
and, notwithitanding Elizabeth's just title to the affetions of
her fubjefts, might have flaken and endangered her throne.

Mary en- W H L E this matter remained in suspense in both houses, an
deavours to account of it was transmitted to Mary by Melvil her ambaflador.
improve this As ihe did not want advocates for her right, even among those
epoilunity. who were near Elizabeth's person, she endeavoured to cultivate

the disposition which appeared towards fettling the right of fuc-
ceflion in her favCer, by a letter to the privy counsellors of En-
gland. She exprel'ed in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friend-
ihip, which flie ascribes chiefly to their good offices, with their
sovereign, in her behalf. She declared her resolution to live in
perpetual amity with England, without urging or pursuing her
claim upon the crown, any farther than should be agreeable to
the queen. But, at the fame time, as her right of succession
was undoubted, fle hoped it would be examined with candour,
and judged of with impartiality. The nobles who attended

+- Keith, her wrote to the Englilli privy council in the fame 1frain t.
354. Mary artfully gave thele letters the air of being nothing more
Append. than a declaration of her own, and of her subjeCts gratitude
136. towards Elizabeth. But as ihe could not be ignorant of the

jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth observed the proceedings
of parliament, a flcp so uncommon as this, of one prince's
entering into public correspondence with the privy counsellors of
another, could not be otherwise construed than as taken with
an intention to encourage the spirit which had already been
iaifed among the Englilh. In this light it seems to have ap-

* Kcith, peared to Elizabeth herself *. But the disposition of her peo-
357. pie rendering it neceflfry to treat Mary's pcrfon with great de-

cency, and ler title with imuch regard, fle mentioned it to her
only in the foftefk language.

Elizabehh NiOTIx ING, however, could be a more cruel mortification
footi I Ic to a princess of Elizabeth's character, than the temper which
y l .llll. "both honfes of parliament discovered on this occalion. She

bent all her policy to defeat, or elude the motion. After al-
lowing the first heat of their zeal to evaporate, fle called into
Jicrplcl.ence a certain number of each houfc. She soothed and

carefled

carefled them; file threatened and promlifed; she remitted Booi IV.
subsidies which were due ; and refused those which were of- --v"
sered; and in the end prevailed to have this formidable motion '566.
put off for that fellion. Happily for her, the conduct of the
Scottish queen, and the misfortunes which besel her, prevented
the revival of such a motion in any future parliament r.

MEA N time, in order to preserve the reputation of inpar-

tiality, and that she might not drive Mary into any desperate
measure, she committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had
publiihed something derogatory to the right of the Scottilh
line t and signified her displeasure against a nmember of the t Card.
houfeof commons, who seemed by some words in a speech, to 40f.
glance at Mary §. § Haynes,

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to 449

promote the interest of that religion which the profefled. The oriieary
re-eftablifliment of the Romifi doctrine seens to have been her flep of
favourite passion; and though the design was concealed with Mary's in
care, and conducted with caution, lhe pursued it with a per- favour of
fevering zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay aside somewhat POpe1'
of her usual reserve ; and the aid which fle expected from the
popish princes, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne,
encouraged her to take a tlep, which, if we confider the tem-
per of the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having for-
merly held a secret correlpondence with the court of Rome, ile
now resolved to allow a nuncio fiom the pope publicly to enter
her dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at that time bishop of Mon-
dovi, was the person on whom Pius V. conferred this office,
and along with him he sent the queen a present of 20,000
crowns *. It is not the character of the papal court, to open
its treasury upon dittant or imaginary hopes. The business of
the nuncio in Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a
reconciliation of the kingdom to the Ronlilh fee. Thus Mary
herself understood it; and in her answer to a letter which the
received front the pope, after exprefling her grateful sense of
his paternal care and liberality, fie proinifes that file would
bend her whole lrrength towards the re-cftablflhinent and pro-
pagation of the cathlolic failh; that 1he would receive the
nuncio with every pollible demonstration of refpcat, and concur,
with the utr1ioft vigour, in all his designs towards promoting
the honour of Gcd, and rclforing peace to the kingdom that
file would celebrate the baptifil of the prince, according to the
cerenlo:ies which the Ronifli ritual prescribes, hoping that her
fiubjets would be taught, by this example, again to reverence
the lacramn:eis of the church, which they had so long treated
with cor;eii:pt ; ant that flie would be careful to inltill early
into her Ion the principles of a filiccre lov: and attachment to

the

· D'Ewe's Journ. o.-i 30. Carnd. 399. Mclv. 1 l. 1-1Hyncs, 446.
> Vita Card, Laur. ar. Burn. vol. iii, 325.

BooK IV. the catholic faith t. But though the nuncio was already ar-
'- -J rived at Paris, and had sent over one of his attendants with

I 366. part of the money, the queen did not think the juncture proper

for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend a magnifi-
cent embaify into Scotland, against the time of the prince's
baptifin; and as it would have been improper to offend her,
fle wifely contrived, under various pretences, to detain Laurea
* ':;i, at Paris 0. The convulsions into which the kingdom was

''. thrown Coon after, made it impossible for him to pursue his jour-

ney any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was secretly carrying on there

negotiations for Subverting the reformed church, she did not
scruple publickly to employ her authority towards obtaining for

t Keith, its ministers a more certain and comfortable fubfittence t.
5"1, 561. During this year, fle issued several proclamations and ats of
KinWx, 40 1. council for that purpose, and readily approved of every scheme

which was proposed for the more effe&ual payment of their fti-
pends. This part of her conduc does little honour to Mary's
integrity; and though justified by the example of princes, who
often reckon falfhood and deceit among the neceflary arts of
government, and even authorised by the pernicious casuistry of
the Roman church, which transfers breach of faith to heretics,
from the lift of crimes, to that of duties, such diflimulation,
however, must be numbered among those blemishes which never
stain a truly great and generous chara&er.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe ambassadors were

Decemb. yet arrived, the baptifin of the prince was put off from time to
her aver- time. Mean while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar $.
fi-n tor the Such a retirement, perhaps, suited the present tenper of her
king excel'-

5fi,'e ni;nd, and induced her to prefer it before her own palace of

1 Kcith, 1-Ioly-rood-houfe. Her aversion for the king grew every day
355. more confirmed, and was become altogether incurable. A deep

nlclancholy succeeded to that gaiety of spirit, which was na-
tural to her. The rashness and levity of her own choice, and
the king's ingratitude and obstinacy, filled her with fliame and
wi:h despair. A variety of paflions prayed at once on a mind,
all wh!ofi sensations were cxquifite, and all its emotions frong,
and often extorted from her, the last wifl of the unfortune, that

* Keitll, life itfclf would come to an end *.
]Pri :. V1. 1M u R R A Y and Maitland observed all those workings of pas-
A div'nrcC fios in the breast of the queen, and conceived hope;; of turn-
them pro- ing them to t'le advantage of their ancient associates, Morton,
poi'ej. and the other con;i'iratnrs ngainft Rizio. They were .'ill in

bai:ifllnetr, and tile quccn's refcntnient againit them continued
up,:barcd. Murravyand the fecrctary flattered thenifelves, how-
ever, that her inciina:tion to be fcparatcd from Darnly would
furmluunt this dccp-routcd aveiflun, and that the hopes of an

event
f Cona;l Vit.a Ialiibs a). Jebb, vol. ii. 51.

event so desirable might induce her to be reconciled to the con- BOOK IV.
fpirators. It was eaIf to find reasons, in the king's behaviour, - "--
on which to found a fcntence of divorce. This sentence they 'S66.
had interest enough to obtain, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament. In return for this service, they proposed to fti-
pulate with the queen to grant a pardon to Morton and his fol-
lowers. The design was firlt of all communicated to Argyle,
who, as well as Murray, owed his return to Scotland to the
conspiracy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who at that
time directed all MIlary's councils, were likewise admitted into
the concert. They juined together in making t!:- overture to
the queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's eloquence .. t Anders.
But Mlary, however desirous of obtaining that deliverance from vol. iv.
Darnly's caprices, with which they endeavoured to allure her, Part ii. 88
had nevertheless good reasons for rejecting the method, by
which they proposed to acconiplilh it. The birth of her ton
had greatly strengthened her claim upon the Englill fucceflion,
and encouraged the abettors of it to appear with greater bold-
ness, and to act with more vigour. She could scarce hope to
be divorced from her husband, without throwing some imputa-
tion on her son. This might open a new dispute with regard to
the fucceflion, and put it in the power of Elizabeth and her
ministers to call in queltion the prince's legitimacy, or at leafl to
fubjeat it to all the delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The
fear of these inconveniencies weighed with Mary, and deter-
mined her rather to endure her hard fate, than to leek relief, by
venturing on such a dangerous experiment.

TH a earl of Bedford, and the count de Brienne, English

and French ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stir-
ling, to celebrate the baptifin of her ton. Bedford was attended
by a numerous and splendid train, and brought presents from
Elizabeth, suitable to her own dignity, and the rcfpect with
which file affected, at that time, to treat the queen of Scots.
Great preparations had been made by Mary, and the magnifi-
cence displayed by her on this occasion, exceeded whatever
had been formerly known in Scotland. The ceremony itfelfDec. 17.
was performed according to the rites of the Romifli church.
But neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottilh nobles who pro-
selfed the protestant religion, entered within the gates of the
chapel *. The spirit of that age, firm and uncomplying, would * Keith,
not, upon any inducement, condescend to witncfs an action, 360.
which is eftecemed idolatrous.

HEM N i v's behaviour, at this juncture, perfecly discovers The kIing'

the excess of his caprice, as well as of his folly. IHe chore to beavilocu t
reside at Stirling, but confinedl lilnfell to Iis own apartment; a thle hap
and as the iquleen diflrufted every nobleman who ventured to tiin or tlio
converse with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing prince.
could be more singular, or was less expcated, than his choofing

to

BOOK IV. to appear in a manner, that both publiihed the contempt under

r-----' which he had fallen, and by exposing the queen's domestic un-
1566. happiness to the observation of so many foreigners, looked like

a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt
this insult sensibly; and notwithstanding all her efforts to as-
fume the gaiety which suited the occasion, and which was ne-
ceflary for the polite reception of her guests, she was some-
times obliged to retire, in order to be at liberty to indulge her
* Keith, sorrow, and give vent to her tears *. The king still persisted in

ri. his design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily threatened to

put it in execution t.

T H E ceremony of witnefling the prince's baptism was not

the sole business of Bedford's embassy. His inifruaions con-
tained an overture, which ought to have gone far towards ex-
tinguilhing those jealousies which had so long subsisted between

Flizabeth the two queens. The treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so
en eavours often mentioned, was the principal occasion of these. The
t0dCt°do'- spirit, however, which had risen to such an height in the late
ferences parliament, the power of the party which favoured the Scottish
with Mary queen's title, the number and activity of her agents in the dif-

ferent parts of the kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced
her to forego any advantage, which the ambiguous and artful
exprefllons in that-treaty might afford her. Nothing was now
demanded of Mary, but to renounce any title to the crown of
England during Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity;
who, on the other hand, engaged to take no ftep, which might

r Keith, prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the fucceflion *.
356- MARY

t Camden affirm', 401. that Bedford was commanded by Elizabeth not

to give Darnly the title of king. As this was an indignity, not to be
borne, (itl.er by Mary or her husband, it hath been asserted to be the cause
of the king's absence from the ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360.
Good. 3 1 9. But, . No such thingis to be found among Bedford's inftruc-
tior., the original of which lill remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bedford's ad-
*ice to the queen by Melvil is utterly incdniiftent with Camden's airertion.
Mrlv. 15 Me levil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's infirudions to fir
Hen y N.rris, where f(e affirms that Ihe commanded Bedford to employ
hi., bctl i.lhces towards reconciling Mary to her hulband, which he had at.
te npll.l to no pupule Digges's Compl. Ambalf. p. 13. A paper pub-
lthedl. Append. No. XVIII. proves the lame thing. 3. Le Croc theFrench
relilent mentions the kitg's ablence, but without giving that reafoifbr it,
which has been Ibunl(,le on Camden., words, though, if that had bedn the
real (ont, he wcould :cacce have failed to mentioln it. His account of this
matter is that whid1 I have fullowe(, Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his
court, that on account of the difflrence hetwixt the cking and the queen,
he had reiflnfd to hol any further correlliondence with the oIrmer, tlhough
hi nppears, in man;' icIlanc:!, to have been his gre.t confidant. ibid.
5. As the king was inot prelenrt at Ihe baptinm, he 'eem. to have been cx-
cluiled irom any (ireL in the orlinary adi.nifltrat:on cl hIlliuelfd. Two
* n\s of privy count. , c;e on tle: 2aoth, anl the other oun the z i of D)e-
cember, are fund in Kleili, S6z. They both run in r !lqueen's name
alone. The king 'e-mniT not to have been pleit'nt. Tlhis oul oot be uw.
ing to Elizabeth'c influclioun to lDedlord,

MA RY could not, with decency, rejet a proposition so BOOK IV,

equitable; iheinfifted, however, that Elizabeth should order ---
the right upon which fie claimed to be legally examined, and '566.
publickly recognized, and particularly that the testament of
Henry VIII. whereby he had excluded the descendants of his
eldest sifter the queen of Scotland, from the place due to them
in the orderof fucceflion, might be produced, and confidered
by the Englif nobility. Mary's ministers had credulously em-
braced an opinion, that this tellament which they so justly con-
ceived to be injurious to their mistress, was a mere forgery ;
and on different occasions had urged Elizabeth to produce it.
Mary would have suffered considerably by gaining this point.
The original testament is fill extant, and not the least doubt
can be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity. But it
was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the title
of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to
keep the question concerning the fucceflion perplexed and unde-
cided, and by induftrioufy eluding this request, flie did real
(ervice to Mary's cause *.

A F E w days after the baptism of the prince, Morton and

all the other conspirators against Rizio obtained their pardon,
and leave to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto
continued inexorable to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded at
last to the solicitations of Bothwell -. He could hope for no
success in those bold designs on which his ambition resolved to
venture, without drawing aid from every quarter. By procur-
ing a favour for Morton and his associates, of which they had
good reason to despair, he expected to secure a band of faithful
and determined adherents.

TH E king frill remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under

contempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the
alarm given him, by the rumour of a design to seize his person,
and confine him to prison t, was the occasion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Decem. i.
Gla fgow.

Two aflenblies of the church were held during this year. Church as.

New complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the stair
poverty, id contempt under which the protestant clergy were
Iufferea olainguifl. Penurious as the allotlment for their sub-
fiftencc was, they had not received the leaf part of what was
due for the preceding year§. Nothing lets than a zeal, ready § Keith,
to endure and to Luff;r cvery thing for a good ca;ule, could have 501.
perfitaded men to a:dlJrc to a cur'ch. In indigent anti so ne-
gltled. The cxtraur.:inary expen:c,, ,c:.-:onedl by the prince's
oupt lfil, liad exhi:ulutid the queen':; tr.al'urr, and the funms ap-
pr.priated for the ilbfiftcnce of tkh clelgy were diverted into

Vo 1.. I. other

KreltS, 36f, 358. Note (c) Munlin. 368.
Go CodJ. vol i. i. 140. elv. 54. 1 Iclithl. Prcf. vi:i.

BooK IV. other channels. The queen was therefore obliged to prevent
i*'vC"- the just remonstrances of the assembly, by falling on some new

J566. method for the relief of the church. Some symptoms of li-

berality, some stretch towards munificence might have been
expeted in an aflignment which was made with an intention of
soothing and silencing the clergy. But both the queen and the
nobles held fait the riches of the church which they had seized.
A fum, which, at the highest computation, can scarce be

* Keith, reckoned equal to goool. sterling*, was deemed sufficient for
S6z. the maintenance of a whole national church, by men who had

lately seen single monasteries possessed of revenues far superior in
value.

TH E ecclefiafticks in that age bore the grievances which

affected themselves alone with astonishing patience, but wher-
ever the reformed religion was threatened, they were extremely
apt to be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their
apprehensions of danger. A just occasion of this kind was
given them, a short time before the meeting of the afiembly.
The usurped and oppreflive jurifdition of the spiritual courts
had been abolished by the parliament 1560, and commiffaries
were appointed to hear and determine the causes which formerly
Id. X S. came under their cognizance t. Among the few aas of that

parliament, to which Mary had paid any regard, this was one.
She had confirmed the authority of the comniflfaries, and had

t Keith, given them inftruacions for directing their proceedings t, which
'51. are still of great authority in that court. From that time these

judges had continued in the uninterrupted exercise of their func-
tion, when of a sudden the queen iflued a proclamation, ref-
toring the archbihfop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdic-

§ Knox, tion, and depriving the commiflaries of all authority §.
403. A M OT I v E which cannot be justified, rendered the queen

not unwilling to venture upon this rafli action. She had been
contriving, for some time, how to re-eftablifl the popiih reli-
gion ; and the restoring the ancient ecclesiastics to their former
jurifdiaion, seemed to be a considerable ftep towards that end.
The motive which prompted Bothwell, to whose influence over

* Knox, the queen this action must be chiefly imputed *, was still more
403. criminal His enterprising ambition had already formed that
. bold design, which he soon after put in execution, and the use

which we flall hereafter find him making of that authority,
which the popifli ecclefialtics regained, discovers the reasons
of his present conduEt in contributing to revive their power.
The protestant clergy were not unconcerned fpe&tators of an
event, which threatened their religion with unavoidable def-
trucaion; but as they despaired of obtaining the proper remedy
from the queen herself, they addressed a remonitrance to the
whole body of the protestant nobility, full of that ardent zeal
for religion, which the danger to which it was exposed at that

time,

time, seemed to require t. What effets this vehement ex-BOOK IV.
hortation might have produced, we have no opportunity of~'-v"
judging, the attention of the nation being quickly turned to- 1566.
wards events of another, and more tragical nature. t Keith,

I M E D I A T L Y upon the king's leaving Stirling, and be- The king

fore he could reach Glasgow, he was seized with a dangerous falls sick at
distemper. The symptoms which attended it were violent and Glsrgow.
unusual, and in that age it was commonly imputed to the es- 567.
fees of poison t. It is impoflible, amidst the contradicions of - KMe O
historians, to decide with certainty concerning its nature, or its 401.
cause §. His life was in the utmost danger; but after lan-
guilhing for some weeks, the vigour of his conflitution fur-
mounted the malignity of the disease.

MA RY'S negle& of the king, on this occasion, was equal Negleaed

to that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jed- by Mary.
burgh. She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affetion
which prompts to sympathy, and delights in all those tender of-
sices which sooth and alleviate fickners and pain. At this junc-
ture, lhe did not even put on the appearance of this paflion.
Notwithifanding. the king's danger, Ihe anused herself with
excursions to different parts of the country, and suffered near
a month to elapse before she visited him at Glasgow. By that
time, the violence of the distemper was over, and the king,
though weak and languishing, was out of all danger.

TH E breach between Mary and her husband was not occa- The breach

sioned by any of those flight disgusts, which interrupt the do- between
meftic union, without dissolving it altogether. Almost all the the'm irr
passions, which operate with greatest violence on a femalePra
mind, and drive it to the most dangerous extremes, concurred
in raising and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for
the favours fIe had bellowed, contempt of her person, viola-
tions of the marriage-vow, encroachments on her power, con-

P 2 fpiracies

i Buchanan and Knox are pofilive that the king had been poisoned.

They mention the black and putrid puflules which broke out all over his
body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy the king's phyfcian plainly de-
clared that poilbn was the cause of Lhelr symptoms, and that the queen re-
ful'ed to allow her own phylician to attend him, Buch. 349. Knox, 401.
a. Blackwood, Caulin, &c. Jebb, vol. ii. z4, 59. affeit, that the small-
pox was the disease with which the king was seized. He is called a Prck.
:Jb man in the queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 5. The reason given by
French Paril for lodging the king at the Kirk of Field, viz. left the young
prince fliould catch the infe&ion if he Raid in the palace, seems to favour
this opinion, Ander. vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's
tendernels to her husband, that though lice never had the fiall pox her-
I'lt, Ihe ventured to aitend him, vol. iii. 4.16. This, if it had been true,
would have aforded a good pretence for not visiting him sooner; but Mary
had the flnall pox in her intancy. Sasdlle' Lcttlrs. 3. Bifflop Lefly as-
firls, that the king' dlila'nle' was the Friench pox, Keith, 364. Note (b).
In that age, this dil'cale was elieered lb contagious, that pcrfooa infced4
whvt it were removed without the wallb of cities.

BOOK IV. fpiracies against her favourites, jealousy, insolence, and obtli-
"Cv--^ nacy, were the injuries of which Mary had great reason to com-

567. plain. She felt them with the utnoft sensibility; and added to

the anguilh of disappointed love, they produced those fymp-
toms of despair which we have already described. Her resent-
ment againfl the king seems not to have abated from the time
of his leaving Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand,
to her ambassador in France, just before ihe set out for Glaf.
Jan. no. gow, no tokens of sudden reconcilement appear. On the con-

trary, she mentibns, with some bittemess, the king's ingrati-
tude, the jealousy with which he observed her ations, and the
inclination he discovered to diffurb her government, and at the
* Keith, fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost scorn *.

'Pref. vi' AFr E R this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it was scarce

Visits the
king at to be expeted that flie would visit the king; or that any thing
Glasgow. but marks of jealousy and distrust should appear in such an in-

terview. This, however, was far from being the care; fle not
only visited Henry, but, by all her words and ations, endea-
voured to express an uncommon affeaion for him: And though
this made impression on the credulous fpjrit of her hulband, no
less flexible, on some occasions, than obstinate on others; yet,
to those who are acquainted with the human heart, and who
know how seldom and how slowly such wounds in domestic
happiness are healed, this sudden transition will appear with a
very suspicious air, and will be confidered by them as the effec
of artifice.

Her dii- B u T it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged with
mulation. dissimulation in this part of her condut. Two of her famous

letters to Bothwell were written during her flay at Glasgow,
and fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had so far fuc-
ceeded in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an ab-
solute ascendant over the queen; and in a situation, such as
Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, services of far inferior im-
portance, and address much less insinuating than Bothwell's,
may be supposed to fleal imperceptibly on a female heart, and
entirely to overcome it. Among those in the higher ranks of
life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are, unhappily,
neither many, nor strong : Nor did the manners of that court,
in which Miary had been educated, contribute to increase or to
fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and Henry II.
the wildness of the military charater in that age, and the li-
beryt of appearing in all companies, which began to be allowed
to women, who had not yet acquired that delicacy offentiment,
and those polifled manners, which alone can render this liberty
innocent, had introduced, among the French, a licentiousness
of morals that rose to an aftoniflling height. Such examples,
which were familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly
fail of diminiflhing that horror of vice which is natural to a

virtuous

virtuous mind. The king's behaviour would render the fir/t BooK IV.
approach of forbidden sentiments less ihocking; resentment, '
and disappointed love, would be apt to represent whatever 1S67.
soothed her revenge, as justifiable on that account; and so
many concurring causes might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a
new paflion in her heart.

BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife The mo-

and progress of this paflion, the letters themselves breathe all ties of it;
the ardour and tenderness of love. The affeEtion which Mary
there exprelles for Bothwell, fully accounts for every fubfe-
quent part of her conduct; which, without admitting this
circumstance, appears altogether mysterious, inconsistent and
inexplicable. That reconcilement with her husband, of which
if we allow it to be genuine, it is impoflible to give any plau-
fible account, is discovered, by the queen's own confeflion, to
have been mere artifice and deceit. As her aversion for her
hulband, and the suspicious attention with which fle observed
his condu&, became universally known, her ears were offici-
oufly filled, as is usual in such cafes, with groundless or aggra-
vated accounts of his actions. By some, the was told, that
the king intended to seize the person of the prince his son, and
in his name to usurp the government; by others Ihe was
aflured, that he resolved inltantly to leave the kingdom; that
a veflel was hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde
ready to receive him'. The last was what Mary chiefly* Keith,
dreaded. Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have been Pref. viii.
highly dilhonourable to the queen, and would have entirely
disconcerted Bothwell's measures. While he resided at Glaf-
gow, at a distance from her, and in that part of the kingdom
where the interest of his family was greatef, he might, with
more facility, accomplish his designs. In order, therefore, to
prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it was neccffary
to bring him to tome place where he would be more imlmedi-
ately under her own eye. For this purpose, hle first employed Prevails on
all her art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to re- him to
move him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, come to
that there he would have easier access to the advice of phy- Edinburgh
ficians, and that /he herself could attend him without being
absent from her son t. The king was weak enough to susser + ood.
himself to be persuaded ; and being flill feeble and incapable of vol. ii. 8.
bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

TH E place prepared for his reception was.a house, belong-

ing to the provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field.
It flood almost upon the fame spot where the house belonging
to the principal of the university now lfands. Such a situation,
on a rising ground, and at that time in an open field, had all
the advantages of healthful air to recommend it; but on the
other hand, the solitude of the place rendered it extremely pro-

per

BoOK IV. per for the commission of that crime, with a view to which, it
_-_-.' seems manifestly to have been chosen.

567; MA Ra continued to attend the king with the most afliduous
He is tur- care. She seldom was absent from him through the day; ihe

d there. sept several nights in the chamber under his apartment. She

heaped on him so many marks of tenderness and confidence,
as, in a great measure, quieted those suspicions which had so
long disturbed him. But while he was fondly indulging in
dreams of the return of his former happiness, he Rfood on the
very brink of deftrudtion. On Sunday the 9th of February,
about eleven at night, the queen left the Kirk of Field, in or-
der to be present at a marque in the palace. At two next mor-
ning, the house in which the king lay was blown up with gun-
powder. The noise and hock, which this sudden explosion oc-
cafioned, alarmed, the whole city. The inhabitants ran to
the place whence it came. The dead body of the king, with
that of a servant who slept in. the fame room, were found lying
in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouched by fire,
and with no bruise or mark of violence.

Hischsrc- SUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart lord Darnly,
tCr. in the twenty first year of his age. The indulgence of for-

tune, and his own external accomplishments, without any other
merit, had raised him to an height and dignity, of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft
the heart of a woman who doated on him to diftrantion. His
insolence and inconstancy alienated from him such of the
nobles as had contributed most zealously towards his elevation.
His levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the people,
who once revered him as the descendant of their ancient kings
and heroes. Had he died a natural death, his end would have
been unlamented, and his mnemory have been soon forgotten;
but the cruel circumstances of his murder, and the remissness
with which it was afterwards avenged, have made his naime to
be remembered with regret, and have rendered him the object
of pity to which he had otherwise no title.
Bethwell Ev R Y one's imagination was at work to guess who had

eand lhe contrived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion

peted of fell, with almost a general consent, on Bothwell ; and some
the mur. reflecions were thrown out, as if the queen herself were no
der. franger to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the

uelv. fullest evidence, that the nature of the action will admit. The
vol.i. 6. queen's known firnrinents with regard to her hulband, gave a

great appearance of probability to the imputation with which
Jlie was loaded .I..

T w o days after the murder, a proclamation was i'uhed by
the queen, offering a considerable rewaid to any perlon who

llould

+ See DiTertalinn concerning the murder of Herny Darnly, and tile
genuillictfo of Mary's ,rl.ltl tu Buthwcll. Appclndix.

flould discover those who had been guilty of such a horrid and BOOK IV.
detesable crime t; and though Bothwell was now one of the -v
greatest fubjeats in the kingdom, formidable on account of his S567.
own power, and protected by the queen's favour, it was in- T Anderr
pollible to suppress the sentiments and indignation of the people. v 3.
Papers were affixed to the most public places of the city, ac-
cufing him of the murder, and naming his accomplices; pic-
tures appeared to the fame purpose, and voices were heard in
the middle of the night, charging him with that barbarous
aftion. But the authors of these rumours did not confine their
accusations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated that the queen
herself was accessory to the crime*. This bold accusation, * Anders.
which so directly attacked Mary's reputation, drew the atten- vol. ii. 1'56
tion of the council; and by engaging them in an inquiry after
the authors of these libels, diverted them from searching for
the murderers of the king t. It could scarce be expected that Id vol.
Mary herself would be extremely solicitous to discover those
who had rid her of an hutband, whom she had so violently
hated. It was Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme direc-
tion of this, as well as of all other affairs, to ftife and sup-
press whatever evidence should be offered, and to cover, if
pofiible, the whole tranfation under the veil of darkness and of
silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and some per-
sons called before the council, but the examination was con-
duced with the most indecent remissness, and in such a man-
ner, as to let in no light upon the scene of guilt . t Id. vol.

IT was not her own fubjeas alone who fufpeded Mary of iv. 167,

having been accessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an t68.
opinion, so diflonourable to her characer, owe its rife and
progress to the jealousy and malice of her factious nobles.
The report of the manner and circumstances of the king's mur-
der spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in that age,
which was accustomed to deeds of violence, it excited univer-
fal horror. As her unhappy breach with her husband had long
been matter of public discourse, the first conjetures which
were formed with regard to his death, were extremely to her
disadvantage. Her friends, at a lots what apology to offer for
her condut, called on her to prosecute the murderers with the
utioft diligence, and expected that the rigour of her proceed-
ings would prove the bel and fullef vindication of her inno- Ke;h,
cence §. Prcf. ix.

L E N o x, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with

incessant importunity. This nobleman had flared in his son's Lenox ac-
difgracc, and being treated by Mary with neglect, ulfially re- cufes Botlh
fided at a distance from court. Rouzed, however, by an event wl 'lmlur-
no lets flocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to all der
his schemes of ambition, he ventured to write to the queen, Feb. z1.
aud to offer his advice with refpeQ to the nmoft effecual method

for

BooK IV. for discovering and conviaing those who had so cruelly de-

-v ---prived him of a son, and her of a hufland. He urged her to
1567. prosecute those who were guilty, with vigour, and to bring

them to a speedy trial; he declared his own suspicion of Both-
well, and of those who were named as his accomplices; he re-
quired that, out of regard to decency, and in order to encou-
rage evidence to appear against them, the persons accused of
such an atrocious cnme should be committed to custody, or at

Keith, least excluded from her court and presence *.
Pref. ix. MA a Y was then at Seaton, whither she had retired after

Andes. the burial of the king, whose body was deposited among the
Sol. i. 13d monarchs of Scotland, in a private, but decent manner t. The

former part of the earl's demand, could not, on any pretence,
be eluded; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately

Mary con. to trial. But, instead of confining him to any prison, Mary
*inues to admitted him into all her councils, and allowed a person, uni-
favour him. verfilly reputed the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the
i Id. ibid. security, the dignity, and the power of a favourite t. The
4, &c. offices which Bothwell already possessed, gave him the com-

mand of all the south of Scotland. The castle of Edinburgh,
however, was a place of too much consequence, not to wilh
it in his own power. The queen, in order to prevail on the
c9 earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the person of the

young prince in his hands, and immediately heftowed the

. Aaderl. government of that important fortress upon Bothwell*. So
vol. i. 3. many fieps in her condulc, inconsistent with all the rules of
Pref. 64. prudence, and of decency, must be imputed to an excess either
Keitll, of folly or of love. Mary's known character fully vindicates

her from the former; of the latter, many and striking proofs
soon appeared.

Haften on No direct evidence had yet appeared against Bothwell; but
his trial. as time might bring to light the circumitances of a crime, in

which so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great
importance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more than
general suspicions, and uncertain surmises, could be produced
by his accusers. For this reason in a meeting of privy council
held on the 28th of March, the i ztl of April was appointed
for the day of trial. And tho' the law allowed, and the man-
ner in which criminal causes were carried on in that age re-
quired a much longer interval, it appears, from several cir-
cumftances, that this short space was considerably contraced,
and that Lenox had only eleven days warning to prepare for
accusing a person, so far superior to himself, both in power and
in favour . No man could be less in a condition to contend

+ The at of privy council, appointing the lay of Bothwell's trial

hears date March the :8th, which happened on a Thuriday. Anders. vol.
0. Trhe qneen's warrant to the Imf iHg¢,s, irnpnwering them to lrm-
mon Lcnux to be prclcnt, is dated on che ty. ibid. vol. ii. 97. He was

Iurn

with an antagonist who was thus supported. Though Lenox's BOOK IV.
paternal state had been restored to him, when he was recalled - *'
into Scotland, it seems to have been considerably impaired dur- '567.
ing his baniihment. His vaflals, while he resided in England,
had been accustomed to some degree of independance, and he
had not recovered that absolute ascendant over them, which a
feudal chief usually polfefled. He had no reason to expet the
concurrence of any of those factions into which the nobles
were divided. During the short period of his son's prosperity,
he had taken such steps as gave rife to an open breach with
Murray and all his adherents. The partizans of the house of
Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly was
linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to
the disgrace of the nation, Lenox stood alone in a cause, where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to
second him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present,

and fat as a member in that meeting of privy council, which
gave direcions with regard to the time and manner of his trial;
and he still enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into
the queen's presence with the fame diftinguilhed familiarity as
formerly . · va t

NOT HI N could be a more cruel disappointment to the ,v.'.

wimhes and resentment of a father, than such a premature trial; Lenox
every ftep towards which seemed to be taken by directions from craves a
the person who was himself accused of the crime, and cal-deley.
culated on purpose to conceal rather than to detect his guilt.
Lenox foresaw what would be the iflue of this mock inquiry,
and with how little safety to himself, or success to his cause,
he could venture to appear on the day prefixed. In his former
letters, though under expressions the most refpetful, Come
symptoms of his distrusting the queen may be difovered; he
spoke out now in a plain language. He complained of the in-
jury done him, by hurrying on the trial with such illegal pre-
cipitation. He represented once more, the indecency of allow-
ing Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to retain
his former influence over her councils. He again required her,
as she regarded her own honour, to give some evidence of her
sincerity in prosecuting the murder, by confining the person who

was,

summoned by public proclamation at the crotr of Edinburgh on the fame
day. Ibid. moo. He was summoned at his dwellinghoules in Glasgow and
Dumbarton the 3oth of March, the l t and ad days of April. ibid. 0oz. Though
Lenox resided at that time 40 miles from Edinburgh, the citation might
have been given him sooner. Such an unnecefcary delay affoads Come
cause for ful'picion. 'Tia true, Mary in her letter, March .4th, invited
Lenox to come to Edinburgh the ensuing week; this gave him warning
some days sooner, that (he intended to bring on the trial without delay.
But the precise time could not be legally or certainly known to Lenox
sooner than 1 I or 1a days, before the day on which he was required to ap-
pear. By the law and praftice of Scotla.d, at that time, parties were
summoned in cares of treason o5 days previous to the trial,

BooK IV. was, on good grounds, fufpeeted to be the author of it and,

_-v-_ ttill that were done, he signified his own resolution not to be

,,67 present at a trial, the manner and circumstances of which were

vo A drf. so irregular, and unfatisactory*
Applies tor HE seems, however, to have expected little success from
this pur- this application to Mary; and therefore, at the fame time, be-
pose to Eli- fought Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a delay
za'he',. as he demanded t. Nothing can be a stronger proof, how
vol. s." violently he fufpeaed the one queen, than his submitting to im-
351. plore the aid of the other, who had treated his son with the

utmost contempt, and himself and family with the greatest
rigour. Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to interpose in the
affairs of Scotland, wrote instantly to Mary, advised her to delay
the trial for some time, and urged, in such strong terms the
fame arguments which Lenox had used, as might have con-
vinced her to what an unfavourable confkrution her condut
would be liable, if she perfiited in her present method of pro-

SAnders. ceeding 1.
Yre. 60. NEITHE R her intreaties, however, nor those of Lenox,
SeeADpend. could prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed,
No. xlx; Bothwell appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it

eroceds, would have been dangerous to condemn, and impofible to

punilh him. Besides a numerous body of his friends and vassals
afiembled, according to custom, from different parts of the
kingdom, he was attended by a band of hired soldiers, who

Anders. marched with flying colours along the streets of Edinburgh*.
vol. i. 135. A court of justice was held, with the accustomed formalities.

An indictment was presented against Bothwell, and Lenox was
called upon to make good his accusation. In his name ap-
peared Robert Cunningham, one of his dependants. He ex-
culed his mnater's absence, on account of the fliortnefs of the
time, which prevented his aflemnbling his friends and vassals,
without whose alliftance he could not, with safety, venture to
set hiifelf in opposition to such a powerful antagonist. For
thisreafon, he desired the court to stop proceeding, and pro-
telling that any sentence which flould be passed at that time,
ought to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell, on the other
hand, infilced, that the court flould instantly proceed to trial.
One of Lenox's own letters, in which he craved of the queen
to proficute the murderers without delay, was produced.
Cunningham's objctions were over-ruled ; and the jury, confit-
ing of peers and barons of the first rank, found Bothwell not
guilty of the crime.

nothwrll is No person appeared as an accuser, not a single witness was
«iatLiLtbe. exanined, nor any evidence produced against him. The jury

under thefc circuniftances, could do nothing else but acquit
hinm. Their verdict, however, was far from gratifying the
wvilhcs, or silencing the murmurs of the people. Every cir-

cum-

eumifance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion, and excited Boorl IV.
indignation; and the judgment pronounced, instead of being a --v
proof of Bothwell's innocence, was esteemed an argument of 1S67.
his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were affixed to different places,
exprefling the sentiments of the public, with the utmost viru-
lence of language.

TH E jury themselves seem to have been aware of the cen-

sure, to which their proceedings would be exposed; and, at
the fame time, that they returned their verdict acquitting Both-
well, the earl of Caithness protested, in their name, that no
crime lhould be imputed to them on that account, because no
iccufer had appeared, and no proof was brought of the in-
dictment. He took notice, likewise, that the ninth instead of
the tenth of February was mentioned in the indictment, as the
day on which the murder had been committed. A circum-
stance, which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of those who
prepared the indicment; and at a time when men were dif-
posed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of every thing,
this inall matter contributed to confirm and to increase their
iufpicions *. * Bothw.

Ev E N Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment which Trial. An-

he had obtained in his favour, as a full vindication of his in- derf. vol. i.
nocence. Immediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance97 &.
with a custom which was not then obsolete, published a writ-
ing, in which he offered to fight, in single combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who fliould prefunme to accuse him
of being acceflory to the murder of the king.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if he had

been cleared by the moif unexceptionable and fatisfa&ory evi-
dence. The ascendant he had gained over her heart, as well
s over her councils, was more visible than ever; and Lenox,
who could not expe& that his own person would be safe in a
country where the murderer of his son had been absolved,
without regard to justice, and loaded with honours, in con-
tempt of decency, fled with precipitation towards England I-. t Keith,

Two days after the trial a parliament was held, at the 378.

opening of which the queen dittinguilhed Bothwell, by appoint- Note i(.
ing hint to carry the sceptre before lert. Most of the acts ment hcll.
paFied in this Ailenibly, were calculated on purpose to strengthen 1. 1. ibid.
his party, and to promote his designs. He obtained the ratifi-
cation of all the poffeflions and honours which the partiality of
the queen had conferred upon him ; and the aft to that effec
contained the ftlongeft declarations of his faithful services to
the crown, in all tunes pas. The surrender of the castle of
Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The law of attainder a-
gainft Huntly was repealed, and he, and his adherents, were
restored to the estates and honours of their ancestors. Several
of those who had been on the jury which acquitted him, ob-

tained

BooK IV. tained ratifications of the grants made in their favour; and as

v-' -^ pasquinades daily multiplied, a law pafled, whereby those, into
1567. whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were commanded in-

ftantly to destroy it; and if. through their neglet, it flould
be allowed to spread, they were fubjeded to a capital punifli-
* Keith, ment, in the fame manner as if they had been the original

s authors*.

Bur the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had acquired

over Mary's mind appeared in the clearest manner, by an act in
favour of the protestant religion, to which, at that time, she
gave her aftent. Mary's attachments to the Romish faith was
uniform and superstitious; Ihe had never laid aside the design,
nor loft the hopes of restoring it. She had, of late, come un-
der new engagements to that purpose, and in consequence of
there, had ventured upon some Rfeps more public and vigorous
than any {he had formerly taken. But Bothwell was prompted,
by powerful motives, to promote this law. He had been
guilty of crimes, which rendered him the object of juRf and
universal detestation. He was meditating others, which he
easily foresaw would heighten the public indignation against him.
By this popular law he might hope to divert, or to delay the re-
fentment of the nation, and flattered himself that the obtain-
ing this unexpected and legal security for the protestant religion,
would atone for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his crimes.
The a& itself was so favourable to the doctrine of the re-
formers, that the parliament, which met next year, under
very different leaders, could substitute nothing stronger or more
explicit in its place; and thought it sufficient to ratify it word

Parl. I. for word . To pass such an act, was utterly inconsistent with
Jac VI. all the maxims which Mary followed in every other period of
c. 3L. her life; but what could never be extorted from her by the

Solicitations of the aflemblies of the church, or by the intreaties
of her people, the more powerful influence of Bothwell now
obtained t.

lothwell EVE R Y ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended
rviails on with all the success which his most sanguine wishes could ex-
the nobles
orecom-n pedt. He had entirely gained the queen's heart; the murder of
mead him the
m. n hus- [ Ruchanan, Hist. 355, not only omits taking any notice of this law,
band tothe but afterts. that the queen, though l(e had given pr-,mifec it favoulr of the
qacea. reformed religion, refuied to permit any a& to pals in lupport of it, and

even difmiried the deputies of the church with contempt. Spnoiwood, 210.
and Calderwood, vol. iii. 41. both affirm the fame thing. It would not
have been necessary to olbferve this instance of Buchanl 's inaccuracy ; but
that an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwoodl. and one Io in-
du(trious as Calderwood, fliould commit such an error, when not only the
or;ginal flatite wan exitnt in the records of Mary's parliament, hut even
v, hen the printed a-t of Murray's parliament wa, beeorc their eyes, is re-
;,*4 l;Ibli. lico Bucjhanan hiitnll h as taken notice of this aC. Do-
!Calin, p. 8.

the king had excited no public commotion; he had been acquit- Boot IV.
ted by his peers of any flare in that crime; and their decision a
had been, in some fort, ratified in parliament. But in a king- i561.
dom, where the legal authority was so extremely limited, and
the power of the nobles so formidable, he durst not venture of
the last action, towards which all his ambitious projects tended,
without their approbation. In order to recure this, he, im-
mediately after the dissolution of parliament, invited all the
nobles who were present to an entertainment. Having filled
the house with his friends and dependants, and surrounded it April 19.
with armed men *, he opened to the company his intention of* Good.
marrying the queen, whose consent, he told them, he had al- vol ii. '41
ready obtained; and denmardcd their approbation of this match,
which he said, was no leis acceptable to their sovereign, than
honourable to himfelft. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy t Andaf.
to all Bothwell's scheme, and promoted them with the utmost vol' i 94
zeal; the popifli ecclesiastics, who were absolutely devoted to
the queen, and ready to Cooth all her paflions, instantly de-
clared their fatisfafion with what.he had proposed. The reft,
who dreaded the exorbitant power which Bothwell had ac-
quired, and observed the queen's growing affection towards
him in all her actions, were willing to make a merit of yielding
to a measure, which they could neither oppose, nor defeat.
Some few were confounded and inraged. But, in the end,
Bothwell, partly by promises and flattery, partly by terror and
force, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper,
which leaves a deeper stain than any occurrence in that age, on
the honour and charater of the nation.

TH s paper contained the strongest declarations of Both-

well's innocence, and the most ample acknowledgment of his
good services to the kingdom. If any future accusation should
be brought against him, on account of the king's murder, the
subscribers promired to tand by him as one man, and to hazard
their lives and fortunes in his defence. They recommended him
to the queen, as the molt proper person flie could choose for a
husband; and if ile fhouldcondefcend to befow on him that
mark of her regard, they undertook to promote the marriage,
and to join him with all their forces, in opposing any person
who endeavoured to obftruA it *. Among the subscribers of* Anders.
this paper, we find rome who were the queen's chief confi- vol. i. 77
danrs, others who were strangers to her counsels, and obnoxi-
ous to her difpleaftire; sone who faithfully adhered to her,
through all the vicillitudes of her fortune, and others who be-
came the principal authors of her sufferings; tome paflionately
attached to the Romilh superstition, and others zealous advo-
cates for the protestant faith -. No common interest can bes Keith.
supposed to have united men of such opposite principles and38a.
parties, in recommending to their fovcregn a flep to injurious

to

Booc IV. to her honour, and so fatal to her peace. This strange coali-
v- v, tion was the effect of much artifice, and mu&t be confidered as

567. the boldest and most masterly stroke of Bothwell's address. It

is observable, that amidit all the altercations and mutual re-
proachcs of the two parties which arose in the kingdom, this
unwortt y tranfaCion is seldom metioned. Conscious on both
fides, that in this particular, their condut could ill bear exa-
mination, and would redound little to their fame, they always
touch upon it unwillingly, and feeil desirous that it ihould re-
main in darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many per-
sons, who, both at that tine, and ever after pofleffed the queen's
favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion becomes strong,
that Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary,
nor disapproved by her .

T HE s a suspicions are confirmed by the most diret proof.

Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a considerable share in her fa-
vour. He, as well as his brother, kept a secret correspondence
in England, with those who favoured her pretensions to that
crown. The rumour of her intended marriage with Bothwell
having spread early in that kingdom, excited universal indigna-
tion; and Melvil received a letter from thence, which repre-
sented in the strongest terms, what would be the fatal effeas of
such an imprudent ftep. He put this letter into the queen's
hands, and inforced it with the utmost warmth. She not only

disregarded

Of all the different systems with regard to this tranfa&ion, that of

Camden leems to be tl:e leaf accurate, and the worst founded. He sup.
poles that Bothwell was hated by Murray, Morton, Scc. who had been
his aflociates in the murder of the king, and that they now wanted to
ruin him. He affirms, at the fame time, that the subscriptions to this
paper we e obtained by them, out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his
hopes, and betray the whole bloody secret, 404. But besides the absurdity
of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute towards raising hint
to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of afterwards depriving him
of it ; betides the impoulibility of accomplilhing such a marriage, if it
had bren either unknown to the queen, or disagreeable to her; we may
observe that this supposition is destroyed by the direa tellimony of the
queen herself, who alcribes the confentof the nobles to Bothwell's artifi-
cet, bwho purchajed it by giving them to underfJand that r'e uwre con.
tent therewith. Ar.derl: vol. i. 94. It would have been no small advan-
tage to Mary, if ile could have represented the content of the nobles to
have been their own voluntary deed. It is [till more lurprifing to find
Lefly afcrihing this paper to Murray and his faciln. Anders. vol. i. G6.
The bilh.p himself was one of the persons who fubifcribed it. Keith, 383.
The king'scommiflionert, at the conference held at York, 1568, prctend-
ed that none of the noble, except the eall of Huntly, would lubl'cribe this
paper till a warrant from the queen was produced, by which they were
allowed to do so ; this warrant they had in their cultody, and exhibited.
Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 59. This dif;:rs from Buchnnan's account, 'ho
ful poses that all the nobles prefeut fubllcribcd the paper on the 9gth, and
that, next day, they obtained the applobation of what tbry had dlonc, bl
way of leculrty to tlemlclvcs. 35e.

disregarded there remonftances, but communicated the mat- BOOK IV.
ter to Bothwell ; and Melvil, in order to save his life, was o-'-
bliged to fly from court, whither he durst not return, till the t567.
earl's rage began to abate'. At the fame time, Elizabeth
warned Mary of the danger and infamy to which fle would
expose herself, by such an indecent choice ; but an advice from nt
her met with fill less regard t. voli. Ae.

TH E E days after the rising of parliament, Mary went Bothwell

from Edinburgh to Stirling, in orderto visit the prince her son. carries the
Bothwell had now brought his schemes to full maturity, and queen by
every precaution being taken, which could render it safe to Dabrr.t
venture on the last and decisive ftep, the natural inipetuofity of
his spirit did not susser him to deliberate any longer. Under
pretence of an expedition against the freebooters on the bor-
ders, he affemnbled his followers, and marching out of Edin-
burgh with a thousand horse, turned suddenly towards Linlith-
gow, met the queen on her return near that place, difperfedApl 4.,
her slender train without resistance, seized on her person, and
conduEted her, together with a few of her courtiers, as a pri-
soner to his castle of Dunbar. She expressed neither furprize,
norterror, nor indignation, at such an outrage committed on
her perfan, and such an insult offered to her authority, but seem-
ed to yield without struggle or regret *. Melvil was, at that Keith,
time, one of her attendants; and the officer by whom he was 383.
seized informed him, that nothing was done without the queen's
own content *. If we may rely on the letters published in Ma- * Melv.
ry'sname, the scheme had been communicated to her, and 158.
every ftep towards it was taken with her participation and ad- oo
vice *.oo

B T H the queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to vol. ii. 37.

employ this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent
excuse for her condu&t; and while she could plead that it was
owing to force rather than choice, flie hoped that her reputa-

tion,

- Melv. t56. According to Melvil, lord {Herreis likewise remonfrat-

ed against the marriage, and conjured the queen, on his knees, to lay a-
fide all thoughts of Iuch a diflonourable alliance, 156. But it has been
obl'erved that Herreis is one of the nobles who fubficiibed the bond, April
19. Keith, 383. z. That he is one of the wilneffes to the marriage arti-
cles between the queen and Bothwell, May 14. Good. vol. ii. 61. 3.
That he lat in council with Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386. But this re-
monstrance of lord Herreis againlt the marriage happened belore thcfce
made by Melvil himself, 157, Melvil'i remonllrance mutl have happen-
ed fime time before the meeting of parliament; fur after offending loth-
well, he retired from court: he allowed his rage time to rullfitlc, and had
agiin joined the queen, when ile was seized, April 14. 158. The time
which mull have clapsed, by this account of the matter, was perhaps sus-
ficient to have gained Herreis, fiom being an oppolcr, to become a pro-
moter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil may have committed lrme milf
take with regard to this fael, f' far as relates to lord Hcrreis. He could
aot well be millaken with regard to what himlelf did.

Boo IV. tion, among foreigners at least, would escape without censure,

- or be exposed to less reproach. Bothwell could not help dif-
s67. trusting all the methods which had hitherto been used, for vin-

dicating him from any concern in the murder of the king.
Something was ifill wanting for his security, and for quieting
his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the great Teal. By
the laws of Scotland, the moet heinous crime must be mentio-
ned by name in a pardon, and then all lesser offences are deem-
ed to be included under the general clause, and all other crimes

+ Parl. 6. whatloever +. To seize tie person of the prince is high trea-
jqc. IV. c. son; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon obtained for this,
6z. would extend to every thing of which he had been accused *.

nder. BO T H W E L L, having now got the queen's person into his

vol. i-. hands, it would have been unbecoming either a politician or a
Yart ii. 6x. man of gallantry to have delayed consummating his schemes.
A1 divorced For this purpose, he instantly commenced a suit, in order to
trom his obtain a sentence of divorce from his wife lady Jane Gordon,

the earl of Huntly's sifter This process was carried on, at the
fame time, before protestant and popish judges; before the
former, in the court of cominiffaries ; and before the latter,
Aprilg 1. in the Spiritual court of the archbishop of St. Andrew's, whose

jurifdiCion the queen had lately restored.' The pretexts which
he pleaded were trivial, or scandalous. But his authority had
greater weight than the justice of his cause; and in both

* Anders. courts, sentence of divorce was pronounced, with the fame in-
o"l. i. '32. decent and suspicious precipitancy *.
'art ii. 6i. W HIL E this infamous tranfa&ion was carrying on, the

queen resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated
Ma 3· with the greatest refpea. Soon after Bothwell, with a nume-

rous train of his dependants, conduted her to Edinburgh;
but instead of lodging her in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe,
he conveyed her to the castle of which he was governor. The
discontent of the nation rendered this precaution necessary. In
an house unfortified, and of easy access, the queen might have
been rescued without difficulty out of his hands. In a place
of strength, Ihe was secured from all the attempts of his
enemies.

ONE small difficulty still remained to be surmounted. As

the queen was kept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a marri-
age concluded in that condition might be imputed to force,
May 1i. and be held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared

in the court of session, and in prefcnce of the chancellor, the
other judges, and several of the nobility, declared that fihe
was now at full liberty; and though Botlhwell's violence in
seizing herperfon had, at first excited her indignation, yet his
respectful behaviour since that time had not only nppeafed

' Anders her resentment, but determined her to raise him to higher ho-
*. 187. nours t.

W An A T

WH A T these were soon became public. The title of duke BOOK IV.

of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell ; and on the x th of -
May his marriage with the queen, which had so long been the '567.
object of his wishes, and the motive of his crimes, was so- t mhrred
lemnized. The ceremony was performed, in public, according queen.
to the rites of the protestant church, by Adam Bothwell bi-
Jhop of Orkney, one of the few prelates who had embraced the
reformation, and on the fame day, was celebrated in private,
according to the forms prescribed by the popilfi religion *. The * Anders.
boldness with which Craig, the minilter who was commanded 136. a.
to publifli the banns, testified against the design; the fiiall 276.
number of the nobles, who were present at the marriage; and
the fullen and difrefpetful silence of the people, when the
queen appeared in public, were manifest fyniptorms of the vio-
lent and general diffatisfation of her own subjects. The re-
fufal of Du Croc, the French ambassador, to be present at the
nuptial ceremony or entertainment, discovers the sentiments of
her allies, with regard to this part of her conduct; and al-
though every other action of Mary's life could be justified by
the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the principles of virtue,
this fatal marriage would remain an inconteRible proof of her
raflfnefs, if not of her guilt.

IA R Y's first care was to offer some apology for her conduct,

to the courts of France and England. Thle instructions to her
ambassadors till remain, and are drawn by a maflterly hand..
But under all the artificial and false colouring lile employs, it
is easy to discover not only that Imany of the steps 1te had ta-
len were unjutlifiable, but that ihe her.:if was conscious that
they could not be justified t. + Andert

TH E title of Iing, was the only thin,, which vas not be- '. 89

stowed upon Bothwell. Notwitliftandpi;n her attachment to
him, Mary remembered the inconveniencies which had arisen
from the rafli advancement of her tormlcr huPiand to that ho-
nour. She agreed, however, that he fhoulld sign, in token of
consent, all the public wriLs illi.ed in her anlne T. This was
nothing more than mere orun, bu,, togcther with it, he pof- t Coodz.;
leired all the reality of power. T'h queen's. person was in his 60.
banlds; Ihe was lurrounded inore clol:ly tha:i ever by his crea-
tures; none of her subjects could obtain audience without his
perllilion; and, unlcfs in his ov.'n lp:cfcnce, none but his con-, * nder
fidants were per;mitted to convc:'i v with her'. . The Scottish , ,6.
nmunarclhs were accutlonla J to live ani!ong t!hir' l.il.ijects as fa-
thers or as equals, without ciilrufl, alnl v',:r ilttle (tate ; arm-
ed guards ltalldillg at lh doolrs or0 the rol i apartlnent, diffi-
cuity o' accefi, distance aind rcircmienr, were things unknown,
ai:d unpopular.

Tin e s i. precautions were neccuary fir secu'ring to Bothwell Endeavoure
the.power, -'hich lie had acquired. But, without being maa- ° bcome

prmailer of
V oL. tI,. Q.. ter the prince's

pcrfn.,

BOOK IV. fRer of the person of the young prince, he efeemed all that he
^-v>-- had gained to be precarious and uncertain. The queen had

;S67. committed her son to the care of the earl of Mar. The fide-

lity and loyalty of that nobleman were too well known to ex-
pect that he would be willing to put the prince into the hands
of the man, who was so violently suspected of having mur-
dered his father. Bothwell, however, laboured to get the
prince into his power, with an anxiety, which gave rife. to the
blackest suspicions. All his address as well as authority were
employed to persuade, or to force Mar, into a compliance with

t Melv. his demands t. And it is no flight proof both of the firnnefs
160. and dexterity of that nobleman, that be preserved a life of so
Buch. 361. much importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy of a

man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to violent

General attempts against it.
indignation TH E eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time,
on which upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during
the queen's three months. A king murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in
coadut. the prime of his days, and in his capital city; the person sis-

pected of that odious crime suffered not only to appear pub-
lickly in every place, but admitted into the pretence of the
queen, diftinguilhed by her favour, and entrusted with the chief
direction of her affairs'; subjected to a trial, which was car-
ried on with most fhanelefs partiality, and acquitted by a fen-
tence, which served only to confirm the suspicions of his guilt;
divorced from his wife, on pretences frivolous, or indecent;
and, after all this, instead of meeting with the ignominy due
to his actions or the puniflhment merited by his crimes, per-
mitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a queen, the
wife of the prince whom he had affafinated, and the guardian
of those laws which he had been guilty of violating. Such a
quick fucceflion of incidents, so singular and so detestable, is
not to be found in any other hitlory. They left, in the opini-
on of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the characer of the na-
tion. The Scots were held in abhorrence all over Europe;
they durt scarce appear any where in public; and after luf-
fering so many atrocious deeds to pals with impunity, they

Ander. were universally reproached as men void of courage, or of hu-

vol . ,8s. mianity, as equally regardless of the reputation of their queen,
134. Melv. and the honour of their country *.
163. See THESE reproaches roused the nobles, who had been hi-
.Append. therto anlufed by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his
The noble power. The manner in which he exercised the authority which
combine a- he had acquired, his repeated attempts to become mafler oI
gainft her the prince's person, together with some rash threatnings againtl
nd BoLh- hint, which he let fall , added to the violence and proniptncl
well.
1' Melv. of their resolutions. A considerable body of then affcmbled at
161 . MStirling,

Stirling, and entered into an association for the defence of theeBoOK IV,
prince's person. Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, -
Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of '567.
Grange, and Maitland the secretary, were the heads of this, Keith
confederacy *. Stewart earl of Athol was remarkable for an394,
uniform and bigoted attachment to popery, but his indignation
on account of the murder of the king, to whom he was near-
ly allied, and his zeal for the safety of the prince, overcame,
on this occasion, all considerations of religion, and united him
with the most zealous protestants. Several of the other nobles
acted, without question, from a laudable concern for the safety
of the prince, and the honour of their country. But the spirit
which some of them discovered, during the subsequent revolu-
tions, leaves little room to doubt, that ambition or resentment
were the real motives of their condut ; and that, on many
occasions, while they were pursuing ends just and necessary,
they were atuated by principles and passions altogether unjufti-
fiable.

TH E first accounts of this league filled the queen and Both-

well with great consternation. They were no firangers to the
sentiments of the nation, with refpet to their conduct ; and
though their marriage had not met with public opposition, they
knew that it had not been carried on without the secret disgust
and murmurings of all ranks of men. They foresaw the vio-
lence with which this indignation would burst out, after having
been so long suppressed ; and in order to prepare for the ftorn,
Mary issued a proclamation, requiring her subjects to take arms, May a3
and to attend her husband by a day appointed. At the fame
time, fhepublifhed a fort of manifesto, in which fle laboured
to vindicate her government from those imputations with whicii
it had been loaded, and employed the ftronrget terms to express
her concern for the itfaety and welfare of the prince her son.
Neither of these produced any considerable effeet. Her pro-
clamation was ill obeyed, and her manifesto inet with little § Keth,
credit §. 387, 39g.

T H E confederate lords carried on their preparations with no 396.

less activity, and with much niore liicccls. Among a warlike The queen
people, men of so much power and popularity found it an easy an Both-
matter to raise an army. They were ready to imarch before to Dunbar,
the queen and Bothwell were in a condition to resist them.
The cattle of Edinburgh was the place M lwither the queen
ought naturally to have retired, and tlilrc h r person nmight
have been pertletly fatle. But the cnnrclti:ries had fallen on
means to fliake, or corrupt the filu:l.ty ci Sir J;ames U1allour
the deputy governor, and 13o;liwell dilurt iiut coilillit to hihl
fiSch nn important trult. Hie c'-inmlufleil lh( queen to the ca.ill
of 1Borthwick, and on thie appe;riance of lord [-sone, with a.
body of his followers, b,.tbrc that Iplace, Ihe fled with precipi-

Q tatlon

BOOK IV. tation to Dunbar, and was followed by the queen, disguised in

_"-- men's cloaths. The confederates advanced towards Edin-
1567. burgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate the in-

habitants to defend the town against them. They entered
without opposition, and were inifantly joined by many of the
. Keib, citizens, whose zeal became the firneft support of their

8 cause *.

IN order to set their own conduCt in the most favourable

light, and to rouse the public indignation against Bothwell, the
nobles publiflied a declaration of the motives which had in-
duced them to take arms. All Bothwell's pals crimes were
enumerated, all his wicked intentions displayed and aggravated,

. Anders. and every trne Scotfinan was called upon to join them in aveng-
vol. i. 128. ing the one, and in preventing the other -.

MEA N while, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar,

and as he had many dependants in that corner, he soon gather-
ed such strength, that he ventured to advance towards the
confederates. Their troops were not numerous ; the suddenness
and secrecy of their enterprize gave their friends at a distance
no time to join them; and as it does not appear that they were
supported either with money or fed with hopes by the queen of
England, they could not have kept long in a body. But on the

* Keith, other hand, Bothwell durst not rifque a delay *. His army fel-
401. lowed him with relu&tance in this quarrel, and served him with

no cordial affe&ion; fb that his only hope of success was in
surprising the enemy, or in itriking the blow before his own
troops had leisure to recoiled themselves, or to imbibe the fame
unfavourable opinion of his aEtions, which had spread over the
reft of the nation. These motives determined the queen to
march forward, with an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

The nobles ON the first intelligence of her approach, the confederates
march a- advanced to meet her. They found her forces drawn up on the
gain(tthem. fame ground which the Englifl had occupied before the battle
Juy 'S. of Pinkie. The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but

there was no equality in point of discipline. The queen's army
consisted chiefly of a multitude, hastily aflembled, without
courage or experience in war. The troops of the confederates
were composed of gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed

Cd by their most trusty dependants, who were no less brave than

vol. ii. 48 zealou

g49. ' Du Croc the French ambaflador, who was in the field,
An accom- laboured, by negotiating both with the queen and the nobles,
modation to put an end to the quarrel without the cffufion of blood. He
attempted. represented to the confederates the queen's inclinations to-

wards peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences which
they had committed. Morton replied, with warmth, that they
had taken arms not against the queen, but against the nurderer

of

of her hulband, and if he were given up to justice, or banished Boor IV.
from her presence, flie ihould find them ready to yield the obe- I' _
dience which is due from fubjecs to their sovereign. Glencairn '567.
added, that they did not come to alk pardon for any offence,
but to punish those who had offended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would be ineffec-
tual, and that their paflions were too high to allow them to
liften to any pacific propositions, or to think of retreating after
hav'ng proceeded so far *. * Keitl,

TH E queen's army was posted to advantage, on a rising 401.

ground. The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely,
but slowly, and with the caution which was natural on that
unhappy field. Her troops were alarmed at their approach, and
discovered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured to ani-
mate them ; Ihe wept, she threatened, she reproached them
with cowardice, but all in vain. A few of Bothwell's imnedi-
ate attendants were eager for the encounter; the reft flood
wavering and irresolute, and some began to feal out of the
field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offering to de-
cide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own innocence in single
combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange,
Murray of Tullibardin, and lord Lindsay contended for the ho-
nour of entering the lifts against him. But this challenge pro-
ved to be a mere bravade. Either the consciousness of guilt de-
prived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the queen, by her l Cald.
authority, sorbad the combat +. vol. ii. 5o.

APT E i the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers,

Mary would have been inexcusable, had she hazarded a battle.
To have retreated in the face of an enemy, who had already
surrounded the hill on which hie flood, with part of their ca-
valry, was utterly impracticable. In this situation, she was under
the cruel necessity of putting herself into the hands of those
subjeCts who had taken arms against her. She demanded an
interview with Kirkaldy, a brave and generous man, who com-
manded an advanced body of the enemy. He, with the con-
sent and in name of the leaders of the party, promised that, on
condition fle would difinifs Bothwell from her pretence, and go-
vern the kingdom by the advice of her nobles, they would ho- .Gd.
nour and obey her as their sovereign *vl i.i. '64.

Du R I NG this parley, Bothwell took his las farewell of the Mciv. i6;

queen, and rode off the field with a few followers. This difinal Bothwell
reverse happened exactly one month after that marriage, which "bligcd to
had cost him so many crimes to acconplilh, and which leaves Ily.
so foul a fRain on Mlary's memory. ry ur-

As Coon as Bothwell retired, Mary furrenclered to Kirkaldy, rendlis to

who conducted her toward the confederate army, the leaders ile nobles.
of which received her with much refpcct ; and Morton. in

their

BOOK IV. theirname, made ample professions of their future loyalty and

-v--- obedience t. But she was treated by the common soldiers with
1567. the utmost insolence and indignity. As Ihe marched along,

t Good. they poured upon her all the opprobrious names, which are be-
vol. ii.

v flowed only on the lowest and most infamous criminals. Where-

ever she turned her eyes, they held before her a standard, on
which was painted the dead body of the late king, stretched
on the ground, and the young prince kneeling before it, and ut-
tering these words, " Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord !"
Mary turned with horror from such a flocking fight. She be-
gan already to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter complaints, he
melted into tears, and could scarce be kept from finking to the
ground. The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and,
in spite of many delays, and after looking with the fondness
and credulity natural to the unfortunate for some extraordinary
relief, she arrived there. The streets were covered with mul-
titudes, whom zeal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold
such an unusual scene. The queen, worn out with fatigue,
covered with duff, and bedewed with tears, was exposed as a
fpeEtacle to her own fubjets, and led to the provost's house.
Notwithstanding all her arguments and intreaties, the fame
standard was carried before her, and the fame insults and re-
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beautiful, and in dif-
trefs, is naturally the objec of compassion. The comparison
of their present misery with their former splendour, usually sos-
tens us in favour of illustrious sufferers. But the people beheld
the deplorable situation of their Sovereign with insensibility ; and
so ifrong was their persuasion of her guilt, and so great the vio-
lence of their indignation, that the sufferings of their queen
did not, in any degree, mitigate their refcntment, or procure
her that sympathy, which is feldoul denied to unfortunatw
princes *.

* Melvil, s66. Budi. 3S4,

*I Hs. t

# BOOK V.

T H E
THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK V.
T HE confederate lords had proceeded to such extremities BoOK V.

against their sovereign, that it now became almost im- -- «

poflible for them either to stop short, or to pursue a course less i 67.
violent. Many of the nobles had refused to concur with them Delibera.
in their enterprize; others openly condemned it. A finall cir- he nobles
cumitance might abate that indignation with which the multi- concerning
tude were, at present, animated against the queen, and de- the queen.
prive them of that popular applause which was the chief foun-
dation of their power. These considerations inclined iome of
them to treat the queen with great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affeCtion for Bothwell

continued as violent as ever; flie obstinately refused to hearken
to any proposal for dissolving their marriage, and determined
not to abandon a man, for whose love fle had already facri-
siced so much -. If they ihould allow her to recover the fu- * Keith,
preme power, the firfl exertion of it would be to recall Both- 419, 446-
well; and they had reason, both from his refentnent, from 449. Mcv.
her conduac, and from her own, to expect the severest effcts Appendix,
of her vengeance. These considerations furnounted every No. XXI.
other motive; and reckoning thenlmelves absolved, by Mary's
incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the engagements which
they had come under when fle yielded herself a prisoner, they They im-
without regarding the duty which they owed her as their queen, priluo hce
and without consulting the reft of the nobles, carried her next Ivin,
evening, under a strong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and
signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to de-
tain her as a prisoner. This castle is situated in a small island,
in the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belonged, was
a near relation of Morton's, and had married the earl of Mur-
ray's mother. In this place, under tridt custody, with a few

atten-

BooK V. attendants, and fubjeaed to the insults of a haughty woman,
.-',/-.a who boasted daily of being the lawful wife of James V. Mary
3567. suffered all the rigour and miseries of captivity *.

* Kelth, I M a D IA T E LY after the queen's imprisonment, the con-
Note (ó). federates were at the utmost pains to strengthen their party;

they entered into new bonds of aflociation; they assumed the
title of lords of the secret council, and without any other right,
arrogated to themselves the whole regal authority. One of the
firt acts of power was to search the city of Edinburgh for those
who were concerned in the murder of the king. This shew
of zeal gained reputation to themselves, and threw an oblique
reftetion on the queen for her remifinefs. Several fufpeted
persons were seized. Captain Blackadde and three others were
condemned and executed. But no discovery of importance
was made. If we believe some historians, they were conviced
by sufficient evidence. If we give credit to others, their fen-
tence was unjust, and they denied, with their last breath, any

- Cdd. knowledgeof the crime, for which they suffered -.

. ;ii. 3-. Ar unexpected accident, however, put into the hands of

Crawf. Mary's enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her
Mom. 35. guilt. Bothwell having left, in the caffle of Edinburgh, a

castet, containing several obnnets and! letters written with the
queen's own. hand; he now sent one of his confidants to bring
to him this precious depofite. But as his messenger returned,

* Anders he was intercepted, and the casket seized by Morton*. The
vol. ii. 92. contents of it were always produced by the party, as the most
Good. vol. ample justification of their own conduc, and the molt unan-
". 90' fwerable proof of their not having loaded their sovereign with
- See dif- the imputation of imaginary crimes.t.
fertation BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordinary
t the end success, were flill far from being perfectly at ease. That so
f the ap- small a part of the nobles flould pretend to dispose of the person
Some of of their sovereign, or to aflume the authority which belonged
the nobles to her, without the concurrence of the reft, appeared to many
favour the of that body to be unprecedented, and prefunptuous. Several
queen. of these were now assembled at Hamilton, in order to delibe-

rate what course they should hold, in this difficult conjuncture.
The confederates made some attempts towards a coalition with
them, but without eff'e6. They employed the mediation of
the aflembly of the church, to draw them to a personal inter-
view at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That party,
however, though its numbers were formidable, and the power
of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want of unani-
mity and vigour; all its consultations evaporated in murmurs
and complaints, and' no scheme was concerted for obitrudiig

t Ke'th, the progrers of the confederates t.
407. T I E . - appeared rome prospect of danger from another

quarter. This great revolutiun in Scotland had been carried on

without

without any aid from Elizabeth, and even without her know- Boor V.'
ledge §. And though she was far from being displeased to fee v-
the affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom she S167.
hated, reduced to distress; ihe neither wished that it Should Eier:pbose
be in the power of the one faction entirely to suppress the in her be-
other, nor could she view the steps taken by the confederates half.
without great offence. Notwithstanding the popular maxims § Id. 41-
by which she governed her own subje&s, her notions of royal
prerogative were very exalted. The confederates had, in her
opinion, encroached on the authority of their sovereign, which
they bad no right to controul, and had offered violence to
her person, which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They
had set a dangerous example to other fubjeas, and Mary's
cause became the common cause of princes . If ever Eli- Keith,
zabeth was influenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland, 412, 4s5.
by the feelings of her heart, rather than by considerations
of interest, it was on this occasion. She instantly dispatch- June 30.
ed Throgmorton into Scotland, with powers to negotiate
both with the queen, and with the confederates. In his
inftruaions there appears a remarkable solicitude for Mary's
liberty, and even for her reputation A. And the choice of ant Id. 4"1.
ambassador, so devoted to the interest of the Scottish queen,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But neither Eliza-
beth's friendship, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much a-
vail to Mary. The confederates foresaw what would be the
effets of these good offices; and that the queen, elated by
the profpet of protection, would rejea with scorn the over-
tures which they were about to make her. They, for that
reason, peremptorily denied Throgmorton acccfs to their pri-
soner; and what propositions he made to them in her behalf,
they either refused, or eluded t. t Kckih,

ME A N while they deliberated with the utmof anxiety, con-417, 4z7-

ccming the settlement of tne nation, and the future disposal Sche1nes
of the queen's person. Elizabeth, olbcrving that Throgmor- fedcrte
ton made no progrcfs in his negotiations with them, and that nobls.
they would liften to none of his demands in Mary's favour,
turned towards that party of the nobles who were alfeTnblcd at
Hamilton, incited thein to take arms in order to rcftore their
queen to liberty, and pronlifed to aflitt them in fulch an at-
tempt, to the utmoll of her power A. But they discovered no f Sec Ap-
greater union or vigour than formerly, and behaving like men relndi;
who had given up all concern either for' their queen or their No- XXtI.
country, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part of their body,
whether we confider it with refcpe6t to numbers, or to power,
to fettle the government of the kingdom, and to cliljofl of the
queen's person at pleasure. Many confiltalions were held, and
various opinions arose with regard to each of t!:rlf. Some
seemed dcfirou. of adhering to the plan oIn hich d.1, confede-

racy

BOOK V. racy was at firfl formed; and after punishing the murderers

of the king, and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell; after
3567. providing for the safety of the young prince, and the security of

the Protestant religion ; they proposed to re-establish the queen
in the poffeliion of her legal authority. The success with
which their arms had been accompanied, inspired others with
bolder and more desperate thoughts, and nothing less would
satisfy them than the trial, the condemnation and punihmnent
of the queen herself, as the principal conspirator againff the
life of her husband and the iafety of her son t-: the former
was Maitland's fytein, and breathed too much of a pacific and
moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wishes of the
party. The latter was recommended by the clergy, and
warmly adopted by many laics; but the nobles durt not, or
would not venture on such an unprecedented and audacious
deed i.

They o- BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so mo-
blige the derate as the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to
eslign the be persuaded or forced to resign the crown ; the young prince
govein- was to be proclaimed king, and the earl of Murray was to be
Oent. appointed to govern the kingdom during his minority, with the

name and authority of regent. With regard to the queen's
own person, nothing was determined. It seems to have been
the intention of the confederates, to keep her in perpetual im-
prifonment; but in order to intimidate herself, and to overawe
her partizans, they frill reserved to themselves the power of pro-
ceeding to more violent extremes.

I T wasobvious to foresee the difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high spirited, and accuf-
tomed to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own
incapacity for governing, to renounce the dignity and power
which fihe was born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own
fubjets, to content to her own bondage, and to invest those
persons. whom Lhe confidered as the authors of all her calami-
ties, with that honour and authority of which ihe herself was
stripped, were points hard to be gained. These, however, the
confederates attempted, and they did not want means to in-
sure success. Mary had endured for several weeks, all the
hardlhips and terror of a prilbn; no prospect of liberty appear-
ed; none of her subjeCts had either taken arms, or so much as

Keith, solicited her relief ; no person in whom fle could confide was
'Lts alladllitred into her presence; even the ambassadors of the

French king and queen of England were refused access to her.

In

- KeIcith, 410, 4 1:

zll , . tz.

TII'n intention ou puriing the lueen to death 'eems to have been car-

I l.I 'i lhy Inmef ol'hcr lubjctjetl: at this time we olict find I'lizalleth

Ih.!ilni: lthat IMary o'.vS. hr li'e to het interpofiGion. Diggek'a Compl.
AmnL, 'I, vc. See Appendix, No, XVILI.

In this solitary irate, without a counsellor or a friend, under BOOK V.
the pressure of distress, and the apprehension of danger, it was '-v
natural for a woman to hearken almost to any overtures. The '567.
confederates took advantage of her condition, and of her fears.
They employed Lord Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the party,
to communicate their fchene to the queen, and to obtain her
subscription to those papers which were neceflary for rendering
it effectual. He executed his commilfion with harflines and
brutality. Certain death was before Mary's eyes, if she re-
fused to comply with his demands. At the fame time, the was
informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in the name of Athol, Maitland,
Kirkaldy, the persons among the confederates who were mos:
attentive to her interest, that a resignation extorted by fear,
and granted during her imprisonment, was void in law, and
might be revoked io soon as Ihe recovered liberty. Throgmor-
ton, by a note which he found means to convey to her, fug-
gested the fame thing . Deference to their opinion, as well * Keith,
as concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield to every 425· Note
thing which was required, rnd to sign all the papers which (). Melv.
Lindsay presented to her. By one of these she resigned the uly 2.
crown, renounced all Ihare in the government of the kingdom,
and consented to the coronation of the young king. By ano-
ther, fle appointed the earl of Murray regent, and conferred
upon him all the powers and privileges of that high office.
By a third she substituted some other nobleman in Murray's
place, if he should refute the honour which was designed for
him. Mary, when she subscribed these deeds, was bathed in
tears; and while flhe gave away, as it were with her own
hands, the sceptre which flie had swayed so long, she felt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the fevelrcl:, perhaps,
which can touch the human heart t. f Ibil.

TH E confederates endeavoured to give this resignation all 43°'

the weight and validity in their power, by proceeding without Mer. 38.
delay to crown the young prince. The ceremlon)y was prlorm- Jime. vI.
ed at Stirling, on the 29th of July, with muclh f(lc.lllity, in crowned,
presence of all the nobles of the party, a considerable number al"" Mtr-

ray ChuellzI

of lesser barons, and a great aflFcllbly ofl the people. Prom regent.
that time all public writs were ifllecd, and the government car-
ried on, in name of James VI *. * Kciih,

No revolution so great was ever alffaccd with more cafe, 437-

or by means to unequal to the end. Tn a warlike age, and in
less time than two Inonths, a part of the nobles, who neither
possessed the chief power, nor tlle greatef wealth in the nation,
and who never brought 3000 imen into the field, feizcil, im-
prisoned, and dethroned their queen, and without fliedlling a
single drop of blood, fct her lon, an iihfit of ,a year old, on
the throne.

Du n i a

BOOK V. Du RING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes
3-v~1 of all the nation were turned on them, with aftoniihment;
1567. and various and contradictory opinions were formed, concerning

Rea3ln- the extraordinary steps which they had taken.
ings of
both ar- EV E N under the ariltocratical form of government, which
tics. prevails in Scotland, said the favourers of the queen, and not-

withRfanding the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, theprince
poflefies considerable power, and his person is treated with
great veneration. No encroachments should be made on the
tormer, and no injury offcred to the latter, but in cafes where
the liberty and happiness of the nation cannot be secured by any
other means. Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to
any part, but to the whole, or at leads to a majority of the
society, to judge of their existence. By what action could it
be pretended, that Mary had invaded the rights or property of
her fubjeas, or what scheme had flee formed against the liberty
and constitution of the kingdom? Were fears, suspicions, and
surmises, enough to justify the imprisoning, and the deposing
a queen, to whom the crown descended from so long a race of
monarchs ? The principal author of whatever was reckoned
culpable in her conduct, was now driven from her presence.
The murderers of the king might have been brought to condign
puniihment, the safety of the prince have been secured, and
the protestant religion have been established, without refting
the sceptre out of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual
imprisonment. Whatever right a free parliament might have
had to proceed to such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever name
its determinations might have merited, a sentence of this na-
ture, passed by a few nobles, without acknowledging or con-
silting the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conspiracy against the person
of their sovereign.

T E partizans of the confederates reasoned very differently.

'Tis evident, said they, that Mary either previously gave con-
sent to the king's murder, or did afterwards approve of that
horrid action. Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and
honours with which she loaded him, the manner in which she
filuffled his tnial to be carried on, and the indecent speed with
which she married a man, slained with so many crimes, raise
firong suspicions of the tormer, and put the latter beyond all
doubt. To have suffered the lilpreine power to continue in
the hands of an ambitious man, capable of the molf atrocious
:ind defperateaaqions, would have been difgracefll to the na-
tin, diixonourable to the queen, and dangerous to the prince.
Recourse was, therefore, had to arms. The queen had been
cou palled to abandon a husband, so unworthy of herself. But
her all'cti.,n toward hinm still continuing unabated; her indig-
nat;on aganifll the authors of this separation being visible, anti

often

often exprefled in the ftrongefi terms; they, by restoring her BOOK V.
to her ancient authority, would have armed her with power to-- J
destroy themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and 1567·
have afforded her an opportunity of pursuing fchemnes fatal to
the nation, with greater eagerness, and with more success.
Nothing, therefore, remained, but by one bold aEtion to deli-
ver themselves and their country from all future fears. The
expedient they had chosen was no less refpeclful to the royal
blood, than necefiary for the public safety. While one prince
was set aside as incapable of governing, the crown was placed
on his head, who was the undoubted reprcfentative of their
ancient kings.

WIt A T E V E R opinion posterity may form on comparing the

arguments of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments
we mayentertain concerning the justice or necessity of that
course which the confederates held, it cannot be denied that
their conduc, so far as regarded themselves, was extremely
prudent. Other expedients, less rigorous towards Mary, might
have been found for fettling the nation ; but, after the injuries
they had already offered the queen, there was none so effec-
tual for securing their own safety, or perpetuating their own
power.

T o a great part of the nation, the conduct of the confe- Murray
derates appeared not only wife, but just. The king's accession afrunes,

the govera.

to the throne was every where proclaimed, and his authority met.
Submitted to without opposition. And though several of the
nobles were still assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be en-
tering into some combination against his government, an also-
ciation for supporting it was formed, and signed by so many
persons of power and influence throughout the nation, as en-
tirely discouraged the attempt *. * Anderr.

TH E return of the earl of Murray, about this time, added vol ii.

strength to the party, and gave it a regular and finished form. 23'
Soon after the murder of the king, this nobleman had retired
into France, upon what pretence historians do not mention.
During his residence there, he had held a close correspondence
with the chiefs of the confederacy, and, at theirdefire, he
now returned. He seemed, at firil, unwilling to accept the
office of regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the
scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray wanted nei-
ther abilities to entitle him, nor ambition to aspire to this high
dignity. He had received the first accounts of his promotion
with the utnioft fatisfa&ion ; but by appearing to continue for
some days in suspense, he gained time to view with attention
the ground on which he was to at ; to balance the strength
and resources of the two contending factions, and to examine
whether the foundation on which his future fame and success
mull reft were found and firm.

BEFORE

BOOK V; BEEORE he declared his final resolution, he waited on

L-x'- Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter, and a queen, in a
's67. prison, from which he had neither any intention to relieve her,

nor to mitigate the rigour of her confinement, may be mention-
ed among the circuniltances, which discover the great want of
delicacy and refinement in that age. Murray, who was natu-

Keith, rally rough and uncourtly in his manner*, expoftulated so
56 ' warnmly with the queen concerning her pals conduet, and charg-

ed her faults so home upon her, that Mary, who had flattered
herillf with more gentle and brotherly treatment from him,
t !b. 445, melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to delpairf.

4 This interview, from which Murray could reap no political

advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so severe and un-
relenting, may be reckoned among the most bitter circum-
fiances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most unjufti-
fiable in his conduct.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Mlurray accepted

the office of regent, and began to act in that character without
oppolition.

Aug. 2z. AMID s T so many great and unexpected events, the fate
Fate of of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost for-
Bothwell. gotten. After his flight from the confederates, he lurked for

fcme time among his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar.
But finding it impolfible for him to make head, in that country,
against his enemies, or even to secure himself from their pur-
suit, he fled for shelter to his kinfinan the bishop of Murray;
and when he, overawed by the confederates, was obliged to
abandon hin, he retired to the Orkney isles. Hunted from
place to place, deserted by his friends, and accompanied by a
fevw retainers, as desperate as hiimfef, he suffered at once the
niferies of infamy and of want. His indigence forced him
upon a course which added to his inramy. He armed a few
fitall flips, .vhlch had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every velle which fell in his way, endeavoured to
procure fulfiftence for himself and his followers by piracy.
Kirkaldy '.nd Murray of Tullibardin were sent out against him
by the confederates; and surprising hint while he rode at anchor,
fcattereti his lirall fleet, took a part of it, and obliged him to
fly with a single (ilp towards Norway. On that coast he fell
in with a vefmel richly laden, and immediately attacked it ; the
Norwegians failed vcith armed boats to its alliftance, and after
a dclperaie light, lBothwll l and all his crew were taken prison-
ers. Hlis nanle and tiruality werce both unknown, and he was
tr.atlcd . (irll witih all the indignity and rigour, which the
odi,,us c:'in c of piracy inc:irti. I-lis real chlracler was Coon
tlii:(,vcred;l; and. thc(.ulh it f:vcd hilm freml tle ;tlltlllous deatll
ro wllich his all;ciatcs were condemned, it could neither pro-
curc hiini liberty, nor mitigate the hardfilips of his ilipriion-

ment,

ment. He languiifled ten years in this unhappy condition ; Boor V.
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at last he'-v'
ended his days unpitied by his countrymen, and unallifted by 'l567
strangers*. Few men ever accomplilhed their ambitious pro- * Melv.
jects by worse means, or reaped from them less fatisfaftion. i6S.
The early part of his life was restless and enterprising, full of
danger and of viciflitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur,
to which he attained by To many crimes, was extremely Ihort;
imbittered by much anxiety, and disquieted by many fears. In
his latter years, he suffered the imolt intolerable calamities, to
which the wretched are subje&t, and from which persons who
have moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted.

TH E good efFects of Murray's accellion to the regency were Success of

quickly felt. The parly forming for the queen was weak, til regent's
irresolute, and dilunited ; and no lioner was the government of drninilut'
the kingdom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his
abilities and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was coin-
posed loft all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat
separately with the regent. So many of them were brought
to acknowledge the king's authority, that icarce any appear-
ance of opposition to the cflabliflied government was left in the
kingdom. Had they adhered to the queen with any firmness,
it is probable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that
ihe would have afforded them such allitance as might have
enabled them to face their enemies in the field. But there ap-
peared so little vigour or harmony in their councils, that fle
was discouraged from espousing their cause; and the regent
taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to submit to
his government, without granting any terms, either to them-
selves, or to the queen *. * Keith,

TH E regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get in- 447, 450S

to his hands the places of itrength in the kingdom. Balfour, 463.
the deputy-governor, surrendered the castle of Edinburgh; and
as the reward of his treachery, in deferring Bothwell his patron,
obtairnd terms of great advantage to himfllilf. The Governor
of Dunbar, who discovered more fidelity, was soon forced
to capitulate; some other small forts surrendered without re-
fiftance.

Ti t s face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the re- A parlil-

gent to call a meeting of parliament. Nothing was wanting ment.
to confirm the king's authority, and the proceedings of the con-
federates, except the approbation of this fiupreme court ; and
after the success which had attended all their menfirces, there
could be little doubt of obtaining it. The numbers that re-
lbrted to an afrembly, which was called to deliberate on mat-
ters of so much importance, were great. 'rhe meeting was
opened with the utmof; folcmnity, and all its acts panscd with

much

Boor V. much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords, who had
_vs'^ discovered the wannest attachment to the queen, were present.

1567. But they had made their peace with the regent. Argyle,

Huntly, and Herreis acknowledged, openlyin parliament, that
their behaviour towards the king had been undutiful and cri-
minal *. Their compliance, in this manner, with the mea-
fures of the regent's party, was either the condition on which
they were admitted into favour, or intended as a proof of the
sincerity of their reconcilement.

Confilms TH E parliament granted every thing the confederates could
the pro- demand, either for the safety of their own persons, or the fe-
iceltcngfeo curity of that form of government which they had eftabilhed
derates. in the kingdom. Mary's resignation of the crown was ac-

cepted, and declared to be valid. The king's authority, and
Murray's election, were recognized, and confirmed. The im-
prisoning the queen, and all the other proceedings of the con-
federates, were pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary
had written to Bothwell were produced, and ihe was declared
to be acceflory to the murder of the king . At the fame time,
all the a&s of parliament 1560, in favour of the protestant re-
ligion, were publickly ratified; new statutes to the fame pur-
pose were enacted. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of popery, or to encourage the growth of the
reformation, was negle&ed.

.IT is observable, however, that the fame partlmonious spirit

prevailed in this parliament, as in that of 156o. The pro-
teftant clergy, notwithstanding many discouragements, and
their extreme poverty, had, for seven years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. The expedients fallen upon for
their subsistence had hitherto proved ineffeual, or were in-
tended to b1 So. But, notwithstanding their known indigence,
and the warm renonftrances of the assembly of the church,
which met this year, the parliament did nothing more for their
relief, than prescribe some new regulations concerning the pay-
nlent of the thirds of benefices, which did not produce any con-
fi'erable change in the situation of the clergy.

A r E w days after the dissolution of parliament, four of Both-
anourL83. well's dependants were convited of being guilty of the lcing's

murder, and suffered death as traitors. Their confeflions
brought to light many circumstances relative to the manner of
committing that barbarous crime ; but they were persons of a
low rank, and teem not to have been admitted into the secrets of

f Anderr. the conspiracy .
vol. ii. No Tr w I 'r H S T A N DI N G the universal fubmifiion to the re-
t65. gent's authority, there ({ill abounded in the kingdom nmaly

secret murmurs and cabals. The partizans of the house of

HIamilton

* An!erf. vol. iv. 153. Sec Appendix, No. XXIII.
t Coo'l, vol. ii. 66. Ado'erf vol, ii, lo6i

Hamilton reckoned Murray's promotion an injury to the duke of BoOK V.
Chatelherault, who, as first prince of the blood, had, in their - _'-
opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent. The length and 5'68.
rigour of Mary's sufferings began to move many to commiserate
her cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opinions in religion
dreaded the effecs of Murray's zeal. And he, tho' his abi-
lities were great, did not poflefs the talents requisite for soothing
the rage or removing the jealousies of the different fations.
By insinuation, or address, he might have gained or softened
many, who had opposed him; but he was a stranger to these
gentle arts. His virtues were revere; and his deportment to-
wards his equals, especially after his elevation to the regency,
distant and haughty. This behaviour offended tome of the
nobles, and alarmed others. The queen's faction, which had
been so easily dispersed, began again to gather, and to unite,
and was secretly favoured by some who had hitherto zealously
concurred with the confederates A. * Melv.

SUCH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards 79-
the queen, when fle recovered her liberty, in a manner no less Mary es-

capes from

surprising to her friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several Lochlevin.
attempts had been made to procure her an opportunity of
escaping, which some unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of
her keepers, had hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employ-
ed all her art to gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a
youth of eighteen. As her manners were naturally affable and
insinuating, fle treated him with the loft flattering distinCtion;
lhe even allowed him to entertain the most ambitious hopes, by
letting fall rome expreflions, as if she would choose him for her
hufland t. At his age, and in such circunmtances, it was im- 469el b
possible to resist such a temptaion. He yielded, and drew4
others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of May, while his
brother fat at supper, and the reft of the fomily were retired
to their devotions, one of his accomplices found means to
steal the keys out of his brother's chanlier, and opening the
gates to the queen and one of her main!, locked them behind
her, and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with
precipitation to the boat which was prepared for her, and on
reaching the fliore, was received with the utmost joy, by
Douglas, lord Seaton, and fir Jamnes Hamilton, who, with a
few attendants, waited for her. She illantdy mounted on
horseback, and rode flil fpDeed towards Niddrie, lord Seaton's
sent in Weft-Lotlhian. She arrived there that night, without
being pursued or interrupted. After halting three hours, file
set out for Hamilton; and travciling at the fame pace, The
reached it next mornirg.

ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends whom, in ArrivCe; a
their present difpofiti,)r, a much smaller accident would have lHamit

. .nd raifca
rouled, ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with , numerous

Vo .. I. R a great army,

BOOK V. a great and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by such
'--t -'c numbers of followers, as formed an army above 6000 frong.

1568. In their presence she declared that the resignation of the crown,

and other deeds she had signed during her imprisonment, were
extorted from her by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her
declaration; and on that, as well as on other accounts, a
council of the nobles and chief men of her party pronounced
May 8. all these tranfaaions, void and illegal. At the falme time

an association was formed for the defence of her person and
authority, and subscribed by nine earls, nine bifliops, eighteen

Keith, lords, and many gentlemen of diftinaion*. Among them, we
475. find several who had been present in the last parliament, and

who had signed the counter-affociation in defence of the king's
government; but such sudden changes were then so common,
as to be no matter of reproach.

Confterna- AT the time when the queen made her escape, the regent
tion of the
regent's ad- was at Glasgow, holding a court of justice. An event so con-
herents. trary to their expetatio is, and so fatal to their schemes, gave

a great flock to his adherents. Many of them appeared
weavering and irresolute; others began to carry on private
negotiations with the queen; and Tome openly revolted to her
fide. In so difficult a junture, where his own fame, and the
being of the party depended on his choice, the regent's mod
faithful associates were divided in opinion. Some advised him
to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The queen's army
was already strong, and only eight miles distant; the adjacent
country was full of the friends and dependents of the house of
Hamilton, and other lords of the queen's faction; Glasgow
was a large and unfortified town; his own train consisted of no
greater number than was usual in times of peace ; all these rea-
sons pleaded for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments
were urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glaf-
gow were well affeced to the cause ; the vassals of Glencairn,
Lenox, and Semple lay near at hand, and were both nume-
rous, and full of zeal; succours might arrive from other parts
of the kingdom in a few days; in war, success depends upon
reputation, as much as upon numbers; reputation, is gained,
or loft, by the firif ftep one takes; in his circumstances, a re-
treat would be attended with all the ignominy of a flight, and
would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies witl

His pru- boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, the fuperiorit)
dent con- of Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both to choof
due. with wisdom, and to a& with vigour. He declared against re.

treating, and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And whill
he amused the queen for rome days, by pretending to hearkei
to tome overtures, which she had made for accommodatini
their differences, he was employed with the utmost industry, ii
drawing together his adherents, from different parts of thl

kingdom

kingdom. He was soon in a condition to take the field; and BOOK V.
though far inferior to the enemy in number, he confided so '"v
much in the valour of his troops, and the experience of his 1568.
officers, that he broke off the negotiation, and determined to
hazard a battle *. * Buchan.

AT the fame time, the queen's generals had commanded her 369'

army to move. Their intention was, to condut her to Dun- May 13.
barton-caftle, a place of great strength, which the regent had
not been able to wrest out of the hands of lord Fleming the
governor: but if the enemy should endeavour to interrupt their
march, they resolved not to decline an engagement. In Mary's
situation, no resolution could be more imprudent. A part only
of her forces was affenlbled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the nor-
thern clans were soon expected ; her sufferings had removed,
or diminished the prejudices of many among her fubjecs ; the
address with which fle surmounted the dangers that obftrueed
her escape, dazzled and interested the people; the sudden con-
fluence of To many nobles added lustre to her cause ; The might
afluredly depend on the friendship and countenance of France ;
she had reason to expect the protection of England; her enemies
could not poflibly look for support from that quarter. She had
much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious meafires; they
had every thing to fear.

B u T Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her

pallions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition
from the depth of distress, to such an unusual appearance of
prosperity, that she never doubted of success. Her army,
which was almost double to the enemy in number, consisted
chiefly of the Harniltons, and their dependants. Of there the
archbilhop of St. Andrew's had the chief direction, and hoped,
by a vict- y, not only to crulh Murray, the ancient enemy of
his house, but to get the person of the queen into his
hands, and to oblige her, either to marry one of the duke's
son's, or at least to commit the clief direcion of her affairs to
hlimfelf. His ambition proved fatal to the queen, to himself,
and to his family *.

MIvA R Y's imprudence, in rerolving to fight, was not greater Battle of

than the ill conduct of her generals in the battle. Between the Langfidc.
two armies, and on the road towards Dunbarton, there was an
eminence called Langfide-Hill. This the regent had the pre-
caution to seize, and polled his troops in a linall village, and
among rome gardens and inclofil.rs adjacent. In this advan-
tageous situation le waited the approach of the enemy, whole
superiority in cavalry could be of 1no benefit to them, on such
broken ground. The Hamniltons who compored the vanguard,
ran so eagerly to the attack, that they put themselves out of
breath, and left the main battle far behind. The encounter of
the fpearmen was fierce and desperate ; but as the forces of the

R z Hamil-
* Anders. *ol. iv. 3z. Melv, 181.

Boole V. Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a continued fire
--v--J from a body of mufqueteers, attacked on the other by the

1568. regent's most choice troops, and not supported by the reft of

the queen's army, they were soon obliged to give ground, and

Thequeen's the rout immediately became universal. Few victories, in a
rmy de- civil war, and among a barbarous people, have been pursued
feated. with less violence, or attended with less bloodfled. Three

hundred fell in the field; in the flight scarce any were killed.
The regent and his principal officers road about, beseeching the
soldiers to ipare their countrymen. The number of prilbners
was great, and among them many persons of distinction. The
regent marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thank:
to God for this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless vic-

* Keith, tory W.
77.flight Du R I N G the engagement, Mary stood on a hill, at no great

distance, and beheld all that passed in the field, with such
emotions of mind as are not easily described. When she saw
the army, which was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable
confusion, her spirit, which all her palt misfortunes had not
been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether. In the utmost
consternation, /he began her flight, and so lively were her
impressions of fear, that ihe never closed her eyes till she reached
the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottilh miles
f Id. 481. from the place of battle t.

TH E s E revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less ra-

pid, than singular. In the /hort space of eleven days, hie had
been a prisoner at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies;
lhe had seen a powerful army under her command, and a nu-
merous train of nobles at her devotion ; and now fle was
obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her life, and to lurk,
with a few attendants, in a corner of her kingdom. Not think-
ing herself safe, even in that retreat; her fears impelled her to
an action, the most unadvised, as well as the most unfortunate
ih her whole life. This was her retiring into England, a ftep,
which, on many accounts, ought to have appeared to her rash
and dangerous.

Retblve on BrEF o E Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual diftnuft and
retiring in- jealousies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their sub-
to England. sequent tranfaaions had contributed to exasperate and inflame

there paflions. She had endeavoured, by secret negotiations
and intrigues, to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's govern-
ment, and to advance her own pretensions to the Englihl crown
Elizabeth, who possessed greater power, and afted with lefi
teferve, had openly Supported Mary's rebellious fubjets, ant
fomented all the dissentions and troubles in which her reigi
had been involved. The maxims of policy till authorizce
that queen to pursue the fame course, as by keeping Scotland
in confusion, she effectually secured the peace of her own king

1otlt

dom. The regent, after his vitory, had marched to Edin- BooK V.
burgh, and not knowing what course the queen had taken, -
it was several days before he thought of pursuing her *. She, c568.
might have been concealed in that retired corner, among sub- Mem. 95.
jets devoted to her interclt, till her party, which was dispersed
rather than broken by the late defeat, flould gather such
strength, that fle could again appear with safety at their head.
There was not any danger, which she ought not to have run,
rather than throw herself into the hands of an enemy, from
which flhe had already suffered so many injuries, and who
was prompted both by inclination, and by interest, to renew
them.

B u T on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, Eliza-

beth had declared against the proceedings of her fubjeds, and
rolicited for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the ap-
pearance of sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in
England, and had promised her to meet her in person, and to
give her such a reception as was due to a queen, and an allyt.
Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's
designs, while she had power in her hands, she was, at pre-
sent, the objeet, not of fear, but of pity; and to take advan-
tage of her situation, would be both ungenerous and inhu-
man. The horrors of a prison were frefll in Mary's memory,
and if Jhe flould fall a second time into the hands of her sub-
jeEts, there was no injury to which the presumption of success
might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt escaping
into France, was dangerous; and in her situation, almost in-
pofiible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing as an
exile, and a fugitive, in that kingdom, where flie had once
enjoyed all the splendor of a queen. England remained her
only asylum; and, in spite of the intreaties of lord Herrcis,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured her, even
on their knees, not to confide in Elizabeth's promises or gene-
rofity, her infatuation was invincible, and she resolved to fly
thither. Herreis, by her command, wrote to Lowther the Her recerp
deputy.governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he would ion at Car-
give her; and, before his answer could return, her fear and lic.
impatience were so great that lite got into a ftiher-boat, and,
with about twenty attendants, landed at Workington in Cum- May '6
berland, and thence she was conducted with many marks of re-
fpeet to Carlisle *. * K ,

So Coon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote a long letter Anders

to the queen, representing, in the strongest terms, the injuries vol. iv. z.
which flie had suffered from her own fubjees, and imploring Elizabcth
that pity and afliftance which her present situation demandedt. delibe'ra"
An event Co extraordinary, and the conduct which might betremanner
proper in consequence of it, drew the attention, and employed of treating

the her.
[. Crm;l, 489. Andeif. vol. iv, 99, izo. Murdil, 369. 1' Id. 29.

BOOK V. the thoughts of Elizabeth and her council. If their delibe-
t-_V rations had been influenced by considerations of justice or gene-

1568. rofity alone, they would not have found them long or intricate.

A queen vanquished by her own subjects, and threatened by
them with the loss of her liberty, or of her life, had fled from
their violence, and thrown herself into the arms of her nearc&
neighbour and ally, from whom she had received repeated
afflirances of friendship and protection. These circumstances
entitled her to respect and to compafion, and required that flue
should either be restored to her own kingdom, or at least be
left at full liberty to seek aid from any other quarter. But with
Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not, what
was most just or generous, but what was most beneficial to her.
self, and to the English nation. Three different resolutions
might have been taken, with regard to the queen of Scots,
To re-instate her in her throne, was one; to allow her to re-
tire into France was another; to detain her in England, was a
third. Each of there drew consequences after it, of the ut-
most importance, which were examined, as appears from papers

Anders. fill extant*, with that minute accuracy, which Elizabeth's

vol. iv. 34, ministers employed in all their consultations upon affairs of mo-
99, ioz. rent.

T o restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority

in Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful
than ever. The nobles who were most firmly attached to the
Englifl interest, would quickly feel the utmost weight of her
resentment. And as the gratitude of princes is seldom strong
or lasting, regard to her own interest might soon efface the
memory of her obligations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to re-
new the alliance of the Scottifl nation with France, and re-
vive her own pretensions to the Englifli Crown. Nor was it
poflible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottiflh queen, by ary
conditions that would prevent there dangers. Her party in
Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her return, even with-
out any support from England, would inspire her friends with
new zeal and courage; a tingle vicory might give them the
fiperiority, which they had loft by a tingle defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

T H dangers arising from utffering Mary to retire into France,

were no less obvious. The French king could not refute his
assistance towards restoring his sifter and ally to her throne.
Elizabeth would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island,
overawing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and
if the commotions in France, on account of religion, were
fettled, the princes of Lorrain might resume their ambitious
projeecs, and the united forces of France and Scotland might
invade England, where it is weakest and most defence-
less.

NOTHIN X

NoT H I N G therefore remained but to detain her in Eng- BooK V.

land; and to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to -v'
confine her in a prison. The former was a dangerous experi- S568.
nment. Her court would become a place of resort to all the dRefolves t
Roman catholics, to the difaffeaed, and to the lovers of in- in England.
novation. Though Elizabeth affeEted to represent Mary's
pretensions to the Engliih crown as altogether extravagant and
ill-founded, Ihe was not ignorant that they did not appear in
that light to the nation, and that many thought them prefera-
ble even to her own title. If the activity of her emissaries had
gained her so many abetters, her own personal influence was
much more to be dreaded; her beauty, her address, her
sufferings, by the admiration and pity which they would
excite, could not fail of making many converts to her
party *. * Anderr.

'Twas, indeed, to be apprehended, that the treating Mary vol. iv.

as a prisoner would excite universal indignation against Eliza- 56, 6o.
beth, and that by this unexampled severity towards a queen,
who implored, and to whom she had promised her proteftion,
She would forfeit the praise of justice and humanity, which
was hitherto due to her adminifiration. But the Englilh mo-
narchs were often so solicitous to secure their kingdom againfl
the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about the means which
they employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had seized the
heir of the crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the violence
of a storm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his kingdom ;
and, in contempt of the rights of hospitality, without regard-
ing his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his father,
detained him a prisoner for many years. This action though
detested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to imitate. Her
virtue was not more proof than Henry's had been, againlt the
temptations of interest ; and the pofleffion of a present advan-
tage was preferred to the profpeet of future fame. The satis-
faaion which /he felt in mortifying a rival, whose beauty and
accomplishments she envied, had, perhaps, no less influence
than political considerations, in bringing her to this resolution.
But, at the fame time, in order to screen herself from the cen-
sure which this condut merited, and to make her treatment of
the Scottish queen look like the effet of neceflity, rather than
of choice, she determined to put on the appearance of
concern for her interest, and of deep sympathy with her sus-
ferings.

W IT H this view Ihe instantly dispatched lord Scroope war- May 2z.

den of the weft marches, and fir Francis Knollys her vice-
chamberlain, to the queen of Scots, with letters full of ex-
prefions of kindness and condolence. But, at the fame time,
they had private inftru&ions to watch all her motions, and o Anderr.
take care that flie should not escape into her own kingdom *. ol. iv 36

On 70, 9X.

BOOK V. On their arrival, Mary demanded a personal interview with

'-V'-' the queen, that she might lay before her the injuries which

568. she had suffered, and receive from her those friendly offices

Masr de- which she had been encouraged to expet. They answered,
mands ad-
mnitace that it was with relucance this honour was at present denied
into Eliza- her; that while she lay under the imputation of a crime so
beth'spr.e- horrid as the murder of her husband, their mistress, to whom
fence. he was so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a stain

upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence; but as
soon as Ihe had cleared herself from that aspersion, they pro-
mifed her a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid propor-

f Ibid. vol. tioned to herdiftrefs F.
iv. 8, s5 No T H N G could be more frivolous than this pretence. It
She offere
to vindicate was the occasion, however, of leading the queen of Scots into
herteodua. the share, in which Elizabeth and her ministers wilhed to in-

tangle her. Mary expressed the utmost furprize at this un-
expected manner of evading her requet ; but as The could not
believe so many profefilons of friendship to be void of sincerity,
£he frankly offered to submit her cause to the cognizance of
Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs of her own
innocence, and of the falfhood of the accusation, brought a-
gainft her, as should fully remove the scruples, and satisfy the

Elizabeth delicacy of the English queen. This was the very point to
takes ad- which Elizabeth laboured to bring the matter. By this ap-
vantage of peal of the Scottifh-queen, fie became the umpire between
this offr her and her fubjeds, and had it entirely in her own power to

protrac the inquiry to any length, and to perplex and involve
it in endless difficulties. In the mean time, she was furnished
with a plausible pretence for keeping her at a diitance from
court, and for refusing to contribute towards replacing her on
her throne. As Mary's condu& had been extremely incautious,
and the presumptions of her guilt were many and strong, it was
possible her fubjeas might make good their charge against her;
and if this ihould be the result of the inquiry, she would,
thenceforth, cease to be the obje& of regard, or of com-
pallion, and the treating her with coldness and negleEt would
merit little censure. In a matter so dark and mysterious, there
was no probability that Mary could bring proofs of her inno-
cence, so incontefted, as to render the condue of the Eng-
lilh queen altogether culpable. And, perhaps, her impatience
under restraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's partiality, or her
discovery of her artifices, might engage her in such cabals, as
woultd jutify the using her with greater rigour.

EL Z A nE 'r early foresaw all those advantages, which

would nrife from an inquiry into the conduA of the Scottish
queen, carried on under her direEtion. There was rome dan-
ger, however, that Mary might discover her secret intentions
too Coon, and by receding from the offer which /he had made,

,ndea-

endeavour to disappoint them. But even in that event, the de- BOOR V.
tennined not to drop the inquiry, and had thought of several -
different expedients for carrying it on. The counters of Lenox, '568-
convinced that Mary was accessory to the murder of her son,
and thirsting for that vengeance which it was natural for a
mother to demand, had implored Elizabeth's justice, and so-
licited her with many tears, in her own name, and in her hus-
band's, to bring the Scottish queen to a trial for that crime *.
The parents of the unhappy prince had a just right to prefer
this accusation; nor could she, who was their nearest kinf-
woman, be condemned for listening to so equitable a demand.
Besides, as the Scottish nobles openly accused Mary of the
fame crime, and pretended to be able to confirm their charge
by fufficierit proof, it would be no difficult matter to prevail on
them, to petition the queen of England to take cognizance of
their proceedings against their Sovereign ; and it was the opinion
of the English conncil, that it would be reasonable to comply
with the requests. At the fame time, the obsolete claim of
the superiority of England over Scotland began to be talked of;
and, on that account, it was pretended that the decision of
the contest between Mary and her fubjets belonged of right
to Elizabeth. But tho' Elizabeth revolved all these expedients
in her mind, and kept them in reserve to be made use of as
occasion might require, she wified that the inquiry into Mary's
condut Should appear to be undertaken purely in compliance
with her own demand, and in order to vindicate her innocence;
and so long as that appearance could be preserved, none of the
other expedients were to be employed.

WH E N Mary consented to submit her cause to Elizabeth,

Ihe was far from fufpeting that any bad consequences could
follow, or that any dangerous pretensions could be founded on
her offer. She expeced that Elizabeth herself would receive,
and examine her defences. ; flie meant to confider her as an
equal, for whole fatisfation she was willing to explain any
part of her conduEt that was liable to censure; not to acknow-
ledge her as a superior, before whom Ithe was bound to plead
her cause. But Elizabeth put a very diirerent sense on Mary's
offer. She confidered herself as chosen to he judge in the
controversy between the Scottiil queen and her fubccjets, and
began to a& in that capacity. She propolt(l to appoint coin-
missioners to hear the pleadings of both parties. and wrote to
the regent of Scotland, to inpowcr proper persons to appear
before them, in his namnc, and to produce what he could
alledge in vindication of his proceedings aginfll his fove-
reign.

Mn a.Y had, hitherto, relied with unnccountable credulity Matvren
on Elizabeth's profellion of regard, and expected that so many Iy olffenmid

kind at Eliza-

beh' conll..

* Camd. 4.12, 1)'nes, 469. ' Anderr, vol. iv ;7. 1 Anlderf. duit
wol,.iv, 10.

BoOK V. kind speeches would, at last, be accompanied with' some fuita-

--r---. ble actions. But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She
,568. plainly perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and saw

what a diminution it would be to her own honour, to appear
on a level with her rebellious subje&s, and to stand together
with them at the bar of a superior and a judge. She retraced
the offer which file had made, and which had been perverted to
a purpose so contrary to her intention. She demanded, with
more earnestness than ever, to be admitted into Elizabeth's pre-
fence; and wrote to her, in a firain very different from what
flie had formerly used, and which fully discovers the grief and
indignation that preyed on her heart. " In my present fitua-

tion, fays she, I neither will, nor canreply to the accusations
of my fubjeas. I am ready, of my own accord, and out

"of friendlhip to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to vin-
"dicate my own conduct. My fubjecs are not my equals;

nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial trial, ac-
knowledge them to be so. I fled into your arms, as into those

" of my nearest relation and most perfet friend. I did you
"honour, as I imagined, in choofing you preferably to any
" other prince, to' be the restorer of an injured queen. Was
"it ever known that a prince was blamed for hearing, in per-
"f on, the complaints of those who appealed to his justice,
" against the false accusations of their enemies ? You admit-
;' ted into your presence my bastard brother, who had been

guilty of rebellion; and you deny me that honour! God
' forbid that I should be the occasion of bringing any stain up-

on your reputation. I expeCted that your manner of treat-

" ing me would have added lustre to it. Suffer me
' either to implore the aid of other princes, whose de-

licacy, on this head, will be less, and their resentment of
i' my wrongs greater; or let me receive from your hands that

a fftance, which it becomes you, more than any other prince,

"to grant ; and by that benefit, bind me to yourself in the in-

voil. iv. 94. "iiffolublc ties of gratitude*.
jane Io. T'r ils letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but
t.l,.zlie.h', did not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the mat-
p"Il""li"l ter before the privy council, and it was there determined, not-
«;lIt ht r.witlhltaildiig the intrcatics and remonllfrances of the Scottifl

queen, to go on with the inquiry into her conduct, and till
that was finllled, it was agreed that Elizabeth could not, con-
fiflently with her own honour, or with the fifety of her govern-
ment, either give her the afiftance which she demanded, or
pcrmlit her to retire out of the kingdom. And left flhe fliould
have an opportunlilv of elcaping, while she resided so near Scot-

* Anderr. land. it wna thought advifeable to remove her to some place, at a
iti! m101. greater dilfance from the borders*.

W iI i . l. the Engliflh court was occupied in there delibera-
tions, the regent did not negle¢t to improve the victory at

Langfide.

Langfide. That event was of the utmost importance to him. BooK V.
It not only drove the queen herself out of the kingdom, but-v
left her adherents dispersed, and without a leader, at his mer- i568.
cy. He seemed resolved, at sirs, to proceed againit them Prtheern"
with the utmost rigour. Six persons of some diftindion, who gentagainft
had been taken prisoners in the battle, were tried and con- the queen's
demned to death as rebels against the king's government. They adherents.
were led to the place of execution, but by the powerful inter-
ceflion of Knox, they obtained a pardon. Hamilton of Both-
wellhaugh was one of the number, who lived to give both the
regent and Knox reason to repent of this commendable ac of le-
nity t. - Cald.

SOON after, the regent marched with an army, confidting voI. ii. 99

of 4000 horse and iooo foot, towards the weft borders. The
nobles in this part of the kingdom were all of the queen's sac-
tion; but as they had not force sufficient to obstruct his progress,
he must either have obliged them to submit to the king, or
would have laid waste their lands with fire and sword. But
Elizabeth, whose interest it was to keep Scotland in confusion,
by preserving the balance between the two parties, and who
was endeavouring to sooth the Scottish queen by gentle treat-
ment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the field two
weeks, the regent, in compliance with the Englifl ambassador,
dismissed his forces; and an expedition, which might have
proved fatal to his opponents, ended with a few acs of feve-
rity *. * Cald.

TH E resolution of the Englilh privy council with regard to vol. ii. 99.

Mary's person, was soon carried into execution ; and, without Mary car-
regarding her remonstrances or complaints, she was conduEted ietl to

Bolton.

to Bolton, a castle of lord Scroope's, on the borders of York- July 13.
lhire . In this place, her correspondence with her friends in t Anderr.
Scotland became nmore difficult, and any profpeA of making vol. iv. 14.
her escape was entirely cut off. She now felt herself to be en-
tirely in Elizabeth's power, and though treated as yet with the
rcepect due to a queen, her real condition was that of a prisoner.
Mary knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded
it as the worst of all evils. While the remembrance of her
late imprisonment was still lively, and the terror of a new one
filled her mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper junture to renew July 28.
her former proposition, that she would fulfer the regent and his
adherents to be called into England, and content to their being
heard in defence of their own conduEt. And, on her part, fle .grees that
promised, whatever flould be the issue of this inquiry, to cm- In inquiry
ploy all her power and influence towards replacing Miary on her h lr con-
throne, under a few limitations, which were far from being dlut.
unreasonable. Fear, impatience, despair, as well as this sooth- 1 A'l'e''
ing promise, with which the proposition was accomlpanlie'd, in- vo. iv.

1 09.
duced the Scottifli queen to comply :. tH.ve,

I[, .r.i

Boo V. INe order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired nothing so

-v--' Imuch as to render the union between them as close as possible,
1 g68. she fliewed a disposition to relax somewhat in one point, with
er dliffi- regard to which, during all her past and subsequent misfortunes,
with regard she was uniformly inflexible. She expressed a great veneration
o religion. for the liturgy of the church of England ; she was often pre-

sent at religious worship, according to the rites of the reformed
church; made choice of a protestant clergyman to be her
chaplain; heard him preach against the errors of popery with
attention and seeming pleasure; and discovered all the fymp-

* Ander. toms of an approaching conversion *. Such was Mary's known
vol. iv- and bigoted attachment to the popifli religion, that it is im-
1Haynes. poflible to believe her sincere in this part of her condut ; nor
509. can any thing mark more strongly the wretchedness of her con-

dition, and the excess of her fears, than that they betrayed her
into dissimulation, in a matter concerning which her tentiments
were, at all other times, scrupulously delicate.

Alg. 's. AT this time the regent called a parliament, in order to pro-
A pai!il- ceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to acknowledge the
Sent nd. king'sauthority. The queen's faction was alarmed, and Ar-
E kotlann. a

gyle and Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants,
the one in the south, and the other in the north of Scot-
land, began to assemble forces to obstruct this meeting.
Compassion for the queen, and envy at those who governed
in the king's name, had added so much strength to the party,
that the regent would have found it difficult to withitand its
efforts. But as Mary had submitted her cause to Elizabeth, she
could not refute, at her desire, to command her friends to lay
down their arms, and to wait patiently till matters were brought
to a decision in England. By procuring this ceflation of arms,
Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the regent's fation,

n AnderfrL as /he had formerly given to the queen's t.

vol. iv. TH E regent, however, would not content, even at Eliza-
'"5' beth's request, to put off the meeting of parliament. But we

nay ascribe to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of
Maitland, who laboured to prevent the one half of his country-
men from exterminating the other, any appearances of mode-
ration which this parliament discovered in its proceedings. The
moll: violent opponents of the king's government were forfeited;
the reft were allowed still to hope for favour *.

F.lzabeth No sooner did the queen of Scots fubmiit her cause to her ri-
rcetuiiet, the val, than Elizabeth required the regent to fend to York, depu-
regent tI ties, properly inftru&ed for vindicating his concdut, in presence
,ltou)c. ° of her conilllifaries. It was not without hesitation and anx-

it-ly, that the regent consented to this neafiure. His authority
w's alleatly eflablillied in Scotland, and confirmed by parlia-
nIlVlll To' lilldr its validity now to be called in question, and

subjected
*Buch. 371.

fiubjeced to a foreign jurifdition, was extremely mortifying. BOOK V.
To accuse his Sovereign before strangers, the ancient enemies of'-
the Scottish name, was an odious task. To fail in this accu- 1568.
fation was dangerous; to succeed in it was disgraceful. But
the strength of the adverse faction daily increased. He dreaded
the interposition of the French king in its behalf. In his fitua-
tion, and in a matter which Elizabeth had so much at heart, her
commands were neither to be disputed, nor disobeyed t.

THn necessity of repairing in person to York added to the Both the

ignominy of the ftep which he was obliged to take. All his as- queen a.a1
fociates declined the office; they were unwilling, it would om if-31
seem, to expose themselves to the odium and danger with which fiocers
it was easy to forefce that the discharge of it would be attended,
unless he himfelfconfented to flare these in common with them.
The earl of Morton, Bothwell biflop of Orkney, Pitcairn com-
mendator of Dunfermling, and lord Lindsay were joined with
him in colninifflon. Macgill of Rankeilor and Balnaves of
Halhill, two eminent Civilians, George Buchanan his faithful
adherent, a man whose genius did honour to the age, Mait-
land, and several others, were appointed to attend them as as-
filtants. Maitland owed this diftination to the regent's fear,
rather than to his arffetion. He had warmly remonstrated a-
gainft this measure. He wished his country to continue in
friendihip with England, but not to become dependant# on that
nation. He was desirous of re-eftabliihing the queen in some
degree of power, not inconfiitent with that which the king pof-
fefled; and the regent could not, with safety, leave behind
him a man, whose views were so contrary to his own, and who,
by his superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the nation,
equal to that, which others derived from the antiquity and power
of their families *.

MARY impowered Lefly bifflop of Ross, lord Livingston,

lord Boyd, lord Herreis, Gavin Hamilton commendator of
Kilwinning, fir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and fir James
Cockburn of Stirling, to appear in her name t.

ELI Z A a E r m nominated Thomas Howard duke of Nor-

folk, Thomas Ratcliff earl of Suflex, and fir Ralph Sadler, her
commiflioners to hear both parties.

TH a fourth of Oaober was the day fixed for opening the The confe-

conference. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides, rence at
the dignity of the judges before whom they were to appear, the York.
high rank of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the
importance of the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranf-
a&ionno less illustrious than it was singular. The situation in
which Elizabeth appeared on this occasion, (trikes us with an
air of magnificence. Her rival, an independent queen, and

the

Buclh. 371. See Append. No. XXV.
Buch. 371. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Mclv. 186, 88.
t Andcrl. vol. iv, 33,

BooK V. the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was a prisoner in her
t'-_V- hands, and appeared, by her ambassadors, before her tribunal.

;568. The regent of Scotland, whoreprefented the majesty, and pof-

sessed the authority of a king, flood in person at her bar. And
the fate of a kingdom, whose power her ancestors had often
dreaded but could never subdue, was now absolutely at her dif-
pofal.

Views of TH E views, however, with which the several parties con-
the diffe- ented to this conference, and the issue to which they expected
stilt plar-
ties. to bring it, were extremely different.

MA R Y'S chief object was the recovering her former autho-

rity. This induced her to consent toa measure, against w -;ch
ihe had long struggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground
for entertaining hopes of being restored to her kingdom ; in or-
der to which, she would have willingly, made many concef-
sions to the king's party; and the influence of the Engliih queen,
and her own in patience under her present situation, might have
led her to many more ' The regent aimed at nothing but fe-
curing Elizabeth's protecion to his party, and seems not to
have had the moit distant thoughts of coming to any compo-
fition with Mary. Elizabeth's views were more various, and
her schemes more intricate. She seemed to be full of concern
for Mary's honour, and solicitous that she should wipe off the
aspersions which blemilhed her character. This fle pretended
to be the intention of the conference ; amusing Mary, and elud-
ing the solicitations of the French and Spanish anibafladors in
her behalf by repeated promises of assisting her, as soon as ihe
could venture to do so, without bringing disgrace on herself.
But, under this veil of friendship and generosity, Elizabeth con-
cealed sentiments of a different nature. She expected that the
regent would accuse Mary of being acceflory to the murder of
her husband. She encouraged him, as far as decency would
permit, to take this desperate ftep t. And as this acclustion
might terminate two different ways, fle had concerted nea-
fures for her future conduct suitable to each of these. If the
charge against Mary fiould appear to be well founded, fh re-
solved to pronounce her unworthy of wearing a crown, an to
declare that she would never burden her own conscience v ith
the guilt of an action so detestable, as the retoring her to 'er

# Anderr. kingdom . If it Ihould happen, that what her accusers; 1-
vol. iv. il. ledged, did not rnaount to a proof of guilt, but only of m:.l-

administration, she determined to set on foot a treaty for re'-
toring her, but on ftch conditions, as would render her s: r

lb ibid. ever dependant on England, an.d the slave of her own fubjefts .
ó6. And as every Itep in the progress of the conference, as well:;

the final result of it, was in her own power, she would frill I

; t

a nderl. vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. *[ Anders. vol. iv, 11, 4:.
HayneS, 487.

at liberty to choose which of these courses flei would hold; or Bool v.
if there appeared to be any danger or inconveniency in purfiiing ---
eitherof them, she might protract the whole cautie by endless i568.
delays, and involve it in inextricable perplexity.

TH E conference, however, was opened with much folem- Com!aiant

nity. But the very firif ftep discovered it to be Elizabeth's in- qttl:,e
tention to inflame, rather than to extinguifl the difl:ntions and comrnil:
animofities among the Scots. No endeavours were used to re- fioners a-
concile the contending parties, or to iolify the fierceness ofgainl the
their hatred, by bringing the queen to offer pardon for what reselt.
was pail, or her subje&s to promnile more dutiful obedience for
the future. On the contrary, Mary's comiiilfiioners were per- Oa°b 8.
mitted to prefer a complaint againtl the regent and his party,
containing an enumeration of their treasonable actions, of their
seizing her perfbn by force of arms, committing her to prison,
compelling her to resign the crown, and making use of her son's
name to colour their usurpation of the whole royal authority.
And of all these enormities, they required such speedy and es-
fectual redress, as the injuries of one queen demanded from the
justice of another t. t Andr.

IT was then expected that the regent would have disclosed

the whole circumstances of that unnatural crime, to which he
pretended the queen had been accessory, and would have pro-
duced evidence in support of his charge. But far from accu-
sing Mary, the regent did not even answer the complaints
brought against himself. He discovered a reluctance at the un-
dertaking that office, and started many doubts and scruples,
with regard to which, he demanded to be resolved by Eliza-
beth herself ** His reserve and hesitation were no less furpri- * Hayncr,
(ing to the greater part of the Englifli commiflioners than to 478'
his own aflbciates. They knew that he could not vindicate
his own conduct without charging the murder upon the queen,
and he had not hitherto flewn any extraordinary delicacy on
that head. An intrigue had been fccretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this mystery.

THE duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most power- Intrigueps

ful and molt popular man in England. His wife was lately "· Njrt'jlk
dead; and he began already to form a project, which he after- w^,h he
wards more openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scot-
land, by a marriage with the queen of Scots. He saw the in-
famy which would be the consequence of a public accusation
agamnlt Mary, and how prejudicial it might be to her pretensions
to the Englifi fucceflion. In order to save her this cruel mor-
tification, lie applied to Maitland, and exprefldc his aftonill-
ment at feeing a man of lb much reputation for wifdoni, con-
curring with the regent in a measure so dishonourable to them-
selves, to their queen, and to their country; submitting the
public tranfaations of the nation to the judgment of foreigners;

ai.d

BooK V. and publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of their
'-'-x-'- sovereign, which they were bound, in good policy, as well as in

*568. duty, to conceal and to cover. It was easy for Maitland, whose

sentiments were the fame with the duke's, to vindicate his own
conduct. He assured him, that he had employed all his credit
to dissuade his countrymen from this measure; and would still
contribute, to the utmost of his power, to divert them from it.
This encouraged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the
regent. He repeated and enforced the fame arguments which
he had used with Maitland. He warned him of the danger to
which he must expose himself, by such a violent ation as the
public accusation of his sovereign. Mary would never forgive
a man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on
her character. If she ever recovered any degree of power, his
deftrution would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it
at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him from this, by
a public approbation of his conduct. For whatever evidence
of Mary's guilt he might produce, fie was resolved to give
no definitive sentence in the cause. Let him only demand that
the matter Ihould be brought to decision, immediately after
'hearing the proof, and he would be fully convinced how false
and insidious her intentions were, and, by consequence, how
improper it would be for him to appear as the accuser of his
own .sovereign *. The candour which Norfolk seemed to disco-
ver in there remonftrnces, as well as the truth which they
contained, made a deep impression on the regent. He daily
received the itrongeft alfurances of Mary's willingness to be re-
conciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her of such an
odious crime, together with denunciations of her irreconcilable
hatred, if he acted a contrary part t. All there considerations
concurred in determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the duke had fuggafted.
a. 9. HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he pro-

ceeded farther, whether the Engliflh commiflioners were im-
powercd to declare the queen guilty, by a judicial act; whether
they would promise to pass sentence, without delay ; whether
the queen should be kept under such restraint, as to prevent her
from disturbing the government now eftablified in Scotland;
and whether Elizabeth, if she approved of the proceedings of
v ond.cr. the king's party, would engage to protec it for the future *.

The paper containing these demands was signed by himself
alone, without connmunicating it to any of his attendants, ex-

t Ibid. 56. cept Maitland and Melvil f. Nothing could appear more na-
Melv. i9o. tural than the regent's solicitude to know on what footing ie

flood. To have ventured on a ftep so uncommon and dan-
gerous,as the accufinig his Ibvereign, without previously ascertain-

inr

* Melv. 187 n 3,

Hayn, t3 ' Andlcf. vol. iv. 77. Good. vo;
ii. 15;. Sec Append. No. XXVI,

ing that he might take it with safety, would have been unpardona- Boon v.
ble imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expect that he -v-
would have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered her C568.
commifioners to give him that fatisfacion, which he de-
manded. It became necessary to tranfinit the articles to her-
self, and by the light in which Norfolk placed them, it is easy
to fee that he wished that they ihould make no flight impreflion
on Elizabeth and her Ministers. " Think not the Scots, laid

he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us view their condut,
as we would wish our own to be viewed in a like situation.
The game they play is deep ; their estates, their lives, their
honour are at stake. It is now in their own power to be
reconciled to their queen, or to offend her irrecoverably, and
in a matter of so much importance, the utmost degree of
caution is not exceflive S. t AnderC.
WHI LE the Englilh commiflioners waited for fuller in- vol. iv. 77.

ftru&ions with regard to the regent's demands, he gave in an
answer to the complaint, which had been offered in the name
of the Scottish queen It was exprefied in terms perfecly con-
formable to the system which he had at that time adopted. It
contained no insinuation of the queen's being accessory to the
murder of her husband, the bitterness of stile peculiar to the
age was considerably abated; and though he pleaded, that
the infamy of the marriage with Bothwell, made it necessary to
take arms in order to dissolve it; though Mary's attachment to
a man io odious justified the keeping her for some time under
restraint; yet nothing more was laid on there fubjeas than was
barely requisite in his own defence. The queen's commifioners Oaob. t7.
did not fail to reply . But while the article with regard to v Anderl.
the murder remained untouched, there were only Ikirmiles at 64. 80
a distance, of no consequence towards ending the contest,
and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commiflioners.

TH a conference had, hitherto, been conducted in a man- The con-

ner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none ference re-
of those discoveries which fie had expected. The distance be- Wedmin-
tween York and London, and the necessity of consulting her ,er.
upon every difficulty which occurred, consumed much time.
Norfolk's negotiation with the Scottish regent, however secret-
lycarried on, wasnot, in all probability, unknown to a prin-
cess so remarkable for her sagacity in penetrating the designs of
her enemies, and feeing through their deepest schemes f. In- Good.
ftend, therefore, of returning any anfwcr to the regent's de-vol. ii. 16o,
mands, ihe resolved to move the conference to Westminster, iiad. vol.
and to appoint new commifloners, in whom the could more
abiolutely confide. Both the Scottilli queen and the regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this refolu- Haynes,
tion t. 484. Aa-
VOL. I.S W derf. vol'

iv, 94.

BOOK V. WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority of her corn.

'- millioners during the conference at York, and how, by the
568. strength of their arguments, they confounded her adversaries,
°od.,86 and silenced all their cavils *. The dispute stood, at that time,
84, 35.o on a footing, which rendered her victory not only apparent,

but easy. Her participation of the guilt of the king's murder
was the only circumRfance, which could justify the violent
proceedings of her subjects. And while they industriously a
voided mentioning that, her cause gained as much as that of
her adversaries loft by fupprefing this capital argument.

EL I Z A B E T H resolved that Mary should not enjoy the fame

advantage in the conference to be held at Westminster. She
deliberated with the utmofl anxiety, how flie might overcome
the regent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse the queen.
She confidered of the molt proper method for bringing Mar's
commiflioners to answer such an accusation ; and as fle fore-
saw that the promises with which it was necessary to allure the
regent, and which it was impossible to conceal from the Scot-
tifh queen, would naturally exasperate her to a great degree,
fle determined to guard her more narrowly than ever; and
though lord Scroop had given her no reason to distrust his vigi-
lance or fidelity, yet because he was the duke of Norfolk's bro-
ther-in-law, ihe thought it proper to remove the queen as soon
as poflible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and commit her to

-. Haynes, the keeping of the earl of Shrewibury, to whom that castle
487. belonged t
Mary' ófu- MA RY began to suspect the design of this second confcr-
lizabeth's ence, and notwithitanding the satisfaction fie exprefled at fee-
intentions. ing her cause taken more immediately under the queen's own
Oob. 21. eye S, ihe framed her instructions to her commiflioners, in such
$ Anders. a manner, as to avoid being brought under the necessity of an-

Cvold. 95' fwering the accusation of her fubjets, if they should be so
vol. ii. 349. desperate as to exhibit one againa her *. These suspicions

were soon confirmed by a circumstance extremely mortifying
The regent having arrived at London, in order to be present at
the conference, was immediately admitted into Elizabeth's pre-
fence, and received by her, not only with respect, but with
affetion. This Mary justly confidered as an open declaration

Nov. 2. of that queen's partiality towards her adversaries. In the first
Claims a emotions of her resentment, ihe wrote to her commissioners,
perlonal and commanded them to complain, in the presence of the
Pudience of Englifl nobles, and before the ambassadors of foreign princes,
Elizabethr f the usage {he had hitherto met with, and the additional ir-

juries which ile had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious sub-
jecs were allowed access to the queen, fle was excluded from
herprefence; they enjoyed full liberty, fle languilhed under I
longimprifonment ; they were encouraged to accuse her, in
defending herself, flie laboured under every disadvantage. For

thc;

these reasons she once more renewed her demand, of being ad- BooK V.
mitted into the queen's presence; and if that were denied, she '-v'
intructed them to declare, that flie recalled the consent hfe '568
had given to the conference at Westminster, and protested,
that whatever was done th re, Ihould be held to be null and s Good
invalid t. vol. ii. 184.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution Mary

could have taken. The pretences on which she declined the
conference were plausible, and the juncure for offering them
well chosen. But either the queen's letter did not reach her
commissioners in due time, or they fiuffered themfclves to be de-
ceived by Elizabeth's profeflions of regard for their mistress, and... A.

- -

i. * -

i, r ' 1 Anders.
consented to the opening of the conference . vol. iii 25.

To the commiftloners who had appeared in her name at Nov. a5.

York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon keeper of the
great feal, the earls of Arundel and Leicester, lord Clinton,
and Sir William Cecil *. The difficulties which obltructed the * Anders
proceedings at York were quickly removed. A satisfying an- vol iv. 9.
fwer was given to the regent's demands ; nor was he so much
disposed to hesitate, and raise objecions as formerly. His ne-
gotiation with Norfolk had been discovered to Morton by rome t Melv
of Mary's attendants, and he had communicated it to Cecil t. z0-.
His personal safety, as well as the continuance of his power,
depended on Elizabeth. By favouring Mary, fle might, at any
time, ruin him; and by a question which ffie artfully itarted,
concerning the person who had a right, by the law of Scot-
land, to govern the kingdom during a minority, flhe let him
fee, that even without reltoring the queen, it was an easy mat-
ter for her to deprive him of the fuprleme dire&ion of affairs t. t Haynec,
These considerations, which were powerfully seconded by mos 484.
of his attendants, at length determined the regent to produce
his accusation againRt the queen.

HE endeavoured to leflcn the infamy with which he was Thregenth

sensible this ation would be attended, by protesting, that it queen of
vwas with the utmnol relucance he undertook this disagreeable being ac-
talk ; that his party had long suffercd their conduct to be mif- ceffory to
conifrued, and had borne the worst imputations in silence, ra- herdhuf
ther than expose the crimes of their sovereign to the eyes of murder
strangers; but that now the insolence and importunity of the
adverse faction forced then to publifl, what they had hitherto,
though with loss to thelmfelves, endeavoured to conceal§. § Anders,
These pretexts are decent ; and had the party discovered any vol. iv,
delicacy or reserve, with regard to the queen's ations, in the 5
reft of their conduct, might have patlld for the real principles
by which they were influenced. But their former treatment to
lie queen renders ir iinpolTible to give any credit to these pro-
fellions. And the regent, it is plain, was drawn by the necelli-

S z ty

Boo V. ty of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation,
_'V-' where no liberty of choice was left him ; and was obliged ei-

5'68. ther to acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to

charge Mary with having committed murder.

Tu E accusation itself was conceived in the strongest terms.

Marywas charged, not only with having consented to the mur-
der, but with being acceffoiy to the contrivance and executi-
on of it. Bothwell, itwas pretended, had been screened from
the pursuits of justice by her favour; and she had formed de-
signs no less dangerous to the life of the young prince, then
subversive of the liberties and constitution of the kingdom. If
any of these crimes should be denied, an offer was made, to
produce the most ample and undoubted evidence in confirmation

Ander. of the charge *.

vol. iv. AT the next meeting of the commiflioners, the earl of Le-
t19. nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical
No. 29- and unnatural murder of his son, he implored Elizabeth's jus-

tice against the queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath,
of being the author of that crime, and produced papers, which,
as he pretended, would make good what he alledged. The
entrance of a new ator on the stage, so opportunely and at a
juncture so critical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This
contrivance was manifefily Elizabeth's, in order to increase,
by this additional accusation, the infamy of the Scottiff

· Id. ibid. queent.

2l. MA RY'S commifioners expressed the utmost furprize and
Her corn- indignation at the regent's presumption, in loading the queen
rnifloners with calumnies, which, as they affimed, she had io little me-
nrfwer. rited. But, instead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by
Decem. 4. a reply to the charge, they had recourse to an article in their

inftrutions, which they had formerly neglected to mention in
its proper place. They demanded an audience of Elizabeth;
and having renewed their miftrefs'srequeft, of a personal in-
terview, they protested, if that were denied her, against all

o Adefiv. the future proceedings of the commissioners . A protestation
vO I58't sos this nature, offered just at the critical time, when such a

bold accusation had been preferred against Mary, and when
the proofs in support of it were ready to be examined, gave
reason to suspect that fl e dreaded the event of that examinati-
*on. This suspicion received the strongest confirmation fioni a-
nother circumstance ; Ross and Hernes, before they were in-
troduced to Elizabeth, in order to make this protestation, pri-
·vately acquainted Leicester and Cecil, that as her miifrefs had,
from the beginning, discovered an inclination towards bringing
the differences between herself and her fubjets to an amicable
accommodation, so she was still desirous, notwithstanding the
-regent's audacious accusation, that they flould be terminated

Ibid. iv. i that manner t.

134. S U c
Cablh, .
157.

S.uc.H moderation is scarce compatible with the strong re- BOOK V.

fentment which calumniated innocence naturally feels ; or with. b-
that cagernefs to vindicate itself which it always discovers; In 1568.
Mary's filuation, an offer so ill-timed must be confidered as a
conlellion of the weakness of her cause. The known character
of her conmmillioners exempts them from the imputation of fol-
ry, or the suspicion of t eachery. Some fecretconvi&ion, that
the conduc of their miifrefs could not bear so stria a scrutiny.
seems to be the most probable motive of this imprudent proposal,
by which they endeavoured to avoid it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a Dec. 4.

pretence for rejecting it. She told Mary's commissioners, that,
in the present juncture, nothing could be so diihonourable to
their miflrefs, asan accommodation ; and that the matter would
eelm to be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress dif-
coveries, and to hide her lhame; nor was it poflible that she
could be admitted, with any decency, into her presence, while
flie lay under the infamy of such a public accusation.

UP o N this repulse, Mary's commiflioners withdrew ; and

as they had declined answering, there seemed now to be no
further reason for the regent's producing the proofs in fipport of
his charge. But without getting these into her hands, Eliza-
beth's schemes were incompleat, and her artifice for this pur-
poae was as mean, but as successful, as any she had hitherto
employed. She commanded her commiflioners to testify her
indignation and displeasure at the regent's presumption, in for-
getting so far the duty of a subject, as to accuse his sovereign
of such atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the good o-
pinion of such a powerful protearefs, offered to shew that his
accusations were not malicious, nor ill-grounded. Then were
produced, and delivered to the Englifli commiflioners, the ads
of the Scottish parliament in confirmation of the regent's au-
thority, and of the queen's resignation ; the confeflions of the
persons executed for the king's murder; and the fatal calket
which contained the letters, sonnets, and contracts, that have
been already mentioned.

EL I Z A B E 1 H having got there into her pofleflion, began Elizabeth

to lay aside the expreflions of friendship and respect which she trests Mary
had hitherto used in all her letters to the Scottifli queen. She with great
now wrote to her in such terms, as if the presumptions of her rigour.
guilt had amounted almost to certainty; fie blamed her for
refusing to vindicate herself from an accusation which could not
be left unanswered, without a manifett injury to her character;
and plainly intimated, that unless that were done, no change
would be made in her present situation *. She hoped that such * Anders.
a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was VO' i"
scarce recovered from the shock of the regent's attack on her 79g dl v.
reputation, and force her to confirm her resignation of the ii. 60o.

crown,

BOOK V; crown, to ratify Murray's authority as regent, and to conrent
'-. - that both herself and her son should reside in England, under

1568. her protection. This scheme Elizabeth had much at heart;

lhe proposed it both to Mary and to her commiflioners, and ne-
gleced no argument, nor artifice, that could pofibly recom-
mend it. Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her reputa-
tion, to her pretensions, and even to her personal safety. She
rejected it without hesitation. " Death, said she, is less dread-
" ful than such an ignominious ifep. Rather than give away,
" with my own hands, the crown which descended to me from

t Haynes, " my ancestors, I will part with life; but the last words I ut-
497 " ter, flall be those of a queen of Scotland t."
See Ap- AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible how open
XXVll. her reputation lay to censure, while {he suffered such a public
Good. vol. accusation to remain unanswered; and though the conference
ii. 74, was now dissolved, {he impowered her commissioners to present
301. a reply to the allegations of her enemies, in which fle denied,

Dec in the strongest terms, the crimes imputed to her; and recri-

minated upon the regent and his party, by accusing them of

t Good. having devised and executed the murder of the king t. The
i. 285. regent and his afiociates afierted their innocence with great

warmth. Mary continued to insist on a personal interview, a

§ Ibid. condition which she knew would never be granted §. Eliza-
a83. beth urged her to vindicate her own honour. But it is evi-
Cabal. dent from the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to which

both queens had recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, and
Elizabeth did not desire to make any further progress in the
inquiry.

X569. TH z regent was now impatient to return into Scotland,
Feb. s. where his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to
Dirmifres raise some commotions. Before he set out, he was called into
the regent
without ei- the privy council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's
ther ap- sentiments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on ore
proving or hand nothing had been objeted to his conduct, which flie
condemning could reckon detrimental to his honour, or inconsistent with his
his con . duty; nor had he, on the other hand, produced any thing n-

gainft his sovereign, on which ihe could found an unfavourable
opinion of her actions; and for this reason, she resolved to
leave all the affairs of Scotland, precisely in the fame situation,
in which she had found them, at the beginning of the confer-
ence. The queen's comniflioners were diimiTed much in the

Good. 2. fame manner *.
3i15 333. AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed i,

earnestly on this conference, upwards of four months, such :,
conclusion of the whole appears, at f.rft fight, trifling and ri-
diculous. Nothing, however, could he more conformable to
Elizabeth's original views. or more subservient to her future

schem>e

schemes. NotwithRanding herfeeming impartiality, fie had no BooK V.
thoughts of continuing neuter; nor was fli at any loss on -
vhom to bestow her protection. Before the regent left Lon- tS69*
don, fle supplied him with a considerable fum of money, and BuupptorC'hi'
engaged to support the king's authority to the utmost of her prty.
power t. Mary, by her own conduct, fortified this resolution. t Id. 133.
Enraged at the repeated instances of Elizabeth's artifice and Carte, 3.
deceit, which flhe had discovered during the progress of the 478.
conference, and despairing of ever obtaining any succour from
her, file endeavoured to rouse her own adherents in Scotland
to arms, by imputing such designs to Elizabeth and Murray, as
could not fail to inspire every Scotchman with indignation.
Murray, flie pretended, had agreed to convey the prince her
son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the places of great-
eft strength in the kingdom ; and to acknowledge the depend-
ance of the Scottifl upon the Englilh nation. In return for
this, he was declared to be the lawful heir of the crown of
Scotland ; and, at the fame time, the question with regard to
the English fucceflion was to be decided in favour of the earl
of Hartford, who had promised to marry one of Cecil's daugh-
ters. An account of these wild and chimerical projects was
spread industriously among the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it
was calculated on purpose to bring her government into difrepu-
tation, laboured to destroy its effects, by a counter-proclama-
tion, and became more disgusted than ever with the Scottiih
queen *.

TH E regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the ut- Efforts of
most tranquillity. But the rage of the queen's adherents, MarI's d

· ' o . liherents a..

which had been suspended in expectation that the conference gin, him.
in England would terminate to her advantage, was now ready
to break out with all the violence of civil war. They were
encouraged, too, by the appearance of a leader, whose high
quality and pretensions intitled him to great authority in the
nation. This was the duke of Chatelherault, who had resided
for fonme years in France, and was now sent over by that court,
with a filall supply of money, in hopes that the presence of
the sirs nobleman in the kingdom would strengthen the queen's
faction. Elizabeth had detained him in England, for some
months, under various pretences, but was obliged at last to
susser him to proceed on his journey. Before his departure,
MIlary inveRted him with the high dignity of her lieutenant general Feb. 5,
in Scotland, together with the fantastic title of her adopted
father.

Tn E regent did not give him time to form his party into

any regular body. He assembled an army with his usual expe-
dition, and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and
Huntly, who composed the chief part of the queen's facion,
lying in very distant corners of the kingdom, and many of the

duke's
Haync5, 5oo, 503. See Append. No. XXVIII

BooK V. duke's dependants having fallen, or having been taken in the
.--v"- battle of Langfide, the spirit and frength of his adherents

56g9. were totally broken, and an accommodation with the regent

was the only thing, which could prevent the deftruion of his
estate and vaflfls. This was efeled without difficulty ; and
on no unreasonable terms. The duke promised to acknow-
ledge the authority both of the king and of the regent; and to
claitm no jurifdiftion in consequence of the commiflion, which
he had received from the queen. The regent bound himself to
repeal the a&, which had pafled for atrainting several of the
.queen's adherents; to restore all, who would submit to the
king's government, to the pofleflion of their estates and ho-
nours; and to hold a convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties 1hould be fettled by mutual content.
The duke gave holfages for his faithful performance of the
treaty; and, in token of their sincerity, he and lord Herreis

C atotompanied the regent to Stirling, and visited the young king.
l The regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide *.

Crawf. A a Y t L and Huntly refused to be included in this treaty.
Mem. co6. A ecret negotiation was carrying on, in England, in favour of

the taptive queen, with so much success, that her affairs began
to wear a better aspea, and her return into her own kingdom
fetmel to be an event not very distant. The French king had
lately obtained such advantages over the Hugonots, that the
ettiniion of'that party appeared to be inevitable, and France,
by recovering domestic tranquillity, would be no longer prevent-
ed firo protecting her friends in Britain. These circumstances
not only nfluenced Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an
impreflion on the duke, that he appeared to be wavering and
irresolute, and plainly discovered that he wished to evade the
atcconpliihment of the treaty. The regent saw the danger of
allowing the duke to fliake himself loose, in this manner, from
his engagements; and intantly formed a resolution equally
bold and politic. He commanded his guards to seize Chatel-
herault in his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had conCe,
in orderto attend the convention agreed upon; and, regard-
less either of his dignity as the first nobleman in the kingdom,
and next heir to the crown, or of the promises of personal fecu-
rit, on which he had relied, committed him and lord Hcrreis,
pnfonmr to the castle of Edinburgh *. A blow To fatal and
April xs unexpeted di'cirited the party. Argyll submitted to the king's

government, and made his peace with the regent, on very easy
terms ; and Huntly, being left alone, was at last obliged to lny
down his arms.

July tr. S on after, lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brouglt
A pr°opoal letters to the regent both from tlh Elnglilh and Scottifil queens
in fZvour of
Mary re. A convention was held a't Perth, in order to confider them.
j.tced. Elizabeth'i

* Crav:F. Mem. i 1. Melh Woai.

Efizabeth's letter contained three different proposals with re- BooK V.
gard to Mary; that flie flould either be restored to the full '--"
poffeflion of her former authority; or be admitted to reign 'S69-
jointly with the king her son; or at least be allowed to reside
in Scotland, in fonie decent retirement, without any flare in
the administration of government. These overtures were ex-
torted by the importunity of Fenelon the French ambaflador,
and have rome appearance of being favourable to the captive
queen. They-were, however, perfecly suitable to Elizabeth's
general system with regard to Scottilh affairs. Among propo-
fitions so unequal and disproportionate, lhe easily foresaw where
the choice would fall. The two former were rejected ; and
long delays must necessarily have intervened, and many difficul-
ties have arisen, before every circumstance relative to the las
could be finally adjusted *. * Spotr-

MA RY in her letter, demanded that her marriage with wood, 13o.

Bothwell should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found
invalid, should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce.
This fatal marriage was the principal source of all the calami-
ties she had endured for two years; a divorce was the only
thing which could repair the injuries, her reputation had susser-
ed by that ftep. It was her interef to have proposed it early;
and it is not easy to account for her long silence with respeCt to
this point. Her particular motive for prorofing it, at this time,
began to be so well known, that the demand was reje&ed by
the convention of efates. They imputed it not so much to any
abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her eagerneis to conclude a mar-
riage with the duke of Norfolk.

'rH s marriage was the objet of that secret negotiation in Norfolk's

England, which we hIve already mentioned; but, like all icheme for
those concerted for the relief of the queen of Scots, it ended therrYuen
tragically. The fertile and projecing genius of Maitland firt of Scots.
conceived this scheme. During the conr.rcrence at York, he
communicated it to the duke hinmfelf, and to the bishop of
Ross. The former readily closcd with a fchene, so flattering
to his ambition. The latter confidered it as a probable device
for refloring his misreGi to liberty, and replacing her on her
throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a correl-
pondence, by means of his sifter lady Scroop, averse from a
measure, which would have rcftored her to her kingdom with
so much rplendor . The sudden removal of the conference
from York to Wecflninftcr fufpcndcd, but did not break off
this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were till the duke's promp-
ters, and hi.; agents; and many letters and love-tokens were
exchanged between him and the queen of Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an administration so Concnls
vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long 'tjl'1rcth.

. 1. con, ce .ed,"izah.
* Cimii. 413. Hal'ne5, <., State Tnijl'y , 71.

BeoK V. concealed, he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of

'--^- openness and candor, an artifice which seldom fails of success.
z569- He mentioned to her the rumour, which was (pread of his

marriage with the Scottiflh queen; he complained of it as a
groundless calumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind,
with many exprellions full of contempt, both for Mary's cha-
ra&er, and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of every thing
relative to the queen of Scots, file seems to have credited thole
profeflions -. But inlcead of discontinuing the negotiation, he
renewed it with great vigour, and admitted into it new afioci-
ates. Among these was the regent of Scotland. He had given
great offence to Norfolk, by his public accusation of the queen,
in breach of the concert into which he had entered at York.
He was then ready to return into Scotland. The influence of
the duke, in the north of England, was great. The earls of
Northumberland and Weftmoreland, the most powerful noble-
men in that part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the regent, the injuries he had done his sovereign. In order to
secure his safe retreat, he addrefled himself to Norfolk, and,
after some apology for his past conduc, he insinuated that the
duke's scheme of marrying the queen his sifter was no less ac-
ceptable to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms ; and that
he would concur, with the utmost ardour, in promoting so de-

e Anders. firable an event *. Norfolk heard him with the credulity, na-
3- 34. tural to those, who are passionately bent upon any dcfign. He

w'rote to the two earls to desist from any hostile attempt against
Murray, and to that he owed his passage through the northern
counties, withcut disturbance.

Gains the li C 0 U

n A n E D by his success in gaining the regent, he

,.t ib.t next attempted to draw the Englifli nobles to approve his de-
·~n'lil sign. The nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying.

I-er jealousy kept the qucftion with regard to the right of fuc-
cellion undecided. The memory of the civil wars, which had
desolated England for more than a century, on account of the
disputed titles of the houses of York and Lancaster, was fill
recent. AlInmo the whole ancient nobility had perished, and
the nation itself had been brought to the brink of deftrucion,
in that unhappy contest. The Scottilh queen, though her
rieht of fuccellion was generally held to be undoubted, might
ineet with formidable coiupetitors. She might marry a foreign
and a popilli prince, and bring both liberty and religion into
duliger. But, by marrying her to an Englihmnan, a zealous
'1,olelCant, the molt powerful and mloft universally beloved of
all the nobles, an effeLun I remedy seemed to be provided against
;.11 tlfe evils. The greater part of the peers, eitherdirectly
c.t tcitlv. approved of it, as a salutary projeEt. The earls of
Arunilll'. I'ninbroLe, Lciceller, and lord Lunlley ftbfcribed a

letter
1-* -layac, 574. State Trials, I. 79, 8c.

letter to the Scottish queen, written with Leicester's hand, in BOOK V.
which they warmly recommended theematch, but insisted, by '--
way of preliminary, on Mary's promise, that flie flould at- '569.
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to the Englifli
crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth or to her posterity; that she
llould consent to a league ostensive and defensive between the
two kingdoms; that Mhe should confirm the present establish-
ment of religion in Scotland; and receive into favour such of
her fubjets as had appeared in arms against her. Upon her
agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying these articles, they en-
gaged that the English nobles would not only concur in restoring
her immediately, to her own throne, but in securing to her
that of England, in reversion. Mary readily consented to all
these proposals, except the second, with regard to which, she
demanded some time for consulting her ancient ally the French
king *.

TH E whole of this negotiation was industriously concealed

from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scottiflh queen was well
known, nor could it be expeted, that fie would willingly
come into a measure, which tended so visibly to save the repu-
tation, and to increase the power of her rival. But in a matter
of so much consequence to the nation, the taking a few steps
without her knowledge, could scarce be reckoned criminal;
and while every person concerned, even Mary and Norfolk
themselves declared that nothing lhould be concluded without
obtaining her consent, the duty and allegiance of subje&s
seemed to be fully prcferved. The greater part of the nobles
regardedthe matter in this light. Those who conducted the
intrigue, had farther and more dangerous views. They saw the
advantages which Mary procured by this treaty, to be present
and certain ; and the execution of the promises which she came
under, to be distant and uncertain. They had early commu-
nicated their scheme to the k ngs of France and Spain, and ob-
tained their approbation-f. A treaty, concerning which they
consulted foreign princes, while they concealed it from their
own sovereign, could not be deemed innocent. They hoped,
however, that the union of so many nobles would render it ne-
cefary for Elizabeth to comply ; they flattered themselves, that
a combination so ifrong would be altogether irresistible ; and
such was their confidence of success, that when a plan was
concerted in the North of England, for rescuing Mary out of
the hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that if Ille
recovered liberty, her sentiments in his favour might change,
used all his interest to difflluade the conspirators from attentpt-
ing it.

* Anderr. .iii md .

4 . Anders vo. iii. i:.
Carmd. 410.

BOOK V. I N this situation did the affair remain, when Lord Boyd ar-
'-- --' rived from England; and, besides the letters which he pro-

1569 duced publickly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and

Throgmorton to the regent, and to Maitland. These were
full of the most sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Englard
concurred, faSd they, in favouring the design. Every preli-
minary was adjusted ; nor was it polfible that a scheme so deep
laid, conducted with so much art, and supported both by powv-
er and by numbers, could miscarry, or be defeated in the ex-
ecution. Nothing now was wanting, but the concluding cere-
mony. It depended on the regent to haften that, by procuring
a sentence of divorce, which would remove the only obstacle
that stood in the way. This was expected of him, in confe-
quence of his promile to Norfolk ; and if he regarded either
his interest or his fame, or even his fafery, he would not fail
to fulfil these engagements t.

BUT the regent was now in very different circumifances,

from those which had formerly induced him to asset an appro-
bation of Norfolk's schemes.: He saw that the downfall of his
own power must be the sirs consequence of the duke's success.
And if the queen, who confidered him as the chief author of
all her misfortunes, fiould recover her ancient authority, he
could never expee favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No
wonder he declined a ftep so fatal to himself, and which would
have eftabliihed the grandeur of another on the ruins of his
own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But, as every other
circunistance was fettled, the bishop of Ross, in name of his
mistress, and the duke, in person, declared, in preIence of the
French ambassador, their mutual consent to the marriage, and
a contraa to this purpose was signed, and entrusted to the keep-
ing of the ambassador *.

Anu. 13. TH E intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could not
Y.abei: h long remain a secret. It began to be whispered at court; and
ihe ,'uke'a Elizabeth calling the duke into her presence, exprefled the ut-
,tcfign and most indignation at his conduct, and charged him to lay aside
deeats it. all thoughts ofprofecuting such a dnngcrous design. Soon as-

ter, Leicester, who, perhaps had countenanced the projet
with no other intention, revealed the whole circumstances of
it to the queen. Pembroke, Arundel, Lumley, and Tlhrcg-
morton were confined, and cxamined. Mary was watched
more narrowly than ever; and Haiings, earl of Huntingtc,.,
who pretended to dispute, with the Scotlii i queen, cer right
to the fuccellion, being joined in comniiflion withi Shrewfbuly,
rendered her imprifonlnent more iitolera:lle, by the exceis of
his vigilance and rigour :. The Scottifl reI.cenr, threatened
with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betraycd the duke; put

hi:,

H'lynec, 50.o . 1SpIts . 1o Sec Alpcndii, n,,. :XIX.
* C2.e vol. iii. 486. X Hayne , 515 5S0, 5lo, 3'.

his letters into her hands; andfurniihed all the intelligence in BOOK V.
his power 1. The duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, '-v-
and then, in contempt of a fummnons to appear before the 1569.
privy council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the Se AP-
inprifonment of his aflbciates; coldly received by his fiiends No. XXX.
in that county ; unprepared for a rebellion ; and unwilling per-
haps to rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed a
second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was firif kept as a
prisoner in a private house, and then sent to the tower. After
being confined there upwards of nine months, he was released
upon his humble fubmillion to Elizabeth, giving her a promise,
on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence with the
Scottish queen s. During the progress of Norfolk's negotiati- * Hayne,
ons, the queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt of 520 597'
their issuing in her rcftoration to the throne, with an increase
of authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the Maitllnd
foul of that party, and the person, whose activity and abilities bml thend
the regent chiefly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that in- regen.
trigue, which had kindled filch combustion in England. He
continued to foment the spirit of disaffection in Scotland, and
had reduced from the regent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and fe-
veral of his former aflociates. While he enjoyed liberty, the
regent could not reckon his own power secure. For this rea-
son he employed captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures, to
accuse him of being accessory to the 'murder of the king; and
under that pretence carried him a prisoner to Edinburgh. He
would soon have been brought to trial, but was saved by the
friendflip of Kirkaldy, governor of the caffle, who, by pre-
tending a warrant for that purpose from the regent, got him
out of the hands of the persons, to whose care he was com-
mlitted, and conducted him into the castle, which, from that
time, was under Maitland's command. The loss of a place
of so much importance, and the defetion of a man so emi-
nent for military Ikill as Kirkaldy, brought the regent into some
difreputation, for which, however, the success of his ally
Elizabeth abundantly compensated.

TH E intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottish queen to A rebllinn

liberty having been discovered, an attempt was made, to the zabeth by
fame purpose, by force of arms; but with no better success. Mury'a ad-
The earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, though lit-tierente.
tie diftinguiflcd by their personal merit, were two of the most
ancient and powerful of the English peers. Their estates in
the northern counties were great, and they poflefled that in-
fluence over the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the po-
pular and minrtial families of Percy and of Ncvil. They were
both attached to the Popifli religion, and discontentcd with
the court, where new men, and a new system prevailed. Ever
since Mary's arrival in England, they had warmly espoused

her

BOOK V. her interest; and zeal for popery, opposition to the court, and

_--v-J commiseration of her sufferings, had engaged them in different
iS69. plots for her relief. Notwithlfanding the vigilance of her keep-

ers, they held a close correspondence with her, and conmniuni.

X Hayner, cated to her all their designs :. They were privy to Norfolk's
595. schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded did not
Nurdin, suit their ardour and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottilh
44, 6%.
&c. queen was not their sole objec. They aimed at bringing

about a'change in their religion, and a revolution in the go-
vemment of the kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the
aid of the king of Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of po-
pery in that age. Nothing could be more delightful to the
restless spirit of Philip, or more necessary towards facilitating
his schemes in the Netherlands, than the involving England in
the confutation and miseries of a civil war. The duke of Al.
va, by his direction, encouraged the two earls, and promised,
so loon as they either took the field with their forces, or fur-
prifed any place of strength, or rescued the queen of Scots,
that he would supply them both with money, and a strong body
of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dii-
guise of a tailor, founding the ports where it would be moll
proper to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest
officers, was dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling
rome commercial differences between the two nations; but in
reality, that the rebels might be sure of a leader of experience,
so soon as they ventured to take arms*.
Defeated. THE conduE of this negotiation occasioned many meetings

and messages between the two earls. Elizabeth was informed
of these ; and though file suspected nothing of their real design,
file concluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's
confidants. They were summoned, for this reason, to repair
to court. Conscious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they
delayed giving obedience. A second, and more peremptory
order was issued. This they could not decline, without fllak-
Nov. 9. ing off their allegiance. And as no time was left for delibe-

ration, they instantly ereaed their standard against their fove-
reign. The re-eftablinling the catholic religion; the fettling
the order of fucceflion to the crown; the defence of the an-
cient nobility; were the motives they alledged to justify their
rebellion t. Many of the lower people flocked to them, with
such arms as they could procure; and had the capacity of the
leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprize, it mull
have soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth acned
with prudence and vigour; and was served by her subjects with
fidelity and ardor. On the first rumour of an insurrection, Ma-
ry was removed to Coventry, a place of strength, which could

not
* Carte, vol. iii. 483, 490. Camd, 411. + Srype, vol. i, 547'

not be taken without a regular siege; a detachment of the BOOK V.
rebels, which was sent to rescue her, returned without success. -
Troops were aflemnbled in different parts of the kingdom; as 569
they advanced, the malecontents retired. In their retreat
their numbers dwindled away, and their spirits funk. Despair
and uncertainty whither to diret their flight, kept together for
some time, a finall body of them, among the mountains of
Northumberland. But they were at length obliged to disperse, Dcc. 11.
and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottifl borderers. The
two earls, togeiher with the counters of Northumberland,
wandering for some days in the waste of Liddifdale, were
plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the season,
and left destitute of the necessarics of life. Wcfinorland was
concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherif, and
afterwards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland
was seized by the regent, who had marched with some troops
towards the borders, to prevent any irpreffion the rebels might
make on those mutinous provinces *.

AM IDST Co many surprising events, the affairs of the Church r'-

church, for two years, have alnolt escaped our notice. Itsfairc.
general ai'emblies were held regularly; but no business of much
importance employed their attention. As the number of the
protestant clergy daily encreafed, the deficiency of the funds,
set apart for their fubfiftance, became greater. Many efforts
were made towards recovering the ancient patrimony of the
church, or at least To much of it, as was possessed by the
Popish incumbents, a race of men, who were, now, not only
useless, but burderfome to the nation. But though the man-
ner in which the regent received their addresses and complaints,
was very different from that to which they had been accustom-
ed, no effetual remedy was provided ; and while they suffered
intolerable oppreflion, and groaned under extreme poverty, fair
words, and liberal promises, were all they were able to obtain-.

EL IZ A B ET H began now to. be weary of keeping such a Elizabeth

dangerous prisoner as the Scottifl queen. During the former r.,fol
year, the tranquillity of her government had been disturbed, MrI to
first by a secret combination of some of her nobles, then bythe regent.
the rebellion of others; and she often declared, not without
reason, that Mary was the hidden cause of both. Many of her
own subjects favoured, or pitied the captive queen; the Roman
catholic princes on the continent were warmly interested in her
cause. The detaining her any longer in England, flie foresaw,
would make the pretext or occasion of perpetual cabals and
infurreclions among the former, and might expole her to the
hostile act:,mpts of the latter. She resolved, therefore, to give
up Mary into the hands of the regent, whose fecuri;y, no less

than
* Caballj, 17z. Camd4. 4z. Cald, vol. ii, 8o, 8&c.

Boos V. than her own, depended on preventing her frot re-afcending
--v-' the throne. The negotiation for this purpose was carried fame
is70. length, when it was discovered by the vigilance of the bishop

of Ross, who together with the French and Spanish ambaffa.
dors, remonstrated against the infamy of such an ation, and
represented the surrendering the queen to her rebellious fubjets,
to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth should, by her own au-
thority, condemn her to instant death. This procured a de-
lay; and the murder of the regent prevented the revival of that
delign t.

But he is H A M I L T o N of Bothwellbaugh was the person who com-
murdered. mitted this barbarous aation. He had been condemned to death

soon after the battle of Langfide, as we have already related,
and owed his life to the regent's clemency. But part of his
estate had been bestowed upon one of the regent's favourites,
who seized his house, and turned out his wife naked, in a cold
night, into the open fields, where, before next morning, flie
became furioufy mad. This injury made a deeper imprefion on
him, than the benefit he had received, and from that moment
he vowed to be revenged upon the regent. Party-rage strength-
ened and inflamed his private resentment. His kinsmen the
Hamiltons applauded the enterprize. The maxims of that
age justified the most deiperate course he could take to obtain
vengeance. He followed the regent for some time, and watch-
ed for an opportunity to strike the blow. He resolved at last
to wait till his enemy should arrive at Rinlithgow, through
which he was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh.
He took his stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window
towards the frreet; spread a feather bed on the floor, to hinder
the noise of his feet from being heard; hung up a black cloth
behind him that his fladow might not be observed, from with-
out; and after all this preparation, calmly expceted the re-
gent's approach, who had lodged during the night in a house
not far diflant. Some indilnin& information of the danger
which threatened him, had been conveyed to the regent, and
he paid so much regard to it, that he resolved to return by the
fame gate through which he had entered, and to fetch a com-
pass round the town. But as the crowd about the gate was
great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he proceeded
diretly along the street , and the throng of the people obliging
him to move very slowly, gave the aflaflin time to take so
true an aim, that he slot him with a single bullet, through the
lower part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentleman
who rode on his other fide. His followers inftantlv endeavour.
ed to break into the house whence the blow had come, bul
they found the door strongly barricaded ; and before it could be
forced open, Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which ftooc

readl
'Il Carte, vol. iii. 491. Anders. vol. iii. 84.

ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far beyond their BOOK V.
reach. The regent died the fame night of his wound *.

THE Ra e is no person, in that age, about whom historians 3570.

have been more divided, or whose character has been drawn Bucha.
with such opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military skill, raws.
sagacity and vigour in the administration of civil affairs, are Mem. 124.
virtues, which even his enemies allow him to have pofleffed, His cha-
in an eminent degree. His moral qualities are more dubious, r2er.
and ought neither to be praised, nor censured, without great
reserve, and many distinctions. In a fierce age, he was capa-
ble of using vitory with humanity, and of treating the van-
quilhed with moderation. A patron of learning, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown, or despised. Zealous
for religion, to a degree, which distinguished him, even at a
time, when profeflions of that kind were not uncommon. His
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior only to his
liberality towards them, which knew no bounds. A difinte-
refted paflion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to op-
pose the pernicious system, which the princes of Lorrain had ob-
liged the queen-mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland,
he served her with a zeal and affection, to which he Sacrificed
the friendship of those who were mod attached to his person.
But, on the other hand, his ambition was immoderate; and
events happened, that opened to him vast profpets, which
allured his enterprising genius, and led him to actions, incon-
fiftent with the duty of a subject. His treatment of the queen,
to whose bounty he was so much indebted, was unbrotherly
and ingrateful. The dependance on Elizabeth, under which
he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He de-
ceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness unworthy of a
man of honour. His elevation to fich unexpected dignity, in-
spired him with new pallions, with haughtiness and reserve ;
and instead of his natural manner, which was blunt and open,
he affected the arts of diflimulation and refinement. Fond, to-
wards the end of his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice,
his creatures, by soothing his vanilv, led him astray, while
his ancient friends flood at a clifance, and predicted his ap-
proaching fall. But, alnidft the turbulence and confusion of
that factious period, lie difpcrnfd iuflice with so much impartia-
lity, he reprelred the liceninus borderers with (b much courage,
and eftablflhcd such uncommon order andl tranquillity in the
country, that his adiiiniftrarion was cxtremely popular, and he
was long and affectionately remembcrcd among the commons,
by the name of the Good Rgcnt.

VOL. I T THE

# BOOK VI.

THE
HISTORY

0 F
SCOTLAND.

BO O K VI.

BOOK VI. T H E unexpeaed blow, by which the regent was cut oft;

v.-,,-_ J struck the king's party with the utmolt conflernation.
1570. Elizabeth bewailed his death as the most fatal dilafler, which

Disorders could have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a
occasioned degree that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted,
by the te-,
gent'sdeath. as If, now, her reioration were not only certain, but near at

hand. The infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who
expressed such indecent joy at the commiflion of it. And as
the aflnafin made his escape on a horse, which belonged to lord
Claud Hamilton, and fled diretly to Hamilton, where he was
received in triumph, it was concluded that the regent had fallen
a sacrifice to the resentment of the queen's party, rather than
to the revenge of a private man. On the day after the murder,
Scott of Bucc!eugh, and Ker of Ferniherft, both zealous abet-
tors of the queen's cause, entered England in an hostile man-
ner, and plundered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of
which expected no such outrage. If the regent had been alive,
they would scarce have ventured on such an irregular excursion,
nor could it well have happened so soon after his death, unless
they had been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy

that followed the regent's death gave occasion. During such
general confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and

Stept taken broke out into excesses of every kind. As it was impoflible to
towards restrain these, without a fettled form of government, a con-
eleting an- vention of the nobles was held, in order to deliberate concein-
other re- ing the election of a regent. The queen's adherents refused to
Feb. :. be present at the meeting, and protefied againtt its proceedings.

The king's own party was irresolute, and divided in opinion.
Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had set at liberty, and who obtained
from the nobles then assembled a declaration acquitting him ol
the crime which had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by proposing to ad.
rit the queen to the joint administration of government with

her

her son. Elizabeth adhering to her ancient system with regard BooK Vr.
to Scottish affairs, laboured, notwithl[anding the folicirations -v
of Mary's friends *, to multiply, and to perpetuate the fations, 1570.
which tore in pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom ihe dif- * See Ap-
patched into Scotland on the first news of the regent's death, pend. No. L
and who was her usual agent for such ferviccs, found all par-
ties so exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcile-
able rancour. that it cost him little trouble to inflame their ani-
mofity. The convention broke up without coming to any
agreement; and a new meeting, to which the nobles of all
parties were invited, was appointed on the first of May t. 4. Crwf

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who fill continued to Mem. 13T.

acknowledge the king's authority, were at the utmost pains to Calderw.
restore some degree of harmony among their countrymen. t'S7._

A coalition

They procured for this purpose, an amicable conference among of parties t-
the leaders of the two factions. But v.hile the one demanded tempted in
the restoration of the queen, as the only thing which could re- vain.
elRablifli the public tranquillity; while the other esteemed the
king's authority to be so sacred, that it was, on lno account, to
be called in question or impaired; and neither of them would
recede in the leafl point from their opinions, they separated
without any profpedt of concord. Both were rendered more
averse from reconcilement, by the hope of foreign aid. An
envoy arrived from France with pronifi s of powerful succour
to the queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in that kingdom
seemed to be on the point of terminating in peace, it was ex-
pe&ed that Charles would soon be at liberty to fulfil what he
promised. On the other hand, the earl of Suffex was aflem-
bling a powerful army on the borders, and its operations could
not fail of adding spirit and firength to the king's party *. * Craw,

THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of tie factions Mem. 134.

proved ineffecual, it contributed somewhat to moderate, or Queei'spar-
suspend their rage; but they soon began to ac with their usual ty 'in offef

flon ofF. din-

violence. Morton, the molt vigilant and able leader on the burgh.
king's fide, solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for
the safety of a party, so devoted to her interest, and which
flood so much in need of her allillance. The chiefs of the April zo.
queen's faction, afTrenbling at Linlithgow, marched thence to
Edinburgh ; and Kirkaldy, who was both governor of the caf-
tie, and provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens, though
with tome difficulty, to admit them within tie gates. Toge-
ther with Kirkaldy, the earl of Athole, and Maitland, acceded
almost openly to their party; and the duke and lord Herreis,
having recovered their liberty by l:rkaldy's favour, resumed
their places, which they had formnlrly held in their councils.
Encouraged by the acquisition ol persons, so illustrious by their
birth, or so eminent for their abilities, they published a pro-
clamation, declaring their intention to support the queen's au-

T , thority,

Booi VI. thority, and seemed resolved not to leave the city before the
Iv_"9 meeting of the approaching convention, in which, by their

Is7c' numbers and influence, they did not doubt of securing a majo-

rity of voices on their fide *.

Endeavour AT the fame time, they had formed a design of kindling war
to involve between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in
the'nationin holtilities, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy,
% war with they hoped, not only to difiolve a confederacy of great advan-
Enlan d tage to the king's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to

the queen, Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With
this view, they had, immediately after the murder of the re-
gent, prompted Scott and Kerr to commence hostilities, and
had since instigated them to continue and extend their depreda-
tions. As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one hand, the dangerous
consequences of rendering this a national quarrel, and resolved,
on the other, not to susser such an insult on her government to
pars with impunity ; he issued a proclamation, declaring that
fle imputed the outrages which had been committed, not to
the Scottifl nation, but to a few desperate and ill-defigning per-
sons; that, with the former, she was resolved to maintain an
inviolable friendship, whereas the duty, which Ilhe owed to her
own fubjets, obliged her to chastise the licentiousness of the
lattert. Suffex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the east, the other on the weft borders, and laid

Cabala, wafe the adjacent countries with fire and sword T. Fame
174. magnified the number and progress of their armies, and Mary's

adherents, not thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, the in-
habitants whereof were ill-affected to their cause, retired to
April 28. Linlithgow. There, by a public proclamation, they aflerted

the queen's authority, and sorbad giving obedience to any, but
the duke, or the earls of Argyll and Huntly, whom flie had
constituted her Lieutenants in the kingdom.

King's par- TH E nobles who continued faithful to the king, though con-
ty cn:er fiderably weakened by the defection of so many of their friends,
EdiDburgh. aflembled at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They issued a
May ' counter-proclamation, declaring those who appeared for the

queen, enemies of their country ; and charging them with the
murder of the late king, and of the regent. They could not,
however, presume so much on their own strength aa to venture
either to elect a regent, or to take the field against the queen's
party; but the affifltnce, which they received from Elizabeth,
enabled them to do both. By her order, fir William Drury
marched into Scotland, with a thoufiand font, and three hun-
dred horse; the king's adherents joined him with a confidera-
ble body of troops, and advancing towards Glasgow, where
the adverse party had already begun hostilities by attacking the
ealf'e, they forced them to retire, plundered the neighbouring

country,
r.rCawf. Mcm, 137. Calderw. a, 176, *' Cald. a, B11.

country, which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after seizing BOOK VI.
tome of their castles, and razing others, returned to Edin- _
burgh. '570.

UNDER Drury's protection, the earl of Lenox returned into EMitvethsf

Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of thecondu,
kingdom to him, during the minority of his grandson. His il with regard
lultrious birth, and alliance with the royal family of England, to them,
as well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that honour;
and his resentment againif Mary being implacable, and his estate
lying in England, and his family residing there, Elizabeth confi-
dered him as a man, who, both from inclination, and from in-
terest, would ad in concert with her, and ardently wilied that
he might succeed M.urray in the office of regent. But, on ma-
ny accounts, Ihe did not think it prudent to discover her own
sentiments, or to favour his pretensions too openly. The civil
wars in France, which had been excited by a pretended zeal for
religion, and carried on with a fierceness that did it real diiho-
nour, appeared now to be on the point of coming to an issue;
and after shedding the bell blood, and wafting the richest pro-
vinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace with an ar-
dour, that facilitated the negotiations which were carrying on
for that purpose. Charles IX. was known to be a passionate ad-
mirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser a
queen of France, and the molt ancient ally of his crown, to
languih in her present cruel situation, without attempting to
procure her relief. He had, hitherto, been obliged to satisfy
himself with remonfirating, by his ambassadors, againfl the in-
dignity, with which ihe had been treated. But if he were
once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations, Elizabeth would
have every thing to dread from the impetuosity of his temper,
and the power of his arms. It therefore became necessary for
her to ad with some reserve, and not to appear, avowedly, to
countenance the choice of a regent, in contempt of Mary's au-
thority. The jealousy and prejudices of the Scots required no
less management. Had she openly Supported Lenox's claim;
had ile recommended him to the convention, as the candidate,
whom the approved ; this might have rouzed the independent
spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her intenti-
on, ihe might have defeated its success. For these reasons,
fie hesitated long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
nmefages, which the received from the king's party. A more
explicit declaration of her sentiments was at last obtained, and
an event of an extraordinary nature seems to have been the oc-
cafion of it. Pope Pius V. having iflued a bull, whereby lie
excommunicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and
absolved her fubjeas from their oath of allegiance. Felton,
an Englishman, had the boldness to fix it on the gates of the
biflhop of London's palace. In former ages, a pope, moved

by

BOOK 'I. by his own ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this fa-
_"" t""-tal sentence againfi the miolt powertul monarchs; but as the
!'7°. authority of the court of Rome was now less regarded, its

proceedings were more cautious; and, it was only when they
were rouzed by some powerful prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this
ftep, which the pope had taken, to a combination of the Ro-
man catholic princes against her, and suspeCted that some plot
was on foot in favour of the Scottifli queen. In that event,
fe knew that the safety of her own kingdom depended on pre-
serving her influence in Scotland ; and in order to strengthen
this, lhe renewed her promises of protecting the king's adhe-
rents, encouraged them to proceed to the eleEtion of a regent,
and even ventured to point out the earl of Lenox, as the per-
son who had the belt title. That honour was accordingly con-
ferred upon him, in a convention of the whole party, held on
the izth of July *.

Lenoxelea- THE regent's firfi care was to prevent the meeting of the
ed regent. parliament, which the queen's party had summoned to convene

at Linlithgow. Having effeaed that, he marched against the
earl of Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garrison, which he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at dif-
cretion. Soon after, he made himself master of some other
castles. Emboldened by this successful beginning of his admi-
nitration, as well as by the appearance of a considerable army,
with which the earl of Suflex hovered on the borders, he de-
prived Maitland of his office of secretary, and proclaimed him,
the duke, Huntly, and other leaders of the queen's party,
traitors and enemies of their country II.

Mary's ad- IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the queen's adhe-
herents ne-rents had recourse to the king of Spain I, with whom Mary
gotiate with had held a close correspondence eyer since her confinement in

Spain England. They prevailed on the duke of Alva, to fend two

of his officers to take a view of the country, and to examine
its coasts, and harbours; and obtained from him a finall sup-
ply of money and arms, which were sent to the earl of Hunt-
ly t. But this aid, so difproporiionitte to their exigencies,

Elizabeeh would have availed them little. They were indebted for their
propofre a safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on, under co-
treaty of lour of restoring the captive queen to her throne. The fitfl
accommo- *
daIion be- steps in this negotiation had been rnken in the month of May;
tween Ma- but hitherto little progrcfs was made in it. The peace con-
ry and her eluded between the Roman catholics and hugonots in Francc,
fubJeas and her apprehensions that Charles would interpose with vi-

gour in behalf of his lifter-in-law, quickened Elizabeth's mo-

tioI:

* Spotrw. 140. CAld. 1. 18(6. See Append. No. II.
f Crawf. Mem, 159. Cnld. 1. 198. 1- See Append. No. 1II.
id Anders. 3 113. Crawf. Mcm. 153.

tions. She affected to treat her prisoner with more indulgence, Boor VI.
fne listened more graciously to the solicitations of'foreign am- -
bafladors in.her favour, and seemed fully determined to replace 1570.
her on the throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her finceri-
ty, fle laboured to procure a ccflation of arms between the
two contending factions in Scotland. Lenox, elated with the
good fortune, which had hitherto attended his adniiniftration,
and flattering himself with an ea!y triumph over enemies,
whole estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, refused,
for some time, to come into this measure. It was not safe for
him, however, to dispute the will of his protectress. A cefla-
tion of hostilities during two months, to commence on the
third of September, was agreed upon; and being renewed
from time to time, it continued till the first of April next year *. SpoLf. 243,

SOON after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and fir Walter Mild-

may to the queen of Scots. The dignity of there ambassadors,
the former her prime minister, the latter chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, and one of her ablest councellors, convinced all par-
ties, that the negotiation was serious, and that the hour of
Mary's liberty was now approaching. The propositions, which
they made to her, were advantageous to Elizabeth, but such
as a prince in Mary's situation, had reason to expect. The ra-
tification of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing any pre-
tensions to the English crown, during Elizabeth's own life, or
that of her posterity; the adhering to the alliance between the
two kingdoms; the pardoning her fubjees, who had taken
arms against her; and her promising to hold no correspondence,
and to countenance no enterprize, that might disturb Eliza-
beth's government, were among the chief articles. By way of
fecuriry for the accomplishment of t.,efe, they demanded that
f:me persons of rank hould be given as hostages, that the
prince her son fliould reside in England, and that a ftw caflles
on the border should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some
of these propositions Mary consented ; some flSe endeavoured
to mitliate; and others flie attempted to evade. In the mean
time, ihe transmitted copies of them to the pope, to the kings
of France and Spain, and to the duke of Alva. She infinuat-
ed, that without some timely and vigorous inrerpofition in her
behalf, file would be obliged to accept of there hard conditions,
and to purchase liberty at any price. But the pope was a di-
ftant and feeble ally, and by his efforts againfl the Turks, his
treasury was entirely exhaufled. Charles had already begun to
meditate that conspiracy against the hugonots, which marks his
reign with such infamy; and it required much leisure, and
perfect tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan to maturity.
Philip was employed in fitting out that fleet, which acquired
so great renown to the christian arms, by the victory over the
infidels at Lepanto; the Moora in Spain threatened an infurrec-

tion;

BOOK VL tion; and his fubjeas in the Netherlands, provoked by much
~'-v.-J oppreflion, and many indignities, were breaking out into open

1570. rebellion. All of them, for there different reasons, adviled

Mary, without depending on their aid, to conclude the treaty
on the best terms The could procure *.

Elizabeth'. MA RY, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's de-
irtifices in mands, and discovered a facility of tifpofirion, which promiscd
the conduct fill further conceflions. But no conceflion lhe could have
of it.

made, would have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her re-
peated profeflions of finceriry to foreign ambafladors, and not-
withstanding the solemnity with which flhe carried on the trea-
ty, had no other objec in ir, than to abuse Mary's allies, and
to gain time t. After having so long treated a queen, who
fled to her for refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, file could
not now difinifs her with safety. Under all the disadvantages
of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found means to excite
commotions in England, which were extremely formidable.
What desperate effecs of her just refentnent might be expetl-
ed, if she were set at liberty, and recovered her former power ?
What engagements could bind her, not to revenge the wrongs
She had suffered, nor to take advantage of the favourable con-
junacures, that might present themselves ? Was it possible for
her to give such fecuriry for her behaviour, in times to come,
as might remove all suspicions and fears ? And was there not
good cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ever ob-
literate the memory of past injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth
reasoned; though file continued to a.t as if her views had
been entirely different. She appointed seven of her privy
counsellors to be commniioners tbr Ifttling the articles of the
treaty; and as Mary had alre:,iy rnamed the biflops of Ross,
and Galloway, and lord Levinglton, for her amhbafiadors, fie
required the regent to impower proper persons to appear in be-
half of the king. The earl of Morton, Pitcairn abbot of Dun-
fermling, and fir James Macgill, were the persons choftn l.y
the regent. They prepared for their journey as slowly as £ii-
zabeth herself could have wished. At length they arrived at
Feb. 19. London, and nmet the conilillioners of the two queens. Ma-

ry's ambassadors dilcovcred the ftrongefl inclination to comply
with every thing that would remove thle obllicles which flocil
in the way of their iniilrefi's lilert. But when Mot on and
his associates were called upon to vindicate their conduct, and
to explain the fentimients of' their party, thiy began, in juflili-
cation of their trenatlniit of thle ilueen, to advance such axn-
in's concerning the limited pow.'.r of princes, and the natural
right of fubjecs to refill and to controul them, as were ex-
tremely flocking to Elizabetrl, whiofle notions of regal preroga-
tive were very exalted. \Vitl regard to the authority wliili
* Andectr. Vol. 1II. l9o, rzo. t Digges Comp. Arab, 78.

the king now poffiffed, lhey declared that they neither had, nor BOOK VI.
could poflibly receive inaruations, to consent to any treaty, --i
that tended to subvert, or even to impair it, in the least de- . '57-
gree. Nothing could be nore trifling and ridiculous, than 2 C Dig' ,
such a reply froml the commiflioners of the king of Scots, to 5.
the queen of England. His party depended absolutely on her Hayres,
proteaion, her hand had feated him on the throne, and to her 5$3, 524.
power he owed the continuance of his reign. With the ut-
most ease, fine could have brought them to talk in a very diffe-
rent manner, and whatever conditions flne might have thought
fit to prescribe, they would have had no other choice but to
submit. This declaration, however, she affe&ed to confider
as an insuperable difficulty. And finding that there was no rea- It proves
son to dread any danger from the French king, who had not fruitiefs.
discovered that eagerness in support of Mary, which was ex-
peteed; the reply made by Morton furnifled her with a pre-
tence for putting a flop to the negotiation, till the regent
thould fend ambafiadors with more ample powers. Thus after March 14.
being aimufed for ten months with the hopes of liberty, the un-
happy queen of Scots remained under striCter cullody than ever,
and without any profpec of escaping from it; while those fulb-
jets, who still adhered to her, were exposed, without al!y or
protector, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in this
negotiation rendered still more insolent §.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which had Dunbarton

been obfcrved with lit-le exaa:nets on either fide, captainca(tt lur-
Crawfurd of Jordan-hill, a gallant and erierrpifing officer, riliedbyLhe
performed a lervice of great i:lportance to the regent, by fur- reg"nt.
prifing the caile of Dunbarton. This was Ihe only fortified
place in the kingdom, of which the queen had kept poflfefion,
ever since the comtmencetment of the civil wars. Its situation
on the top of an high and nliniot inacccfiil,!e rock, which rifes
in the middle of a plain, rendered it extremely firong, and in
the opinion of that age iiiipiegnal'l ; na it comnirinded the ri-
v r Clyde, it was or great conlequence, nl:d eftceneed the
nofl proper place in the kingdomi flr

ti liinig ny foreign troops,

that might come to Mis;r's aid. 1 lie firength of tlle place
rendered loIl Fleming, rhe grvcrnir, niore fctcre than he
ought to have been, crnC. ring iis imnporiance. A soldier,
who had f,:rved in the garrifcitn, and a;I leen difgufned by lbme
ill ulage, proposed the ictilcl.;' to ti'c n

Ir'- n, lenrdavrnurcd to

denmonfrate that it waS practica.hle, anri oilt.reil liiifrelr to go
the foremofi man on the cnte:prizc. Ir was (,iolglht l ru.!r
to rifque any danger, lor so grent a prize. Srllinh ladder",
and whatever ellc was neceflhry, were prpare(d wili Ihe it
molt fecrccy and dispatch. All the avnuw:, to the calile v. er
seized, that no intelligence of the dcligtr miight reach the go-

VA I :i(lt
§ And. 3 :, &.

BOOK VI. vernor, Towards evening, Crawfurd marched from Glasgow,

\-r-v-' with a small but determiined band. By midnight, they a rived
'57'* at the bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the

Iky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was covered
with a thick fog. It was where the rock was highest, that
the assailants made their attempt, because, in that place,
there were few sentinels, and they hoped to find themn least
alert. The firfR ladder was Icarce fixed, when the weight and
eagerness of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and none of the
garrison alarmed by the noise. Their guide and Crawfurd
Icrambled up the rock, and faltened the ladder to the roots of
a tree, which grew in a cleft. This place they all reached
with the utmolt difficulty, but were fill at a great ditlance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made faif a fe-
cond time; but in the middle of the ascent, they met with an
unforeseen difficulty. One of their companions was seized
with some sudden fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the
ladder. All were at a stand. It was impossible to pass him.
To tumble him headlong was cruel; and might occasion a dif-
covery. But Crawfurd's pretence of mind did not forsake him.
He ordered the soldier to be bound fat to the ladder that he
might not fall when the fit was over: and turning the other
fide of the ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there still remained a high wail
to scale; but after surmounting so many greater difficulties,
this was soon accomplished. A sentry observed the firRf man,
who appeared on the parapet, and had jugt time to give the
.larin, before he was knocked on the head. The officers and
soldiers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more so-
licitous about their own safety, than capable of making refill-
ance. The :lfTilants rushed forwards, with repeating fh(;lis,
and with the utmost fury ; took pofleflion of the magazine;
sized the cannon; and turned them against their enemies.
Lord Flening got iro a finall boat, and fled all alone, into
Argyllfhire. Crawfuid, in reward of his valour and good con-
duet, triiailetd l maer of the cantle; and as he did not lore a
single man in the enterprize, he enjoyed his success with un-
mixed pleo'rile. Lady Fleming. Verac the French envoy, and
Ha-Mniilin iTclibiflop of Sr. Andrew's, were the prilbners of
greatetf dillinclion §.

ri
t lilhp V i. n .c,'s character protcEted him from the usage which he

i.rF'. An- nmeriid by his altivity in tlirring up enemies againlt the king.
,.w', l"tLI 'l.ie li(,eell treated the lady with great polilenels, and hunani-

ly. l:u'; a very different tate awai!ed the archbishop; he was
c:iiric uinder a Itlong guard io Srirling ; and as he had for-
ncily) been attainted by ad of pallianieat, he was without any

formal
§ Bucb. 394.

formal trial, condemned to be hanged; and on the fourth day BooK VI.
after he was taken, the sentence was executed. Aa attempt '-- '
was made to convict hitn of being accerfary to the murder of S57t-
both the king and regent. but rhefe accusations were support-
ed by no proof. Our hiflorians observe that he was the first
bifliop in Scotland who died by the hands of the executioner.
The high office-s he had enjoyed, both in church and fate,
ought to have exempted him from a punifliment, inflicted only
on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for the queen, his abili-
ties, and his profeflion, rendered him odious and formidable to
the king's adherents. Lenox hated him as the person, by
whose counsels the reputation and power of the house of Ha-
milton were Supported. And party rage, and personal enmity,
dictated that indecent sentence, for which some colour was
fought, by imputing to him such odious crimes §. § Spotfwr.

THE lots of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment of the 152

archbishop, perplexed and enraged the queen's party ; and hof- Kik dd the
tilities were renewed with all the fierceness, which disappoint- castle of
ment and indignation can aspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the Edinburgh
truce, had taken care to increase the number of his garrison, in the
and to provide every thing neceflary for his defence, ifTued a queens
proclamation declaring Lenox's authority to be unlawful, and
ururped; commanded all who favoured his cause to leave the
town within fix hours ; seized the arms, belonging to the citi-
zens; planted a battery on the (leeple of St. Giles, repaired the
walls, and fortified the gates of the city; and, though the as-
sections of the inhabitants leaned a different way, held out t!e
metropolis against the regent. The duke, Huntly, Home,
Herreis, and other chiefs of that facion, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a finall funm
of money, and Ibme ammunition frol France, formed no con-
temptible army witr:in the walls. On the other fide, Morton
seized Leith, and fortified it; the regent joined him with a
considerable body of men. While the airmies lay so near each
other, daily Ikirniifles happened, and with various success.
The queen's party was not strong enough to take the field
against the regent, nor was his superiority so great as to under-
take the siege of the castle, or of the town *.

SOME rime before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his ene- Both par'ies

mies, the regent had summoned a p..rliaiient to meet in that ho01 plarlia-
place. In order to prevent any obje&ion agninll the lawful- ,ets.
ness of the meeting, the meinb, rs obeyed the proclamation as
exaCtly as poflible; and anfieibled in a honfe at the hend of
the canongate, which, though without ihe walls, lies within
the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy exerted hinlClf to the ut-
most to interrupt their meeting; but thcv were Co firnngly
guarded, that all his efforts were vain. The)y pallid an na

attaintill,
* Cald. A. 233, &c.

BooK VI. attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then adjourned to

v---J 2the z8th of Augull +.
157L. THE other party, in order that their proceedings might be

countenanced by the fame shew of legal authority, held a
meeting of parliament soon after. There was produced, in
this aflembly, a declaration by the queen, of the invalidity of
that deed, whereby she had rcfigned the crown, and consented
to the coronation of her son. Conformable to this declaration,
an aa was past, pronouncing the resignation to have been ex-
torted by fear; to be null in itself, and in all its consequences;
and enjoining all good subje&s to acknowledge the queen alone
to be their lawful sovereign, and to support thole who aled
in her name. The present eftablifliment of the proteflant reli-
gion was confirmed by another statute; and, in imitation of
the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on the z6th
of August .

Miserable ME.ANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the
condi!ion of kingdom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different
the king- fides, and ranged thetielves under the flandards of the con-
dom, tending fhations. In every county, and almioll in every town

and village, King's-tenz and .2een's-men were names of diftinc-
tion. Political hatred dissolved all natural ties, and extinguifl-
ed the reciprocal good will and confidence, which hold man-
kind together in lociety. Religious zeal mingled itself with
these civil distinctions, and contributed not a little to heighten,
and to inflame them.

State of 'IH E liaions which divided the kingdom were, in appear-
fzaicls. once, only two. But in both there, there were persons, with

views, and principles, so different from each other, that they
ought to be dillingnifhned. With tome, considerations of reli-
gion were predominant, and they either adhered to the queen,
becaule they hoped, by her means, to re-etlablilh popery, or
they defended the king's authoiity, as the best support of the
protellant laitih. Among there the opposition was violent and
irreconcilable. Others were influenced by political motives
only, or allured by views of interest; the regent aimed at unit-
ing thelf, and did not despair of gaining, by gentle arts, many
of IVMary's adherents to acknowledge the king's authority.

lMaitland anti Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a coali-
tion, hut on fIch terms, that the queen might be restored to
oume lhaie in the government, and the kingdom liake off its
dcpendence on England. Morton, the ablcl, the most ambi.
tiou;, and the most powerful of the king's party, held a parti-
cular course ; and moving only as he was prompted by the
court of England, thwarted every measure, that tended to-
iarid a recoucilemient of thc Ifacions; and as he served Eliza-

betli
$ Crawf. MNm, 1;7. Ibid. 177.

beth with much fidelity, he derived both power and creditBoOK VI.
from her avowed protection. -

THE time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of 1571.

their parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two
bilhops appeared in that, which was held in the queen's name
at Edinburgh. But contemptible as their numbers were, they
palTed an adt forattainting upwards of 2oo of the advcfe sac-
tion. The meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid.
The regent had prevailed on the carls of Argyll, Eglinton,
Callils, and lord Boyd, to acknowledge the king's authority.
The three earls were among the most powerful noblemen in the
kingdoml, and had hitherto been zealous in the queen's cause.
Lord Boyd had been one of Mary's commiflioners at York and
Weftiiniter a,

a ince that time, had been admitted into all

her noft secret councils. But, during that turbulent period the
conduct of individuals, as well as the principles of fations,
varied so often, that the sense of honour, the chief preferva-
tive of confitence in character, was entirely loft; and without
any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one party,
and adopted all the violent paflions of the other. The defec-
tion, however, of so many perions of diftincion, not only
weakened the queen's party, but added reputation to her ad-
verfaries.

AFTER the example of the parliament at Edinburgh, that'The king',

at Stirling began with framing ats against the opposite faction. party fur-
But in the n:idf of all the fecurily, which confidence in their prized inl
own numbers, or diltance from danger could inspire, they Stirling
were awakened, early one morning, by the flouts of the ene- Sept. .
my in the heart of the town. In a moment, the houses of
every person of diriinfilon were surrounded, and before they
knew what to think of so firange an event, the regent, the earls
of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Callils, Eglinton, Montrose,
Buchan, the lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made
prisoners, and mounted behind troopers, who were ready to
carry them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this
daring enierprize ; and if he had not been induced, by the ill-
tined solicitude of his friends about hij safety, not to hazard
his own person in conducting it, that day might have terninat-
ed the contell between the two factions, and have rellored
peace to his country. By his direction, four hundred mien,
under the command of -luntly, lord Claud I'lamilton, and
Scott of Buccleugh, set out from Edinburgh, and the better to
conceal their design, marched towards the south. But they
fuio wheeled to the right, and horses having been provided for
the iniantry, rode fireight to Stirling. By four in the morning,
they nrrived there; not one sentry was polted on the walls,
not a single man was awake about the pince. They met with
no relltance from any person they had seized, except Morton.

I49

BOOK VI. He defending his house with obRfinate valour, they were oblig-

v--'- ed to set it on fire, and he did not surrender till forced out of it
*571. by the flames. In performing this, some time was consumed;

and the private men, unaccustomed to regular discipline, left
their colours, and began to rifle the houses and shops of the
citizens The noise and uproar in the town reached the caf-
tie. The earl of Mar sallied out with thirty soldiers; fired
briikly upon the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers
kept together in a body. The townsmen took arms to affit
their governor; a sudden panic firuck the assailants; some fled,
some surrendered themselves to their own prisoners; and had
not the borderers, who followed Scott, prevented a pursuit,
by carrying off all the horses within the place, not a man
would have escaped. If the regent had not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the king's fide would have been as inconfi-
derable, as the alarm was great. Think on the arcbbiJ7:op of
St. Andrew's, was the word among the queen's foldicrs; and
Lenox fell a sacrifice to his memory. The officer to whom he
surrendered, endeavouring to prote& him, loft his own life in

The regent his defence. He was fain, according to the general opinion,
kill'd. by command of lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glo-

ry of concerting this plan with great secrecy, and prudence;
but Morton's fortunate obRfinacy, and the want of dilciplir.e
among his own troops, deprived him of fuccels, the only. thing
wanting to render this equal to the molt applauded military er.-

Melv. terprizes of the kind *.

2z6. As so many of the nobles were aflembled, they proceeded,
Crawf. without delay, to the eleaion of a regent. Argyll, Morton,
Mem. 204. and Mar, were candidates for the office. Mar was chosen by a
regento majority of voices. Amidfi all the fierce dinentions, which
Sept. 6. had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had distinguished himself

by his moderation, his humanity, and his difintereflednefs.
And as his power was far inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities
not so great as Morton's, he was, for these reasons, less formi-
dable to the other nobles. His merit, too, in having so lately
rescued the leaders of the party from imminent deftrudior,
contributed not a little to his preferment.

Proceedings WHILE these things were carrying on in Scotland, the
in England transactions in England were no less interesting to Mary, and
against fiill more fatal to her cause. The parliament of that kingdom,
Mary. which met in April, passed an aSt, by which, it was declared

to be high treason, to claim any right to the crown during the
life of the queen ; to affirm that the title of any other perfor.
was better than hers; or to maintain that the parliament had
not power to fettle, and to limit the order of fucceflion. This
remarkable statute was intended not only for the security o!
their own sovereign, but to curb the restless and intriguing fpi

§ Camd. rit of the Scotifli queen, and her adherents §.
436. A;

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and BooK Vr.

the duke of Anjou, the French king's brother, was well ad- _---
vanced. Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardor, '571-
and gave out, with the utmost confidence, that it could not Mar"rige

. . ncgotlatea

fail of taking place. Neither of them, however, wished its bitwen
success ; and they encouraged it for no other end, but because 1liizilbth
it served to cover or to promote their particular designs. The and the
whole policy of Catherine of Medicis was bent towards the 'dUi. of
accomplishment of her detestable projec for the destruction of A"lJOU
the hugonot chiefs; and by cnarying on a negotiation for the
marriage of her foil with a princess, who was justly efleened
the prorecrefs of that party, by yielding tome things in point
of religion, and by dilcovering an indifrerence with regard to
others, she hoped to amuse all the protetlanis in Europe, and
to lull asleep the jealorfy even of the hugonots themselves.
Elizabeth flattered herself with reaping advantages of another
kind. During the dependence of the negotiation, the French
could not wiih decency give any open affillance to the Scot-
tifh queen ; if they conceived any hopes of success in the trea-
ty of marriage, they would, of course, ititereft themselves but
coldly in her concerns; Mary herself muit be dejected at losing
an ally, whom fle 'had hitherto reckoned her most powerful
protecor; and by interrupting her correspondence with
France, one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues which
disturbed the kingdom, would be flopt. Both queens succeed-
ed in their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Eliza-
beth, and blinded the hugonots. The French discovered the
utmost indifference about the interest of the Scottifl queen;
and Mary, confidering that court as already united with her ri-
val, turned herself, for proteetion, towards the king of Spain *.
Philip, whose dark and thoughtful mind, delighted in the my-
fiery of intrigue, had held a secret correspondence with Mary,
for some time, by means of the bishop of Robs, and had sup-
plied both herself, and her adherents in Scotland, with fnmall
umns of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine gentleman, who re-
fided at London under the character of a banker, and who
aded privately as an agent for the pope, was the person whom
the biNhop intruded with this negotiation. Mary thought it rNotr,ilk's
necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to the duke ofconfpilcy
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty, upon in fayl'r o
his solemn promire to have no further intercourse with the Mary.
queen of Scots; which, however, he regarded so little, that
fie took no ltep in any matter of moment, without his advice.
She complained in a long letter, which she wrote to him in cy-
pliers, of the baseness, with which the French court had aban-
doned her interef ; Ihe declared her intention of imploring the
afliflance of the Spanifl monarch, which was now her only re-

source;
Digge, 144, 148. Camd. 434,

Eooi VI. source; and recommended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a per-
.-,~. son, capable both of explaining and advancing the scheme.

1571. The duke commanded Hickford, his secretary, to decypher,

and then to burn this letter; but whether he had been already
gained by the court, or resolved at that time to betray his
malter, he dilbbeyed the latter part of the order, and hid the
letter, together with other treasonable papers, under the duke's
own bed.

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of

those arguments, and spared none of those promises, which
are the usual incentives to rebellion. The pope, he told him,
had a great funs in readiness to bellow in so good a cause.
The duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand men,
not far from London. The catholics to a man would rite in
arms. Many of the nobles were ripe for a revolt, and wanted
only a leader. Half the nation had turned their eyes towards
him, and called on him to revenge the unmerited injuries,
which he himself had suffered ; and to rescue an unfortunate
queen, who offered him her person, and her crown, as the re-
ward of his success. Norfolk approved of the design, and
though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, allowed

* Anders. him to ule his name, in negotiating with the pope, and Alva*.
3 161. The bishop of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper,

and impatience to procure relief for his mifirefs, was apt to
run into rash and desperate designs, advised the duke to assem-
ble fecrerly a few of his followers, and at once to seize Eliza-
beth's rerron. But this the duke rejected as a scheme equally

Discovered wild and hazardous. Mean while, the English court had re-
byEliza- ceived some imperfca information of the plot, by intercepting
beth. one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident happened, which
Augurt. brought to light all the circumstances of it. The duke had

employed Hickford to tranfinit to lord Herreis, some money,
which was to be diflributed among Mary's friends in Scotland.
A pcrfon not in the secret was intrudted with conveying it io
the borders; and he?, fufpecing it from the weight to be gold,
whereas he had been told that it was silver, carried it direclly
to the privy council. The duke, his domestics, and all who
were privy, or could be suspected of being plivy to the de-
Sept 7 sign, were taken into culocly. Never did the accomplices in a

conspiracy discover less lirmners; or servants betray an indul-
gent maftcr, with greater balinefi. Every one confesscd the
whole of what he knew. I-lickford gave directions how mo
find the papers, which he had hidden. The duke himfelt, rc-
lying at firfl on the fidelity of his associates, and believing all
dangerous papers to have been destroyed, confidently aftrI'd
his own innocence ; but when their depofirions, and the pa-
pers themlfelves were produced, aflonified at their treachery,
he acknowledged his guilt, and implored the . en's mrryv.

IL;.~

His offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain BOOK VI.
pardon ; and Elizabeth thought it necessary to deter her sub- '-v-
jedts, by his puniihment, from holding correspondence with 5S71.
the queen of Scots, or her emissaries. Being tried by his
peers, he was found guilty of high treason, and, after several
delays, suffered death for the crime . Ande

TH discovery of this conspiracy produced many effees, 3ste tr49h

extremely detrimental to Mary's interest. The bilhop ofRofs, z. 85.
who appeared by the confeflion of all concerned, to be the
prime mover in every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into
custody, his papers searched, himself committed to the tower,
treated with the utmost rigour, threatened with capital punilh-
ment, and after a long confinement, set at liberty, on conditi-
on that he thould leave the kingdom. Mary was not only de-
prived of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his abi-
lities, but was denied, from that time, the privilege of having
an ambassador at the Engliih court. The Spanilh ambafiador,
whom the power and dignity of the prince he represented, ex-
empted from such insults as Ross bad suffered, was command-
ed to leave England §. Mary herself was kept under a fnrier j Digges;
guard than formerly, the number of her domestics abridged, 163.
and no person permitted to fee her, but in presence of her
keepers t. t Strype,

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the fortm which An. z. so.

was gathering, on the continent, against her kingdom, began dEliabeth
to wifi that tranquillity were restored in Scotland; and irritat- openly
ed by Mary's late attempt against her government, she deter- against the
mined to aft, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the queen's par.
king's party. This resolution ihe intimated to the leaders oftLY
both factions. Mary, the told them, had held such a criminal ot. a3.
correspondence with her avowed enemies, and had excited such
dangerous conspiracies both against her crown and life, that The
would henceforth confider her as unworthy of protection, and
would never consent to restore her to liberty, far less to replace
her on her throne. She exhorted them, therefore, to unitein
acknowledging the king's authority. She promised to procure
by her mediation equitable terms for those, who had hitherto
opposed it. But if they still continued refractory, /he threat-
ened to employ her utmoll power to compel them to submit *, See
Though this declaration did not produce an immediate effeat; Append.
though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-NO° IV'
burgh; though Huntly's brother, fir Adam Gordon, by his
bravery, and good conduct, had routed the king's adherents in
the North, in many encounters; yet such an explicit difcove-
ry of Elizabeth's fenriments contributed not a little to animate
one party, and to depress the spirit and hopes of the other H. II Cald.a.

As Morton, who commanded the regent's forces, lay at 89, 94.
Leith, and Kirkaldy till held out the town and castle of Edin- 7rype, a4

V L. 1. U burgh,

BOOK VI.burgh, scarce a day pasted without a Ikirmifh. And while
* -v-~ both avoided any decisive ation, they harafled each other by

?.71. attacking small parties, beating up quarters, and intercepting

H,.oneu concvoys. These operations, though little memorable in them-
carried on con. ' Tli9',
between selves, kept the pafiions of both fations in perpetual exercise
them. and agitation, and wrought them up, at last, to a degree of

fury, which rendered themselves regardless not only of the
laws of .war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor was it
in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this im-
placable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and with-
out trial. Great numbers suffered in this shocking manner;
the unhappy vicims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution;
and it was not till both fides had smarted severely, that they
discontinued this barbarous praaice, so reproachful to the cha-

* Crawf. rarer of the nation *. Mean while, those in the town and
Memn0 cafile, though they had received a fipply of money from the
218, 220.
t Cald. a. duke of Alva t, began to susser for want of provisions. As
345, Morton had destroyed all the mills in the neighbourhood of the

city, and had planted small garrisons in all the houses of
strength around it, scarcity daily encreafed. At last all the
miseries of famine were felt, and they must have been soon re-
duced to such extremities, as would have forced them to capi-
tulate, if the Englilh and French ambafladors had not procur-

Id. 346. ed a fufpetfion of hofiilities, between the two parties t.

League YTHO UGH the negotiation for a marriage, between Elizabeth
between and the duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and
England
,and he were desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between
France. the two crowns. He confidered such a treaty, not only as

the best device for blinding the proteflants, against whom the
conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution; but as a good
precaution, likewise, againfi the dangerous consequences, to
which that atrocious measure might expose him. Elizabeth,
who had hitherto reigned without a single ally, now saw her
kingdom so threatened with intestine commotions, or exposed
to invasions from abroad, that she was extremely solicitous to
secure the afiiflance of so powerful a neighbour. The difficul-
ties arising from the situation of the Scottifli queen, were the
chief occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some terms of
advantage for Mary and her party. Elizabeth refused to lifien
to any proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame the
faint efforts of the French monarch. Mary's name was not so
much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scottifi
affairs, a short article was inserted, in general and ambiguous
April 11. terms, to this purpose, "That the parties contrating flall

make no innovations in Scotland; nor susser any firanger to en-
ter, and to foment the fations there; but it flall be lawful

for

for the queen of England to chafife, by force of arms, those BooK Vr.
Scors who shall continue to harbour the English rebels now in a
Scotland *." In consequence of this treaty, France and En- '575.
gland asseted to aft in concert with regard to Scotland, and
Du Croc, and lir William Drury, appeared there, in name of
their refpetive sovereigns. By their mediation, a truce, for
two months, was agreed upon, and, during that time, confe-
rences were to be held between the leaders of the opposite sac-
tions, in order to accommodate their differences, and refore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a seasonable inter-
val of tranquillity to the queen's adherents in the south ; but in
the North, it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon
had fill maintained his reputation and superiority there. Seve-
ral parties, under different officers, were sent againit him.
Some of them he attacked in the field; againit others he em-
ployed firatagem; and as his courage and conduct were equal,
none of his enterprizes failed of success. He made war, too,
with the humanity, which became so gallant a man, and gain-
ed ground by that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If
he had not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend his operati-
ons, he would, in all probability, have brought that part of
the kingdom to submit entirely to the queen's authority t.

N o T W IT H T A N DI N G Gordon's bravery and success, Ma- Proceed;

ry's interest was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, ings i"
but among the English. Nothing could be more offenuive to EDgla,
that nation, jealous of foreigners, and terrified at the prospeR Mary;
of the Spanish yoke, than her negotiations with the duke of
Alva. The parliament, which met in May, proceeded against
her as the moll dangerous enemy of the kingdom; and after a
solemn conference between the lords and commons, both
houses agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty of high
treason, and to deprive her of all right of fucceflion to the
crown. This great carse, as it was then called, occupied
them during the whole session, and was carried on with much
unanimity. Elizabeth, though flhe applauded their zeal, and
approved greatly of the course they were taking, was satisfied
with i(ewing Mary what she might expeEt from the resentment
of the nation; but as (he did not yet think it time to proceed
to the most violent extremity againfR her, ile prorogued the
parliament T.

THESE severe proceedings of the Englifll parliament were The'

not more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglect of French
her allies, the French. The duke of Montmorency, indeed, negleb
who came over to ratify the league with Elizabetll, made a terest.
shew of intcrefing himself in favour of the Scottilh queen; but,

U 2 instead

* Digge:, 17o, 191. Camd. 444. t Crawf. Merm.
t D'Ewe's journal, ao6, ac.

BOOK VI. inRfead of soliciting for her liberty, or her restoration to her
%-v throne, all that he demanded was a flight mitigation of the ii-

1571. gour of her imprisonment. And even this small requett, he

urged with To little warmth or importunity, that no regard
was paid to it *.

The maf- TH E alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfac-
sacre of tion, and lhe expected from it a great increase of security.

She now turned her whole attention towards Scotland, where
the animofities of the two facaions were fill so high, and so
many interfering interests to be adjusted, that a general pacifi-
cation seemed to be at a great distance. But while fle labour-
ed to bring them to some agreement, an event happened which
filled a great part of Europe with aftonilminent, and with hor-
ror. This was the maflacre at Paris, an attempt, to which
there is no parallel in the history of mankind, either for the
diflimulation which led to it, or for the cruelty and barbarity,
with which it was put in execution. By the moti solemn pro-
mises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the protestants
were drawn to court; and though doomed to destruction, they
were received with caresses, loaded with honours, and treated,
for seven months, with every poflible mark of familiarity, and
Aug. 24. of confidence. In the midR of their security, the warrant for

their destruction was issued by their sovereign, on whose word
they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen,
their fellow citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in
their blood. Ten thousand protestants, without diRlin&ion of
age, or sex, or condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were sent to other parts of the kingdom,
and a like carnage ensued. This deed, which no popilh writ-
er, in the present age, mentions without detestation, was, at
that time, applauded in Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanks-
givings were offered to God for its success. But amongst the
protetants it excited incredible horror; a firiking picture of
which is drawn by the French ambaflador at the court of En-
gland, in his account of his first audience after the mafiacre.
" A gloomy sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on each
fide, all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed through them,
not one befowed on me a civil look, or made the least return
to my salutes t."

Detrimen- BUT horror was not the only palion, with which this event
tal to Ma- inspired the proteflants; it filled them with fear. They confi-
ry inte- dered it as the prelude to some greater blow, and believed, not

without much probability, that all the popifli princes had con-
spired the deftrution of their feEt. This opinion did no
small diflervice to Mary's affairs in Scotland. Many of her ad-

hercnts
* Jcbb. a. l5t, t Carte, 3. 52a,

lirents were proteRtants; and, though they wished her relo- BOOK VI.
ration, were not willing, on that account, to sacrifice the faith '-
which they profefled. They dreaded her attachment to a re- '572.
ligion, which allowed its votaries to violate the mord solemn
engagements, and prompted them to perpetrate the most bar-
barous crimes. A general confederacy of the protestants
seemed to them the only thing that could uphold the reforma-
tion againfi the league, which was formed to overturn it. Nor
could the present eftablilhment of religion be long maintained
in Britain, but by a ftrit union with Elizabeth. and by the
concurrence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it, as
a common cause a.

THE regent took hold of this favourable conjunture for ne- The re.

gotiating a general peace. And as he laboured for this pur- gent en-
pose, with the utmost zeal, and the adverse facion placed en-delvourt
tire confidence in his integrity, his endeavours could scarce both pr
have failed of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came ties.
so near to an agreement with him, that scarce any thing re-
mained, except the formality of signing the treaty. But Mor-
ton had not forgotten the disappointment he met with in his
pretensions to the regency; his abilities, his wealth, and the
patronage of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the regent himself; and he took
pleasure in thwarting every measure pursued by him. He was
afraid that if Maitland and his aflociaaes recovered any mare
in the adminitfration, his own influence would be considerably
diminished; and the regent, by their means, would regain that
ascendant, which belonged to his flation. With him, con-
curred all those, who were in potfeflion of the lands, which
belonged to any of the queen's party. And his ambition, and
their avarice, frustrated the regent's pious intentions, and re-
tarded a blefling so neceflary to the kingdom, as the eftablifli-
ment of peace t.

SUCH a discovery of the felfiflnefs and ambition, which His death.

reigned among his party, made a deep impreflion on the regent,
who loved his country, and wished for peace with much ardor.
This inward grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on
a fettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of which he
died on the agth of Otober. He was, perhaps, the only
person in the kingdom, who could have enjoyed the office of
regent, without envy, and have left it without loss of reputa-
tion. Notwithfianding their mutual animofities, both facions
acknowledged his views to be honourable, and his integrity to
be uncorrupted *. 0 Ctwf.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. The queen Mer. 4t.

of England powerfully supported his claim, and notwithftand- chosen
ing the fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he regent.

was Nov. 24,
* Digge»s M4, 67. t Mclv. s33. Crawf. Mem, a37,

BO30K VI. was elected regent; the fourth, who, in the space of five

ru3 V-' years, had held that dangerous office.
'57X. As the truce bad been prolonged to the first of January,

this gave him an opportunity of continuing the negotiations
with the opposite party, which had been ft on foot by his
predeceflbr. They produced no effects, however, till the be-
ginning of the next year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, some events, hitherto un-
touched, deserve our notice.

T e earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner

in Lochleven, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year
1569, was given up to Lord Hunfdon governor of Berwick;
and being carried to York, suffered there the punifliment of his
rebellion. The king's party were so sensible of their depen-
dence on Elizabeth's protection, that it was scarce poflible for
them to refuse putting into her hands a person who had taken
up arms against her. But as a fum of money was paid, on
that account, and lhared between Morton and Douglas of
Lochleven, the former of whom, during his exile in England,
bad been much indebted to Northumberland's friendflip, the
abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to cer-
tain derhution, was deemed an ungrateful and. mercenary
action '.

Affiars of THI s year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in
the fuich. the government of the church. Soon after the reformation,

the popish bishops had been confirmed by law in pofleflion of
part of their benefices;. but the Spiritual jurifdicion, which
belonged to their order, was exercised by fuperintendants, tho'
with more moderate authority. On the death of the archbilhop
of St. Andrew's, Morton obtained from the crown a .grant of
the temporalities of that fee. But as it was thought indecent
fora layman to hold a benefice, to which the cure of fouls
was annexed, he procured Douglas, retor of the univeirity of
St. Andrew's, to be chosen archbiihop; and allotting him a
fnlall pension out of the revenues of the fee, retained the re-
nainder in his own hands. The nobles, who saw the advan-
tages they might reap from such a practice, supported him in
the execution of his plan. It gave great offence, however,
to the clergy, who, instead of perpetuating an order. whose
name and power was odious to them, wished that the revenues
which had belonged to it, might be employed in supplying such
parilhes, as were still unprovided with fettled patlors. But on
the one hand, it would have been rash in the clergy to have ir-
ritated, too much, noblemen, on whom the very existence of
the proteflant church in Scotland depended ; and Morton, o..
the other, conduted his Icheine with 'uchdextelily, and inli-
naged them with so much art, that it wa', at lall, agreed, !:

a co (
* Crawf MAni. 55,, :. C ud.s .(I.

a convention composed of the leading men among the clergy, BdOK VI.
together with a committee of privy council, " that the name --v,'
and office of archbilhop, and bishop, should be continued dur- i57z.
ing the king's minority, and there dignities be conferred upon
the best qualified among the protestant ministers; but that with
regard to their spiritual juril:diaions, they should be subject to
the general aflenibly of the church." The rules to be obferv-
ed in their eletion; and the persons who were to supply the
place, and enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the dean
and chapter in times of popery, were likewise particularly fpe-
cified *. And the whole being laid before the general assembly,
after some exceptions to the name of archbijbop, dean, chapter,
&c. and a proreftation that it should be confidered only as a
temporary conflitution, till one more perfect could be intro-
duced, it obtained the approbation of that court +. Even
Knox, who was prevented fromattending the assembly by the
ill slate of his health, though he declaimed loudly againfi the
Simoniacal pa4lion, to which Douglas owed his preferment,
and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out with age and
infirmities, to an office, which required unimpaired vigour
both of body and mind, seems not to have condemned the pro-
ceedings of the convention; and in a letter to the assembly,
approved of some of their regulations with refpet to the elec-
tion of bishops, as worthy of being carefully observed T. In
consequence of the aflembly's consent to the plan agreed upon
in the convention, Douglas was installed in his office, and at
the fame time, an archbishop of Glasgow, and a bishop of
Dunkeld were chosen from among the protestant clergy. They
were all admitted to the place in parliament, which belonged
to the ecclesiastical order. But in imitation of the example set
by Morton, such bargains were made with them by different
noblemen, as gave them pofReflion only of a very frmall part of
the revenues, belonging to their fees §. § SpotfW.

SOON after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, the 6.'

prime instrument of spreading and establishing the reformed re- DV;h7 nd
ligion in Scotland, ended his life, in the 67th year of his age. characer
Zeal, intrepidity, difintereftedneis, were virtues which he of Knox.
polfefled, in an eminent degree. He was acquainted, too,
with the learning, cultivated in that age; and excelled in that
species of eloquence, which is calculated to rouze, and to
inflame. His maxims, however, were often too severe, and
the impetuosity of his temper exceflive. Rigid and uncomply-
ing himself, le shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of
others. Regardless of the diftintions of rank and characer,
he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence,
more apt to Irritate, than to reclaim. Thisoften betrayed him
into indecent and undutiful expreflions, with respect to the

quecen'
* Cald. 2. 305. ' Id, 354. See Appendix No. V.

BooK VI. queen's person and conduct. Those very qualities, however,
,_-"~" which now render his character less amiable, fitted him to be

i572. the inftnunent of providence for advancing the reformation

among a fierce people, and enabled him to face dangers, and
to surmount opposition, from which a person of a more gen-
tle spirit would have been apt to shrink back. By an unwearied
application to fitdy, and to business, as well as by the frequen-
cy and fervor of his public discourses, he had worn out a con-
ftitution, naturally strong. During a lingering illness, he dif-
covered the utmost fortitude; and met the approaches of death
with a magnanimity inseparable from his character. He was
constantly employed in ats of devotion, and comforted himself
with those profpets of immortality, which not only preserve
good men from desponding, but fill them with exultation in their
Jaft moments. The earl of Morton, who was present at his
'funeral, pronounced his eukigiul in a few words, the more
honourable for Knox, as they came from one whom he had
often censured with peculiar severity. '' There lies he, who

p Spotrw. never feared the face of masn *."
a,6. YTH o U G a Morton did not desire peace from such generous

. 2 motives as the former regent, he laboured, however, in good

3'73: earnest, to eftablifi it. The public confusions and calamities,
The regent to which he owed his power and importance when he was only
treats with the' fcqnd perton in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
the queen's him, now that he was railed to be the first. While so many

pa. of the nobles ,continued in arms against him, his authority, as

regent, waspartial, feeble, and precarious, Elizabeth was no
leif desirous of extinguiihing the flame, which lhe had kindled,

f Digges, and kept so long alive in Scotland A-. She had discovered the
599 'alliance with France, from which she had expected such ad-

vantages, to be no foundation of se.curity. And though ap-
pearances of friendlhip fRill subsisted between her and that
court, and Charles daily renewed his protestations of inviolable
adherence to the treaty, hfe was convinced, by a fatal exam-
ple, how little the

ought to rely on the promises or oaths of

that perfidious monarch. Her arbaflador warned her that
the French held a secret correspondence with Mary's adherents

: Id. 196, in Scotland, and encouraged them in their obstinacy t. The
311. duke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that kingdom, with

left disguise. She was persuaded that they would embrace the
first serene interval, whch the commotions in France and in
the Netherlands would allow them, and openly attenlpt to land
in Scotland. She resolved therefore, to prevent their getting
any footing in the ifand, and to cut off all their hopes of find-
ing any afslitance there, by uniting the two parties.

Hi; over- Tn E situation of Mary's adherents enabled the regent to
ul'SC 'y- carry on his negotiations with them to great advantage. They
Maitiand were now divided into two fations At the head of the one,
and Kir- were
kaldy.

were Chltelherault, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were Booa vs.
the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their extensive pro- '--
perty, and the numbers of their followers, rendered the former '573..
considerable. The latter were indebted for their importance,
to their personal abilities, and to the strength of the catle of
Edinburgh, which was in their poffeflion. The regent had no
intention to comprehend both in the fame treaty; but, as he
dreaded that the queen's party, if it remained entire, would
be able to thwart and embarraIs his administration, he resolved
to divide and weaken it, by a separate negotiation. He made
the first overture to Kirkaldy, and his associates, and endea-
voured to renew the negotiation with them, which, during
the life of his predeceflbr, had been broken off by his own ar-
tifices. But Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of go-
vernment, to be very different from those of the former regent.
Maitland confidered him, as a personal and implacable enemy.
They received repeated aflurances of protection from France.
And though the siege of Rochelle employed the French arms
at that time, the fame hopes, which had so often deceived
the party, iill amused them, and they expected that the obfti-
nacy of the Hugonots would loon be subdued, and that
Charles would then be at liberty to a& with vigour in Scotland.
Mean while, a supply of money was tent, and if the castle
could be held out till Whitfunday, effectual aid was promised *. * Di;e
Maitland's geniusdelighted in forming schemes, that were dan. 314'
gerous; and Kirkaldy poffefied the intrepidity, necessary for
putting them in execution. The caRtle, they knew, was Co
situated that it might defy all the regent's power. Elizabeth,
they hoped, would not violate the treaty with France, by
fending tfrces to his afliftance; and if the French should be
able to land any considerable body of men, it might be possible
to deliver the queen from captivity, or at least to balance the
influence of France and England in such a manner, as to rescue
Scotland from the dishonourable dependence on the latter, un-
der which it had fallen. This splendid, but chimerical pro-
jeEt, they preferred to the friendflip of Morton. They encou-
raged the negotiation, however, because it served to gain
time ; they proposed, for the fame purpose, that the whole of
the queen's party fliould be comprehended in it, and that
Kirkaldy should retain the command of the cattle, fix months
after the treaty was signed. His intercft prompted the regent
to reject the former; his penetration difcovcred the danger of
complying with the latter; and all hopes of accommodation
vanished . * Me.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the 235' sc

city of Edinburgh, which, by the return ot the inhabitants
whom he had expelled, was devoted a.; zcaloufly as ever, to
the king's cause. But as the regent had now set on foot a

treaty

BooK Vl.treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of arms
_'-.-v--J still continued with them.

1.573. T H E Y were less scrupulous than the other party, and liften-

ycehpted cd eagerly to his overtures. The duke was naturally nnfeady,
herault andand the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and
Hunily. aversion to ation. The miieries of civil discord had affliaed

Scotland, alnoft five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration of any former contest. The war, instead of doing
service, bad been detrimental to the queen; and more ruinous
than any foreign invasion to the kingdom. In prosecuting it,
neither party had gained much honour; both had suffered great
lofics i and had exhausted their own estates in wafting those of
their adversaries. The commons were in the utmost micfry,
and longed ardently for a peace, which might terminate this
fruitless, but deftruEtive quarrel.

Articles of A G R E AT flep was taken towards this desirable event, by
the treaty. the treaty concluded at Perth, between the regent on one hand,
Feb. 13 and Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the media-

See Ap. tion of Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambafliador*. The chief arti-
od3. No. "cles in it were thef:; that all the parties comprehended in the

treaty should declare their approbation of the reformed religion,
now established in the kingdom; that they should submit to
the king's government, and own Morton's authority as regent;
that they Ihould acknowledge every thing done in opposition to
the king, since his coronation to be illegal; that, on both fides,
the prisoners who had been taken fliould be set at liberty, and
the lands restored to their proper owners j that the aft of at-
tainder pafwed against the queen's adherents flould be repealed,
and indemnity granted for all the crimes, of which they had
been guilty since the 5th of June, 1567; and that the treaty
fliould be ratified, by the common consent of both parties, in

f Crawf. parliament t.
Mrm. I51. a K KAL DY, though abandoned by his associates, who
Si"gc tl neither discovered solicitude, nor made provision for his safety,
the caule
of I'lin- did not lose courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accom-
uiib. slodation . And though all Scotland had now submitted to

the

1 Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who joined with

Kilktaldy in the defence of the catile, and who was himself firongly at-
tnihche to their 'anit, alTeits that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any rea-
lunabic term4 of composition, but that all his offers were rejeted by the
regent. Mulv. .,In. But as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely de-
f.ious of refnling peace in Scntland, and her ambassador Killegrew, as
well a. the earl of RothUs, ul'Ce their utmofi endeavours to persuade Kir-
kaldy to ncrede to the treaty at Perth, it feerns more credible to impute
the contintinuce of hofilities tri Kirkaldy's obllinacy, his diftrull of Moli
t'n, or his, hrpe of fioreign aid, than to any other cause.

'ThaI thIli \vas really the cale, is evident from the positive te(limony of

i;t1,lwv. .ng, 170. Calmd. 448. Jonhln. Hilt. 3, 4. DiggeF, 334.
il :".r's' s L~eounti: al;recs, in the main, with theirs, Mem. 163.

the king, he Rill resolved to defend the cafile, in the queen's BOOK Vr.
name; and to wait the arrival of the promised succours. The '- -
regent was in want of every thing neceflary for carrying on a 1573-
siege. But Elizabeth, who determined, at any rate, to bring
the diflentions in Scotland to a period, before the French could
find leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him sus-
ficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into Scotland,
with 15oo foot, and a considerable train of artillery. The re-
gent joined him, with all his forces; and trenches were open- April a5.
ed and approaches regularly carried on, againfi the caRle.
Kirkaldy, though discouraged by the loTs of a great fum of
money, remitted to him from France, and which fell into the
regent's hands, through the treachery of Sir James Balfour,
the most corrupt man of that age, defended himself with bra-
very, augmented by despair. Three and thirty days he resiled
all the efforts of the Scors and English, who pushed on their
attacks with courage, and with emulation. Nor did he de-
mand a parly, till the fortifications were battered down, and
one of the wells in the cafsle dried up, and the other choaked
with rubbish. Even then his spirit was unfubdued, and he de-
termined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrenchment,
than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison was
not animated with the fame heroic or desperate resolution, and
rising in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered May 29.
himself to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mitirefs,
that he Ihould be favourably treated. Together with him,
James Kirkaldy his brother, lord Home, Maitland, Sir Ro-
bert Melvil, a few citizens of Edinburgh, and about 16o fol-
diers were made prisoners *. * Cald. a.

SeVER A L of the officers, who had been kept in pay during 408.

the war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the cra.240
Low-countries, and entering into the service of the hates, add- Mem. 165.
ed, by their gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military
virtue, which has always been the charafferiftic of the Scottifil
nation.

THus by the treaty with Charelherault and Huntly, and Review of

the surrender of the castle, the civil wars in Scotland were the c1a-
brought to a period. When we review the Rlare of the nation, both ar
and compare the fRrength of the two factions, Mlary's partizans ties
among the nobles appear, mnanifellly, to h:lve been filperior
both in numbers, and in power. Ut, thrhe advantages were
more than counterbalanced by others, which their antagoniRa
enjoyed. Political abilities, military still, and all the talents,
which times of action form, or call forth, appeared chiefly on
the king's fitle. Nor could their enemies bonft of any man,
who equalled the intrepidity of Murray, tempered with wis-
dom; the profound fiigacity of Morton ; the subtle genius,
and insinuating addrefa of Maitland ; or the successful valour

of

BooK VI. ofKirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed in laying the

--p-J foundations of the king's authority. On the one fide, measures
'573. were concerted with prudence, and executed with vigour; on

the other, their resolutions were rash, and their conduct fee-
ble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompt-
ed by indignation against the queen, warmly supported the
king's cause. The clergy threw the whole weight of their po-
pularity into the fame scale. By means of these, as well as by
the powerful interposition of England, the king's government
was finally eflablifhed. Mary loft even that shadow of fove-
reignty, which, amidf all her fifferings rhe had hitherto re-
tained among part of her own fubjets. And as she was no
longer permitted to have an ambassador at the court of Eng-
land, the only mark of dignity which flie had, for some time,
enjoyed there. the must henceforth be confidered as an exile
fripped of all the ensigns of royalty, guarded with anxiety
in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or forgotten in the
other.

Kirkildy KIRKALDY and hisafiociates remained in Drury's custody,
put to and were treated by him with great humanity, till the queen

of England, whose prisoners they were, should determine their
fate. Morton infifed that they should susser the punifhtnent
due to their rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that so long
as they were allowed to live, he did not reckon his own person
or authority secure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's
honour, or his promises in her name, gave them up to the re-
gent's disposal. He first confined them to separate prisons;
and, soon after, with Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirk-
AuguR 3. aldy, and his brother, to be hanged at the cross of Edinburgh.

Maitland, who did not expec to be treated more favourably,
prevented the ignominy of a public execution, by a voluntary
death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil, after the old Ro-

0 Melv. man fashion *."
242* WHILE the regent was wreaking his vengeance on the re-

mains of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording
them any relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of
her prison. At the fame time her health began to be much
impaired by confinement, and want of excrcife. At the in-
treaty of the French ambaffldor, lord Shrevfbury her keeper
was permitted to carry her to Buxton.wells, not far fiom
Tuthbury, the place of her iinprilbnment. Cecil, who lately
had been created baron of Burleigh, and lord high trenfurer of
England, happened to be there at the fame time And though
no minister ever entered more warmly into the views of a so-
vereign, or gave fironger proofs of his fidelity and attachment,
than this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust of every
person, who approached the queen of Scots, that her fufpici-
uns ex;ended even to him ; and while Mary jualy reckoned

him

him her mos dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty in BoOK VI.
persuading his own miftrels, that he was not partial to that un-
happy queen '. 1S73.

THE duke of Alva was this year recalled from the govern

ment of the Netherlands, where his haughty and opprefive ad-
ministration rouzed a spirit, in attempting to subdue which,
Spain exhaufled its trealilres, ruined its armies, and loft its
glory. Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a milder tem-
per, and of a less enterprizing genius. This event delivered
Elizabeth front the perpetual disquietude, occasioned by Alva's
negotiations with the Scottilh queen, and his zeal for her in-
terelt.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace, 's74.

many of the evils, which accompany civil war, were fill felt. The r
The refRraints of law, which, in times of public confulion, mininfra
are little regarded even by civilized nations, were totally de- (ion be-
spifed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to the regular admini- comes odi-
firation of juRice. The disorders in every corner of the king-ous
dom were become intolerable; and under the protection of the
one, or the other faation, crimes of every kind were com-
mitted, with impunity. The regent set himself to redress
these, and, by his indufry and vigour, order and security were
re-eftabliflied in the kingdom. But he loft the reputation, due
to this important service, by the avarice which he discovered
in performing it; and his own exactions became more perni-
cious to the nation, than all the irregularities which he re-
strained t. Spies and informers were every where employed;
the remembrance of old offences were revived; imaginary
crimes were invented; petty trefpafles were aggravated ; and
delinquents were forced to compound for their lives, by the
payment ofexorbitant fines. At the fame time, the current
coin was debated t; licenses were fold for carrying on prohi-
bited branches of commerce, unusual taxes were imposed on
commodities; and all the refinements in oppreflion, from
which, nations so imperfectly polished as the Scots are usually
exempted, were put in pracice. None of these were com-
plained of more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injuf-
tice towards the church. The thirds of benefices, out of which
the clergy received their fubfiltence, had always been slowly

and

Strype . 248, 288. S See Append. No. VII.

I The corruption of the coin, during Morton' adminillration, was

vary gicat. Although the quantity o' current money coined out of a
pound of bullion, was gradually increaled by former princes; the Ilandard
of linenefl lulfered liltle nlteration, and the nmxture of alloy was nearly
the fame, with what is now uledi. But Morton mixed a fourth part of
alloy, with every pound of silver, and funk, by conlcquence, the value
of coin, in proportion. In the year 581 t, all the money coined by him
was called in, and appointed to be recoincd. The flandard was restored
to the fame purity as lormerly. Ruddim. Pref. to Anderlf Diplom. . p. 74.

BOOK VI. and irregularly paid to collectors, appointed by the general
- ---' aflembly ; and during the civil wars, no payment could be
'574. obtained in several parts of the kingdom. Under colour of

redrelling this grievance, and upon a promise of afligning every
miniiter a stipend within his own parilh, the regent extorted
from the church the thirds to which they had right by law.
But the clergy, instead of reaping any advantage from this al-
teration, found that payments became more irregular and dila-
tory than ever. One ninifter was commonly burdened with
the care of four or five pariihes, a pititul salary was alloited
him, and the regent's infariable avarice seized on the reft of the
fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was

a new misfortune to the Scottilh queen. Henry I. who
succeeded him, had not the fame attachment to her person,
and his jealousy of the house of Guise, and obfeqiioufnefs to
the queen mother, greated alienated him from her interest.

5'75- THE death of the duke of Chatelherault must likewise be
Jan. 21. confidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had fre-

quently declared him next heir to the crown, this entitled hin
to great refiped among his countrymen, and enabled him, more
than any other person in the kingdom, to counterbalance the
regent's power.

SoON after, at one of the usual interviews between the war-

dens of the Scottifil and Englilh marches, a scuffle happened,
in which the Englifil were worsted ; a few killed on the spot;
and Sir James Forrelfer, the warden, with several gentlemen
who attended him, taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and
the regent were too lenfible of the advantage, which refuked
from the good understanding that fubfi!}ed between the two
kingdoms, to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

Attempts THE domefiic tranquillity of the kingdom was in some dan-
of the ger of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons
gleinr the raised to the dignity of bishops, poflefled very small revenues,
episcopal and a very moderate degree of power, the clergy, io whom
order. the regent and all his measures were become extremely odious,

began to be jealous of that order. Knowing that co ruptions
Qeal into the church, gradually, under honourable names, and
upon decent pretences, they were afraid that, from such small
beginnings, the hierarchy might grow, in time, to be as pow-
erful and oppreflive as ever. The chief author of these suo·
picions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man, distinguished by his
uncommon erudition, by the severity of his manners, and the
intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the retirement of an
academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of life ; and being
more attentive to the ends which he pursued, than to the mean!
which he employed for promoting them, he often defeater

laudable
* CrawE. Mem. 17., Spotlfw. 273, Cald, ., 4o0, 427.

laudable designs, by the impetuosity and imprudence with BOOKVI.
which he carried them on. A question was moved by him in -./. .
the assembly, "whether the office of bishop, as now exercised '575-
in the kingdom, was agreeable to the word of God ?" In the
ecclesiastical judicatories, continual complaints were made of
the biflops, tor neglec of duty, many of which, their known
remissness too well justified. The bishop of Dunkeld, being
accused of dilapidating his benefice, was found guilty by the
assembly. And the regent, inflead of checking, connived at
these disputes about ecclesiastical government, as they diverted
the zesl of the clergy from attending to his daily encroachments
on the patrimony of the church *.

THa weight of ,i regent's oppreflive administration had, I 76-
hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower, and middlee i'rri-

tates fomre

rank; but he began now to take finch R(eps, as convinced the f the no-
nobles, that their dignity would not long exempt them from bles.
feeling the effe&s of his power. An accident, which was a
frequent cause of dissention among the Scottillf nobles, occafi-
oned a difference between the earls of Argyll and Athole. A
vafial of the former had made some depredations on the lands
of the latter. Athole took arms to punish the offender; Ar-
gyll, to proteCt him; and this ignoble quarrel they were ready
to decide in the field, when the regent, by interposing his au-
thority, obliged them to disband their forces. Both of them
had been guilty of irregularities, which, though common,
were contrary to theletter of the law. Of these the regent
took advantage, and resolved to found on them a charge of
treason. This design was revealed to the two earls by one of
Morton's retainers. The common danger, to which they
were exposed, compelled them to forget old quarrels, and to
unite in a close confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their
jun1 ion rendered them formidable; they despised the summons
which the regent gave them to appear before the court of jus-
tice ; and he was obliged to desist from any further prosecution.
But the injury he intended made a deep impreflion on their
minds, and drew on him I'evere vengeance f.

NoR was he more successful in an attempt, which lie made, '577'

to load lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed
a conspiracy againlt his life. Though those, who were sup-
pored to be his accomplices, were seized and tortured, no evi-
dence of any thing criminal appeared; but, on the contra-
ry, many circumstances discovered his innocence, as well as
the regent's secret views, in imputing to him such an odious
derign i.

TIg'aE Scottifl nobles, who were almofl equal to th ir mo- They turn
narchs in power, and treated by them with much diltinlion, thcir ye

obfcrved towa.ds

tile king.

* Cald, Affcmblics, 1574, &c. Johnfl. Hifl. 15.
t Crawf. Mem. A85. X Craw f Mem a87.

Booc Vt. observed these arbitrary proceedings of a regent, with the ut.

- v- most indignation. The people, who, under a form of govern-
s577. ment extremely simple, had been little accuomied to the bur-

den of taxes, complained loudly of the regent's rapacity. And
all began to turn their eyes towards the young king, from whom
they expected the redress of all their grievances, and the return
of a more gentle, and more equal adminifiration.

James's JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The queen,
education soon after his birth, had committed him to the care of the earl
and ditfp- of Mar, and during the civil wars, he had resided securely in

the caflle of Stirling. Alexander Erikine, that nobleman's bro-
ther, had the chiefdirection of his education. Under him,
the famous Buchanan acted as preceptor, together with three
other maiters, the rmot eminent the nation afforded, for skill
in those sciences, which were deemed necessary for a prince.
The young king ihewed an uncommon pallion for learning,
and made great progress in it. And the Scots fancied that they
already dilcovered in him, all those virtues, which the fondness
or credulity of fubjets usually ascribe to princes, during their
minority. But as James was Lill far from that age, at which
the law permitted him to assume the reins of government, the
regent did not sufficiently attend to the sentiments of the peo-
ple, nor reflect, how naturally these prejudices in his favour
might encourage the king to anticipate that period. He not
only neglected to secure the friendship of those who were about
the king's person, and who poflefled his ear, but had even ex-
afperated some of them, by personal injuries. Their resent-

He is fr- ment concurred with the ambition of others, in infusing into
pcious of the king early suspicions of Morton's power, and designs. A
tgentm king, they told him, had often reason to fear, seldom to love,
power. a regent. Prompted by ambition, and by interest, he would

endeavour to keep the prince in perpetual infancy, at a dif-
tance from his fubjeas, and unacquainted with business. A
rmall degree of vigour, however, was fuflicient to break the
yoke. Subjects naturally reverence their sovereign, and be-
come impatient of the temporary and delegated jurifdiEtion
of a regent. Morton had governed with a rigour, unknown to
the ancient monarchs of Scotland. The nation groaned under
hisoppreffiona; and would welcome the first profpec of a
milder administration. At present, the king's name was scarce
mentioned in Scotland, his friends were without influence, and
hisfavourites without honour. But one effort would discover
Morton's power to be as feeble, as it was arbitrary. The
fame attempt would put himself in pofrellion of his jult autho-
rity, and rescue the nation from intolerable tyranny. If he
did not regard his own rights as a king, let him liten, at least
to the cries of his people *.

MvCVTHE. 49S
* Melv. 149.

TH S E suggestions made a deep impreflion on the young BooK VI.

king, who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to
command. His approbation of the design, however, was of '577
Imall consequence, without the concurrence of the nobles. formed a.
The earls of Argyll and Athole, two of the mod powerful ofgainft the
that body, were animated with implacable resentment against regent.
the regent. To them the cabal in Stirling castle communicat-
ed the plot, which was on foot ; and they entering warmly into
it, Alexander Erskine, who, since the death of his brother,
and during the minority of his nephew, had the command of
that fort, and the custody of the king's person, admitted them
secretly into the king's presence. They gave him the fame
account of the misery of his fubjefs, under the regent's arbi-
trary administration ; they complained loudly of the injustice,
with which themselves had been treated; and besought the
king, as the only means for redrefling the grievances of the
nation, to call a council of all the nobles. James consented,
and letters were issued, in his name, for that purpose; but the
two earls took care that they flould be sent only to such as
were known to bear no good will to Morton*. Spotfw.

THE number of these was, however, so inconsiderable, that, 78578.

on the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles assem- March 4.
bled at Stirling; and so highly were they incensed against Mor-
ton, that although on receiving intelligence of Argyll and
Athole's interview with the king, he had made a feint as if he
would resign the regency, they advised the king, without re-
garding this offer, to deprive him of his office, and to take the
administration of government into his own hands. Lord Gla- He resigns
mis the chancellor, and Herreis, were appointed to signify this hnd re
resolution to Morton, who was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his tires.
usual place of residence. Nothing could equal the joy, with
which this unexpected resolution filled the nation, but the fur-
prize occasioned by the seeming alacrity with which the regent
descended fiom so high a flation. He neither wanted sagacity
to foresee the danger of resigning, nor inclination to keep pof-
session of an office, for the expiration of which the law had
fixed so distant a term. But all the sources, whence the facti-
on, of which he was head, derived their tlrength, had either
failed, or now supplied his adversaries with the means of hum-
bling him. The commons, the city of Edinburgh, the clergy,
were all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied opprefli-
ons. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself by treaty, to fend
a considerable body of troops to the afliltance of the inhabi-
tants of the Netherlands, who were firuggling for liberty, had
little leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as she had
nothing to dread from France, in whose councils the princes
of Lorrain had not, at that time, much influence, file was not
displeased, perhaps, at the birth of new faction in the king-

VoL, 1. X dom.

BOOK VI. dom. Even those nobles, who had long been joined wit:
.-v Morton in faction, or whom he had attached to his perlun by
1578. benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcarn the fececrary,

Murray of Tillibardin comptroller, all dcfcrted his falling tbr-
tunes, and appeared in the council at Stirling. So many con-
curring circumltances convinced Morton of his own weaknels,
and determined him to give way to a torrent, which was too
March 12. impetuous to be resifted. He attended the chancellor and Her-

reis to Edinburgh; was present when the king's accep!an-e
of the government was proclaimed; and, in the presence of
the people, surrendered to the king, all the authority to which
he had any claim in virtue of his office. This ceremony wtis
accompanied with such exceflive joy and acclamiations of tile
multitude, as added, no doubt, to the anguifli, which an am-
bitious spirit must feel, when compeiled to renounce fiupren;i
power; and convinced Morton how entirely he had loft the
affections of his countrymen. He obtained, however, from
the king an act, containing the approbation of every thing done
by him in the exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the nimct
ample form, that his fear or caution could devise, of all pas
offences, crimes, and treasons. The nobles, who adhered to
the king, bound themselves, under a great penalty, to procure
the ratification of this aa, in the firif parliament *.

Continues A COUNCIL of twelve peers was appointed to aflit teic
to watch king, in the adminifiration of affairs. And Morton, delerted
the rno-
tions of by his own party, and unable to struggle with the fation,
the ad- which governed ablblutely at court, retired to one of his feat:,
verse par- and seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occupied only
ty. in the amusements of a country life. His mind, however, was

deeply disquieted with all the uneasy reflections, which accom-
pany disappointed ambition; and intent on schemes for reco-
veringhis former grandeur. Even in this retreat, which the
people called the Lion's-den, his wealth and abilities rendcred
him formidable. And the new counsellors were so imprudent
as to rouze him, by the precipitancy with which they halfte;ed
to irip him of all the remains of power. They required him
to surrender the cafile of Edinburgh, which was still in his pof-
feflion. He refused at firfi to do so, and began to prepare sot
its defence ; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
and repulsed a part of the garrison, which was sent out to guard
a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that impor-
tant fortress, without refilance. This encouraged his adver
saries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multi
ply their demands upon him, in such a manner, as convincec
him that nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their in.
veterate hatred.

Tu rc
* Spotfw, 278. Crawf, Mem. ;89. Cald. li. Slz

Tn.EIR power and popularity, howeser, be,.an alread7 to BOOK VI.

ieclinc. '1 ie cihancellor, r!'e ableil and in(, in l iicerite man --'
ini the part'y having Ibeen ktiled at 81i;iing il .in acciden I :578.
rcncounter between his ltllowers. and thol; of ihe earl ot
Crawlord ; Athole, who wv2s ;appointc' i is fu:cccilji ' n rhat
high ollice, the earls of Eglinton, Cathieiss. atni l,iJ ()gilvie,
all the prime favourites at court were either avowed piipifli,
or lulpccted of leaning to the opinions of that fdt. In an age,
when the return of popery was, so Inuch, and so juflly, dread-
ri, this gave univerial alarn. And as Mlorton liad always
treated the papills with rigour, this unseasonable indulgence
made all zealous proteflants remember that circumfltancc in his
adminiltration with great praile . * Spotfv.

/VIoRTON, to whom none of there particulars were un- R83es

known, thought this the proper junc:ure for setting to work his lurmer
tile instruments, which he had been preparing. Having gained authority.
the confidence of the earl of Mar, and of the countess his mo-
tler, lie insinuated to them that Alexande lErfkine had fortned
a plot to deprive his nephew of the govu;ini:ent of Stirling-
cattle, and the custody of the king's perfan ; and cafi!y in-
duced an ambitious woman, and a youth of twenty, to em-
ploy force to prevent this supposed ilruiry. The earl repairing
luddenly to Stirling, and being ad.!:itted, as usual, into ril
castle with his attendants, seiz-d the gates early in tile morn-
ing, and turned out his uncle, who crecdccl no danger from
his hands. The loldiers of the garrifcn lubr:ited to hil as April z6.
their governor, and, with little d;:rgr, and no cffufion of
blood. le became maftcr both or ie i.ing' p:'fon, and tile
fortress t. - Cald. ,

AN event so uticxpeced, occasioned great connlernation. 535.

And though Morton's hand did not aopear in the ehecu'ior, he
was universally belicved tr) be the ;iihor r:' :r- ac.pt 'Fh'
newcounfellors law it :o be ncclLryv, ,'r '.i'r .iown lilte:y, to
change their nimalures, r.n.l inlc:ad ol':: !r i; wi: , iic.
imnpacable refentmenr, to enter ir:o t"ne: '. a;i:njili:;ia.' in
with an advcrthry, fill tf ca;p:l.;'a *f c ':ii.'! t'ltm nti (nie.
Four were named, on 'tich sidie, '.) :,j'. i l': ;:i';..rellccs.
They met not far liorn D,.lkcith. A '.' ;"al br:,ma h:
matters near a conclusion, l\/orton, V ,o r, ,.; ., , i

, . o not

to improve the advanrae, which lhi i: ;:;:v iil tlir
attention to the treaty afforded liin, I: n i'

i. iltiime

for Stirling, and having gained .iirrv .I' i:! .:!ia:;;n, !,,ln'i
uncle, was admitted by hiinl inwo '; '' ; ,l ;'.nagrin g Y z4.
matters there with Iiis ul'ual dextcr: ; '., i.1l n rrc n-
tirely the command of the fort, iiit rl cr .::;' li l'. -IHI wa.
likewile adiirtred to a feat in trli' :;, ',JL.iici, ai.d acquiredl
the falme alcendnnt in it t.

X 2 As
t C.,.:d - ;,.

BOOi VI. As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at

Cvl*'. Edinburgh now approached, this gave him some anxiety. He
'578. wag afraid of carrying the young king to a city whole inhabi-

tants were so much at the devotion of the adverse faction. He
was no less unwilling to leave James behind at Stirling. In or-
der to avoid this dilemma, he issued a proclamation. in the
king's name, changing the place of meeting from Edinburgh
to Stirling-caftle. This Athole and his party represented as a
ftep altogether unconstitutional. The king, said they, is Mor-
ton's prisoner; the pretended counsellors are his slaves; a par-
liament, to which all the nobles may repair without fear, and
where they may deliberate with freedom, is absolutely necessary
for fettling the nation, after disorders of such long continuance.
But in an assembly, called contrary to all form, held within the
walls of a garrison, and over-awed by armed men, what safety
could members expe& ? what liberty could prevail in debate ?
IJuly S. or what benefit result to the public ? The parliament met,

however, on the day appointed, and notwithstanding the pro-
teftation of the earl of Montrose and lord Lindsay, in name of
their party, proceeded to business. The king's acceptance of
the government was confirmed; the as granted to Morton,
for his security, ratified; some regulations, with regard to the
numbers and authority of the privy council, were agreed up-
on; and a penfon for life granted to the countess of Mar, who

* Cald. a. had been so instrumental in bringing about the late revolution *.
547' MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their followers, took
Jac. Vl. arms, upon the specious pretence of rescuing the king from
Argyll and captivity, and the kingdom from oppreflion. James himself,
Athole take impatient of the servitude in which he was held, by a man
armS a. whom he had long been taught to hate, secretly encouraged
gainthim. their enterprize; though, at the fame time, he was obliged

not only to disavow them in public, but to levy forces against
them, and even to declare, by proclamation, that he was per-
fe&ly free from any conitraint, either upon his person, or his
will. Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll and Athole
were at the head of 7000 men ; the earl of Angus, Morton's
&ug. it. nephew, met them with an army of 000ooo irong ; neither party,

however, was eager to engage. Morton difrrufted the fidelity
of his own troops. The two earls were sensible that a (ingle
viCtory, however compleat, would not be decisive ; and as they
were in no condition to undertake the siege of Stirling-caflle,
where the king was kept, their strength would soon be ex-
haulled, while Morton's own wealth, and the patronage of the
queen of England, might furniflh him with cndlefs resources.

Elzabeth By the mediation of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had sent into Scot-
negotites land to negotiate an accommodation between the two fations,
modation a treaty was concluded, in confcquence of which, Argyll and
between Athole were admitted into the king's presence i; bme of their
them. party

party were added to the privy council ; and a convention ofBooK VI.
nobles called, in order to bring all remaining differences to an L-v-
amicable issue *. 578.

So soon as James assumed the government into his own * Cwf.

hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Eli- Mo.
.abeth of that event; to offer to renew the alliance between
the two kingdoms; and to demand poffeflion of the eflate,
which had lately fallen to him, by the death of his grandmo-
ther, the countel' of Lenox. That lady's second son had left
one daughter. Arabella Stewart, who was born in England.
And as the chief objection againfi the pretensions of the Scot-
tilh line to the crown of England, was that maxim of English
law, which excludes aliens from any right of inheritance with-
in the kingdom, Elizabeth, by granting this demand, would
have eftablilhed a precedent in James's favour, that might have
been esteemed decisive, with regard to a point, which it had
been her conflant care to keep undecided. Without suffering
this delicate question to be tried, or allowing any new light to
be thrown on that, which she confidered as the great mystery'
of her reign, she commanded the rents of the estate to be si-
quefiered by lord Burleigh, master of the wards; and by this
method of proceeding, gave the Scottish king early warning
how necessary it would be to court her favour, if ever he hop-
ed for success in claims of greater importance, but equally lia-
ble to be controverted *. * Camd.

AFTEK many delays, and with much difficulty, the con- 461.

tending nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But 1579'
it was followed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of re- April 24.
concilement, having invited the leaders of the opposite party to
a great entertainment, Athole the chancellor was, soon after,
taken ill, and died within a few days. The symptoms and
violence of the disease gave rife to strong suspicions of his be-
ing poilbned; and though the physicians, who opened his bo-
dy, differed in opinion as to the cause of the difiernper, the
chancellor's relations publickly accused Morton of that odious
crime. The advantage which visibly accrued to him, by the
removal of a man of great abilities, and averse from all his mea-
fures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the people, who are
ever fond of imputing the death of eminent to extraordinary
caures *. * Spotrw.

THE office of chancellor was beflowed upon Argyll, whom 306.

this preferment reconciled, in a great measure, to Msorton's Morton's
adminiltration. He had now recovered all the authority he procedc
poeflffed during his regency, and had entirely broken, or ing, a-
baffled, the power, and cabals of his enemies. None of the g inn the
great families remained to be the object of his jealousy, or to tamily of
obftru&t his designs, but that of Hamilton. The earl of Arran, Hamilto,
the eldest brother, had never recovered the flock, which he

received

BOOK VI. received from the ill luccefs of his pafion for the queen, arn
i_~-.s. had now altogether loft his reason. Lord John, the fccon:l

1579. biother, was in poffellion of the ihmily ellate. Lord Ciaimt

was coniiiendaior of Paisley ; both of rhemn young men, an.-
bitious, and enterprising. Morton dreaded their influence i,
the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to Ihare their spoils auncn-
them; and as all princes naturally view their successors wi.i
jealousy and hatred, it was easy to infuse there pailions into th-
mind of the young king. A pretence was at hand to justify the
nott violent proceedings. The pardon, stipulated in the trea-
ty of Perth, did not extend to thole, who were accessary to tlie
murder of the regents Murray or Lenox. Lord John and hi;
brother were fufpested of being the authors of both thefc
crimues, and had been included in a general act of attainder on
that account. Without summoning them to trial, or exnamin-
ing a single witness to prove the charge, this attainder was now
thought fuficient to subjet them to all the penalties, which
they would have incurred by being formally convicted. The
earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the loird
Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a cominilion to seize
their perfonsand estates. On a few hours warning, a confider-
able body of troops was ready, and marched towards Hamilton,
in hostile array. Happily, the two brothers made their escape,
though with great difficulty. But their lands were confiscated;
the castles of Hamilton and Draffan bcfieged ; those who de-
fended them puniflied. The earl of Arran, though incapable,
from his situation, of committing any crime, was involved, by
a fliameful abuse of law, in the common ruin of his family;
and as if he, too, could have been guilty of rebellion, confined
a clole prisoner. These proceedings, so contrary to the funda-
mental principles of justice, were all ratified in the fubfciqu;i:

* Cr.wf. parlitamecnt *.
Mcmr. pi 1' A o U'T this time .Mary fc;:r, by NanI her secretary, a ler-
Spnifw. 3~6. ter to her son, togei:cr vwith tbme jev;wel of value, and a v::

enibi, ldered with her own hands. But as flhe gave himn n::.!
the liile of prince of 'cotland, the inefrenger was difliiiil J,

F Crawr. without being admnitted iiio l,is pr if:ncc t.
Mrei. 314. TrHO Ic tt hiizx:beth I ^d, at 'hi; time, no panricular rcafir,
Negnti r a to fear a.iy aticlmpt of tiic popilil pr'crc?. il '? ia ' fiav ir.
ions l or a . "

·

mairi:rg file llill conitinued ti gu d il[r vwilt tlie :iic an:iious c:;-.
between The acquiiition of -'or tlg;al, on tile one ianil, and the defcn.::
Elizabeth of the Netherila;ds, r,n t;,e oil,er, Ifulil employ'ed t le cou :;'n
and' tile and nrins of Spain. ;: in:.:, torn ri ,I.c: by i inteflini comlti-
duke of
Al.ccon. tions, and under a e:.i nnd capricious prince, del'iifrd n".

ditlrufed by his owun fubjeces, was in no condition to !i:liurL
its neighbours. Lliznbeth h:ld j:)n.g a :ur:cd thnt court by car.
rying on a treaty of marriage uwith the duke of Acltroll, tI'l
king's brothcr, llut whethlr, ar the age ot' Iory five, l;:

re:,.'*

really intended to marry a prince of twenty? whether the BOOK VI.
plealure of being flattered and courted, made her lifen to the '
addresses of so young a lover, whom fle allowed to visit her at '579-
two different time:, and treated with the molf diflinguifling
refpe:t ? or whether considerations of interest, predominated
in tlis, as well as in every other tranfaation of her reign, are
problems in hiltory which we are not concerned to resolve?
During the progrels of this negotiation, which was drawn out
to an extraordinary length, Mary could expect no assistance from
the French court, and lcinis to have held little correspondence
with it. And theic wa:; no period in her reign, wherein Eliza-
beth enjoyed more pert:et lecurity.

Mo RTON seems, at this time, to have been equally secure ; Two fa-

but his security was not fb well founded. He had weathered Vourites
out one storm, had crushed his adversaries, and was again in ,endant:
polTellion of the sole direction of affairs. But as the king was over
now of an age, when the character and dispositions of the mind James.
begin to unfold thenifelves, and to become visible, the smallest
attention to these might have convinced him, that there was
reason to expedt new and more dangerous attacks on his power.
James early discovered that excessive attachment to favourites,
which accompanied him through his whole life. This passion,
which naturally arises from inexperience, and youthful warmth
of heart, was, at his age, far front being culpable; nor could
it well be expected that the choice of the objects, on whom he
placed his affections, fliould be made with great skill. The
mofl considerable of them, was Efmne Stewart, a native of
France, and son of a second brother of the earl of Le-
nox. He was diftinguified by the title of lord D'Aubigne, an
ellate in France, which descended to him from his ancestors,
on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their valour, and
services to the French crown. He arrived in Scotland. about Sept. 8.
this time, on purpose to demand the estate and title of Lenox,
to which he pretended a legal right. He was received, at
firif, by the king, with the respect due to so near a relation.
The gracefulness of his person, the elegance of his dress, and
his courtly behaviour, made a great impression on James, who,
even in his more nature years, was little able to relifl there fri-
volous charms; and his affetion flowed with its usual rapi-
dity, and profulion. Within a few days after Stewart's ap-
pearance at court, he was created lord Aberbrothock, Toon
after earl, and then duke of Lenox. governor of Dumbarton
cafilc, captain of the guard, first lord of the bed-chamber, and
lord high chamberlain. At the fame time, and without any
of the envy, or emulation which is usual among candidates for
favour, captain Janmes Stewart, the second Ton of lord Ochil-
tree, grew into great confidence. But noiwithflanding this
union, Lenox and captain Stewart were persons of very oppo-

fito

BOOK VI. site chara&ers. The former was naturally gentle, humane,
t -v--) candid; but unacquainted with the state of the country, and

1579. mil-ed, or misinformed by those, whom he trufled; not un-

worthy to be the companion of the young king, in his amuse-
ments, but utterly disqualified for acting as a minilter, in di-
recting his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices,
which render a man formidable to his country, and a perni-
cious counsellor to his prince ( nor did he poflefs any one vir-
tue, to counterbalance these vices, unless dexterity in conduct-
ing his own designs, and an enterpriling courage, superior to
the sense of danger, may pass by that name. Unrefirained by
religion, regardless of decency, and undifinayed by opposition,
he aimed at objeEts, seemingly unattainable; but under a
prince, void of experience, and blind to ail the defe&s of thole,
who had gained his favour, his audacity was successful; and
honours, wealth, and power, were the reward of his crimes.

They lt- BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their whole
hour t8 address, to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obftruaed
uMdrtose their full poffefion of power. And as James had been bred
authority. up with an aversion for that nobleman, who endeavoured ra-

ther to maintain the authority of a tutor, than to a& with the
bbfequioufnefs of a minister, they found it no difficult matter
to accompli/h their design. Morton, who could no longer keep
the king ihut up within the walls of Stirling-cattle, having call-
O&ob. 17. ed a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, brought him thither.

James made his entry into the capital, with great foleminty;
the citizens received him with the loudest acclan'arions of joy,
and with many expensive pageants, according ro the mode of
that age. After a long period of thirty-fcven years, during
which, Scotland had been fubjeded to the delegated power of
regents. or to the feeble government of a woman, and had luf-
sered all the riferies of civil war, and felt the insolence of so-
reign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more
in the hands of a king. Fond even of that shadow of authori-
ty, which a prince of fifteen could poffcil, the Scots flattcrle
themselves, that union, order, and tranquillity would now be
restored to the kingdom. James opened the pallinlnent with
extraordinary pomp, but nothing remarkable paflid in it.

THss E demonstrations, however, of the people's love and

attachment to their sovereign, encouraged the favourites to
continue their insinuations against Morton; and as the king
now resided in the palace of H:ly-rud house, to which all his
fubjeas had access, the cabal agninlt the earl grew daily 'rrong-
er, and the intrigue, which occaiiond Lhi fall, ripened gra-
dually.
tSCO. MorwroN began to be sensible ofhis danger, and endea-

voured to put a stop to the career of Lenox's preferment, hy
reptetenting him as a formidable enemn to the rclbrmed religi-

on:

on, a secret agent in favour of popery, and a known emifrary of BOoK VI.
the houfeofGuife. The clergy, apt to believe every rumour --v-
of this kind, spread the alarm among the people. But Lenox, 1580.
either out of conplaifance to his master, or convinced by the Morton
arguments of rome learned divines, whom the king appointed ,,,d t
to initrucE him in the principles of the proteltant religion, pub- prevent
lickly renounced the errors of popery, in the church of St. them.
Giles, and declared hlimfelt a member of the church of Scot-
land, by signing herconfeflion of faith. This, though it did
not remove all suspicions, nor silence some zealous preachers,
abated in a great degree, the force of the accusation*.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was

preparing to seize the king's person, and to carry him into Eng-
land. Whether despair of maintaining his power, by any
other means, had driven him to make any overture of that
kind to the Englifl court, or whether it was a calumny, in-
vented by his adversaries to render him odious, cannot now be
determined with certainty. As he declared at his death, that
such a deign had never entered into his thoughts, the latter
teems to be most probable. It afforded a pretence, however,
for reviving the office of lord chamberlain, which had been,
for some tine, difuled. That honour was conferred on Le-
nox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy, was his de-
puty ; they had under them a band of gentlemen, who were
appointed constantly to attend the king, and to guard his
person f.

MoRTON was not ignorant of what his enemies intended Elizabeth

to insinuate, by such unulial precautions for the king's safety; interPore
and as his lat resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protection h;s.
had often stood him in Hlead, in his greareft difficulties. In
consequence of this application, Bowes her envoy accused Le-
nox of practices againaf the peace of the two kingdoms, and
inlifed, in her name, that he lhould inf.intly be removed from
the privy council. Such an unprecedented demand was con-
fidered by the counsellors, as an affront to the king, and an
encioachment on the independence of the kingdlom. They as-
sected to call in quellion the envoy's powers, and upon that
pretence, refutcd him farther audience ; and he retiring in
dirgalt, and without taking leave, Sir Aiexander Home was
sent to expoftu!ate wi:h Elizaberh on the fuil.,jcct. Atecr rhe
treatmient which her envoy lad received, [:lizibeth thoughr it
below her dignity to admrit Hioine into her pref;vice. Burleigh,
to whom he was commianded to impart his commission, re-
proached him with his ninfler's ingrati:ule towards a bene-
factreis, who had placed the crown on his head, and required
hin to advise the king to beware of fEacificing the friendlhip
of so necefFaiy an ally, to the giddy humours of a young man,

without
t Crawf. Mem. 315. SpOLIW. 308, I' Id. 320,

Boo. VI. without cxpcriencc, and ltrongly suspeCted of principles, and

-- ~ attachments, incompatible with the happinefa of the Scottifi
1580. nation.

Morton T'HIS accusation of Lenox haflened, in all probability,
accuiir ( iMorton's fali Thle ad of indemnnity, which lie had obtained
the mur-
der of the when le rL signed the regency, was worded with such fcrupuloua
late king. exadnrcf, as ainoi' Ircteetied him fromaany legal profecurion. '1 he

murder of the late king was the only crime, which could not
with decency, be intleited in a pardon, granted by his son.
Here Morton f1tl lay open to the penalties of the law. And
captain Steward, who tluiuu:vd no action, however defperale,
if it led to power, or to favuur, entered the council-chaimbler,
while tile king ant nobles were alrfenbled, and falling on his
Dee. 30. knees, accuscd Morton of being accef.fry, or accotding to the

langu.ge of the Scoltiih law, art andpart, in tie conspiracy
alainit the life of his nmajefy's father, and cff:red, under the
ulual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evidence. Mor-
ton, who was present, heard this accufaiion with firiinefs ; and
replied with a dildainful finile, proceeding eilher fioni con-
tempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
fcioufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known zeal, in
punishing those who were fufpedted of that deteflable crime,
niight well exempt himself from any suspicion of being ac-
ceffary to it, neverlheletf, he would cheerfully submit to a
trial, either in that place, or in any other court ; and doubted
not but his own innocence, and the malice of his enemies,
·would then appear in the cl-areil light." Stewart, who was
fi;ll on his knees, began to enquire how he would reconcile his
bLil uwing fb many honouis on Archibald Douglas, whom he
ct ninly knew to be one of the murtherers, with his pretended
zeal againlt that crime. Morron was ready to anf;er. But

i:ai. Ihe kiuig commanlded both of thein to be lenloved. The ci i
Jul. *'. was conlined, lil a ofall, to Ihis own hoiufe, and then conmimit-

ttl to the calle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erfline
was governor ; and as if it liad not been a fuflicient indignily
to silibjetl hilm t tile power of one of hii. enemies, he wais,
l;:on after, crrricd to Dumbarton, of which Lenox had tlie
Jan. ,8. con:andI. A wairant was, likewile, iflilbc for' apprelhcnlii, Lg

Arclibald Douglas; hut he, having rcceived timely intclli-
gence of the approacliing danger, II.d into Einglnd *.

' ll: earl ot Alniu, who imlpuad tl Ice violent proccedinlgs

nolt to latred agaiiilt Morton alone, iut to the ancient enitii v
bctween tl;c lioLI.; of S:ewart a;,d of DuLglas, hlld who i)e-
licv;d that a cu::lpjiracv was now iorm'ad lor the dclli uilic(n
ft thie V'ho.!c ri:li', wv': re:!cly to take aims1l in order to rel-C'ru
.:1, i:i..:':!:'. linJ t ']ior!on! allc.)luti !v t;'mlid oiry filch at lemii'l
:'.;i d :;iated!, tlil;t le v.uuid la j.er lul'ti ;n tlloullinl deaths,

than
*' C'..r;,r. . 'cm :3.

than bring an imputation on his own character by seeming to BOOK VI.
decline a trial *. -

Er IZAB ETI did not fail to interpose, with warmth, in be- E581.

half of a man, who had contributed so much to preserve her measures
influence over Scotland. The late tranfaaions in that kingdom in order to
had given her great uneasiness. The power which Lenox had save him.
acquired independent of her was dangerous ; the treatment her
ambassadors had niet with, differed greatly from the respect,
with which the Scots were in use to receive her ministers; and
the attack now made on Morton fully convinced her, that there
was an intention to sow the feeds of discord between the two
nations, and to seduce James into a new alliance with France,
or into a marriage with foine popifi princefi. Full of these
apprehensions, fle ordered a coiufiderable body of troops to be
airerlbled on the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph
as her ambassador into that kingdom. He addressed himself
not only to James, and to his council, hut to a convention of
etiates met at that time. He began with enumerating the ex-
traordinary benefits which Elizabeth.had conferred on the Scot-
tifh nation: that without demanding a single foot of land for
herself, without encroaching on the liberties of the kingdom
in the Inmalleflt article, (he had, at the expence of the blood
of her subjects, and the treasures of her crown, rescucd the
Scots fiom the dominion ot France, eflablilled among them
true religion, and put them in pofllefion of their ancient rights:
that from the beginning ihe had proteaed those, who espoused
the king's caule, and by her atlidonce alone, the crown had
been preserved on his head, and all the attempts of the ad-
verse i.'tioni baffled: that an union, unknown to their ancef-
tors, but equally beneficial to both kingdoms, had ubl.'ifled for
a long period ot years, and thoughli so many popish piinccs had
combined to dilurb this happy l.rc of thinrgs, her care, and
their coniiancy, had hitherto delcat,.l all thele etforts: that (he
had observed, of late, an unulfual coldness, dt;lIluil, and es-
trarnnenient in r:e Scottilli counci!, whicih rie could inipute t'
nnne but o I e, a luhje& us 'ran:cc, a rtaihCer to thie hou c
of Guile, bred up in the errrrs of popery. and tllill Ihf'ufpc't
of Invcuring that fliperl':iion. Not fali.cied witrl having
mnounted fl si l to tuch an uncomn;n-. height o:' pnwer, which
he excrcicld with all the railinels or you:h, ..id all the igno-
rance of a franger ; nor tliinking it er:uuigh to have d.'piivel
tile earl of Morton of the autlhurili, duc to his abilities, and
experience, he had conflpircd ite ruin or' tiat noblelman, who
had often expoled Ihis lite in the kinr's cailc, who had contri-
buted nmore than any other subjef to place hlill on the tlrnnr,
to resist the encroachments of popery, and to prelcrve the
union between the two kingdom;s. It' any zeal f01 rclii-n rec

tai t; tI'd
Jolhnnfl, 6.. Spolsw. .31

BooK VI. mained among the nobles in Scotland, if they wished for tli
_»-v--- continuance of amity with England, if they valued the privi-

5gs8. leges of their own order, he called upon them, in the name of

his mistress, to remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lenox
from the presence of the young king, to refciue Morton out of
the hands of his avowed enemy, and secure to him the bene-
fit of a fair and impartial trial: and if force were neceflary to-
wards accomplifiing a design to salutary to the king and king-
dom, he promised thein the protetion of his mistress in the
enterprize, and whatever alIiftance they Ihould demand either
of men or money *.

BuT there extraordinary remonitrances, accompanied with

such an unusual appeal from the king to his fubjeas, were not
the only means employed by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton,
and againit Lenox. She persuaded the prince of Orange to fend
an agent into Scotland, and under colour of complimenting
James on account of the valour which many of his subjects had
displayed in the service of the fiates, to enter into a long detail
of the restless enterprizes of the popish princes against the pro-
teflant religion; to beseech him to adhere inviolably to the al-
liance with England, the only barrier which secured his king-
dom against their dangerous cabals ; and above all things, to
diltruft the insinuations of those, who endeavoured to weaken
or to dissolve that union between the Biitifli nations, which
all the protestants of Europe beheld with to much pleasure 1.

James de- JAMES's counsellors were too intent upon the detfruaion
termines of their enemy to liMen o these remonttrances. The officious
to prceccd

Pii'detd interporition of the prince of Orange, the haughty tone of' Eli-
E_2m. zabeth's mef'age and her avowed attempt to excite subje&s to

rebel against their sovereign, were confidered as unexampled
insults on the majesty and independence of a crowned head.
A general and evasive answer was given to Randolph. James
prepared to aflert his own dignity with spirit. All those sus-
pected of favouring Morton were turned out of office, some of
them were required to surrender themfelv * prisoners; the
tencible men throughout the kingdom were commanded to take
arms; and troops were levied, and posted, on the borders.
The Englifl ambafrador finding that neither the public mani-
fello which he had delivered to the convention, nor his private
cabals with the nobles, could excite them to arms, fled in the
night-time out of Scotland, where libels against himn had been
daily publiflhed, and even attempts made upon his lite. In
both kingdoms every thing wore an hoflile afpeet. But Lli-
zahbeth, though fle wilhed to have intimidated the Scotlifh
king by her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a

vwar
c CAld. 3. 6, Srypcr, . QG'. j. Cald. 3. 9.

war with him, and the troops on the borders, which had given Boox VL
such umbrage, were soon dispersed . -.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's '5s'-

safety, the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes
for his deftruttion. Captain Stewart his accuser was first ap-
pointed tutor to the earl of Arran, and soon after both the litle
and eflate of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced some
frivolous claim, were conferred upon him. The new-made
peer was commanded to conduct Morton from Dumbarton to
Edinburgh; and, by that choice, the earl was not only warn-
ed what fate he might expet, but rad the cruel mortification
of feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with honours, in
reward of the malice with which he had contributed to his
ruin.

TH E records of the court of jitficiary at this period are loft. He is tried

The account which our historians give of Mlorton's trial is in- and an-
accurate and unfatistacory. The whole proceedings seem to em
have been violent, irregular, and oppreilive. Arran, in order
to extort evidence, tortured several of the earl's domestics with
unusual cruelty. During the trial, great bodies of armed men
were drawn up in different parts of the ciry. The jury was
composed of the earl's known enemies; and though he chal-
lenged several of them, his objections were over-ruled. After
a short consultation, his peers found him guilty of concealing
and of being art and part in the conspiracy against the life of
the late king. The first part of the verdic did not furprize
him, but he twice repeated the words art and part with some
vehemence, and added, " God knows it is not so." The doom,
which the law decrees against a traitor, was pronounced. The
king, however, remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the
sentence, and appointed that he lhould susser death next day,
by being beheaded '-.

DURING that awful interval, Morton pofefled the utmost Hisdeli,

composure of mind. He filppedchearfully ; slept a part of
the night in his usual manner, and employed the reft of his
time in religious conferences, and in ats of devotion, with
some minillers of the city. The clergymen who attended him,
dealt freely with his conscience, and pressed his crimes home
upon him. What he confeTfed with regard to the crime for
which he luffered is remarkable, and supplies, in fonie rnea-
sure, the imperfection of our records. I-e acknowledged, that
on his return from England, after the death of Rizio, Bothwell
had informed him of the conspiracy against the king, which the
queen, as he told hin, knew of and approved; that he soli-
cited him to concur in the execution of it, which, at that
time, he absolutely declined ; that, lbon after, Bothwell him-

self,

* Crawf. Mem. 318. Strype, 2, App. 138.
t Spotfw, 314. Johns. 65. Crawff. Mc. 332. Cald. 3. 45.

BooK: VI. self, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, renewing their fuli-
'-V;-'
t citations to the lame purpose, he had required a warrant un-

'S81. dcr the queen's hand, authorising theattempt, and as that had

never been produced, he had refused to be any farther concern-
ed in the matter. " But, continued he, as 1 neither consented

to this treasonable ad, nor allitled in the committing of it,
so it was impuiible for me to reveal, or to prevent it. To
"whom could I make the discovery ? The queen was the

author of the enterprize. Darnly was such a changeling,
that no secret could be safely communicated to hinl. Hunt-

"ly and Bothwell, who bore the chief sway in the kingdom,
"were themselves the perpetrators of the crime ?" Thele
circumstances, it must be confessed, go some length towards
extenuating Morton's guilt; and though his apology tor the
favour he had Ihewn to Archibald Douglas, whom he knew to
be one of the conspirators, be far lels latisfa&ory, no uneasy
reflections seem to have disquieted his own mind on that ac-
count . When his keepers told him that the guards were at-
tending, and all things i; readiness, " I prailc my God, said
" he, I am ready likewise." Arran commanded there guards;
and even in thole moimen:s, when the most implacable hatred
is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could not forbear this
insult. On the Scaffold, his behaviour was calm ; his counte-
nance arnd voice unaltered ; and after onme time spent in de-
votion. he suffered death with the intrepidity, which became
the nae oi Douglas. His head was placed on the public
gaol of Edinburgh; and his body, after lying till s'un-set on the
scaffold, covered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by corn-
mon porters to the usual burial-place of criminals. None of
his friends durst accompany it to the grave, or discover their
gratitude and refpet by any symptoms of sorrow -.

Odious ARR AN, no less profligate in private life, than audacious in
conduc of his public conduct, soon after drew the attention of his coun-
Arran. trymen, by his infamous marriage with the countess of March.

Before he grew into favour at court, he had been often enter-
tained in her husband's house, and without regarding the laws
of hospitality or of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with
the wife of his benefactor, a woman young and beautiful, but,
according to the description of a cotemporary hiflorian, " in-
tolerable in all the impertecions, incident to her sex." Impa-
tient of any restraint upon their mutual desires, they, with
equal ardor, wiflied to avow their union publickly, and to le-
gitimate, by a marriage, the offspring of their unlawful pas-
sion. The countess petitioned to be divorced from her hus-
band, for a reason, which no modest woman will ever
July 6. plead. The judges, over-awed by Arran, pased sentence

without delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a

mar-
* Crawf, Mem, App. 3. * Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotfw, 314.

marriage, foleninized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks BooK VI.
ct men with the urioll horror *. - -

A plAR1I.1 A.M !:T v'as held this venr, at the opening of, ¶8. '

S ImLw.

which loine diCpuie'; arose betweenl Ain aIr.t tile cal now Z5.
created :ilke ot Lcnox. Arran, h:iug!ty by nature, and pull- oi. 24.
cd on by his wii'. ambuition, begean to trcnl an (.q'!lity with
the duke under wholib prorection hie I:d hiiihctto been content-
cd to place hiiir l.: Aitrcr vari(,is a;teiiip:s to orim a party
in the council ;:^ninl I.enx, lie i,;.nd him fixed fl firumly
in the kinh;': :

:iT dtion, that ii wa; iPnllule tor fl;.,ke hlin, and

rather thall oti! all initrcel at ccmii t, Iroln whichl he was banill-
ed, hte ni:le the [uintl lhunllle Il)lbilsliions :o the iavourire. and
agnin r(corercii his fornier cr.(it. 'his ruptlre contrilutcd,
however. to rirldl r t:e duke lill Ie odiou.; to tile n;ation.
During the contintance ot it, Arran a!itccd to court the cler-
gy, prcten.lkd an e> raordinary zeal lor the proteft:nt relifion,
and laboured to confirm tihe fujliicions, which were et:irt;ii-
ed of his rival, a' an cniilliry of the hcule of Gitii, ::nc a
favourer of popery. As he w.is luppol'il to be acctilninted v'itl
the duke's nioll lecret l dlign-, his c.loniinics wt re liflenedl to
with umore credit, than was due to his cl:aractcr. 'o the
fame cause, we munif alcribe several aes of parliament uncolm-
nionly favourable to the church, particularly one, .:hich abo-
lified the practice, introduced by Morton, of app-'i.;ng but
one minister to leverai parilhes.

No notice hath bccn taken for son:e years or ecclefiasiical i.cc'l a:-
ElarTrs. \\hi;e the civil government underwent so ninny ex- r-a,.
traordinary revolutions, the church was not free froim convul-
lions. '1Two otbjcd.s, chiefly, engrofled the atren-ion of' the
clergy. 'hle one was the forming a fyllein ofdifipline, or
ecclcfiaftical polity. After long labour, anld nmny di.'!u!tiee,
this was at lalt brought to some degree of per:'ecion. 'I'he as-
fenbly solemnly approved of it, and appointed it to be laid b.-
fore the privy council, in order to obtain Ilie ra'ilicaliol of' it
in parlia:ntnt But IVIrton, dining hia adisinitlra'i.n, .rid
those who, after his fall, governed the king, were e(qinly cu,-
willing to fee it carried into execution ; and by ilar;i:g ii:.i-
culties, and throwing in objectiors, prcvenled it liroo rrcri:'in':
a legal sanction ''he other point in view was the al'u;:: .
of the episcopal order. The billtops were li) devoted t I'l
king, to whom they owed their pr;ninition, that the In l"

"iii

itf-lftwas by bfoe reckoned dangelous to civil liberty. il ,;'
allowed a feat in parliament, andl dli!ingilhlied by rhl. tlills r.:
honour, these not only occasioned in:lny avoctiiorl; i'rnl :!;i:
spiritual employments, but fnon rendered their cal:lr;RAi s :nii
rianners extremely diflererit froln thliofe o(' hle cler!y iin ri
age. The nobles viewed their power with jcalouly ; ithi :o-
pulace confidered thcir lives a: proflne; aild both willieil lii ir
downfall with equal nrdour. The pcrlunal euiulaiion !'ti'..' rc'

i, i'.,vil

BoOK VI.Melvil and Adamson, a man of learning, and eminent for his
^---J popular eloquence, who was promoted, on the death of Dou-

'S581 glas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the

paflions on each fide, and heightened them. Attacks were
made, in every assembly, on the order of bishops; their privi-
leges were gradually circumscribed; and at last an as was pas-
fed, declaring the office of bilhop, as it was then exercised with-
in the realm, to have neither foundation nor warrant in the
word of God; and requiring, under pain of excommunication,
all who now poffcffed that office, instantly to resign it, and to
abstain from preaching or adminiftring the sacraments, till they
ihould receive permiflion from the assembly. The court did
not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy happening, soon as-
ter, in the fee of Glasgow, Montgomery minister at Stirling,
a man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the ble-
mifles in his charaaer, to have alienated the people from an
order already beloved, than to reconcile them to one which
was the objea of their hatred, firuck up an infamous bargain
with Lenox, and on his recommendation was chosen archbishop.
The presbytery of Stirling ot which he was a member, the pref-
bytery of Glasgow whither he was to be translated, the general
afllmbly, vied with each other in prosecuting him on that ac-
s5tz. count. In order to screen Montgomery, Janles made trial both

of gentle and of rigorous measures, and both were equally in-
effectual. The general assembly was just ready to pronounce
against him the sentence of excommunication, when an herald
entered and commanded them, in the king's name, and under
pain of rebellion, to flop further proceedings. Even this in-
jun&ion they despised. And though Montgomery, by his tears,
and teeming penitence, procured a short respite, the sentence
was at last issued by their appointment, and published in all
the churches throughout the kingdom.

THp firmness of the clergy in a colleaive body, was not

greater than the boldness of some individuals, particularly of
the ministers of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily againlt the
corruptions in the administration, and, with the freedom of
speech admitted into the pulpit in that age, named Lenox and
Arran as the chief authors of the grievances, under which he
church and kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in their turn,
complained to the king of the insolent and seditious spirit of the
clergy. In order to check the boldness of their difcourf's,
James ifiued a proclamation, commanding Dury one of the
mor popular ministers, not only to leave the town, but to al-
fRain from preaching in any other place. Dury complainec,
to the judicatories of the church, of this encroachment upon
the immunities of his office. They approved of the doetrine
which he had delivered ; and he determined to disregard the
toyal proclamation. But the magistrates being determined to

compel

compel him to leave the city, according to the king's orders, BOOK VI.
he was obliged to abandon his charge, after protetting pub- '
lickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against the violence, which '581
was put upon him. The people accompanied him to the
gates, with tears and lamentations; and the clergy denounced
the vengeance of heaven against the authors of this outrage *.

IN this perilous situation Rood the church; the authority of

its judicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit
restrained, when a sudden revolution in the civil government
procured them unexpected relief.

TH a two favourites, by their ascendant over the king, pof- His fa-

sessed uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and exercised it with vourites
the utmost wantonness. James usually relided at Dalkeith or engage
Kinneil, the feats of Lenox and of Arran, and was attended i, upo-
by fich company, and employed in such amusements, as did pular mea-
not suit his dignity. The services of those, who had contri- fureE.
buted molt to place the crown on his head, were but little re-
membered. Many who had opposed him with the greatef vi-
rulence, enjoyed the rewards and honours, to which the others
were entitled. Exalted notions of regal prerogative, utterly in-
consistent with the confliturion of Scotland, being instilled by
his favourites into the mind of the young monarch, unfortu-
nately made, at that early age, a deep impreflion there, and
became the source of almof all his subsequent errors in the
government of both kingdoms *. Courts of juflice were held * Cald. 3.
in almost every county, the proprietors of land were called be-. '5
fore them, and upon the slightest neglect of any of the nume-
rous forms, which are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were
fined with unusual and intolerable rigour. The lord chamber-
lain revived the obsolete jurifdicion of his office over the bur-
roughs, and they were fubjefted to exactions no less grievous.
A design seemed, likewise, to have been formed to exasperate
Elizabeth, and to dillolve the alliance with her, which all good
proteftantsefteemed the chief security of their religion in Scot-
land. A close correspondence was set on foot between the
king and his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the crown, by such a treaty of aflocia-
tion, as Maitland had projected; which could nor fail of en-
dangering or diminilhing his authority, and must have proved
fatal to those, who had aded against her with greatest vi-
gour t. f Cald. 3.

ALL these circumstances irritated the impatient spirit of the 5'7.

The no-

Scottish nobles, who relilved to rolerate no longer the insolence bles coo-
of the two minions, or to stand by, while their presumption spire a.
and inexperience ruined both the king and kingdom. Eliza- gainft
beth, who, during the adiiiniftration of the four regents, had thnem
the entire direction of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself de-

VOL. 1. Y prived

* Cald, Affernb. 1576--158. Spotfw. 177, &c.

BOOK VI. prived of all influence in that kingdom ever since the death of
^-_v_.s Morton, and was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue

aI51. the king out of the hands of favourites, who were leading him

into meaiures, so repugnant to all her views. The earls of
Mar and Glencairn, lord Ruthven, lately created earl of Gow-
rie, lord Lindsay, lord Boyd, the tutor of Glamis, the mafier
of Oliphant, with several barons and gentlemen of diftinEtion,
entered into a combination for that purpose; and as changes
in administration, which, among poliihed nations, are brought
about slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
rude age effected suddenly and by violence, the king's fiiua-
tion, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the con-
fpirators to have immediate recourse to force.

Seize the JAMES, after having resided for some time in Athole, where
king's per- he enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now re-
ftoae at turning towards Edinburgh, with a small train. He was in-

vited to Ruthven-caftle, which lay in his way; and as he sus-
peted no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport.
Aug, 22. The multitude of firangers whom he found there gave him

some uneasiness; and as those who were in the secret arrived
every moment from different parts, the appearance of so many
new faces increased his fears. He concealed his uneasiness,
however, with the utmost care; and next morning prepared
for the field, expefting to find there some opportunity of mak-
ing his escape. But jus as he was ready to depart, the no-
bles entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented a memo-
rial against the illegal and oppressive aitons of his two fa-
vourites, whom they represented as mos dangerous enemies to
the religion and liberties of the nation. James, though he
received this remonfirance with the complaisance which was
neceflary in his present situation, was extremely impatient to
be gone; but as he approached the door of the apartment,
the tutor of Glamis rudely fopped him. The king complain-
ed, expoflulated, threatned, and finding all there without es-
fee, burst into tears. " No matter, said Glamis fiercely, bet-
" ter children weep than bearded men." These words made
a deep impreflion on the king's mind, and were never forgotten.
The conspirators, without regarding his tears or indignation,
dismissed such of his followers as they fufpeaed ; allowed none
but their own party to have access to him; and though they
treated him with great refpec, guarded his person with the
utmost care. This enterprize is usually called, by our hifto-
rians. The raid of Ruilhen w.

Coinmit LENox and Arran were afloniflied to the last degree at an
Arran to event so unexpected, and so fatal to their power. The former
priobn. endeavoured, but without success, to excite the inhabitants ot

Edinburgh to take arms, in order to rescue their sovereign front

cap-
* Cald. 3. 134. Spotfw 310. Melv. 357.

# PREFACE.

PR E F A C E.
IDeliver this book to the world with all the dif-

fidence and anxiety natural to an Author on

publishing his first performance. The time I have
employed, and the pains I have taken, in order to
render it worthy of the public approbation, it is,
perhaps, prudent to conceal, till it be known
whether that approbation ihall ever be bestowed
upon it.

BUT, as I have departed, in many instances,

from former Historians, as I have placed facts in
a different light, and have drawn characters with
new colours, I ought to account for this conduct to
my readers; and to produce the evidence, on which,
at the distance of two centuries, I presume to con-
tradie the testimony of less remote, or even of co-
temporary historians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rire to

two parties, which were animated against each other
with the fiercest political hatred, embittered by re-
ligious zeal. Each of there produced historians of
considerable merit, who adopted all their senti-
ments, and defended all their actions. Truth was
not the sole object of these authors. Blinded by
prejudices, and heated by the part which they
themselves had acted in the scenes they describe,
they wrote an apology for a faction, rather than
the history of their country. SucceedingHiftorians
have followed these guides almott implicitly, and
have repeated their errors end misrepresentations.
But as the fame paflions which inflamed parties in
that age have descended to their posterity; as al-
molt every event in Mary's reign has become the
object of doubt or of dispute; the eager spirit of
controversy soon discovered, that without some evi-
dence more authentic and more impartial than that
of Historians, none of the points in question could

A z be

be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, 'original papers have been pro-
duced, and public archives, as well as the repofi-
tories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties.
The attention of Cecil to colled whatever related
to that period, in which he acded so conspicuous a
part, hath provided such an immense store of ori-
ginal papers for illutrating this part of the English
and Scottish history, as are almost sufficient to fa-
tisfy the utmost avidity of an antiquarian Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whose library is now the property of
the public) made great and valuable additions to
Cecil's collection ; and from this magazine, Digges,
the compilers of the Cabala, Anderson, Keith,
Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most of the papers
which they have printed. No History of Scotland,
that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
since there collections were published. By con-
fulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
fiances, to correct the inaccuracies of former His-
torians, to avoid their mirtakes, and to detect their
misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the

notice of those indutrious Collectors, and after all
they have produced to light, much flill remained
in darkness, unobserved or unpublished. It was
my duty to search for these, and I found this un-
pleasant task attended with considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of Advo-

cates at Edinburgh, contains not only a large col-
lection of original papers relating to the affairs of
Scotland, but copies of others no less curious, which
have been preserved by Sir Robert Cotton, or are
extant in the public offices in England. Of all there,
the Curators of that library were pleated to allow
me the perusal.

THOUGH the British Mufaeum be not yet open
to the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition

is

to. the memory of Lenox, but set his own character itone of Boot VI.
the most favourable points of view. y-

.THe luccefs of the conspiracy, which deprived James of IS8a.

liberty, made great noise over all Europe ;.and at last reached Mary's
the ears of Mary in the prison: to which.lhe was confined. . As. b,:her
her own experience hid taught her what. injuries a captive frn.
prince is exposed to susser; and as many .of those,; who. were
now concerned in the enterprize against herTon, were the fame
persons whom ihe confidered as the chief authors: of her own
misfortunes, it was natural for the tenderness of a mother to
apprehend that the fame calamities were ready to fall. on his
head; and such a profpet did not fail of adding to. the difiref
and horror of her own situation. In the anguilh of her heart,
she wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bitteref: terms of
the unprecedented rigour, with which she herself had been
treated, and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the mercy
of his rebellious. fubjets ; nor permit him: to be involved in
the fame misfortunes under which fhe.had o 'long groaned.
The peculiar vigour and acrimony of.ftile, for which this letter.
is remarkable, discover both the high spirit of the Scottilh queen,
unfubdued by her sufferings, and the violence. of her indigna-
tion at Elizabeth's artifices and' severity. But it was ill adapted
to gain the end she had in view, and accordingly it neither pro-
cured any mitigation of the rigour of her own 'confinement, or
any interposition in favour of the king.*.

HE NRY III. who, though he feared and hated the princes rS13.

of Guise, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed Ambffa-
with warmth, in order to extricate.James out of the hands of dors arrive

from

a party so entirely devoted to the English interest. He com- France and
manded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambaflador at the court of England.
England, to repair to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmoRt
endeavours towards placing James in a situation, more suitable
tO his dignity. As Elizabeth could not, with decency, refuse
him liberty to execute this commiflion, she appointed Davison
to attend him into Scotland as her envoy, under colour of con-
curring with him in the negotiation, but, in reality, to be a spy
upon his motions, and to obstruct his success. James, whore
title to the crown had not hitherto been recognized by any of
the princes on. the continent, was extremely fond of fucl an
honourable embassy from the French. monarch; and, on that
account, as well as for the fake of the errand on which he
came, received Penelon with great respect. The nobles, in January 7.
whose power the king was, did not relill this interpofriion of
the French court, which had long loft its ancient influence over
the'affairs ot Scotland. The.clergy were a;armed at the dan-
ger to which religion would be exposed, if the princes of
Guise should recover any ascendant over the public councils.

And
* Cmd. 489.

Booa VI..And thotgh the king tried. every method for reliaining them

s--.v"-J ithin the bounds of decency, they declaimcd:againft the court
j55,8 of France, agaifit thepiices of GQife, a*ainfl the ambafador,

againfi the entering.into ayualliance with fuchnotorious perse-
cutors of the church of God, with. a vehemence, which no
regular governmeit would now tolerate, but-which was then
extremely common. t.The ambafiador, watched by Davison,
diftiufted by the nobles, and expotfd to the insults of the cler-
gy, and of the people, returned into England without procur-
ing any change inthe king's situation, or receiving any answer
to a proposal which he made, that the government should be
cardied on in the joint names of James, and the.. queen. his mo-
ther*.

James e-. MA.NWHILE, James, though he difembled *ith great art,
capes out became. every day more uneasy under his confinement; hisun-
of the s easiness rendered him.coritinually attentive to -find out :a proper
hands of
the con- opprtuniy for :nking his:efcape; and to tis:attention, he at
fpirators. lait-owed his.libert5 whichthe king of. France- was not able,

northequen.of Eanglaidwilling, to procure for'him. As the
confpi.ators had forcedf.: enox out of the kingdom, and kept
Arra at a ditance' fromr court, they grew secure; and ima-
ging tahat time hadl ecoqciled the king to them,. and to his
fitalion, they witched him with. little care-. Some occasions
ofdifcord had arisen amodrithemfelves.;and the French .am-
baffador, by fomenting these, during the time :of hisrefidence
in Scotland, had: .w t ned. the union,: in. which..aone their

f. Ceam. safety confifedt: CoEonel'.Wilb'at-rSterarti:the commander
4.Z' of the band of.gentlemen;,whcrgunrded the king's perfon,-b.ing

.- gained by James;: 1had'ihe'principal nierit in'the fchetne foe. re-

storing his nafter dto itberty; Uoder'retence of paying a vfilt
June 27. to the earl of March .hie grand unct4;i.Janes was permitted to

gofrom Falkland to Si. Andiew'sr' 'hati ihe' might not create
any suspicion, he lodged, a:firft. inl .a dpen defericelefs.houfe
in the town, but pretending a cutidirty ..r:c ee the castle, no
sooner was he entered with ,lome of his. attendan's whom he
cQuld trust, than colonel: Stewaitcomrmanded.the gates to be
Ibut, and excluded.all.'tlhereeof bis. rain, .Next morning the
earls of Argyfl,. Huntly, Crawford, M4ontrose,. Rothes,. with
others to whom the.fecrer had. beencommunoicated, .entereld tihe
town with their follwers; and chough Mar,..with. several of
the leaders of the fanion, appeated. in armis, they found them-
selves so far out numbered,. Ihat'it waa invain. to think of re-
'corerihg pofltlliow of;:the king's perfon'i vhbich had been in
their power fonewlha liongdr thai, ten olonthi;. Janes wes *na-
turally of so soft and dulile a temliper,. hat thofi who.wele
near h.iu person, commonly made a. detp iripriixoh on his heart,
which was formed to be under the sway of favourites. As he

remained
Cild, 3. o07. Sp9Lfw. 314. Se Append. No. VIII.

captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity, mountedBooK VI.
on horseback the moment he heard what had befallen the king, '-.
and, with a few followers, rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and '58.
as a considerable body of the conspirators, under the command
of the earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose him, he fe-
parared himself from his companions, and with two attendants
arrived at the gate of the castle. At the fight of a man so odi-
ous to his country, the indignation of the conspirators rose, and
inlfant death muff have been the punishment of his rashness,
if the friendship of Gowrie, or some other caule not explained
by our hiltorians, had not saved a life, so pernicious to the
kingdom. He was confined, however, to the catle of Stirling,
without being admitted into the king's presence.

THE king, though really the prisoner of his own fubjeEts, Command

with whose conduc he could not help difcoveting many fymp- Lenx to
toms of disgust, was obliged to publilh a proclamation, signify- lingdom.
ing his approbation of their enterprize, declaring that he him-
self was at full liberty, without any restraint or violence offered
to his person; and forbidding any attempt against those concern-
ed in the Raid of Ruthven, under pretence of rescuing him out
of their hands. At the fame time, he commanded Lenox to Aug. 28.
leave Scotland before the zoth of September t.

So ON after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as am- The coa-

bafradors from Elizabeth. The pretext of their embafTy was rpirators
to inquire after the king's safety ; to encourage and countenance counte-
the conspirators was the real motive of it. By their intercef- Elabeth.
lion, the earl of Angus, who, ever since the death of his uncle
Morton, had lived in exile, obtained leave to return. And the
accession of a nobleman so powerful and so popular strengthened
the faction . · Cald. 3.

L Nox, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured 'S1

him many friends, and who received private aflurances that the
king's favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed re-
solved, at first, to pay no regard to a command, extorted, by
violence, and no less disagreeable to James, than it was rigo-
rous with regard to himself. But the power of his enemies,
who were matlers of the king's person, who were secretly sup-
ported by Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the clergy, de-
terred him from an enterprize, the fuccefa of which was dubi-
ous, and the danger certain both to himself, and to his fove-
reign. He put off the time of his departure, however, by va-
rious artifices, in expetation either that James might make his
escape from the conspirators, or that fortune might present
some more favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely felici-

tous not only to secure the approbation of their countrymen,
but to obtain some legal fantion of their enterprize. For this

Y z purpose,
+ Cold. 3. i35, i3».

BOOK VI. pose, they published a long declaration, containing the mo-
--v--'t lives which had induced them to venture on such an irregular

s8-a. siep, and endeavoured to heighten the public indignation

condet againRt the favourites, by representing in the flrongeft colours,
approved their inexperience and insolence, their contempt to the nobles,
by an if- their violation of the privileges of the church, and their op-
fembly pression of the people. They obliged the king, who could not
and * Cos- with fafery refuse any of their demands, to grant them a re-
cRnttes. miflion in the most ample form; and not satisfied with that,

they applied to the assembly of the church, and easily procured
Oft. 13. an ac, declaring, " that they had done good and acceptable

service to God, to their sovereign, and to their native coun-
try " and requiring all sincere protestants to concur with them
in carrying forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add
the greater weight to this aft, every minister was enjoined to
read it, in his own pulpit, and to inflict the censures of the
church on those who set thenfelves in opposition to so good a
cause. A convention of eltates, aflembled a few days after,
passed an act to the fame effect, and granted full indemnity to
the conspirators for every thing they had done *'

Lenox's JAMES was conducted by them, sirs to Stirling, and after-
departure wards to the palace of Haly-rudhoufe; and though he was re-
frdm Scot- ceived every where with the external marks of refpec due to

his dignity, his motions were carefully observed, and he was
under a restraint no less trict, than at the first moment when he
was seized by the conspirators. Lenox, after eluding many
commands to depart out of the kingdom, was at las obliged to
begin his journey. He lingered, however, for some time in
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had fill intended to
make one effort towards restoring the king to liberty. But ei-
ther from the gentleness of his own disposition, averse to blood-
shed and the disorders of civil war, or from some other cause,
Dec. 30. unknown to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for

France, by the way of England. The king issued the order for
his departure, with no less reluctance than the duke obeyed it.
And .both mourned a separation, which neither of them had
power to prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguish of his mind, threw him in-
to a fever. In his lat moments, he discovered such a firm ad-
herence to the protestant faith, as fully vindicates his memory
from the imputation of an attachment to popery, with which he
had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland t. As he was the
earliest, and bed beloved, he was, perhaps, the mot deferv-
ing, though not the most able of all James's favourites. The
warmth and tenderness of his maRlr's affection for him was not
abated by death itself By many a&s of kindness and genero-
fity towards his posterity, the king not only did great honour

to
* Cald. 3. 177, 187, 0o. Spotfv. 3P1. f Spotfw. 324.

fentation of his abilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, BooK VI.
henceforward, with more decency and refpecó .
".

EL Z A BE T H'seagernefs to protect the conspirators render- XS.3-

ed James more violent in his proceedings againfi them. As
they had all refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms which
he had offered, they were required, by a new proclamation,
to surrender themselves prisoners. The earl of Angus alone
complied; the reft either fled into England, or obtained the
king's license to retire into foreign parts. A convention of
estates was held, the members of which, deceived by an un-
worthy artifice of Arran's, declared those concerned in the
Raid of Ruthen to have been guilty of high treason; appointed
the act pased last year approving of their conduct to beex-
punged out of the records; and engaged to support the king
in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmof rigour of law.

TH E confpiratcrs. though far from having done any thing

that was uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous no-
bles, and under an unsettled state of government, must be ac-
knowledged to have been guilty of an at of treason against their
sovereign; and James, who confidered their conduct in this
light, had good reason to boar of his clemency, when he offer-
ed to pardon them, upon their confefling their crime. But,
on the other hand, it must be allowed that, after the king's vo-
luntary promise of a general oblivion, they had some reason to
complain of breach of faith, and could not, without the molt
unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in Arran's
power.

TNe interest of the church was considerably affected by these 584.

contrary revolutions. While the conspirators kept poffefion of The clerg
power, the clergy not only recovered, but extended their pri- ovpir the
vileges. As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to betors, and
unlawful, they took tome bold measures towards exterminating irritate the
the episcopal order out of the church; and it was owingking.
more to Adamson's dex'eriy in perplexing and lengthening out
the process for that purpose, than to their own want of zeal,
that they did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate all the
bishops in Scotland. When the king recovered his liberty,
things put on a very different aspea. The favour bellowed
upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent and sacred, and
the rigorous prosecution of those nobles who had been the mos
zealous defenders of the protestant cause, were confidered as
sure presages of the approaching ruin of the church. The
clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this
impending danger in silence. Drury, who had been restored to
his office as one of the ministers of Edinburgh, openly applaud-
ed the Raid of Ruthuen in the pulpit, at which the king was so
enraged, that, notwithstanding some symptoms of his fubmiflion,

' Mlv. g3, Cll.3. 58, Jebb.'. h6.e

Melv. t93. Cald, 3. Z58, Jebb. z. 36.

BooK VI. pose, they published a long declaration, containing the mo-
.t-v,.-'tives which had induced them to venture on such an irregular

'58a . fRep, and endeavoured to heighten the public indignation

Thedir against the favourites, by representing in the firongeR colours,
approved their inexperience and infotence, their contempt to the nobles,
by an as. their violation of the privileges of the church, and their op-
fembly preflion of the people. They obliged the king, who could not
and a cos- with safety refuse any of their demands, to grant them a re-
eRstes. miflion in the most ample form.; and not satisfied with that,

they applied to the assembly of the church, and easily procured
Oft. 13. an at, declaring, "that they had done good and acceptable

service to God, to their sovereign, and to their native coun-
try ;" and requiring all sincere protestants to concur with them
in carrying forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add
the greater weight to this aft, every minister was enjoined to
read it, in his own pulpit, and to inflict the censures of the
church on those who set themselves in oppofirion to so good a
cause. A convention of estates, afiembled a few days .after,
passed an aft to the fame effect, and granted full indemnity to
the conspirators for every thing they had done *.

Lenox's JAMES was conducted by them, sirs to Stirling, and after-
departure wards to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe ; and though he was re-
from Scot- ceived every where with the external marks of refpeEt due to

his dignity, his motions were carefully observed, and he was
under a restraint no Ilefs frift, than at the first moment when he
was seized by the conspirators. Lenox, after eluding many
commands to depart out of the kingdom, was at lad obliged to
begin his journey. He lingered, however, for some time in
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had fill intended to
make one effort towards restoring the king to liberty. But ei-
ther from the gentleness of his own disposition, averse to blood-
Thed and the disorders of civil war, or from some other cause,
Dec. 3Q. unknown to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for

France, by the way of England. The king issued the order for
his departure, with no less reluctance than the duke obeyed it.
And .both mourned a separation, which neither of them had
power to prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguilh of his mind, threw him in-
to a fever. In his las moments, he discovered such a firm ad-
herence to the protestant faith, as fully vindicates his memory
from the imputation of an attachment to popery, with which he
had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland+ . As he was the
earliest, and bed beloved, he was, perhaps, the moR deferv-
ing, though not the most able of all James's favourites. The
warmth and tenderness of his maser's affection for him was not
abated by death itfeif. By many aDs of kindness and genero-
fity towards his posterity, the king not only did great honour

to
* Cald. 317, 7, t87, %qo. Spotfw, 311. s Spotfw. 324.

fentation of his abilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, BooK Vr.
henceforward, with more decency and refpeEl *.

ELIZAaETH's eagerness to protet the conspirators render- 15S3.

ed James more violent in his proceedings against them. As
they had all refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms which
hie had offered, they were required, by a new proclamation,
to'furrender themleives prisoners. The earl of Angus alone
complied; the reft either fled into England, or obtained the
king's license to retire into foreign parts. A convention of
eflates was held, the members of which, deceived by an un-
worthy artifice'of Arran's, declared those concerned in the
Raid of Ruthen to have been guilty of high trearon ; appointed
the act pafled last year approving of their condut to be ex-
punged out of the records; and engaged to support the king
in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmoit rigour of law.

TH E conspirators, though far from having done any thing

that was uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous no-
bles, and under an unsettled tate of government, muf be ac-
knowledged to have been guilty of an aft of treason against their
sovereign.; and James, who confidered their condut in this
light, had good reason to boast of his clemency, when he offer-
ed to pardon them, upon their confefling their crime. But,
on the other hand, it mud be allowed that, after the king's vo-
luntary promise ofa general oblivion, they bad some reason to
complain of breach of faith, and could not, without the mod
unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in Arran's
power.

THE interest of the church was conliderably affected by there SS84.

contrary revolutions. While the conspirators kept poTeflion of The clergy
power, the clergy not only recovered, but extended their pri- corpairar
vileges. As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to betors, and
unlawful, they took Iome bold measures towards exterminating irritate the
the episcopal order out of the church; and it was owingking.
more to Adainfon's dex'eriy in' perplexing and lengthening out
the process for that purpose, than to their own want of zeal,
that they did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate all the
bishops in Scotland. When the king recovered his liberty,
things put on a very different aspea. The favour bestowed
upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent and sacred, and
the rigorous prosecution of those nobles who had been the molt
zealous defenders of the protestant cause, were confidered as
sure presages of the approaching ruin of the c'hurch. The
clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this
impending danger in silence. Drury, who had been restored to
his office as one of the minifers of Edinburgh, openly applaud-
ed the Raidof Ruthavn in the pulpit, at which the king was so
enraged, that, notwithstanding some symptoms of his fubmifion,

e Melv. 593. Cald. 3. 58. Jebb, i. ;36.

Boot Vi-he commanded him to efign his charge in the city. Mr. An-

- ,-, drew Melvil, being ummoned before the privy council to an-
JSS4 ,fwer ser for the doctrine he had uttered in a fernion at St. An-

drew's, and accused of comparing the present grievances of the
nation with those under James 1II. and of intimating obliquely
that they ought to be redrefted in the fame manner, thought it
incumbent on him to- behave with greater firmness. He de-
clined the jurifdialion of a civil court, in a cause which he
maintained to be purely eccleiaftical ; the prelbytery of which
he was a member had, As he contended, the sole right to call
him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and neither
the king nor council could judge, in the first instance, of the
doarine delivered by preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the church. This exemption from civil jurifdition was
a privilege, which the popifi ecclefiatics, admirable judges of
whatever contributed to increase the lufre or power of their
body, had long Rfruggled for, and had at last, obained. If the
fame plea had now been admitted, the protestant clergy would
have become independent on the civil magifirate; and an order
of men extremely useful to society while they inculcate those
duties which tend to promote, its happiness and tranquillity,
might have become no less pernicious by teaching, without fear
or controul, the molt dangerous principles, or by exciting their
hearers to the moR desperate and lawlefa actions. The king
jealous to excess of his prerogative, was alarmed at this daring
encroachment on it; and as Melvil, by his learning and zeal,
had acquired the reputation and authority of head of'the
party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour which that
pre-eminence rendered necefiary, and to discourage, by a time-
ly severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim. Melvil,
however, avoided his rage, by flying into England ; and the
pulpits resounded with complaints that the king had extinguish-
ed the light of learning in the kingdom, and deprived the
church of the ablest and mod faithful guardian of its liberties
and discipline .

THRE s violent declamations of the clergy, against the mea-

fures of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people.
The conspirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still pof-
fefled great influence there; and as they had every thing to
fear from the resentment of a young prince, irritated by the fu-
rious counfelsof Arran, they never ceased foliciling their adhe-
rents to take arms in their defence. Gowrie, the only person
tamong, them who had.fubmitted to the king, and accepted of a
pardon, soon repented of a flep, which loft him the esteem of
one party, without gaining the confidence of the other ; and,
after fuffeting many mortifications from the king's neglet, and
the haughtiness of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave

Scotland,
* Spocfw 330. Culd, 3. 304.

Reained implacable and unreconciled to the conspirators, dur- BooK VI.
ing so long a time, and at a period of life when resentment are -
rather violent than lasing, they mut either have improved the 1583.
opportunities of' ifiiuaring thcmfelves into favour with little
dexterity, or the indignation, with which this sirs insult to
his person and authority filled him, 'must have been very great.
::HIs, joy at his escape was youthful and exceflive. He re- Refo'lv
solved, however, by the advice .of Sir James Melvil, and his however,
wisest counsellors, to aCt with the utmost moderation. Hav- t weith
ing called, into his presence, the leaders of both faction, the moderation.
neighbouring gentry, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs,
the ministers, and. the, heads of colleges, he declared, that al-
though he had been held under restraint for some time by vio-
lence, he would not impute that as a crime to any man* but
without remembering the irregularities, which had been so fre-
quent during his minority, would pats a general at of oblivion,
and govern all his fu bjcts with distinguishing and equal affeti-
on. And as an evidence of his sincerity, he visited the earl of
Gowre at Ruthven castle, and granted him a full pardon of
any guilt he had contrated, by the crime committed in that
very place. .. . .. Melv,

U BT James ,did not adhere long to this prudent and mode-. 71.

rate plan. . His. former favourite, the earl. of Arran, had been But Arr.
permitted for rfme time to reside at Kinneil, one of his country fcgentd'·
(eats. As so.on, as, the king felt himself at liberty, his love for over him,
.im beganto revive, and he expreflid a firong desire to fee him.
The courtiers violently opposed the return of a minion, whose
insolent and over-bearing temper they dreaded, as much as the
nation deteRied his. crimes. James, however, continued his
impor.tunity, and promising that he. should continue with him
no longer than.one. day, they were obliged to yield. This in-
!erview -rekindled ncient affection ; the king forgot his pro-
mise; Arran regained his ascendant over him;. and within a
few.days refumed.the exercise of power, with all the arrogance
of an urdeferying favourite, and all the ralhnefs peculiar to
:himself*. .

Ta firit effect of his influence was a proclamation with and the

regard to those concerned in the Raid ofRuth/ven. They were king pur-
.equired to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner; rue anno-
and tlhe king pronmted to grant theni a full pardon, providedl
their future conduct were such, as did not oblige him to remem-
:her pail miscarriages. The tenor of this proclamation was ex-
tremely different trom the at of oblivion, which the confpi-
.ators had. been encouraged to expect. Nor did any of them
reckon it. ate to rely on a promise, clogged with such an equi-
vocal condition, and granted by a young prince, under the do.
minion of a, nlinitfler void of faith, regardless of decency, and

transported
* Melv. t74.

BoOr VI. transported by the desire of revenge', even'beyond the usual fe-'
- v --' -rocity of his temper. Many of the leaders, who had at first

:S83· appeared only at court, retired to their own houses'; and fore-

feeing the dangerous .form which was gathering, began to
lookout for a retreat in foreign countries A.

Eli».- ELIZABETH, who had all along proteted the conspirators,
bath's so- was extremely difgnfted with measures which tended so vilibly
in behalf to their deftrudion, and wrote to the king a harfh'and haughty
ofthe con- letter, reproaching him in a Rile, very uncommon among
iirators. princes, with breach:offaith in recalling Arran to court, and
Aagift 7. with imprudence in proceeding so rigorously against his best and

moal fairhtul fubjetts. James, with a becomingdignity, re-
plied, that promises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
out of fear, were no longer binding, when these were re-
moved; that it belonged to him alone to choose what ministers
he would employ in his lervice ; and that though he re'solved
to treat the conspirators at Ruthver with.the Utmbft clemency,
it was neceflary, for the support of his authority, that fuich an

* Melv. insult on his person Ihould not 'pass altogether uncenfured '.
*79. ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by Walfitgham
Waifing- her secretary, whom flIe appointed her ambassador to James,
barn's em- and who appeared in the Scottish court, with a splendor and
tiffy into magnificence, well calculated to please and dazzle a young
&olanda. prince. Walsingham was admitted to several conferences with

with James himself, in which he inlified on the fame topics
contained in the letter, and the king repeated his'former an-
fwers.

AFTER suffering several indignities, from the arrogance of

Arran, and his creatures, he returned to England, without
concluding any new treaty with the king. Walsingham was,
next to Burleigh, the minifler on whom the chief weight of
the English adminifiration refled; and when a person of his
rank, itept so far out of the ordinary road of business, as to un-
dertake a long journey, in his old age, and under a declining
Rtate ofhealth, some affair of consequence was supposed to be
the cause, or some important event was expeted to be the
effect of this measure. But as nothing conspicuous either oc-
cafioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable that Elizabeth
had no other intention in employing this sagacious minifRer than
to discover, with exactness, the capacity and disposition of the
Scottifl king, who was now arrived at a time of life, when,
with some degree of certainty, conjetures might be fomned
concerning hischarafter, and future conduct. As James pof-
sessed talents of that kind, which make a better figure in con-
verfation, than in action, he gained a great deal by this inter-
view with the Englifl secretary, who, notwithflanding the
cold reception he met with, gave such an advantageous repre-

fentation
1 Melv, a. Spotfw, 3X6. CAld, 3. 330.

is well known, procured me access to that noble
collecion, which is worthy the magnificence of a
great and polished nation.

THAT vast and curious colletion of papers re-

lating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made
by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he published only two
volumes, having been purchaled since his death,
by the lord viscount Royfton, his lordship was so
good as to allow me the use of fourteen Volumes
in Quarto, containing that part of them which is
connected with my subjeCt.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very

valuable collection of original papers, in two large
Volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with archbishop Spots-
wood's hand; and it appears from several passages
in his history, that he had perused them with great
attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent presbyterian cler-

gyman of the last century, compiled an History of
Scotland from the beginning of the reign of James
V. to the death of James VI. in fix large Volumes;
wherein he has inifrted many papers of confe-
quence, which are no where elle to be found. A
copy of this history, which fill remains in manu-
script, in the poffefion of the Church of Scotland,
was put into my hands by my worthy friend the
Reverend Mr. George Wifhart, principal clerk of
the church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to

me the papers which he has collected relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy; but by explaining to me his
sentiments with regard to that problematical pas-
sage in the Scottilh history, has enabled me to
place that tranfadion in a light which dispels much
of the darkness and confusion in which it has been
hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments
with regard to the condud and charadter of queen

Mary

Mary to be extremely different from his own,com-
municated to me a volume of manuscripts in his
pofleflion, which contains a great number of valua-
ble papers copied from the originals in the Cottoni-
an Library and Paper Office, by the late Reverend
Mr. Crawford, Regius Professor of Church History
in the University of Edinburgh. I likewise receiv-
ed from him the original Register of letters kept by
the Regent Lenox during his administration.

I HAVE consulted all there papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any utf, towards illuftrat-
ing that period of which I write the history. With
what success I have employed them to confirm what
was already known, to ascertain what was dubious,
or to determine what was controverted, the public
must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different

repositories to which I had access, as many papers
as would have rendered my Appendix equal in size
to the most bulky colletion of my predecessors.
But I have satisfied myself with publishing a few
of the most curious among them, to which I found
it neceflary to appeal as vouchers for my own vera-
city. None of these, as far as I can recolled, ever
appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Dif-

fertation concerning the murder of King Henry, and
the genuineness of the ,ueen's letters to Bothwell.
The facts and observations which relate to Mary's
letters, I owe to my friend Mr. John Davidson,
one of the Clerks to the Signet, who hath examined
this point with his usual acuteness and industry.

THE

Scotland, and to reside in France. While he waited at Dundee Boox VI.
for an opportunity to embark, he was informed that the earls '-*
of Angus, Mar, and the tutor of Glamis, had concerted a i84.
scheme for surprising the castle of Stirling. In his situation,
little persuasion was necessary to draw him to engage in it. Un-
der various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay ready to
take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the execu-
tion of their enterprize. His lingering so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the
court, proved fatal to hiifelf, and disappointed the success of
the conlpiracy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house
where he lodged with a body ot soldiers, and, in spite of his
refinance, took him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar,
and Glanlis, seized the castle of Stirling, and erecting their
flandard there, publifled a manifesto declaring that they took
arms for no other reason, but to remove, from the king's pre-
fence, a minion, who had acquired power by the mod unwor-
thy acions, and who exercised it with the mod intolerable in-
folence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment (truck a
damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to treachery on his
part, and suspected that, as be had formerly deserted, he had
now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fum of money, with
which Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly
paid, and their friends and vaflals coming in slowly, they ap-
peared irresolute and diiheartened; and as the king, who aaed
with great vigour, advanced towards them at the head of
20,000 men, they fled precipitately towards England, and with
difficulty made their escape . This rafl and feeble attempt
produced such effects, as usually follow disappointed confpira-
cies. It not only hurt the cause, for which it was undertaken,
.but added strength and reputation to the king; confirmed Ar-
ran's power ; and enabled them to pursue their measures with
more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie was the firtl vic-
tim of their resentment. After a very informal trial, a jury of
peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publickly be-
headed at Stirling.

To humble the church was the king's next itep. But as it May sa.

became necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the le- A parti-
giflative authority, a parliament was hastily summoned j and ment held.
while so many of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom,
or forbidden to appear in the king's presence; while Arran's
haughtiness kept sole at a diltance, and intimidated others;
the meeting consisted only of those, who were absolutely at the
devotion of the court. In order to conceal the laws which were Severe
framing from the knowledge of the clergy, the lords of the ar- lws a-
ticles were sworn to secrecy ; and when some of the ministers, gaint the
who either furpected, or were informed of the danger, deputed church

one
* Home's His of Hoire of Dougl. 376. Spotfw. 330.

BooK VI.-one of their number to declare their apprehensions to the king,
'---_ _ he was seized at the palace-gate, and carried to a distant prison.

c 84. Others, attempting to enter the parliament-houe, were refued
May 2* admittance * and such laws were pfaied, as totally overturned

the conflitution and discipline of the church. The refusing to
acknowledge the jurisdiction of the privy council; the pretend-
ing an exemption from the authority of the civil courts; the
attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of any of the
three estates in. parliament, were declared to be high treason.
The holding afiemblies, whther civil, or ecclesiastical, with-
out the king's per onor appointment the

s o uttering, either

privately, or publickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any
false and scandalous reports against the king, his ancestors, or
minifiers, were pronounced capital crimes t.

WH E N these laws were published at the cross of Edinburgh,

according to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont, minifier of
St. Cuthbert's, and one of the lords of (efflon, solemnly pro-
tefled against them, in the name of his brethren, because they
had been passed without the knowledge or content of the
church. Ever since the reformation, the pulpits and ecclesias-
tical judicatories had both been esteemed sacred. In the for-
mer, the clergy had been accustom.ed to censure, and admo-
nilh, with unbounded liberty. In the latter, they exercised an
uncontrouled and independen jurifdidion. The blow was now
aimed at both there privileges. These new flatutes were calcu-
lated to render churchmen as inconsiderable as they were indi-
gent; and as the avarice of the nobles had dfripped them of the
wealth, the king's ambition was about to deprive them of the
power which once belonged to their order. No wonder the
alarm was universal, and the complaints loud. All the mini-
fiers of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and fled into England.
The mos eminent clergymen, throughout the kingdom, imi-
tated their example. Desolation and aftonilhment appeared in
every part of the Scottish church; the people bewailed the loss
of pators, whom they esteemed ; and full ofconfternation, at
an event so unexpected, openly expressed their rage against Ar-
ran, and began to fufpet the king himself to be an enemy to
the reformed religion :.

· Cald. 3. 36. Parl. 8. Jac. VL. t Spotfw. 333.

END OF THE FIRST VOL
