T H E
H

I S

T

0

R

Y$

F
SCOTLAND.

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y and of King

JAMES

VI.

TILL
His Acc ES ION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTCH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS,

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

Minister of LADY YESTE'R'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.
THE SECOND EDITION.

L ONDO N:
Printed for

A. M L r, A R, in the Strand.

MDCCLIX.

___I

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VI.

PE

H I S T O R.Y
SCO T L A N D.

BOOK VL

THE unexpe&ed blow, by which the Regent fell, ifruck Boo VI.
the King's party with the utmotf consternation. Eliza- 'J

1570.
beth bewailed his death as the most fatal disaster, which Disorders oc-

casloned by

could have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a degree the Regent',
that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, death
her restoration were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who expressed such
indecent joy at the commission of it. And as the assassin made his
escape on a horse, which belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and
fled diredly to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it
was concluded that the Regent had fallen a facrifite to the resent-
ment of the Queen's party, rather than to the revenge of a private
man. On the day after the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker
'of Ferniherit, both zealous abettors of the Qeen's cause, entered

VOL. IL B England

Book VI. England in an hostile manner, and plundered and burnt the coun-

57 try, the inhabitants of which expected no such outrage. If the

Regent had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on- such
an irregular incursion, nor could it well have happened so soon after
his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the Regent's death gave occasion. During such general
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excesses of every kind. As it was impossible to restrain these, with-

Steps taken out a fettled form of government, a Convention of the nobles
towards elet-
ing another was held, in order to deliberate concerning the election of a Re-
EReent gent. The Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meeting,

and protested against its proceedings. The King's own party was
irresolute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had
set at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then aembled
a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had been laid to
his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the two par-
ties, by proposing to admit the Queen to the joint administration of
government with her son. Elizabeth adhered to her ancient system
with regard to Scottifl affairs, and notwithstanding the follicitations
of Mary's adherents '*, laboured to multiply, and to perpetuate the
factions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom fie
despatched into Scotland on the first news of the Regent's death,
and who was her ufal agent for such services, found all parties so
exafpcrated by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcilable rancour,
that it cost him little trouble to inflame their discord. The Conven-
tion broke up without coming to any agreement; and a new meet-
ing, to which the nobles of r.ll parties were invited, was appointed
on the first of May -.

* See Appcnd. N0. 1.

t Crawf. Mcmn. 131. Caldcrw, z. 157.

MEAND

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still continued to ac- Book VI.

knowledge the King's authority, were at the utmost pains to restore 57
some degree of harmony among their countrymen. They procured, A coalition of

parties at-

for this purpose, an amicable conference among the leaders of the tempted in
two fations. But while the one demanded the restoration of the
Queen, as the only thing which could re-eflablifh the public tran-
quility; while the other esteemed the King's authority to be so fa-
cred, that it was, on no account, to be called in question or im-
paired; and neither of them would recede in the least point from
their opinions, they separated without any profpet of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by the hope
of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France with promises of
powerful succour to the Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in
that kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating in a peace,
it was expected that Charles would oon be at liberty to fulfil what
he promised. On the other hand, the Earl of Suffex was assem-
bling a powerful army on the borders, and its operations could not
fail of adding spirit and strength to the King's party *.

THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the. facions proved Qe' pir-

ineffecual, it contributed omewhat to moderate, or suspend theirotEdlinbtur.-g] .
rage; but they oon began to at with their usual animosity. Mor-
ton, the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide, follicited
Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for tl]e afetyof a party, so
devoted to her interest, and which flood so much in need of her
afiflance. The Chiefs of the Qeen's fation, aflnmbling at Lin-
lithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh ; and Kirkldy, who was Al,-i ,o,
both Governor of the cafle, and Provost of the town, prevailed

* Crawf. Mcm, 134.

B 1

Pl

Book VI. on the citizens, though with some diflichlty, to admit them withlin

^5^ ~ -the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, 'and:

Maitland, acceded almost openly to their party; and the Duke, and
Lord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,.
resumed the places, which they had formerly held in their coun--
cils. Encouraged by the acquisition of perfbne, so illustrious by-
their birth, or so eminent for their abilities, they published a pro-
clamation, declaring their intention to- support the Queen's autho-
rity, and seemed resolved not to leave the city before the meeting
of the approaching Convention, in which, by their numbers and
influence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices onl
their fide *o

Endeavou t AT the fame time, they had formed a design of kindling war
nation in a between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in,
warwithEng-
l;nd. hostilities, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they

hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage to the
King's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to the Qeen ,
Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With this view,.
they had, immediately after the murder of the Regent, prompted:
Scott and Ker to commence hostilities, and had since infligated
them to continue and extend their depredations, As Elizabeth fore-
saw, on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not to susser such
an insult on her government to pass with impunity; fle issued a
proclamation, declaring that he imputed the outrages which had
been committed, not to the Scotch nation, but to a few desperate
and ill-defigning persons; that, with the former, she was resolved

* Crawf. Mc. 137. Calderw. 2. 176.

06 maintaia ati ihvi6iible frienddhip, whereas the duty, which fie Book VJ,
owed to her own subje&s, obliged her to chastise the licentiousness .
of the latter *. Suffex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the east, the other on the weft borders, and laid waste
the adjacent countries with fire and sword +. Fame magnified the
number and progress of their armies, and Mary's adherents, not
thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof
were ill asseted to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There they April azS
openly proclaimed the Queen's authority, and sorbad giving obe-
dience to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Huntly,
whom mhe had constituted her Lieutenants in the kingdom.

THE nobles who adhered to the King, though considerably King's party

enter Edin-

weakened by the defection of so many of their friends, assembled burgh.
at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They issued a counter-procla-May
mation, declaring those who appeared for the Queen, enemies of
their country; and charging them with the murder both of the late
King, and of the Regent. They could not, however, presume so
much on their own strength as to venture either to elet a Regent,
or to take the field against the Queen's party; but the assistance,.
which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both. By
her order, Sir William Drury marched into Scotland, with a thou-
sand foot, and three hundred horse; the KIng's adherents joined
him with a considerable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already begun hostilities by
attacking the cafile, they forced them to retire, plundered the neigh-
bouring country, which belonged to the Ilamiltons, and, after

* Cald. 2. i81. X Cabala, 174,

seizing

Book VI. seizing Come of their cartles, and razing others, returned to Edinr

5T^ burgh.
1570.

Motives of UMDEPR Drury's proteeion, the Earl of Lennox returned into
Elizabeth's
condua with Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of the king-
regard to
theim. dom to him, during the minority of his grandson. His illustrious

birth, and alliance with the royal family of England, as well as of
Scotland, rendered him worthy of that honour. And as his re-
fentment againf Mary was implacable, as his estate lay in England,
and his family resided there, Elizabeth confidered him as a man,
who, both from inclination, and from interest, would ad in con-
cert with her, and ardently wished that he might succeed Murray
in the office of Regent. But, on many accounts, flie did not
think it prudent to discover her own sentiments, or to favour his
pretensions too openly. The civil wars in France, which had been
excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierce-
ness that did it real diflonour, appeared now to be on the point of
coming to an issue; and after sledding the best blood, and waRiing
the richest provinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the negotiations, which were carry-
ing on for that purpose. Charles IX. was known to be a passionate
admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser a Qeen
of France, and the most ancient ally of his crown, to languish in
her present cruel ituation, without attempting to procure her re-
lief. He had, hitherto, been obliged to content himself with remon-
ftrating, by his ambafadors, against the indignity, with which ile
had been treated. But if he were once at full liberty to purfuc his
inclinations, Elizabeth would have every thing to dread fiomn the
impetuosity of his temper, and the power of his arms. It therefore
became ncceltlhy fI)rhcr to a with some reserve, and not to ap-

pear,

pear, avowedly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con- Book VI.
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and prejudices of the '-
Scots required no less management. Had he openly supported
Lennox's claim; had he recommended him to the Convention, as
the candidate, whom flie approved; this might have rouzed the in-
dependant spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her
intention, he might have defeated its success. For these reasons,
lhe hesitated long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
messages, which ile received from the King's party. A more ex-
plicit declaration of her sentiments was at last obtained, and an
event of an extraordinary nature seems to have been the occasion
of it. Pope Pius V. having iued a bull, whereby he excommu-
nicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and absolved her
fubjeas from their oath of allegiance, Felton, an English man, had
the boldness to fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's palace.
In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride, or
bigotry, denounced this fatal sentence against the most powerful
monarchs; but as the authority of the court of Rome was now less
regarded, its proceedings were more cautious; and, it was only when
they were rouzed by some powerful Prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this elcp,
which the Pope had taken, to a combination of the Roman Catholic
Princes against her, and suspected that some plot was on foot in favour
of the Scottish Queen. In that event, fle knew that the safety of
her own kingdom depended on prcferving her influence inScotland;
and in order to strengthen this, fle renewed her promises of pro-
teAing the King's adherents, encouraged them to proceed to the
eletion of a Regent, and even ventured to point out the Earl of
Lennox, as the person who had the best title. That honour was

accord-

Book VI. accordingly conferred upon him, in a Convention of the whole
L'"'-a .party, held on the izth of July *.
1570.

lennox elea- THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meeting of the Par-
ed Regent.

liament, which the Queen's party had summoned to convene at
Linlithgow. Having effe&ed that, he marched againit the Earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garrison,
which he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at discretion. Soon
after, he made himself mailer of some other castles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his administration, as well as by the
appearance of a considerable army, with which the Earl of Suffex
hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of fe-
cretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other leaders
of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies of their country .

Mlry's adhe- IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Qjeen's adherents
rents nego-
tiate with had recourse to the King of Spain I, with whom Mary had held a

close correspondence ever since her confinement in-England. They
prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two of his officers to take
a view of the country, and to examine its coasts, and harbours; and
obtained from him a small fupplyof money and arms, which were
sent to the Earl of Huntly t. But this aid, so disproportionate to
their exigencies, would have availed them little. They were in-

Elizabeth debted for their safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
propofcs a
treaty of ac- under colour of restoring the captive Queen to her throne. The first
commocdation
between Mary teps in this negotiation were taken in the month of May; but hither-
jetshe sub t little progress had been made in it. The peace concluded between

the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and her apprehen-

* Spotfw. 240. Cald. 2. 186. See Append. N. II. I Crawf. Mem. 159.
Cald. . 198. 1I See Append. Nh. 111. t Anders. 3. 123. Crawf.Mcmn. 153.

lions

sions that Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf of his Book VI.
siser in law, quickened Elizabeth's motions. She aff'eed to treat -...

. 570.

her prisoner with more indulgence, he listened more graciously to
the follicitations of foreign ambassadors in her favour, and seemed
fully determined to replace her on the throne of her ancestors. As
a proof of her sincerity, he laboured to procure a cessation of arms
between the two contending fations in Scotland. Lennox, elated
with the good fortune, which had hitherto attended his admini-
itration, and flattering himself with an easy triumph over enemies,
whose estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, refused, for
some time, to come into this measure. It was not safe for him,
however. to dispute the will of his protecrefs. A cessation of ho-
itilities during two months, to commence on the third of September,
was agreed upon; and! being renewed from time to time, it con-
tinued till the first of April next year *.

SOON after, Elizabeth despatched Cecil and Sir Walter Mildmay

to the Queen of Scots. The dignity of these ambassadors, the
former her prime Minister, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that the
negociation was serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty was
now approaching. The propositions, which they made to her,
were advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in Mary's
situation, had reason to expect. The ratification of the treaty of
Edinburgh; the renouncing any pretenions to the English Crow,
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of he. posterity; the adhering
to the alliance between the two kingdoms; the pardoning her sub-
jeds, who had taken arms against her; and her promising to hold

* Spotfw. 243.
V0.1'. 11

C

110

Book VJ.

._570.
l 57°'

T HE HISTORY

no correspondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that might
diturb Elizabeth's government; were among the chief articles. By
way of security for the accomplifhtnent of these, they demanded
that some persons of rank should be given as hostages, that the
Prince her son should reside in England, and that a few castles on
the border should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To ome of these
propositions Mary consented; some she endeavcured to mitigate;
and others he attempted to evade. In the mean time, she tranf-
mitted copies of them to the Pope, to the Kings of France and
Spain, and to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without rome
timely and vigorous effort in her behalf, she would be obliged to
accept of these hard conditions, and to purchase liberty at any price.
But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by his efforts againit
theTurks, his treasury was entirely exhausted. Charles had already
begun to meditate that conspiracy against the Hugonots, which
marks his reign with such infamy; and it required much leisure,
and perfect tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan to maturity.
Philip was employed in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great
renown to the Christian arms, by the vicory over the infidels at
Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatned an insurreCtion; and his
fubje&ts in the Netherlands, provoked by much oppression, and
many indignities, were breaking out into open rebellion. All of
them, for these different reasons, advised Mary, without depending
on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the best terms she could
procure *.

Elizabeth's MARY, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,
artificcs in the
condutof it. and discovered a facility of disposition, which promised flill

i Anders. Vol. 11. 0og, 120o.

further

further concefions. But no concession The could have made, would Book VI.
havefatisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated professions 570
of sincerity to foreign !ambassadors, and notwithifanding the so-
lemnity with:which the carried on the treaty, had no other object
in it, than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time . After
having so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so
ungenerous a manner, ihe could, not now dismiss her with safety.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had
found means to excite commotions in England, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What desperate effects of her just resentment
might be expeAed, if he were set at liberty, and recovered her
former power? What engagements could bind her, not to revenge
the wrongs he had suffered, nor to take advantage of the favour-
able conjunctures, that might present themselves ? Was it possible
for her to give such security for her behaviour, in times to come,
as might remove all fufpieions and fears ? And was there not good
cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ever obliterate the
memory of past injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned ; though
she continued to aa as if her views had been entirely different. She
appointed seven of her privy counsellors to be commissioners for
fettling the articles of the treaty; and as Mary had already named
the Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingfton, for her
ambassadors, The required the Regent to impower proper persons to
appear in behalf of the King. The Earl ofMorton, Pitcarn abbot of !$7T .
Dunfermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons chosen by
the Regent. They prepared for their journey, as slowly as Eli-
zabeth her self could have wished. At length they arrived at
London, and met the commiflioners of the two Queens. Mary's Feb. 19:

· Digges. Compl. Amb. 78.

C 2 arbaf-
1

Book VI. ambassadors discovered the rongeft inclination to comply with

L5 v every thing, that would remove the cbftacles, which flood in the
1571.

way of their mistress's liberty. But when Morton and his afociates
were called upon to vindicate their condut, and to explain the
sentiments of their party, they began, in justification of their
treatment of the Queen, to advance such maxims concerning the
limited powers of Princes, and the natural right of fubjeds to refiflt
and to controul them, as were extremely hocking to Elizabeth,
whose notions of regal prerogative were very exalted. With regard
to the authority which the King now possessed, they declared that
they neither had, nor could poflibly receive inftru&ions, to content to
any treaty, that tended to subvert, or even to impair it, in the least
degree *. Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than such
a reply from the commissioners of the King of Scots, to the Queen of
England. His party depended absolutely on her protecion, her hand
had feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed the conti.
nuance of his reign. With the utmost ease, he could have brought
them to talk in a very different manner; and whatever conditions ihe
might have thought fit to prescribe, they would have had no other
choice but to submit. This declaration, however, he asseted to con-
Jt proves fider as an insuperable difficulty. And finding that there was no rea-

son to dread any danger from the French King, who had not disco-
vered that eagerness in support of Mary, which was expected; the
reply made by Morton furnished her with a pretence for putting a flop
March 24. to the negociation, till the Regent should fend ambassadors with more

ample powers. And after being amused for ten months with the
hopes of liberty, the unhappy Queen of Scots remained under ftriter
custody than ever; and without any profpet of escaping from it;
while those fubjeds, who still adhered to her, were exposed, without

' Cald. 2. 234. Digges 5 . IIaynes, 523, 524.

ally
7

ally or protetor, to the rage of enemies, whom their fccefs' in this Book VI.
negociation rendered still more insolent .
. '

'57I'

On the day after the expiration of the true, which had been Dunbarton
obferved.with little exa&nefs on either fide, Captain Crawford ofcaaile frpriz-

ed by the Re-

Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, performed a service gent
of great importance to the Regent, by surprising the castle of Dun-
barton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
the Queen had kept poeffelon, ever since the commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rites in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely firong, and in the opinion of that age impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and
esteemed the mots proper place in the kingdom for landing any so-
reign troops, that might come to Mary's aid. The strength of the
place rendered Lord Fleming the governor, more secure than he
ought to have been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who had
served in the garrison, and had been disgusted by ome ill usage,
proposed the scheme to the Regent, endeavoured to demonstrate that
it was practicable, and offered himfeif to go the foremost man on
the enterprize. It was thought prudent to rifque any danger, for so
great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else was necessary,
were prepared with the utmost secrecy and dispatch. All the
avenues to the castle were seized, that no intelligence of the design
might reach the governor. Towards evening, Crawford marched
from Glasgow, with a small but determined band. By midnight,
they arrived at the bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
lky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was covered with a
thick fog. It was where the rock was highest, that the assailants

And. 3. 9, &c.

made

Book VI.

1571.

THE HISTORY

made their attempt, because, in that place there were few sentinels,
and they hoped to find them least alert. Thefirft ladder was scarce
fixed, when the weight and eagerness of those :who .mounted it,
brought it to the ground. None of the assailants weretehurt by
the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and fastened the ladder
to the roots of a tree, which grew in a cleft. This place they all
reached with the utmot difficulty, but were ill at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made fast a second
time; but in the middle of the ascent, they meet with an unforeseen
difficulty. One of their companions was seized with ome sudden
fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All were at a
fland. It was impossible to pass him. To tumble him headlong
was cruel; and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's pre-
fence of mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall when the fit was
over: and turning the other fide of the ladder, they mounted, with
ease, over his belly. Day now began to break, and there frill re-
mained an high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many greater
difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A sentry observed the firtl
man, who appeared on the parapet, and had just time to give the
alarm, before he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more follicitous
about their own safety, than capable of making refislance. The
nflailants rushed forwards, with repeated shouts, and with the ut-
inoft fury; took pofleffion of the magazine'; seized the cannon; and
turned them against their enemies. Lord Fleming got into a small
boat, and fled all alone, into Argylfhire. Crawford, in reward of
his valour and good condut, remained master of the cafele; and as
he did not loe a single man in the enterprize, he enjoyed his fuc-
cess with unmixed pleasure. Lady Fleming, Vcrac the French

Envoy,

Envoy, and Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrews, were the pri-Book VI.
foners of greatest diftiriction*. ·C

1571.
VERAC'S character proteced him from the-ufage, which he me-Archbifhopof

St. Andrews

rited by his activity in stirring up enemies againit the King. The put to death
Regent treated the lady with great politeness, and humanity. Butby him.
a very different fate awaited the archbishop; he was carried under
a strong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted by
ad of Parliament, he was, without any formal trial, condemned
to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken, the fen-
tence was executed. An attempt was made to convict him of being
accessary to the murther both of the King and Regent, but these
accusations were supported by no proof. Our historians observe that
he was the first bishop in Scotland who died by the hands of the
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church and
state, ought to have exempted him from a punishment, inflicted
only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, his
abilities, and his profession, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lennox hated him as the person, by whose
counsels the reputation and power of the house of Hamilton were
supported. And party rage, and personal enmity, dicated that in!
decent sentence, for which ome colour was fought, by imputing
to him such odious crimes A.

THE loss of Dunbarton, and the evere treatment of the Arch- Kirkaldy de-

fends the caf-

bishop, perplexed and enraged the Queen's party; and holilities te of Edin-
were renewed with all the fierceness, which disappointment and in- Qgh n the
dignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the truce, had takenname.
care to increase the number of his garrison, and to provide every thing
necefiary for a siege, ifued a proclamation declaring Lennox's

a Buch.. 94. Spotfw. 252.

autho.

1571.

Both parties
hold parlia-
ments.
May 14.

THE HISTORY

authority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded all who fa-
voured his cause to leave the town within x hours; seized the
arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the fleeple of
St. Giles; repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affetions of the inhabitants leaned a different way,
held out the metropolis againif the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that fation, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a small fum of
money, and some ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable body
of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily ikirmifhes
happened, and with various success. The Queen's party was not
firong enough to take the field against the Regent, nor was his fu-
periority so great as to undertake the siege of the catfle, or of the
town 4.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies,

the Regent had summoned a Parliament to meet in that place. In
order to prevent any objetion against the lawfulness of the meeting,
the members obeyed the proclamation as exatly as possible and
assembled in a house at the head of the Canongate, which, though
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy
exerted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meeting ; but they
were so strongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain. They
passed an at attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then ad-
journed to the 28th of August +.

! Cald. 2. 233, &c. Crawf. Mem. 177,

THu other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun- Book VI.
tenanced by the fame hew of legal authority, held a meeting of

1571.

parliament oon after. There was produced in'this aembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby he
had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an a was past, pronouncing
the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good fubjets to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to
support those who ed in her name. The present eftablifiment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another itatute; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 26th of Augut *.

MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the king- Miserable

condition of

dom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, andthe kingdom.
ranged themselves under the standards of the contending factions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, King's-men
and Qyeen's-men were names of ditfintion. Political hatred dissolved
all natural ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good will and confi-
dence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious zeal
mingled itself with these civil diftindtions, and contributed not a
little to heighten, and to inflame them.

THE fations which divided the kingdom were, in appearance, State of sac,

only two. But in both there, there were persons, with views, andtos
principles, so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tinguifhed. With some, considerations of religion were predomi-

* Crawf. Mm. 177.
VOL. II, D nant,

Book VI.

J571.

Both parties
hold parlia-
ments.
May 14.

THE HISTORY

authority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded all who fa-
voured his cause to leave the town within fix bpurs; seized the
arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the fleeple of
St. Giles; repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affetions of the inhabitants leaned a different way,
held out the metropolis againfl the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that fation, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their follewers; and having received a small fum of
money, and some ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable body
of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily skirmishes
happened, and with various success. The Queen's party was not
firong enough to take the field against the Regent, nor was his fu-
periority so great as to undertake the siege of the castle, or of the
town s.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies;

the Regent had summoned a Parliament to meet in that place. In
order to prevent any objeaior, against the lawfulness of the meeting,
the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly as possible and
assembled in a house at the head of the Canongate, which, though
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy
exerted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meeting; but they
were so firongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain. They
passed an at attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then ad-
journed to the 28th of August i.

* Cald. 2. 233, &c. : Cravf. Mem. 177,

17

THE other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun- Book VI.
tenanced by the fame shew of legal authority, held a meeting of `

I 57I.

parliament soon after. There was produced in this aembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby he
had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an a& was past, pronouncing
the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good fubjees to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to
support those who ated in her name. The present establishment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another tfatute; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 26th of August .

MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the king-Miferable

condition of

dom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, andthe kingdom.
ranged themselves under the standards of the contending factions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, King's-men
and Zeen's-men were names ofdiftintion. Political hatred dissolved
all natural ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good will and confi-
dence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious zeal
mingled itself with these civil distinctions, and contributed not a
little to heighten, and to inflame them.

THE factions which divided the kingdom were, in appearance, State of sac,

only two. But in both there, there were persons, with views, and tions
principles, so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tinguifhed. With ome, considerations of religion were predomi-

* Crawf. Mem. 177.
VOL. II. D nant,

Book VI. nant, and they either adhered to the Queen, because they hoped, by
`---- her means, to re-eflablifh Popery, or they defended the King's au-

5 thority, as the belt support of the Protestant faith. Among these

the opposition was violent and irreconcileable. Others were in-
fluenced by political motives only, or allured by views of interet ;
the Regent aimed at uniting there, and did not despair of gaining,
by gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the King's
authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of
a coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might be refrored
to ome (hare in the government, and the kingdom hake off its
dependance on England. Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious,
and the most powerful man of the King's party, held a particular
course; and moving only as he was prompted by the court of Eng-
land, thwarted every measure, that tended towards a reconcilement
of the factions; and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed protedion.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of their

parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two bishops
appeared in that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were, they passed an
aa for attainting upwards of 200 of the adverse faction. The
meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid. r'he Regent had
prevailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and Lord Boyd,
to acknowledge the King's authority. The three Earls were among
the most powerful noblemen in the Kingdom, and had hitherto
been zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been one of
Mary's commissioners at York andWeftminfer, and, since that time,
had been admitted into all her most secret councils. But, during that
turbulent pcriod, the conduct of individuals, as well as the prin-

ciples

19

ciples of facions, varied so often, that the sense of honour, the Book VI.
chief preservative of consistency in character, was entirely loft;

1571.

and without any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one
party, and adopted all the violent passions of the other. The defec-
tion, however, of so many persons of diftintion, not only weak-
ened the Queen's party, but added reputation to her adversaries.

AFTER the example of the parliament at Edinburgh, that at Stir- The King's

party furpriz-

ling began with framing ads against the opposite fation. But in the ed in Stirling.
midst of all the security, which confidence in their own numbers, or
diflance from danger could inspire, they were awakened, early one
morning, by the flouts of the enemy in the heart of the town.
In a moment, the houses of every person of diftindion were fur- Sept. 3.
rounded, and before they knew what to think of so strange an
event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caf-
fils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers,
who were ready to carry them to Eainburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprize; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill timed follicitude of his friends about his safety, not to
hazard his own person in conducting it, that day would have ter-
minated the contest between the two factions, and have restored
peace to his country. By his direction, four hundred men, under
the command of Huntley, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott of
Buccleugh, set out from Edinburgh, and the better to conceal their
design, marched towards the south. But they soon wheeled to the
right, and horses having been provided for the infantry, rode fireight
to Stirling. By four in the morning, they arrived there; not one
!'entry was posted on the walls, not a single man was awake about
th~ place. They met with no resistance from any person they

D had

Book VI. had seized, except Morton. He defending his house with obstinate
'7' "' valour, they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender

till forced out of it by the flames. In performing this, some time
was consumed; and the private men, unaccustomed to regular dif-
cipline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses, and hops
of the, citizens. The noise and uproar in the town reached the
castle. The Earl of Mar allied out with thirty soldiers; fired briikly
upon the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers kept toge-
ther in a body. The townsmen took arms to assist their governor;
a sudden panic struck the assailants; Come fled, ome surrendered
themselves to their own prisoners; and had not the borderers, who
followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the horses
within the place, not a man would have escaped. If the Regent
had not unfortunately been killed, the loss on the King's fide
would have been as inconsiderable, as the alarm was great. Think-
on the archbijhop of St. Andrews, was the word among the Queen's

The Regent soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to his memory. The officer,
killed.

to whom- he surrendered, endeavouring to protec him, loft his
own life in his defence. He was slain, according to the general
opinion, by command of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had
the glory of concerting this plan with great secrecy, and prudence;,
but Morton's fortunate obstinacy, and the want of discipline
among his own troops, deprived him of success, the only thing
wanting to render this equal to the most applauded military enter-
prizes of the kind *.

Mar chosen As so many of the nobles were assembled, they proceeded, with-
Regent.

pt. 6. out delay, to the cleEtion of a Regent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar

' Mev. 26. Crawf. Mem. 204,

giere

were candidates for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of Book VI.
voices. Amidfi all the fierce dissentions, which had prevailed so

157I.

long in Scotland, he had distinguished himself by his moderation,
his humanity, and his disinterestedness. And as his power was far
inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Morton's, he was,
for these reasons, less formidable to the other nobles. His merit,
too, in having so lately rescued the Leaders of the party from immi-
nent dcflruion, contributed not a little to his preferment.

WIILE these things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfacions Proceedings

in England a-

in England were no less intereffing to Mary, and iRill more fatal togainri Mary.
her cause. The parliament of that kingdom, which met in April,
passed an ac, by which, it was declared to be high treason, to
claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen; to as-
firm that the title of any other person was better than hers; or to
maintain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and to limit.
the order of succession. This remarkable'flatute was intended not
only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb the restless
and intriguing spirit of the Scottish Queen, and her adherents t.

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and the Marriage ne-
Duke of Anjou, the French King's brother, was well advanced. teenEliza-

beth and the

Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave out, Dukcoof An-.
with the utmoff confidence, that it could not fail of taking place.jou
Neither of them, however, wiied its success; and they encouraged
it for no other end, but because it served to cover or to promote
their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of Medi-
cis was bent towards the accompliflment of her deteflable projec

'r the deftrudion of the I-ugonot chiefs; and by carrying on a

t^'niation for the marriage of her son with a Princess, who was
JU ft'Iteemed the protcdlrcls of that party, by yielding tomne things

It- Carnd. 436.

in

Book VI. in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference with regard

L"- to others, the hoped to amuse all the Protestants in Europe, and to

lull asleep the jealousy even of the Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth
flattered herself with reaping advantages of another kind. During
the dependance of the negociation, the French could not with de-
cency give any open affiflance to the Scottish Queen; if they con-
ceived any hopes of success in the treaty of marriage, they would, of
course, interest themselves but coldly in her concerns; Mary herself
must be dejeaed at losing an ally, whom the had hitherto reckoned
her most powerful protector; and by interrupting her correspondence
with France, one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues which
disturbed the kingdom, would be flopt. Both Queens succeeded in
their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Elizabeth, and
blinded the Hugonots. The French discovered the utmost indif-
ference about the interelf of the Scottish Queen; and Mary, confi-
dering that court as already united with her rival, turned herself,

Norfolk's for protection, towards the King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and
'colonpiracy in thoughtful mind, delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had held a
·isvotu of
\lary.. secret correspondence with Mary, for ome time, by means of the

Eifhop of Ross, and had supplied both herself, and her adherents
in Scotland, with small ums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the character of a banker,
and who ated privately as an agent for the Pope, was the person
whom the Bishop intrusted with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to the Duke of
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty, upon his
solemn promise to have no further intercourse with the Qeen of
Scots; which, however, he regarded so little, that he took no fie
in any matter of moment, without his advice. She complaine In

* Digges. 144, 148. Carnl. 43+.

a long

a long letter, which he wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, Book VIa
with which the French court had abandoned her interest; he de- 17I
dared her resolution of imploring the assistance of the Spanish Mo-
narch, which was now her only resource; and recommended Ri-
dolphi to his confidence, as a person, capable both of explaining,
and of advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded Hickford,
his secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this letter; but whe-
ther he had been already gained by the court, or resolved at that
time to betray his malker, he disobeyed the latter part of the order,
and hid the letter, together with other treasonable papers, under
the Duke's own bed.

Ridolphi, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of those

arguments, and spared none of those promises, which are the usual
incentives to rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum
in readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of Alva had
undertaken to land ten thousand men, not far from London. The
Catholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation had
turned their eyes on him, and expected him to revenge the unmerited
injuries, which he hirnfelf had suffered; and to rescue an unfortu-
nate Queen, who offered him her person, and her crown, as the re-
ward of his success. Norfolk approved of the design, and though
he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, allowed him to use
his name, in negociating with the Pope, and Alva *. The Bilhop
of Ross, who, from- the violence of his temper, and impatience to
procure relief for his miiftrefs, was apt to run into rahl and defpe-
rate designs, advised the Duke to aflnmble secretly a few of his fol-
lowers, and at once to cfize Elizabeth's person. But this the Duke

* Anders. 3. 61.

ric(ctcd.
4..

Book VI. rejeced as a scheme, equally wild and hazardous. Mean while,

Ic J `the Englifl court had received ome imperfet information of the

157I.

Ditlovered by plot, by intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident hap-
F lizabeth.
;Auguit. pened, which brought to light all the circumltances of it. The

Duke had employed Hickford to transmit to Lord Herreis, ome
money, which was to be distributed among Mary's adherents in
Scotland. A person not in the secret was intrudted with conveying
it to the borders; and he, fufpeding it from the weight to be gold,
whereas he had been told that it was silver, carried it directly to the
privy council. The Duke, his domestics, and all who were privy,
Žit. 7* or could be fufpeaed of being privy to the design, were taken into

custody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover less
firmness; or servants betray an indulgent matter, with greater base-
ness. Every one confeifed the whole of what he knew. Hickford
gave direcions how to find the papers, which he had hid. The
Duke himself, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates, and
believing all dangerous papers to have been defIroyed, confidently
asserted his own innocence; but when their depositions, and the
papers themselves were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's mercy. His
offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;
and Elizabeth thought it necessary to deter her fubjeds, by his
puniflment, from holding correspondence with the Queen of Scots,
or her emissaries. Being tried by his Peers, he was found guilty
of high treason, and, after several delays, suffered death for the
crime .

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced many effects, ex-
tremely detrimental toMary's interest. The Bishop of Ross, who ap-

" Anders. 3. 149. State Trials, . 85.

peared
7

peared by'the confeflion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in Book VT.
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into custody, his papers

157I'

searched, himself committed to the tower, treated with the utnmoft
rigour, threatened with capital punishment, and after a long con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition that he should leave the king-
domn. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally eminent
for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, from that time, the
privilege of having an ambassador at the Englifl court. The Spa-
nifh ambassador, whom, the power and dignity of the prince he
represented, exempted from such insults, as Ross had suffered, was
commanded to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a strider guard than formerly, the number of her domestics
abridged, and no person permitted to fee her, but in presence of
her keeperst.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the itorm which was Elizabeth de-

gathering, on the continent, againif her kingdom, began to wifl gre oenly
that tranquillity were reflored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's Queen's

party.~

late attempt against her government, lhe determined to act, with-
out difguI^e or ambiguity, in favour of the King's party. This re-
solution he intimated to the leaders of both fations. Mary, fheoa. 23,
told them, had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited uch dangerous conspiracies both
against her crown and life, that she would henceforth confider her
as unworthy of protection, and would never content to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She exhorted them,
therefore, to unite in acknowledging the King's authority. She
promised to procure by her mediation equitable terms for tholt,
who had hitherto opposcd it. But if they fRill continued refiradory,

* Digges. 163. Strypc. Ann, . .0.
VOL. II. E'

took VI

1572.

Iofilities
carried on be
tween them.

'THE HISTORY

Ihe threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them to sub-
mit $. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate es-
fe&; though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery,
and good conduct, routed the King's adherents in the North, in
many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's fen-
timents contributed not a little to animate one party, and to depress
the spirit and hopes of the other *.

As Morton, who commanded the Regent's forces, lay at Leith;

e- and Kirkaldy till held out the town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce
a day passed without a skirmish. And while both avoided any de-
cifive ation, they harraffed each other by attacking fall parties,
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations,
though little memorable in themselves, kept the passions of both
fations in perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrought them up,
at last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them regardless not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity.. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this
implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and without
trial. Great numbers suffered in this hocking manner; the un-
happy vietims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and it
was not till both fides had smarted severely, that they discontinued
this barbarous practice, so reproachful to the character of the na-
tion -. Mean while, those in the town and castle, though they had
received a supply of money from the Duke of Alva , began to
fuffcr for want of provisions. As Morton had dcfitoyed all the

S Sec Append. N°. IV.
t Crawi Mem. 2 18, z zo2

' Cald. z. 289, 294. Strype. 2. 76.

11 Cald. 2. 345.

mnill

mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted small gar- Book VI.
rifons iii all the houses of trength around it, scarcity daily increased. ..-5
At last all the mieries of famine were felt, and they must have been
soon reduced to such extremities, as would have forced them to ca-
pitulate, if the English and French ambassadors had not procured a
suspension of hostilities, between the two parties .

THOvUGH the negociation for a marriage, between Elizabeth and League be-

tween Eng
the Duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and fie were land and

France.

desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between the two crowns.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the best device for blinding
the Protestants, the conspiracy against whom was now almoff ripe
for execution; but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious measure might expose
him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a single ally,
now saw her kingdom so threatned with inteffine commotions, or
exposed to invasions from abroad, that fte was extremely solicitous
to secure the assistance of so powerful a neighbour. The difficul-
ties, arising from the situation of the Scottish eQuen, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some terms of advan-
tage for Mary, and her adherents. Elizabeth refused to lifnen to
any proposition of that kind. Her obflinacy overcame the faint
efforts of the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so much as
mentioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scottifl affairs, a hort April 1I.
article was inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to this pur-
pose, That the parties contracing (hall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any firanger to enter, and tQ foment the sac-
tions there; but it hall be lawful for the Queen of England to
chalfife, by force of arms, those Scots who flall continue to har-
bour the Englifl rebels now in Scotland -." In confcquencc of

Id. 346. t Dggcs. 17o, 191. Camd. 444.

E 2 this

Book VI. this treaty, France and England affected to at in concert with re-
' . gard to Scotland,- and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared
1572.

there, in name of their refpedive fovereignrs. By their mediation,
a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and during that time,
conferences were to be held between the leaders of the opposite
factions, in order to accommodate their differences, and restore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a seasonable. interval
of tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South; but in the
North, it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon had fill
maintained his reputation and superiority there. Several parties,
under different officers, were ent againit him. Some of them he
attacked in the field; against others he employed' stratagem; and
as his courage and conduct were equal, none of his enterprizes
failed of success. He made war, too, with the humanity, which
became so gallant a man, and gained ground by that, no less than
by the terror of his arms. If 'he had not been obliged, by the
truce, to suspend his operations, he would, in all probability, have
brought that part of the kingdom to submit entirely to the Queen's
authority *.

Proceedings NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and success, Mary's in-
ain Mary. terest was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but among

the English. Nothing could be nore offensive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the profpct of the Spanifl yoke,
than her negociations with the Duke of Alva. The parliament,
which met in May, proceeded against her as the moit dangcrous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn conference between
the Lords and Commons, both houses agreed in bringing in a bill
to declare her guilty of high treason, and to deprive hecrof all

Craw. Mem.

right

right of fucceflion to the crown. This great cause, as it was then Book VI.
called, occupied them during the whole feflion, and was carried 7-'

.572.

on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though the applauded'their
zeal,.and approved much of the course they were taking, was fa-
tisfied with hewing Mary what he might expet from the resent-
ment of the nation; but as he did not yet think it time to pro-
ceed to the most violent extremity against her, she prorogued the
parliament ,.

THESE severe proceedings of the English parliament were not Tie French

, neg-IeL her

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglea of her aliiesiterea.
the French. The Duke of MQntmorency, who came over to
ratify the. league with Elizabeth, made a flew of intereffing him-
self in her favour, but inflead of folliciting for her liberty, or her
reitoration to her throne, all that he demanded was a flight miti-
gation of the rigour of her imprisonment. And even this mall
requefft, he urged with so little. warmth or importunity, that no
regard was paid. to it -.

THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfaaion, The mafacre

and She expected from it a great increase of security. She now turned f Paris.
her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animofities of the
two factions were still so high, and so many interfering interefis to
be adjusted, that a general pacification seemed to be at a great dif-
tance. But while the laboured to bring them to some agreement,
an event happened which filled a great part of Europe with afto-
nifiment, and with horror. This was the massacre of Paris; an
attempt, to which there is no parallel in the history of mankind,
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or for the cruelty and

D'Ewcs Journ. 206, &c. 1 Jebb. 2. 512.

barbarity,

Book VI.

_ -- ,

J572.

A1guft 24.

Detrimental
to Mary's in-
tcrcll.

THE HISTORY

barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By the moit solemn
promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the Protestants
were drawn to court; and though doomed to deitrution, they
were received with caresses, loaded with honours, and treated, for
seven months, with every possible mark of familiarity, and of con-
fidence. In the midst of their security, the warrant for their de-
ftrution was iffted by their sovereign, on whose word they.had
relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen, their-fellow
citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in their blood.
Ten thousand Proteflants, without diftinóion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The fame barbarous or-
ders were sent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without deteflation, was, at that time, applauded in Spain;
and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings were offered to God, for its
success. But among the Proteflants it excited incredible horror; a
striking piture of which is drawn by the French ambafiador at the
court of England, in his account of his firit audience after the
mafiacre. " A gloomy sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence,
as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on each fide,
all clad in deep mourning, and.as I pafled through them, not one
betlowed on me a civil look, or made the least return to my
salutes ."

BUT horror was not the only pafflon, with which this event in-

spired the Protestants; it filled them with fear. They confidcred
it as the prelude to ome greater blow, and believed, not without
great probability, that all the Popish Princes had conspired the de-

* Carte, 3. 522.

trucioni

ftruaion of their fed. This opinion did no small disservice to Mary's Book VI.
affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Protestants; and, 572
though they wished her restoration, were not willing, on that
account, to sacrifice the faith which they professed. They dreaded
her attachment to a religion, which allowed its votaries to violate
the most solemn engagements, and prompted them to perpetrate
the most barbarous crimes. A general confederacy of the Pro-
teftants seemed to them, the only thing that could uphold the Re-
formation against the league, which was formed to overturn it.
Nor could the present establishment of religion be long maintained
in Britain, but by a ftrid union with Elizabeth, and by the con-
currence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it, as a com-
mon cause .

THE Regent took hold of this favourable conjuncture for nego- The Regent

endeavours to

ciating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpose, awith unite both
the utmost zeal, and the adverse faction placed entire confidence inarties'
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed of being fuc-
cefsful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement with
him, that scarce any thing remained, except the formality of signing
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the disappointment he
met with in his pretensions to the Regency; his abilities, his wealth,
and the patronage of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the Regent himself; and he took plea-
fire in thwarting every measure pursued by him. He was afraid
that if Maitland and his associates recovered any share in the admi-
niftration, his own influence would be considerably diminished; and
the Regent, by their means, would regain that ascendant, which be-
longed to his station. With him, concurred all those, who were
in pofficflon of the lands, which belonged to any of the Queen's

* Diggcs, 244, 267.

2 party.

Book VI.

1572.

I-rs death.

Morton
chosen Re-
gent.
;Novem. 24.

THE H 'S T O R'Y

party. And -his ambition, and their avarice, frustrated the Re-
gent's pious intentions, and retarded a blefing so necessary to the
kingdom, as the establishment of peace .

SUCH a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition, which reigned

among his party, made a deep impression on the Regent, who loved
his country, and wished for peace with much ardor. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on a fettled melan-
choly, that ended in a distemper, of which he died on the 29th of
O&ober. He was, perhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who
could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy, and have
left it, without loss of reputation. Notwithstanding their mutual
animofities, both factions acknowledged his views to be honour-
able, and his integrity to be uncorrupted t.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. The Qeen of

England powerfully supported his claim, and notwithilanding the
fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was eleced
Regent; the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held that
dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of January, this gave

him an opportunity of continuing the negociations with the opposite
party, which had been set on foot by his predeceflbr. They pro-
duced no effeCts, however, till the beginning of the next year.

BS oRE we proceed to these, some events, hitherto untouched,
deserve our notice.

X Mclv. 233. Crawf. Mcni. 237.

t Id. z.t.

Tirrl
6

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in Book VI.

Lochleven, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year 1569, was
given up to Lord Hunfdane Governor of Berwick; and being car-
ried to York, suffered there the punishment of his rebellion. The
King's party depended so entirely on Elizabeth's protection, that it
was scarce poflible for them to refute putting into her hands a per-
son who had taken up arms againet her. But as a fum of money
was paid, on that account; and shared between Morton and Dou-
glas' f Lochleven, the former of whom, during his exile in Eng-
land, had been much indebted, to Northumberland's friendfllip, the
abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to certain
deftruaion, was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary ation *.

THIS year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in the Afairs of the

Church.

government of the Church. Soon after the Reformation, the Popish
Bishops had been confirmed by law in poifeffion of part of their be-
nefices; but the spiritual jurifdition, which belonged to their order,
was exercised by fuperintendants, though with more moderate au-
thority. On the death of the archbishop of St. Andrews, Morton
obtained from the Crown a grant of the temporalities of that fee.
But as it was thought indecent for a layman to hold a benefice, to
which the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas, recor
of the university of St. Andrews, to be chosen archbishop; and
allotting him a small pension out of the revenues of the fee, retained the
remainder in his own hands. The nobles, who saw the advantages
they might reap-from such a pracice, supported him in the exe-
cution of his plan. It gave great offence, however, to the Clergy,
who, instead of perpetuating an order, whole name and power was
odious to them, wished that the revenues which had belonged to it,

* Crawf. Mm. 55, 222. Cand. 445.
VOL. I.

F

might

BookVI. might be employed in upplying such parishes, 'as were still un-

I--1 provided with fettled paflors. But on the one hand, it would have

been rath in'the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen, on
whom the very existence of the Proreftant Church in Scotland de-
pended; and Morton, on the other, conduCted his scheme with
such dexterity, and managed them with so much art, that it was,
at last, agreed, in a Convention composed of the leading men
among the Clergy, together with a committee of privy council,
" that the name and office of archbishop, and bishop, should be con-
tinued during the King's minority, and these dignities be conferred
upon the best qualified among the Protestant Miniflers; but that with
regard to their spiritual jurifdiaions, they should be subjed to the
general assembly of the Church." The rules to be observed in
their election; and the persons who were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in
times of Popery, were likewise particularly specified*. And the
whole being laid before the General Assembly, after some exceptions
to the names of Archbiop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protestation
that it flould be confidered only as a temporary constitution, till
one more perfect could be introduced, it obtained the approbation
of that court -. Even Knox, who was prevented from attending
the Assembly by the ill Rtate of his health, though he declaimed
loudly against the Simoniacal paction, to which Douglas owed his
preferment, and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out
with age and infirmities, to an office, which required unimpaired
vigour both of body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the Assembly, re-
commended ome of their regulations with refiect to the election
of Bifhoaps, as worthy of being carefully obfcrved I:. In confe-

* Ca.l. 2. 305.

'- ld. 354.

1 Sce Append. N°. V.

quence

quence of the Assembly's content to the plan agreed upon in the Book VI.
Convention, Douglas was installed in his office; and at the fame "

1572.

time, an archbishop of Glasgow, and a bishop of Dunkeld were
chosen from among the Protestant Clergy. They were all admitted
.to the place in parliament, which belonged to the ecclesiastical
order. But in imitation of the example set by Morton, such pac-
tions were made with them by different noblemen, as gave them
possession only of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to
their fees *.

SOON after the dissolution of this afembly, Knox, the prime in- Nov. 27.

firument of spreading and establishing the Reformed religion in charaaer of
Scotland, ended his life, in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, in.repi- Knox'
dity, disinterestedness, were virtues which he poTfefled, in an eminent
degree. He was acquainted, too, with the learning, cultivated in that
age; and excelled in that species of eloquence, which'is calculated
to rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however, were often too fe-
vere, and the impetuosity of his temper excessive. Rigid and un-
complying himself, he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of
others. Regardless of the diftinaions of rank and character, he ut-
tered his admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more apt to
irritate, than to reclaim. This often betrayed him into indecent and
undutiful expreflions, with refped to the Queen's person and con-
dud. Those very qualities, however, which now render his cha-
,racer less amiable, fitted him to be the inifrument of Providence
for advancing the Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled
him to face dangers, and to surmount opposition, from which,
*a person of a more gentle spirit would have been apt to flirink
back. By an unwearied application to fiudy, and to buli-

0 Spof. z6i.

nets,

BookVI. ness, as well as by the frequency and fervour of his public dif-
'^

- courses, he had worn out a contitution, naturally Pfrong. During
1572.

a lingering illness, he discovered the utmost fortitude; and met the
approaches of death, with a magnanimity inseparable from his cha-
racer. He was constantly employed in ads of devotion, and comrl
forted himself with those profpets of immortality, which not only
preserve good men from desponding, but fill them with exultation
in their las moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present at
his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few words, the more
honourable for Knox, as they came from one, whom he had often
censured with peculiar severity, " There lies He, who never feared
the face of man *."

r573. THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such generous mo-

The Regent
treats with tives as the former Regent, he laboured, however, in good eatne,
phrteeen' to establish it. The public confusions and, calamities, to which he

owed his power and importance when he was only the second per-
son in the nation, were extremely detrimental to him, now that hb
was raised to be the first. While so many of the nobles continued
in arms against him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of extinguishing
the. flame, which he had kindled, and kept so long alive in Scot-
land . She had discovered the alliance with France, from which
the had expeded such advantages, to be no foundation of security.
And though the appearances of friendhip still subsisted between
her and that court, and Charles daily renewed his protestations of
inviolable adherence to the treaty, he was convinced, by a fatal
example, how little he ought to rely on the promises or oaths of
that perfidious Monarch. Her ambassador warned her that the

S4 Spotw. zL6. Cald. 2. 273,

t Digges, 299.

French

37

French held ecret correfpondenee with Mary's adherents in Sc6t Book Vr.
land, and encouraged them in their obitinaty *; The Duke of '"
Alva carried o his intrigues in that kingdom, with less disguise.
She was persuaded that they would embrace the fitt serene interval,
which the commotions in Dtance hrtd in the Nethetlands would
allow them, and openly attempt to land in Scotland. She resolVed,
therefore, to prevent their getting any s6oting in te island, and t6
cut off all their hopes of finding any assistance there, by uniting
the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Regent to carry His overtures

on his negociations with them to great advantage. They were now rjeaied bd
divided into two factions. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe-Kirkald.
rauk, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the
other. Their high rank, their extensive property, and the numbers of
their followers, rendered the former considerable. The latter were
indebted for their importance, to their personal abilities, and to the
strength of the cafle of Edinburgh, which was in their possession.
The Regent had no intention to comprehend both in the fame treaty;
but as he dreaded that the Queen's party, if it remained entire,
would be able to thwart and embarrass his administration, he re-
solved to divide and weaken it, by a separate negociation. He made
the first overture to Kirkaldy and his afociates, and endeavoured to
renew the negociation with them, which, during the life of his
predecessor, had been broken off by his own artifices. But Kir-
kaldy knew Morton's views, and system of government, to be very
different from those of the former Regent. Maitland confidered
him, as a personal and implacable enemy.. They received repeated
assurances of protection from France. And though the siege
of Rochelle employed the French arms at that time, the fame

Id. 296, 32,.

a~2;~~~ hopes;

. hopes, which had so often deceived the party, fill amused them,
' and they expected that the obstinacy of the Hugonots, would oon

be subdued, and that Charles would then be at liberty to'acd with
vigour in Scotland. Mean while, a supply of money was sent, and
if the castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effe&ual aid was
promised t. Maitland's genius delighted in forming schemes, that
were enterprizing, and dangerous; and Kirkaldy possessed the intre-
pidity, necessary for putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's power.
Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate the treaty with France, by
fending forces to his assistance. And if the French should be able
to land any considerable body of men, it might be possible to deliver
the Queen from captivity, or at least to ballance the influence of
France and England in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from
the dishonourable dependance on the latter, under which it had
fallen. This splendid, but chimerical project, they preferred to the
friendship of Morton. They encouraged the negociation, however,
because it served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame pur-
pose, that the whole of the Queen's party should be comprehended
in it, and that Kirkaldy hould retain the command of the castle,
fix months after the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the
Regent to rejet the former; his penetration discovered the danger
of complying with the latter; and all hopes of accommodation
vanished [I.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the city

of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom he
lad expelled, was devoted as zcaloufly, as ever, to the King's cause.

t DigZcs, 3.

iI Melv. 23S, &c.

38
Book VI

1573.

But

:But as the' Rgent had now set on foot 'a treaty with ChatelheraultBook VI.
and Huntly, the cessation of armsftill continued.with them; ' "

'1573.
THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, and liftenedAcceptedby

Chatelherault

eagerly to his overtures. The Duke was naturally unrteady, and and Huntly.
the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and averion to
acion. The miseries of civil discord had afflidted Scotland, almost
five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, instead of doing service, had been detrimental
to the Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had gained much
honour; both had suffered great losses; and had exhaufled their
own eflates, in wafting those of their adversaries. The commons
were in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace, which
might terminate this fruitless, but detrudive quarrel.

A GREAT tfep was taken towards this desirable event, by the Articles of

the treaty.

treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hand, and Feb. 23.
Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of
Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambalTador t. The chief articles in it were
these; that all the parties comprehended in the treaty hould declare
.their approbation of the Reformed religion, now eftabliflhed in the
kingdom; that they should submit to the King's government, and
own Morton's authority as Regent; that they hould acknowledge
every thing done in opposition to the King, since his coronation, to
be illegal; that on both fides, the prisoners who had been taken
fiould be set at liberty, and the lands restored to their proper
owners; that the at of attainder passed against the Queen's
adherents hould be repealed, and indemnity granted for all the
crimes, of which they had been guilty since the i th of June

f Sec Append. N. VI.

1567;

Book VI. I 567 that the treaty hould be ratified, by the commn canent

C-73'~ of both parties, in parliament ,.
573. .. ..

Siege ofthe KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates, who neither
castle of Edin-
burgh. discovered follicitude nor made provision for his safety, did not lose

courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation '. And
though all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he till re-
solved to defend the castle, in the Queen's name; and to wait the
arrival of the promised succours. The Regent was in want of
every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who
determined, at any rate, to bring the dissentions in Scotland to a pe-
riod, before the French could find leisure to take part in the quarrel,
soon afforded him sufficient supplies. SirWilliatnDrury marched nto
Scotland, with 500o foot, and a considerable train of artillery. The
April 25. Regent joined him, with all his forces; and trenches were opened,

and approaches regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great fumr of money, remitted
to him from France, and which fell into the Regent's hands,
through the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man

* Crawf. Mem. 251.

1 Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who joined with Kirkaldy in the

defence of the castle, and who was himself ilr9ngly attached to their party, aerts that Kir.
kaldy offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but that all his offers were
rejected by the Regent. Melv. 240. But as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous
of restoring peace in Scotland, and her ambassador Killegrew, as well as the Earl of Rothes,
ufced their utnoft endeavours to persuade Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of pcrth, it seems
more credible to impute the continuance of hoftiliiies to Kirkaldy's obstinacy, his diitrufi of
Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive teflimony of Spotfw. 269, 270,

Camd. 48 Jobnit. Hilt. 3, 4. Digges, 334. CrawfQrd's account agrees, in the main,
with theirs, Mem. 263.

of that age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by defpiir. Book VI.
Three and thirty days he refilled all the efforts of the Scots and " "

1573.

English, who pushed on their attacks, with courage, and with
emulation. Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications were
'battered down, and one of the wells in the castle dried up, and'the
other choaked with rubbish. Even then, his spirit was unfibdued,
and he determined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrench-
ment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison
was not animated with the fame heroic and desperate resolution,
and rising in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered May 29.
himself to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mistress, that
he should be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about 60o soldiers Were made pri-
foners ".

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-
countries, and entering into the service of the sPates, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue, which has
always been the chara&teriftic of the Scottish Nation.

THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, and theReviewof the

charaer of

surrender of the castle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought to bothparties.
a period. When we review the state of the nation, and compare
the strength of the two fations, Mary's partizans among the
nobles appear, manifestly, to have been superior both in numbers,
and in power. But thefc advantages were more than counterbal-
lanced by others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political abi-

Cald. 2. 408. Mclv. 24o. Crawf. Mem. 265.

litics,

G
VOL. II.

Book VI

1573.

'ii-kalely put
to death.

THE H I STORY

lities, military skill, and all the talents, which times of action form,
or call forth, appeared chiefly on the King's fide. Nor could their
enemies boart of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur-
ray,. tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity of Morton;
the subtl.e genius, and insinuating address of Maitland; or the
successful valour of Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed
in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the one fide,
measures were concerted with prudence, and executed.with vi-
gour ; on the other, their resolutions were ram, and their conduct
feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompted
by indignation againit the queen, warmly supported the King's
cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their popularity into
the fame scale. By means of there, as well as by the powerful
interposition of England, the King's government was finally efta-
blissed. Mary loft even that hadow of sovereignty, which, amidst
all her sufferings, he had hitherto retained among part of her own
fubjeds. And as ihe was no longer permitted to have an ambaf-
fador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity which fihe
had, for some time, enjoyed there, he must henceforth be con-
fidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or forgotten
in the other.

Kirkaldy and his associates remained in Drury's custody, and

were treated by him with great humanity, till the queen of England,
whose prisoners they were, flould determine their fate. Morton
infifled that they flould susser the punishment due to their rebel-
lion and obstinacy ; and declared that so long as they were al-
lowed to live, he did not reckon his own person or authority fe-
cure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his
promises in her name, abandoned them to the Regent's disposal.

He

fIe first confined them to separate prisons ; and, oon after, with Book VI.
Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be -
hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not expect Augul 3.
to be treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a public
execution, by a voluntary death, and c ended his days, fays Melvil,
after the old Roman fashion *. "

While the regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains

of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison.
At the fame time her health began to be much impaired by con-
finement, and want of exercise. At the intreaty of the French am-
baffador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her impri-
fonment. Cecil, who lately had been created Baron of Burleigh, and
Lord High Treasurer of England, happend to be there at the fame
time. And though no minister ever entered more warmly into the
views of a sovereign, or gave fironger proofs of his fidelity and at-
tachment, than this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust
of every person, who approached the Queen of Scots, that her
suspicions extended even to him ; and while Mary justly reckoned
him her most dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty in per-
fuading his own miitrefs, that he was not partial to that unhappy
Queen -.

The duke of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppressive adminiftra-
tion rouzed a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhaufled
its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Requefens, who

* Mclv. 242. t Strype, . 248, 88.

succeed-

Book VI. succeeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enterprizing'
v-7- genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
15 73.

quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the ScottifhQueen,
and his zeal for her interest.

1574. THOUcG the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace, many
'pi't;R,~ert's of the evils, which accompany civil war, were still felt. The re-
tinn becomes fraints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little re-
OC:10US.

garded even by civilized nations, were totally despised by a fierce
people, unaccustomed to the regular adminiflration' ofjuftice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and under the protection of the one, or the other fadion, crimes of
every kind were committed, with impunity. The Regent set him-
self to redress there, and, by his indust-ry and vigour, order and fecu-
rity were re-eftabliflied in the kingdom. But he loft the reputation,
due to this important service, by the avarice, which he discovered,
in performing it; and his own exactions became more pernicious to
the nation, than all the irregularities, which he restrained -. Spies
and informers were every where employed; the remembrance
of old offences were revived; imaginary crimes were invented;
petty trefpaifes were aggravated; and delinquents were forced to
compound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time, the current coin was debased *; licences were fold

1- See Append. N°. VII.

* The corruption of the coin, during Morton's adminiflration, was very great. Al-

though the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gradually in-
creased by former princes ; the flandard or fincnefs suffered little alteration, and the mixture
of alloy was nearly the fame, with what is now ued. But Morton mixed a fourth part of
alloy, with every pound of silver, and funk, by confcquence, the value of coin, in prop9r-
tion. In the year 1581, all the money coined by him was called in, and appointed to be
recoined. The flandard was rcllorcd to the fame purity as formerly. Ruddim. Prxf. to
Anders. Diploni. p. 74.

for

for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, unusual taxes Book VI.
were imposed on commoditiesj and all the refinements in oppression, 1574.
from which, nations o imperfectly poliflled as the Scots are usually
exempted, were put in pratice. None of these were complained of
more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injustice towards the
Church. The thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy received
their fubfiffance, had always been slowly and irregularly paid to col-
lectors, appointed by the General Aflembly; and during the civil
wars, no payment could be obtained in several parts of the kingdom.
Under colour of redressing this grievance, and upon a promise of
assigning every Minister a fipend within his own parish, the Re-
gent extorted from the Church the thirds to which they had right
by law. But the Clergy, intlead of reaping any advantage from this
alteration, found that payments became more irregular and dilatory
than ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with the care
of four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and the
Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a new

misfortune to the Scottifl Queen. Henry III. who succeeded him,
had not the fame attachment to her person, and his jealousy of the
house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Qieen Mother, greatly
alienated him from her interet,.

TIE death of the Duke of Chatelherault mufft likewise be 1575.

confidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had frequently Janu""v '22
declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great
refpe among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than any

Crawf. Mem. 272. Spotfw. 73. Cald. 2. 40, 427*

other

Book VTJ.

J3575.

THE HISTORY

other pcrfun in the kingdom, to counterballance the Regent's
power.

SooN after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scottish and English marches, a scuffle happened, in which
the English were worsted; a few killed on the spot; and Sir James
Forester, the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too fen-
fible of the advantage, which resulted from the good understanding
that fubfited between the two kingdoms, to allow this flight acci-
dent to interrupt it.

Attempts of THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in ome danger
the Clergy
again t of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons, raised
picopal or- to the dignity of bishops, possessed very small revenues, and a very

moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent and
all his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions steal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such finall beginnings, the hierarchy
might grow, in time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever. The
chief author of there suspicions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man,
diftinguifihed by his uncommon erudition, by the severity of his
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends which he pursued, than
to the means which he employed for promoting them, he often de-
feated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and imprudence with
which he carried them on. A question was moved by him in the
assembly, " whether the office of biffhop, as now exerciscd in the
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?" In the ecclefiafti-

cal

cal judicatories, continual complaints were made of the bifbiops,Book VI.
for neglet of duty, many of which, their known remifnefs too well-'-'"
justified. The bishop of Dunkeld, being accused of dilapidating
his benefice, was found guilty by the aembly. And the Regent, -
instead of checking, connived at there disputes about Ecclefiafical
government, as- they diverted the zeal of the Clergy from attend-
ing to- his daily encroachments on the patrimony of the Church *.

THE weight of the Regent's opprefive. administration had, hi- 1576.

He irritates

therto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower, and middle rank; but some f the
he began now to fake such ifeps, as convinced the nobles, that their nbles.
dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effecs of his
power. An accident, which was a frequent cause of dissention.
among the Scottilh nobles, occasioned a difference between the Earls-
of Argyll and Athole. A vassal of the former had made ome de-
predations on the lands of the latter. Athole took arms to punifi:
the offender ; Argyll, to protect him; and this ignoble quarrel they
were ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by interposing
his authority, obliged them to disband their forces. Both of them
had been guilty of irregularities, which, though common, were
contrary to the letter of the law. Of these the Regent took advan--
tage, and resolved to found on them a charge of treason. This design
was revealed to the two Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The
common danger, to which they were exposed, compelled them to.
forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close confederacy, for. their
mutual defence. Their juntion rendered them formidable; they
despised the summons which the Regent gave them to appear before
a court of juflice; and he was obliged to defil from any further.

' Cald. Assemblies, 1574, &c. Johns. Hilt. 5.

prc;cution. But the injury he intended made a deep imprefiion on
their mirds, and drew on him revere vengeance *.

NOR was he more fuccefbful in an attempt, which he made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con
fpiracy against his life. Though those, who were supposed to be
his accomplices were seized, and tortured, no evidence of any thing
criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circumifances dif-
covered his innocence, as well as the Regent's secret views, in im-
puting to hinm such an odious design qt.

THE Scottish Nobles, who were almost equal to their Monarchs

in power, and treated by them with much diflindion, observed
these arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indigna-
tion. The people, who under a form of government extremely
simple, had been little accustomed to the burden of taxes, com-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards the young King, from whom they expected the
redress of all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle, and
more equal administration.

JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Queen,

soon after his birth, had committed him to.the care of the Earl of
Mar, and during the civil wars, he had resided securely in the cafile
of Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's brother, had the
chief dirction of his education. Under him, the famous Buchanan
acted as preceptor, together with three other masters, the most emi-
nent, the nation afforded, for skill in those sciences, which were
deemed necessary for a prince. The young King flewed an un-

* Crawf. Mcm. 285.

'.- Crawf. Mem. 287.

4 ,

B3o)lck VI.
F I \J

i576.

They turn
their yees to-
ward; the
JK:1g.

Jamnes' edu-
cation and
difporftion.

common

common pafldn for learning, and made great progress in it. And
the Scots fancied that they already discovered in him, all those vir-
tues, which the fondness or credulity of fubjeds usually ;ascribe to
princes, during their minority. But as James was still far from that
age, at which the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to the sentiments
of the people, nor refled, how naturally these prejudices in his
favour might encourage the King to anticipate that period. He not
only negleded to secure the friendship of those, who were about
the King's person, and who polfefied his ear, but had even exafpe-
rated -tome of them, by personal injuries. Their resentment con-
curred with the ambition of others, in infusing into the King early
suspicions of Morton's power, and designs. A King, they told him,
had often reason to fear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, and by interest, he would endeavour to keep the prince
in perpetual infancy, at a distance from his fubjeds, and unacquainted
with business. A small degree of vigour, however, was sufficient
to break the yoke. Subjeds naturally reverence their Sovereign,
and become impatient of the temporary and delegated jurifdidion
of a Regent. Morton had governed with a rigour, unknown to the
ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groaned under his op-
preflions; and would welcome the first profped of a milder admi-
niftration. At present, the King's name was scarce mentioned in
Scotland, his friends were without influence, and his favourites
without honour. But one effort would discover Morton's power to
be as feeble, as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt would put him-
self in poffeflion of his just authority, and rescue the nation from
intolerable tyranny. If he did not regard his own rights as a King,
let him liften, at leaf-, to the cries of his people *.

49

Book VI.

' 577.

He is fufpici-
ous of the
Regent's
power.
VOL. II.

M. 249.

11I

THtESE

Book VI. THESE suggestions made a deep impression on the young King,

577. who was trained up in an opinion that he was'born to command.

. plot formed His approbation of the design, however, was of 'small consequence,

g-;inlt the
Rccnt. without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyll and

Athole, two of the most powerful of that body, were animated
with implacable resentment against the Regent. To them the Ca-
bal in Stirling-caftle communicated the plot,; which was on foot ;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander. Erskine, who, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
had the command of that fort, and the custody of the King's per-
son, admitted them secretly into the King's presence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his fubjets, under the Re-
gent's arbitrary administration; they complained loudly of the in-
justice, with which themselves had been treated; and besought
the King, as the only means for redressing the grievances of the
nation, to call a council of the whole nobles. James conented,
and letters were itfued, in his name, for that purpose; but the two
Earls took care that they should be sent only to those, who were
known to bear no good will to Morton .

1578. THE number of there was, however, so considerable, that on
larch the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles assembled at

Stirling; and so highly were they incensed against Morton, that al-
though, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's interview
with the King, he had made a feint as if he would resign the Re-
gency, they advised the King, without regarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his office, and to take the adminifration of govern-
ment into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chancellor, and
-Icrreis, were appointed to signify this resolution to Morton, who

Spotfw. 278.

I~~~1~~~~~~~~ was,

was, at that time in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence. No- Book VI.
thing could equal the joy, with which this unexpected resolution '

1578.
filled the nation, but the furpize occasioned by the seeming ala-IHertfigns his

office and re-

crity, with which the Regent descended from so high a station, ties.
He neither wanted agacity to foresee the danger of resigning, nor
inclination to keep possession of an office, for the expiration of
which, the law had fixed so distant a term. But all the sources,
whence the faaion of which he was head, had derived their strength,
were either failed, or now supplied his adversaries with the means
of humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edinburgh, the Cler-
gy, were all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied oppref-
sions. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself by treaty, to fend a
considerable body of troops to the assistance of the inhabitants of
the Netherlands, who were struggling for liberty, had little leisure
to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as she had nothing to dread
from France, in whose councils the princes of Lorrain had not,
at that time, much influence, she was not displeased, perhaps, at
the birth of new factions in the kingdom. Even those nobles,
who had long been joined with Morton in facion, or whom he
had attached to his person by benefits, Glanis, Lindsay, Ruthven,
Pitcarn the secretary, Murray of Tillibarden Comptroller, all de-
sected his falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at Stirling.
So many concurring circumifances convinced Morton of his own
weakness, and determined him to give way to a torrent, which was
too impetuous to be efifted. He attended the chancellor and March 12.
Herreis to Edinburgh; was present when the King's acceptance
of the government was proclaimed; and, in the presence of the
people, surrendered to the king, all the authority to which he
had any claim in virtue of his office. This ceremony was c-
companied with such exccflive joy and acclamations of the mul-
titude, as added, no doubt, to the anguifm, which an ambi-
tious spirit must feel, when compelled to renounce flprelmc

t 2 power;

Book VI.

1578.

THE HISTORY

power; and convinced Morton how entirely he had loft the assec-
tions of his countrymen. He obtained, however, from the King
an a&, containing the approbation of every thing done by him in
the exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the most ample form,
that his fear or caution could devise, of all past offences, crimes,
and treasons. The nobles, who adhered to the King, bound them-
selves, under a great penalty, to procure the ratification of this a&,
in the firt parliament .

Continues to A COUNCIL of twelve nobles was appointed to afiit the King,
watch the mo-
tions of the in the administration of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own

party, and unable to struggle with the faction, which goveirned ab-
folutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and seemed to enjoy
the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amusements, of a
country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all
the uneasy reflections, which accompany disappointed ambition;
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even in
this retreat, which the people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and
abilities rendered him formidable. And the new Counsellors were
so imprudent as to rouze him, by the precipitancy with which
they hastened to firip him of all remains of power. They re-
quired him to surrender the cattle of Edinburgh, which was still in
his possession. He refused at firt to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
and repulsed a part of the garrison, which was ent out to guard
a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that important
fortress, without refiitance. This encouraged his adversarics
to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply
their demands upon him, in such a manner, as convinced him

* Spofwv. 278. Crawf. Mcm. 289. Cald. 2, 522.

that

that nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate Book VI.
hatred. 1578.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began already to decline.

The Chancellor, the ablest and most moderate man in the party,
having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter between
his followers, and those of the Earl of Crawford; Athole, who
was appointed his successor in that high office, the Earls of Eglin-
ton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at court,
were either avowed papists, or fufpeded of leaning to the opinions
of -that sea. In an age, when the return of Popery was, so much,
and fojuftly, dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as Morton
had always.treated the papits with rigour, this unseasonable indul-
gence made all zealous Protestants remember that circumstance in
his administration, with great praise *.

MORTON, to whom none of these particulars were unknown,Refumes his'

former au-

thought this the proper juncture for setting to work the inflru- thority.
ments, which he had been preparing. Having gained the confi-
dence of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother, he in-
finuated to them that Alexander Erskine had formed a plot to de-
prive his nephew of the government of Stirling-caftle, and the cuf-
tody of the King's person; and easily induced an ambitious woman,
and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent this supposed
injury. The Earl repairing, suddenly, to Stirling, and being ad-
mitted, as usual, into the castle with his attendants, seized the
gates early in the morning, and turned out his uncle, who dreaded April 26.
no danger from his hands. The soldiers of the garrison submitted
to him as their governor, and, with little danger, and no effusion

* Spotfw. 283

2 of

«

Book VI. of blood, he became maler both of the King's person, and the

C

-4T^J fobrtrefs .
1578.

AN event so unexpeced occasioned great consternation. And

though Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was
universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety, to change
their measures, and instead of pursuing him with such implacable
resentment., to enter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
fary, still so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkeith. And when they had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too sagacious not to improve the advantage,
May 24. which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded him,

set out in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Murray of
Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into the castle;
and managing matters there with his usual dexterity, he oon had
more entirely the command of the fort, than the Earl himself. He
was likewise admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired the
fame ascendant in it -.

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at Edin-

burgh now approached, this gave him some anxiety. He was
afraid of carrying .the young King to a city, whose inhabitants were
so much at the devotion of the adverse faction. He was no less
unwilling to leave James behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this
dilemma, he issued a proclamation, in the King's name, changing
the place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-caftle. This,
Athole and his party represented as a ftep altogether unconflitutional.

* Cald. 2. 535. f Cald. 2. 536.

The

The King, said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended Coun- Book VI.
fellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may re- -" ~
pair without fear, and where they may deliberate with freedom, is
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after disorders of such
long continuance. But in an assembly, called contrary to all form,
held within the walls of a garrison, and over-awed by armed men,
what safety could members expe ? what liberty could prevail in
debate ? or what-benefit result to the public ? The parliament met, July 25.
however, on the day appointed, and notwithstanding the protefta-
tion of the Earl of Montrose and Lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to business. The King's acceptance of the govern-
Inent was confirmed; the at granted to Morton, for his security,
ratified; some regulations, with regard to the numbers and autho-
rity of the privy council, were agreed upon; and a pension for life
granted to the Countess of Mar, who had been so inilrumental in
bringing about the late revolution *.

MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their followers, took arms, Argyll and

i r * s r-

' i TT- * r * * iAthole take

upon the specious pretence of rescuing the King from captivity, andarms aganit
the kingdom from oppreflon. James himself, impatient of the fer-lim
virude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long been
taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprize; though, at the
fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in public, but
to levy forces againfl them, and even to declare, by proclamation,
that he was perfectly free from any contlraint, either upon his per-
son, or his will. Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll and
Athole were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus, Mor-
ton's nephew, met them with an army 5000 flrong; neither party, Augu, 1n.
however, was eager to engage. Morton difirufted the fidelity of

* Cald. 2. 547. Parl. V. Jac. VI.

his

Book VI.

1578.

Elizaibcth ne-
gociates an
accommoda-
tion between
them.

THE HISTORY

his own troops. The two Earls were sensible that a single vitory,
however compleat, would not be decisive; and as they were in no
condition to undertake the siege of Stirling-caftle, where the King
was kept, their strength would oon be exhausted, while Morton's
own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen of England, might
furnish him with endless resources. By the mediation of Bowes,
whom Elizabeth had ent into Scotland to negociate an accommo-
dation between the two factions, a treaty was concluded, in confe-
quence of which, Argyll and Athole were admitted into the King's
pretence; ome of their party were added to the privy council;
and a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining
differences to an amicable iue *.

So oon' as James assumed the government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Elizabeth of
that event; to offer to renew the alliance between the two king-
doms; and to demand possession of the estate, which- had lately
fallen to him, by the death of his grandmother, the Countess of
Lennox. That Lady's second son had left one daughter, Arabella
Stewart, who was born in England. And as the chief objecion
against the pretensions of theScottifh line to the crown of England,
was that maxim of English law, which excludes aliens from any
right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by granting
this demand, would have established a precedent in James's favour,
that might have been esteemed decisive, with regard to a point,
which it had been her constant care to keep undecided. Without
suffering this delicate question to be tried, or allowing any new light
to be thrown on that, which the confidered as the great mystery
of her reign, fle commanded the rents of the cflate to bc i.quel-

CrawfM. Mem307.

tcred

tered by Lord Burleigh, master of the wards; and by this method Book VI.
of proceeding, gave the Scottish King early warning how necessary 1578.
it would be to court her favour, if ever [he- hoped for success in
claims of greater importance, but equally liable to be contro-
verted t

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending I579.

nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But it was fol-
lowed by a tragical event, Morton, in token of reconcilement hav- April z4.
ing invited the leaders of the opposite party to a great entertainment,
Athole the chancellor was, soon after, taken ill, and died within
a. few days. The symptoms and violence of the disease gave rife
to strong suspicions of his being poifoited. And though the phyfi-
cians, who opened his. body, differed in opinion as to the cause of the
distemper, the Chancellor's relations publickly accused Morton of
that odious crime. And the advantage which visibly accrued to
him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and averse from all
his measures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the people, who
are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent persons to extra-
ordinary causes.*.

THE office of Chancellor was bellowed upon Argyll, whom this Morton's 11-

legal proceed-

preferment reconciled, in a great measure to Morton's adminiftra- ings againfl
tion. He had now recovered all the authority he possessed during Hamilton0
his Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the power and
cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained to be
the objects of 'his jealousy, or to obftruc his designs, but that of
Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never reco-
vered the shock, which he received from the ill success of his pas-

t Camd.46i. * Spotfw. 306.

sion
VOL. IT.

Book VI. Lion for the Queen, and had now altogether loft his reason. Lord

Cc-^- John, the second brother, was in pofeffion of the family estate. Lord

Claud was Commendator of Paisley ; both of them young men,
ambitious, and enterprizing. Morton dreaded their influence in
the kingdom ; the courtiers hoped to flare their spoils among them;.
and as all princes naturally view their successors with jealousy and
hatred, it was easy to infuse these paflions into the mind of the young
King. A pretence was at hand tojuftify the most violent proceed-
ings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth, did not ex-
tend to those, who were accessary to the murder of the Regents
Murray or Lennox. Lord John and his brother were fufpeced
of being the authors of both these crimes, and had been included
in a general a of attainder onthat account. Without summoning
them to trial, or examining a ingle witness to prove the charge,
this attainder was now thought sufficient to subjed them to all the
penalties, which they would have incurred by beingformally convicted.
The Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the Lords
Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commission to seize their
persons and estates. On a few hours warning, a considerable body
of troops was ready, and marched towards Hamilton, in. hostile
array. Happily, the two brothers made their escape, though with
great difficulty. But their lands were confiscated; the castles of
Hamilton and Draffan besieged; those who defended them puni-h-
ed. The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his situation,
of committing any crime, was involved, by a hameful abuse of
law, in the common ruin of his family ; and as if he, too, could
have been guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These pro-
ceedings, so contrary to the fundamental principles of justice, were
all ratified in the subsequent parliament.*.

* Crawf. Mem. 31 1. Spotfv. 306,

tiAOU'r

ABOUT this time Mary ent, by Naue her ecretary, a letter to Book VI.

her son, together with ome jewels of value, and a vefl embroidered
with her own hands. But as he gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without being admitted
into his presence .

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular reason to fearNegociations

for a marriage

any attempt of the Popish Princes, in Mary's favour, he frill con- beteenEli-
tinued to guard her with the fame anxious care. The acquisition zbeh and

the Duke of

of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of the'Netherlands, Alencon.
on the other, fully employed the councils and arms of Spain.
France, torn in pieces by intefine commotions, and under a weak
and capricious prince, despised and distrusted by his own fubjetes,
was in no condition to diflurb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long
amused that court by carrying on a treaty of marriage with the
Duke of Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at the age
of forty five, he really intended to marry a Prince of twenty ? whe-
ther the pleasure of being flattered and courted, made her liften to the
addresses of so young a lover, whom he allowed to visit her at two
different times, and treated with the most ditinguithing refped ?
or whether considerations of interest, predominated in this, as
well as in every other tranfaaion of her reign, are problems in
history which we are not concerned to resolve ? During the pro-
grefs of this negociation, which was drawn out to an extraordinary
length, Mary could expect no assistance from the French court,
and seems to have held little correspondence with it. And there
was no period in her reign, wherein Elizabeth enjoyed more perfedl
security.

* Caws. Mem. 3 4.

MORTON
I 2

Book VI,

'579.

Two favou-
rites gain an
ascendant
over arme.
September 8.

THE. IS ISTORY

MORTON seems, at this time, to have been equally secure; but

his security was not so well founded. He had weathered out
one torm, had crushed his adversaries, and was again in pof-
fcffion of the sole direion of affairs. But as the King was now
of an age, when the character and dispositions of the mind begin.
to unfold themselves, and to become visible, the smallest attention
to these might have convinced him, that there was reason to expect
new and more dangerous attacks on. his power. James early dif-
covered that excessive attachment to favourites, which accompanied
him through his whole life. This paflion, which naturally arises.
from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be expected that
the choice of the obje&s, on whom he placed his affections, should:
be made with great skill. The most considerable of them, was-
Efme Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second brother of
the Earl of Lennox. He was diftinguiffed by the title of Lord
D'Aubigne, an estate in France, which descended to him from his
ancestors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their va-
lour, and services to the French crown. He arrived in Scotland,
about this time, on purpose to demand the estate and title of Len-
nox, to which he pretended a legal right. He was received, at firt,
by the King, with the refpea due to so near a relation. The
gracefulness of his person, the elegance of his dress, and his
courtly behaviour, made a great impression on James, who, even
in his more mature years, was little able to resist there frivolous
charms; and his affection flowed with its usual rapidity, and pro-
fusion. Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at court, he
was created Lord Aberbrothock, ofon after Earl, and then Duke of
Lennox, Governor of Dumbarton castle, Captain of the guard,.
firfl Lord of the bedchamber, and Lord High Chamberlain. At
the fame time, and without any of the envy, or interference,

which

which is usual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, Book VI.
the second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But'- 57
notwitlifanding this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were per-
sons of very opposite characers. The former was naturally gentle,
humane, candid; but unacquainted with the state of the country,
and misled, or misinformed by those, whom he trusted; not un-
worthy to be the companion of the young King, in his amuse-
ments, but utterly disqualified for ating as a Minister, in directing
his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices, which ren-
der a man formidable to his country, and a pernicious counsellor
to his Prince; nor did he posess anyone virtue, to counterbalance
these vices, unless dexterity in conduting his own designs, and
an enterprizing courage, superior to the sense of danger, may pass
by that name. Unrestrained by religion, regardless of decency,
and undismayed by opposition, he aimed at objects, seemingly un-
attainable.; but under a Prince, void of experience, and blind to.
all the defeAs of thoie, who had gained his favour, his audacity
was successful; and honours, wealth, and power, were the reward:
of his crimes,

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their whole address, They labour

to undermine

to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obltruCed their full Morton's a-
pofleffion of power. And as James had been bred up with an aver- thority.
sion for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the
authority of a Tutor, than to at with the obsequiousness of a Mi-
nifter, they found it no difficult matter to accomplish their design.
Morton, who could no longer keep the King shut up within the
walls of Stirling-caftle, having called a parliament to meet at Edin-oaober 17.
burgh, brought him thither. James made his entry into the capital,
with great solemnity; the citizens received him with the loudest

accla-

1 I "5/
I;)OK T' .

ij79

acclamations of joy, and with many expensive pageants, according
to the mode of that age. After a long period of thirty-fcven years,
during which, Scotland had been fubjeded to the delegated power
of Regents, orto the feeble government of a woman, and had sus-
sered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign
armies, the nation rejoiced .to fee the sceptre once more in the hands
of a King. Fond even of that shadow of authority, which a Prince
of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered themselves, that union,
order, and tranquillity would now be retfored to the kingdom.
James opened the parliament with extraordinary pomp, but nothing
remarkable paifed in it.

THESE demonfirations, however, of the people's love and attach-

ment to their Sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue their
insinuations against Morton; and as the King now resided in the
palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his subje&s had access, the
cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger, and the intrigue, which
occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

1580. MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and endeavoured to

dartous eto put a Pfop to the carreer of Lennox's preferment, by representing
preventthem.him as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religion, a secret

agent in favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the house of
Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
spread the alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of'
complaisance to his master, or convinced by the arguments of some
learned Divines, whom the king appointed to instruct him in the
principles of the Proteliant Religion, publicly renounced the errors
of Popery, in the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a mem-
ber of the Church of Scotland, by signing her Confession of Faith.

This,

3
62

This; though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence some Book VT.
zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac- S
cufation*.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was pre-

paring to seize the King's person, and to carry him into England.
Whether despair of maintaining his power, by any other means, had
driven him to make any overture of that kind to the English court,
or whether it was a calumny, invented by his adversaries to render
him odious, cannot now be determined with certainty. As he declared
at his death, that such a design had never entered into his thoughts,
the latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a pretence, how-
ever, for reviving the office of Lord Chamberlain, which had
been, for o.me time difuifed.' That honour was conferred on
Lennox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy, was his
deputy; they had under them a band of Gentlemen, who were
appointed constantly to attend the King, and to guard his perfont.

MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to in- Elizabeth in-

terpofes in his

sinuate, by such unusual precautions for the King's safety. And as behalf.
his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often
flood him in itead, in his greatest difficulties. In consequence of
this application, Bowes her envoy accused Lennox of pra6tices
against the peace of the two kingdoms, and infilled, in her name,
that he hould instantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered by the Counsellors, as an
Affront to the King, and an encroachment on the independency of
the kingdom. They affeaed to call in question the Envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence, refused him farther audience. He retired

* Crawf. Mem. 319. Spotfw. 308.

t Crawlv Men. 320.

BookVI. in disgu-st, anid without taking leave; Sir Alexander Home was
_'.. font toexpoftulate with Elizabeth on the subjec. After the treat-

;ment, which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought it below
her dignity to admit Home into her preence. Burleigh, to whom
he was commanded to impart his commifiion, reproached him with
his Master's ingratitude towards a benefacrefs, who had placed the
crown on his head, and required him to advise the King to beware
of sacrificing the friendship of so necessary an ally, to the giddy
humours of a young man, without experience, and strongly sus-
peded of principles, and attachments, incompatible with the hap-
piness of the Scottish nation.

Morton ac- THIS accusation of Lennox hatlened, in all probability, Mor-
cufideof the n's fall. The at of indemnity, which he had obtained when he
late King. resigned the Regency, was worded with such scrupulous exatnefs,

as almost screened him from any legal prosecution. The murder
of the late King was the only crime, which could not, with de-
cency, be inserted in a pardon, granted by his son. Here Morton
till lay open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stewart,
who shunned no ation, however desperate, if it led to power, or
to favour, entered the council-chamber, while the King and nobles
December30. were assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Morton of being

acceiary, or according to the language of the Scottish law, art and
part, in the conspiracy against the life of his Majesty's father, and
offered, under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dence. Morton, who was present, heard this accusation with firm-
ness; and replied with a disdainful smile, proceeding either from
contempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
fcioufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known zeal, in punilf.
ing those who were fufpeted of that detestable crime, might well

exempt
-.64

OF S COT L A N D. 65

exempt hinfelf from any suspicion of being acceflary to it, never- Book VI.
thelefs, he would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that place, 15o
or in any other court; and doubted not but his own innocence,
and the malice of his enemies, would then appear in the clearest
light." Stewart, who was still on his knees, began to enquire how
he would reconcile his beflowing so many honours on Archbald
Douglas, whom he certainly knew to be one of the murtherers,
with his pretended zeal against that crime. Morton was ready to
answer. But the King commanded both of them to be removed.
The Earl was confined, first of all, to his own house, and then 158( .
committed to the castle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erskine Januar"y
was Governor; and as if it had not been a fuflicient indignity to
Tidbije him to the power of one of his enemies, he was, oon after,
carried to Dumbarton, of which Lennox had the command. A January 1S.
warrant was, likewise, iflued for apprehending Archbald Douglas;
but he, having received timely intelligence of the approaching
danger, fled intoAEngland *.

Tirn Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent proceedings not

to hatred againfi Morton alone, but to the ancient enmity between
the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that a con-
fpiracy was now formed for the deftrution of the whole name, was
ready to take arms in order to rescue his kinsman. But Morton
absolutely sorbad any such attempt, and declared that he would
rather susser ten thousand deaths, than brin'g an imputation on his
own character by seeming to decline a trial -.

* Caws. Mem. 323. - Johnft. 64. SpotfW. 3 .
'VOL. I.

K

ELrz2A-

ELIZABETH did not fail to interpose, with warmth, i behalf of

a man, who had contributed so much to preserve her influence over
Scotland. The late transactions in that kingdom had given her
e great uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquired inde-

pendant of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambaffaddrs had
met with, differed greatly from the. refped, with which the Scots
were in use to receive her ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an intention to sow the
feeds of discord between the two nations, and to seduce James into
a new alliance with France,, or into a marriage with some Popish
Princess. Full of these apprehensions, she ordered a considerable
body of troops to be assembled on the borders of Scotland, and def-
patched Randolph as her ambassador into that kingdom. He ad-
dressed himself not only to James, and to his council, but to a Con-
vention. of eflates met at that time. He began with enumerating
the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had conferred on the
Scottish naton: That without demanding a single foot of land for
herself, without encroaching on the liberties of the kingdom in the
finalleft article, she had, at the expence of the blood of her sub-
jects, and the treasures. of her Crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, eftablilfed among them true Religion, and
put them in poffeflion of their ancient rights: That from the begin-
ling fie had proteced those, who espoused the King's cause, and
by her afliftance alone, the Crown was preserved on his head, and
all the attempts of the adverse faction baffled': That an unions
unknown to their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had subsisted for a long period of years, and though so many
Popifli Princes had combined to diturb this happy dfate of things,
her care, and their conflancy, had hitherto defeated all these efforts:.
That fle had obfcrved, of late, an unusual coldncfs, diftruf, and

efirange-

66
Book VI

15 8 r.

E lizabeth's
n:caliues in
crdir to av
hili.

elrangement in the Scottilh Council, which he .cculd impute toBookVI.
none but to Lennox, a subjed of France, a retainer to the house ~--
of GuiTe, bred -up in the errors of Popery, and still fufpeded of
favouring that fuperitition. Not satisfied with having mounted so
fast to such an uncommon height of power, which he exercised
with all the rashness of youth, and all the ignorance of a firanger
nor thinking it enough to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the
authority; due to his abilities, and experience, he had conspired
the ruin of that nobleman, who had often exposed his life in the
King's cause, who had contributed more than any other subjel to
place him on the throne, to resist the encroachments of Popery, and
to preserve the union between the two kingdoms. If any zeal for.
religion remained among the nobles of Scotland, if they wished for
the continuance of amity with England, if they valued the pri-
vileges of their own order, he called upon them, in the name of
his Miflrefs, to remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lennox
from the presence of the young King, to rescue Morton out of the
hands of his avowed enemy, and secure to him the benefit of a fair
and impartial trial. And if force were necefiary towards accom-
plifhing a design so salutary to the King and kingdom, he promised
them the protection of his Mistress in the enterprize, and what-
ever assistance they hould demand either of men or money *.

BUT there extraordinary remonstrances, accompanied with such

an unusual appeal from the King to his fubjods, were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and againt
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour'of complimenting James on account

* Cald. 3. 6. Strype, 2. 6zl.

K 2

of

Book VI.

1581.

T HE HIS TORY

of the valour, -wbich. many of his subje&s had displayed in the
service of the States, to enter into a long detail of the restless en-
terprizes of the Popish Princes againit the Protestant Religion;
to beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their dangerous
cabals; and above all things, to ditruft the insinuations of those,
who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
British nations, which all the Proteflants in Europe beheld with so,
much pleasure*.

Janes deter- JAMIES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the deftrution of
mines to pro-
ceed againilt their enemy to liften to these remonitrances. The officious inter-

position of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's.
message, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjeds to rebel
against their Sovereign, were confidered as unexampled insults on
the Majesty and independance of a crowned-head. A general and
evasive answer was' given to Randolph. James prepared to aert.
his own dignity with spirit. All those fufpeaed of favouring Morton
were turned out of office, some of them were required to surrender,
themselves prisoners; thefencible men throughout the kingdom were
commanded to take arms; and troops were levied, and posted, on
the borders. The English ambassador, finding that neither the
public manifetlo which he had delivered to the Convention, nor his
private cabals with the nobles could excite them to arms, fled in
the night-time out of Scotland, where libels against him had been
daily published, and even attempts made upon his life. In both
kingdoms every thing wore an hostile asped. But Elizabeth,
though he wished to have intimidated the Scottiflh King by

" Card. 3. 9.

her

her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war with him, Book VI.
and the troops on the borders, which had given such umbrage,. I58 .
were soon dispersed *.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's safety,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
deftruti.n. Captain Stewart his accuser was first appointed Tutor
to the Earl of Arran, and: soon after both the title and estate. of his
unhappy ward, to which he advanced some frivolous claim, were
conferred upon. him. The new made Peer was commanded to
conduc Morton from Dumbarton. to Edinburgh;. and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expet,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his mortal enemy already
loaded with honours, in, reward of the malice with which he had
contributed'to his ruin.

THE records of the court of juficiary at this period are loft. The He is tried

and con-

account which our hifforians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and demned.
u'nsatisfactory. The whole proceedings eem to have been violent,
irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order to extort evidence, tor-
tured feveral-of the Earl's domestics with unusual cruelty. During
the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in different
parts of the city. The jury was composed of the Earl's known
enemies; and though he challenged everal of them, his objections
were over-ruled. After a short consultation, his peers found him
guilty.of concealing, and of being art and part in the conspiracy
against the life of the late King. The first part of the verdit did
not furprize him, but he twice. repeated the words art and part with

Crawf. Mem. 328. Strype, z. App. 138..

some

Book VI. ome vehemnence, and added,' ' God knowsit is' nt so£."' The

'8... doom, which the law decrees againfi a Traitor,:Cwas ponbunc'd.

The King, however, remitted the cruel and ignomiiious--iat of th-'
sentence, and appointed that he hould susser death next day, by
being beheaded *.

: '

* ' ,-
His death. DURING that awful interval, Morton polfefTed the utroft comn-

pofure of mind. He fupped chearfully; slept a part of the night,
in his usual manner; and employed the reft of his time in religious
conferences, and in afts of devotion, with some Ministers of the
city. The Clergymen who attended him, dealt freely with his con-
science, and pressed his-crimes home upon him. What he con-
fested with regard to the crime for Which he suffered is remark-
able, and supplies, in some measure, the imperfedion of our records.
He acknowledged, that on his return from England after the death
of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy against the
King, which the Queen, as he told him, knew of and approved;
that he follicited him to concur in the execution of it, which, at
that time, he absolutely declined; that, oon after, Bothwell him-
self, and Archbald Douglas, in his name, renewing their foilicita-
tions to the fame purpose, he had required a warrant, under the
Queen's hand, authorizing the attempt, and as that had never been
produced, he had refused to be any farther concerned in the matter.
c But, continued he, as I neither consented to this treasonable a,

nor assisted in the committing of it, so it was impossible for me to

"reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I make the discovery ?
" The Q.een was the author of the enterprize. Darnly was such

a changeling, that no secret could be safely communicated to him.

* Spotfw. 315. Johnfl. 65. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald .

3 .
4.

" Isntly

IHluntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief iway in the kingdom, Book :I.

," were themselves the perpetrators of the crime." These circum- "--v-
,ftarces, ,it.muft be confessed, go fomne length towards extenuating
MqrtoR's guilt;. and though his -apology for the favour, he had
shewn- to Archbald Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the cgn-
fpirators, be far less fatisfadory, no uneasy reflecions seem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account *. - When his keepers told
him that the guards were attending, and all: things in. readineI,
' I praise my. God, said 'he, I amn ready likewise." Arran com-
manded there guards; and even in those moments, when the mot
implacable hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could
not' forbear this insult.- On the fcaffdid, his behaviour was calm;
hist. ountenance and voice unaltered; and after some time spent in
devotion, he;fuffered death with the intrepidity, which became the
·name of Douglas. His head was placed on the public jail of Edin-
burgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, co-
vered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to the
-usual burial-place of criminals. .None of his friends durst accom-
pany it to the grave, or discover their gratitude and refpet by any
symptoms of sorrow t.

ARRAN, no lets profligate in private life, than audacious in his Odiou, con-

public conduct, oon after drew the attention of his countrymen, duos Arran
by his infamous marriage with the Countess of March. Before he
grew into favou'r at court, he had been often entertained in her
husband's house, and without regarding the laws of hospitality or
·of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of his
bencfactor, a woman young and beautiful, but, according to the

Crawf. Mem. App. 3. t Crawf. Memn 34.. Spotfw. 313.

defcrip-

Book VI., erfciption ;6f a cotemporary Historian, " intolerable 'in all the im-

5- perfections, incident to her sex." ;:Impatient of a'ny restraint upon

. their mutual desires, they, with equal ardor, wished to avow their
union publickly, and to legitimate, 'by a marriage, the offspring
of their unlawful pafion. The Countess petitioned to be divorced
from her huiband, for a reason, which no modest woman will ever
plead. The judges, over-awed by Arran, passed entence without
July 6. delay. And 'this infamous scene was concluded by a marriage,

solemnized& with great pomp, abd':beheld by 'all ranks of tnen with
the utmof horror *
-Odober h4.

A Parliament was held his year, at the opening of which some

.diputes atofe between Arran and theEarl now created Duke of
[Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition 'began to asset an equality with the Duke, under whose
protection he had hitherto been contented to place himself. After
various attempts to form a party in the council against Lennox, he
'found him fixed so firily in the King's aections, that it was im-
poffble to Ihake him, and rather than lose all interest at court, from
which he was banished, he made the most humble submissions to
the favourite; and again recovered his former credit. This rupture
'contributed, however, to render the Duke still more odious to the
nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affected to court the
'Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the Protestant Religion,
and laboured to confirm the suspicions, which were entertained of
his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, and a favourer of
-Popery. As he was fppofed to be acquainted with the Duke's
n oft fecrct designs, his calumnies were listened to with more cre-

* Spotfw. 315.

7it

dit, than was due to his characer. To the fame cause, we muffBook VI.
ascribe several ads of parliament uncommonly favourable to the 1581.
Church, particularly one, which abolished the practice, introduced
by Morton, of appointing but one miniser to several parishes.

No notice -hath been taken for ome years of Ecclesiastical as- Eccefiafca

fairs. While the civil government underwent so many extraordi-
nary revolutions, the.Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objects, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy. The one
was the forming a fyifem of discipline, or Ecclefiafical polity.
After long labour, and many difficulties, this was at last brought to
some degree of perfection. The Assembly solemnly approved of it,
and appointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order to ob-
tain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, during his
administration, and those who, after his fall, governed the King,
were equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution; and by
flarting difficulties, and throwing in objections, prevented it from
receiving a legal fanaion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The bishops were so devoted to the
King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the funcion itself
was by some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed a
feat in parliament, and diftinguifled by titles of honour, these not
only occasioned many avocations from their spiritual employments,
but soon rendered their charater and manners extremely different
from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles viewed their power
with jealousy, the populace confidered their lives as profane, and
wified their downfal with equal ardour. The personal emulation
between Melvil and Adamson, a man of learning, and eminent for
his popular eloquence, who was promoted, on the death of Doug-
glas, to be arcllbifhop of St. Andrew's, mingled itfiIf with the

VOL. II. L passions

73

in every assembly, on the order of bishops; their privileges were-
gradually circumscribed; and at last an at was passed, declaring
the office of bilhop, as it was then exercised within the realm, to
have neither foundation nor warrant in the word of God; and re-
quiring, under pain of excommunication, all who now possessed
that office, instantly to resign it, and to abstain from preaching or
adminiftring the sacraments, till they hould receive permission
from the assembly. The court did not acquiesce in this decree.
A vacancy happening, oon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Montgo--
mery Minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and
more apt, by the blemishes in his characer, to have alienated the
people from an order already beloved, than to reconcile them to
one which was the object of their hatred, firuck up an infamous.
bargain with Lennox, and on his recommendation was chosen
Archbiflop. The Presbytery of-Stirling of which he was a mem-
ber, the prelbytery of Glasgow whither he was to be translated,
the General Afiembly, vied' with each other in prosecuting him
on that account. In order to screen Montgomery, James made
582. trial both of gentle and of rigorous measures, and both were

equally ineffectual. The General Assembly was just ready to pro-
nounce against him the sentence of excommunication, when an
Herald entered and commanded them, in the King's name, and
under pain of rebellion, to flop further proceedings. Even this
injunction they despised. And though Montgomery, by his tears,
and eeming penitence, procured a flort respite, the sentence was
at last iued by their appointment, and published in all the churches
throughout the kingdom.

B
k. 74.

;aTHE HSTORY'a u

THE firmness of the Clergy in a colledive body, was not greater

than the boldness of forne individuals, particularly of the MinifRers
of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily againfl the corruptions in the
administration, and, with the freedom of fpcech admitted into the
pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief authors
of the grievances, under which the church and kingdom groaned.
The courtiers, in their turn, complained to the King of the info-
lent and seditious spirit of the Clergy. In order to check the bold-
ness of their discourses, James ifTued a proclamation, commanding
Dury, one of the most popular Ministers, not only to leave the
town, but to abflain from preaching in any other place. Dury
complained, to the judicatories of the Church, of this encroach-
ment upon the immunities of his office. They approved of the
doctrine which he had delivered; and he determined to disregard
the royal proclamation. But the magifirates being determined to
compel him to leave the city, according to the King's orders, he
was obliged to abandon his charge, after protesting publickly, at the
cross of Edinburgh, against the violence, which was put upon him.
The people accompanied him to the gates, with tears and lamenta-
tions; and the Clergy denounced the vengeance of heaven against
the authors of this outrage .

75
Book VI.

1582.

IN this perilous ituation flood the Church; the authority of its

judicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit re-
firained, when a sudden revolution in the civil government procured
them unexpected relief.

TiHE two favourites, by their ascendant over the King, poflheTed His furilo
uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and exercised it witl the ut- King in

popular me;-
Cald. Aflimb. S76-- 158z2. Spotfw. 277, c. fures.

110no
L 2

ook VI.

I ~2, .

Ihe nobles
con~ir~c 3-
gainft teni.

THE HISTORY

most wantonness. James usually resided at Dalketth or Kinneil, the
feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended by such company,
and employed in such amusements, as did not suit his dignity.
The services of those, who had contributed most to place the
Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who
had opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the rewards
and honours, to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions
of regal prerogative, utterly inconfirent with the conflitution of
Scotland, being infilled by them into the mind of the young Mo-
narch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impression there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent errors in the go-
vernment of both kingdoms *. Courts of justice were held in almofft
every county, the proprietors of land were called before them, and
upon the slightest neglect of any of the numerous forms, which are
peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual and into-
lerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the absolute jurif-
diion of his office over the Burroughs, and they were fubjeded to
exadtions no less grievous. A design seemed, likewise, to have been
formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with her,
which all good Protestants eeemed the chief security of their re-
ligion in Scotland. A close correspondence was set on foot between
the King and his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty of aflociation, as
Maitland had projected; which could not fail of endangering or
diminiihing his authority, and must have proved fatal to those, who
had ated against her with grcatcft vigour --.

ALL these circumtfances irritated the impatient spirit of the

Scottifl nobles, who resolvcd to tolerate no longer the insolence of
the two minions, or to stand by, while their presumption and in-

* C;ll, 3. 152.

experience
t C1(1. 3. 157.

experience ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who, Book VI.
during the administration of the four Regents, had the entire direc- -2
tion of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence
in that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and was ready to
countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into measures, so repugnant to
all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven,
lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor
of Glamis, the Mafier of Oliphant, with several Barons and gen-
tlemen of diftintion, entered into a combination for that purpose.
And as changes in administration, which among polished nations,
are brought about slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were
in that rude age effeced suddenly and by violence, the King's
situation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the con.
fpirators to have immediate recourse to force.

JAMES, after having resided for ome time in Athole, where he Seize the

King's person

enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now returning, Ruthven.
towards Edinburgh, with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven-
cafile, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeted no danger, he went
thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of strangers whom Augur 22.
he found there gave him ome uneasiness; and as those who were
in the secret arrived every moment from different parts, the appear-
ance of so many new faces increased his fears. He concealed his
uneasiness, however, with the utmost care; and next morning pre-
pared for the field, expecing to find there some opportunity of
making his escape. But jut as he was ready to deprt, the Nobles
entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented a memorial against
the illegal and oppressive ations of his two favourites, whom they
represented as most dangerous enemies to the religion and liberties of
the nation. James, though he received this remonflrance with the

com-

Book VI. moil wantonness. James uffually resided at Dalketh or Kinneil, the

feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended by such company,
and employed in such amusements, as did not suit his dignity.
The services of those, who had contributed most to place the
Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who
had opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the rewards
and honours, to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions
of regal prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the constitution of
Scotland, being infilled by them into the mind of the young Mo-
narch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impreflion there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent errors in the go-
vernment of both kingdoms *. Courts of justice were held in almost
every county, the proprietors of land were called before them, and
upon the slightest neglect of any of the numerous forms, which are
peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual and into-
lerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the absolute jurif-
ditionl of his office over the Burroughs, and they were fubjeced to
exactions no less grievous. A design seemed, likewise, to have been
formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with her,
which all good Proteflants eeemed the chief security of their re-
ligion in Scotland. A close correspondence was set on foot between
the King and his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty of aociation, as
Maitland had projected; which could not fail of endangering or
diminihfing his authority, and muff have proved fatal to those, who
had aed against her with grcatcft vigour -.

The nobCls ALL thee circumstances irritated the impatient spirit of the
conflire a-
gaint theim. Scottifl nobles, who resolved to tolerate no longer the insolence of

the two minions, or to fland by, while their presumption and in-

* Cald. 3. 152.

experience
I. Ct(d. 3 157.

experience ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who, Book VI.
during the adminifration of the four Regents, had the entire direc- 1 82
tion of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence
in that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and was ready to
countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into measures, £o repugnant to
all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven,
lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor
of Glamis, the Matler of Oliphant, with several Barons and gen-
tlemen of diftintion, entered into a combination for that purpose.
And as changes in adminirfiation, which among polished nations,
are brought about slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were
in that rude age effeced suddenly and by violence, the King's
situation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the con-
fpirators to have immediate recourse to force.

JAMES, after having resided for ome time in Athole, where he Seize the

King's person

enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now returningatRthven.
towards Edinburgh, with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven-
castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeded no danger, he went
thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of itrangers whom Augul 2.
he found there gave him some uneasiness; and as those who were
in the secret arrived every moment from different parts, the appear-
ance of so many new faces increased his fears. He concealed his
uneasiness, however, with the utmost care; and next morning pre-
pared for the field, expecting to find there ome opportunity of
making his escape. But just as he was ready to depart, the Nobles
entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented a memorial against
the illegal and oppreflive aions of his two favourites, whom they
represented as most dangerous enemies to the religion and liberties of
the nation. James, though he received this remonstrance with the

com-

Book VI.

1582.

Commit Ar-
ran to prison

THE HISTORY

complaisance which was necessary in his present situation, was ex-
tremely impatient to be gone; but as'he approached the door of the
apartment, the Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him. The King
comp!ained, expoflulated, threatned, and finding all these without
efl-Tct, burst into tears, " No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better
children weep than bearded men." These words made a deep im-
preflion on the King's mind, and were never forgotten. The con-
fpirators, without regarding his tears or indignation, difmifed such
of his followers as they suspected; allowed none but their own party
to have access to him; and though they treated him with great re-
fpet, guarded his person with the utmost care. This enterprize.is
usually called, by our hiflorians, The raid of Ruthven *.

LENNOX and Arran were astonishcd to the laft.degree at an event

so unexpected, and so fatal to their power. The former endea-
voured, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from captivity. The
latter, with his usual impetuosity, mounted on horseback the mo-
ment he heard what had befallen the King, and with a few fol-
lowers, rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable body
of the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of Mar, lay
in his way ready to oppose him, he separated himself from his com-
panions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the castle.
At the fight of a man so odious to his country, the indignation
of the conspirators rose, and instant death muff have been the
punilhment of his rafinefs, if the friendship of Gowrie, or ome
other cause not explained by our historians, had not saved a life,
so pernicious to the kingdom. He was confined, however, to

Cald. 3. 134. Spots. 320. Mclv, 357.

the

die castle of Stirling, without being admitted into the King's Book VI.
preence. 1582.

THE King, though really the prisoner of his own fubjeds, with Command

,Lennox to

whose conduct he could not help discovering many symptoms of leave the
disgust, was obliged to publish a proclamation, signifying his appro- kingdom.
bation of their enterprize, declaring that he himself was at full
liberty, without any restraint or violence offered to his person ; and
forbidding any attempt against those concerned in the Raid of Ruth-
ven, under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
fame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before theAugut z8.
2oth of September *..

SOON after, Sir George Carey; and Bowes, arrived as ambalTadors The Coifpi-

rators coun-

from Elizabeth, The pretext of their embaffv was to inquire after tenanced by
the King's safety; to encourage, and countenance the confpiratorsEiizatcth.
was the real motive of it. By their intercession, the Earl of Angus,
who, ever since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile,
obtained leave to return. And the acceflion of a nobleman so
powerful and so popular itrengthened the facion -.

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured him

many friends, and who received private afirances that the King's
favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at
first, to pay no regard to a command, extorted by violence, and no
less disagreeable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to him.
self. But the power of his enemies, whowere masters oftheKing'sper-
son, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and openly applauded
by the Clergy, deterred him from an enterprize, the success of

* Cald. 3. 135, 13L ft Cald. 3. 152.

which

Book VI. which wa dubious, and the danger certain both to himself, and to

582-. his Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure by various arti-
,!58z.

sices, in expecation either that James might make his escape from
the conspirators, or that fortune might present some more favour-
able opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

Their con- ON the other band, the conspirators were extremely solicitous not
dut approved
b, an Afcm- only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
bly and a
conver.tion some legal fantion of their enterprise. For this purpose, they
of eates. published a long declaration, containing the motives, which had in-

duced them to venture on such an irregular ftep, and endeavoured
to heighten the public indignation against the favourites, by repre-
senting, in the strongest colours, their inexperience and insolence,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of the privileges of
the Church, and their oppression of the people. They obliged the
King, who could not with safety refuse any of their demands, to
grant them a remission in the most ample form; and not satisfied
a)cober 3. with that, they applied to the Assembly of the Church, and easily

procured an a, declaring, " that they had done good and accept-
able service to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native country ;"
and requiring all sincere Proteflants to concur with them in carry-
ing forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add the greater
weight to this ad, every Minister was enjoined to read it, in his
own pulpit, and to infliEt the censures of the Church on those
who set themselves in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven-
tion of estates, assembled a few days after, paifed an at to the
fame effet, and granted full indemnity to the conspirators for every
thing they had done *.

* Cald. 3. 177, I87S 200. SpotCw. 322,

JAMES
so

JAMES was conduced by them, first to Stirling, and afterwards Book VI.

to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe; and though he was received every 8
where with the external marks of refped due to his dignity,. his Lennox's de-

parture from

motions were carefully observed, and he was under a refRraint no Scotland.
less firi&, than at the first moment when he was seized by the con-
fpirators. Lennox, after eluding many commands to depart out of
the kingdom, was at last obliged to' begin his journey. He lingered,
however; for some time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as
if he had fill intended to make one effort towards -restoring the
King to liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own dif-
position, averse to blood-shed and the disorders of civil war, or
from some other cause, unknown to us, he abandoned the design,
and set out for France, by the way of England. The King issued Decem. 30.
the order for his departure, with no less reluctance than the Duke
obeyed it,. And both mourned a separation, which neither of them
had power to prevent. Soon- after his arrival in France, the fatigue
of the journey, or the anguish of his mind, threw him into a
fever. In his last moments, he discovered such a firm adherence
to the Protestant faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im-
putation of an attachment to Pqpery,, with which he had been un
charitably loaded in Scotland . As he was the earliest, and best
beloved, he was, perhaps, the most deserving, though not the
most able of all James's favourites. The warmth and tenderness
of his Master's affection for him was not abated by death itself.
Bjy many as of kindness and generosity towards his poflerity,
the King not only did great honour to the memory of Lennox,
but set his own character in one of the most favourable points
of view.

' Spo.tfw. 324.
VOL. I MT Tr,

J- 'Js

- Iat

Book Vi.- THE fuccef: of the conspiracy, which deprived James of liberty,

~58zn. made great noise over all Europe; and at last reached the ears of
lary's anxie- Mary in the prison to which the was confined. As her own expe-
tv about her
son. rience had taught her what injuries a captive prince is xpofed to

susser; and as many of those, who were now concerned in the en-
terprize againfl her son, were the fame persons whom she confi-
dered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural for
the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that the fame calamities
were ready to fall on his head; and such a profpec did not fail of
adding to the distress and horror of her own situation. In the an-
guifh of her heart, she wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bit-
terest terms of the unprecedented rigour, with which he herself
had been treated, and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the
mercy of his rebellious fubjets; nor permit him to be involved in
the fame misfortunes, under which he had so long groaned. The
peculiar vigour and acrimony of stile, for which this letter is re-
markable, discover both the high spirit of the Scottish Queen, un-
subdued by her sufferings, and the violence of her indignation at
Elizabeth's artifices and severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the
end he had in view, and accordingly it neither procured any miti-
gation of the rigour of her own confinement, nor anyinterpofition
in favour of the King *.

1583. HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated the Princes of

Ambassadors Guise, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed with
arrive from
France and warmth, in order to extricate James out of the hands of a party so
England.

entirely devoted to the Englilh interest. He commanded M. de la
Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at the court of England, to repair
,to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmost endeavours towards
placing James in a situation, more iuitable to his dignity. As Eli-

* Camd. 489.

zabeth
5

zabeth could not, with decency,' refiute him liberty to execute this Book VI.
commillion, he appointed Davison to attend him into Scotland as '583
her Envoy, under -colour of concurring with him in the negocia-
tion, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions, and to obftrud
his success. James, whose title to- the Crown had not hitherto
been recognized by any of the princes on the continent, was ex-
tremely fond of such an honourable embafly from the French Mo-
narch; and, on that account, as well as for the fake of the errand January 7.
on which he came, received Fenelon with great refpe&. The no-
bles, in whose power the King was, did not relish this interposition
of the French court, which had long loft its ancient influence over
the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed at the danger
to which religion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise hould
recover any ascendant over the public councils. And though the
King tried every method for restraining them within the bounds of
decency, they declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise, against the ambassador, against entering into any
alliance with such notorious persecutors of the Church of God, with
a vehemence, which no regular government would now tolerate,
but which was then extremely common. The ambassador, watched
by Davison, distrusted by the nobles, and exposed to the insults
of the Clergy, and of the people, returned into England with-
out procuring any change in the King's situation, or receiving any
answer to a proposal which he made, that the government hould
be carried on in the joint names of James, and the Queen his
mother .

MEANWHILE, James, though he dissembled with great art, be-James escapes
came every day more uneasy under his confinement; his uneasiness hnds of the

conspirators.
Cald. 3. 07o. Spotfw. 3z4. See Append. N. VIII.

M 2 rendered

Book VIi rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper pportiniity
1L83T n for making his efcape;,andto this attention, heatlaft owed hisliberty,

which the King of France was not able, nor the.Queen of England
willing to procure for him. As,the conspirators had -orced Lennox
out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a distance from.court, they
grew secure; and imagining that time had reconciled the King to,
them, and to his situation, they watched him with little care. Some
occasions of discord had arisen among themselves; and the French
ambassador, by fomenting there, during the.time of his residence
in Scotland, had weakened the union, in which alone their safety
conrifted *. Colonel William Stewart, the commander of the band.
of gentlemen, who guarded the King's person, being gained by-
James, had the principal merit in the scheme- for reforing his maf--
Jie 27. ter to liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March

his grand uncle, James was permitted to go from Falkland to St.
Andrew's. That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged at
firtf, in an open defenceless house in the town, but pretending a
curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner was he entered with ome of
his attendants whom he could trust, than Colonel Stewart com-
manded the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of his train..
Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Hnttly, Crawford, Montrose,
Rothes, with others to whom the secret had been communicated,.
entered the town with their followers; and though Mar, with fe-
veral of the leaders of the fation, appeared in arms, they found
themselves so far out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of re-
covering poffeflion of the King's person, which had been in their
power iomewhat longer than ten months. James was naturally of so
soft and ductile a temper, that those who were near his person, com-
monly made a deep impreflion on his heart, which was formed to

' Camd. 482.

be

be under the sway of favourites. - s he rehiained'implpcabIe&iid B60ok VI.
unreconciled to the corifpirators, during so Ibng a time, and at a 5.83
period.of life when refentmerits are rather violent than laftirig, they
must either have improved the .opportunities of infinuting them-
selves into favour with little dexterity, or the indignation, with
which this first insult to his person and authority filled him, must
have been very great.

HIs joy at his escape was youthful and excefive. He resolved, Refiovest

however, tro
however, by the advice of Sir James Melvil, and his wisest coun- treat them

with modet,-

.fellors,. to ad with the utmost moderation. Having called, intotion.
his presence, the leaders of both factions, the neighbouring gentry,
the deputies of the adjacent burroughs, and the Ministers and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that although he had been held
under reftrant. for ome time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the irregu-
larities, which had been so frequent during his minority, would
pass ageneral adc of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeds with un-
distinguishing and equal affecion. And as an evidence of his fin-
cerity, he visited the Earl of Gowrie at Ruthven-caftle, and granted
him a full. pardon of any guilt he had corntraded, by the crime
committed. in that very place *.

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderate But Ar.iuln i

plan. His former favourite, the Earl of Arran, had been per- gains his afr
plan. His former favourite, the Earl of Arran, had been. per- cendant over
mitted for some time to reside at Kenneil, one of his country feats. hl''
As 'oon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and he expressed a strong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion, whose insolent and

' Mclv. 272.

overbearing

86
Book VI.

1583.

And the'Kin
pursues ano-
ther plan.

Elizabeth's
solicitations
in behalf of
the confpira-
tors.
August 7.

overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detefed
his crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and pro-
mifing that he should continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient assec-
.tion; the King forgot his pronife; Arran regained his ascendant
over him ; and within a few days resumed the exercise of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite, and all the rah-
ness peculiar to himself*.

g THE first effed of his influence was a:proclamation with regard,
to those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven. They were required
to acknowledge their crime in the humblet manner; and the iing
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their.future, cp3idudt
were such, as did not oblige him to remember palt-mifcarriages. The
tenor of this proclamation was extremely different from the a of
oblivion, which the conspirators had been -encouraged to expet.
Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely on a promise, clogged
with such an equivocal condition, and granted by a young Prince,
under the influence of a Minister, void of faith, regardless of de-
cency, and transported, by the desire of revenge, even beyond the
usual ferocity of .his temper. Many of the leaders, who had at
first appeared openly at court, retired to their own houses; and fore-
feeing the dangerous florm which was gathering, began to look
out for a retreat in foreign countries f.

ELIZABETH, who had all along proteced the conspirators, was

extremely disgusted with measures which tended so visibly to their
deflruEtion, and wrote to the King a harsh and haughty letter, re-
proaching him in a tile, very uncommon among Princes, with

* Melv. 274.

- Melv. 278. Spots. 326. Cald. 3, 330.

breach

breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudenceBook V..
in proceeding so rigorously againt his bell and moil faithful subjects. 1 58.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that promises extorted by
violence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were no longer bind-
ing, when these were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chute what Ministers he would employ in his. service; and that
though he resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven with the
utmost clemency, it was. necessary,. for the support of his authority.
that such an insult on his person should not pass altogether un-
censured *.

ELIZABETH'S etter was quickly followed by Walsingham her Sept. r.

secretary, whom she appointed her ambassador to James, and whoembaffy into
appeared in the Scottish court, with a splendor and magnificence,. ctland
well calculated to please and dazzle a-young Prince. Walsingham
was admitted to several conferences with James himself, in which.
le insisted on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the King:
repeated his former answers.

AFTER suffering several indignities, from the arrogance of Arran,.

and his creatures, he returned to England, without concluding any-
new. treaty. with the King, Walsingham was, next to BUrleigh; the-
Minister on whom the chief weight of the Englifli administration--
refled; and when a person of his rank, ltept so far out of the or--
dinary road of business,. as to undertake a long, journey, in his old
age; and under a declining state of health, some affair of confe-
quence was supposed to be the cause, or some important event was
expeEed to be the effect of this measure.. But as nothing confpi-
cuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable.
that Elizabeth had' no other intention in employing this sagacious
Minister, than to discover, with exadnefs, the capacity and dif-

Mclv. 279.

position

Book VI.

1583.

T I E i' ST O R Y

position of the Scottish King, who was now arrived at a time of life,
when, with ome degree of certainty, conjetures might be formed
concerning his charaCter, and future condut. As James possessed
talents of that kind, which make a greater figure in conversation,
than in acion, he gained a great deal by this interview with the
English secretary, who, notwithstanding the cold reception he met
with, gave such an advantageous representation of his abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward, with more de-
cency and refpec *.

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to protec the conspirators rendered

James more violent in his proceedings against them. As they had
all refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation,. to surrender
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Agus alone complied, the reft
either fled into England, or obtained the King's licence to retire
Decem. 17. into foreign parts. A Convention of estates was held, the mem-

bers of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's, de-
cared those concerned in the Raid of'RutAven to have been guilty
of high treaobn; appointed the act pased la-st year approving of
their condud to be expunged out of the records;'and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost rigour
of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done any thing that was

uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous nobles, and under an
unsettled slate of government, muff be acknowledged to have been
guilty of an at of treason against their sovereign; and James, who
confidered their conduC in this light, hadgood. reason to boast of his

Melv. 293. Cald. 3. 258. Jebb. 2. 536,

clemency,
4

clemency, when he offered to pardon them, upon their confefling Book VI.
their crime. But, on the other hand, it must be allowed that, '"--

1583.

after the King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion, they had
rome reason to complain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
out the mofl unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in
Arran's power.

The interest of the Church was considerably affeEted by there 1584.
contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept pofleflion of Theu lergY

favour the
power, the Clergy not only recovered, but extended their privileges. conspirators

and irritate

As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they the King.
took ome bold measures towards exterminating the Episcopal
order out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's
dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate all the Bishops in Scotland. When the
King recovered his liberty, things put on a very different aspect.
The favour bestowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the most zealous defenders of the Protestant cause, were con-
fidered as ure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church. The
Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this im-
pending danger in silence. Dury, who had been restored to his
office as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit, at which the King was o enraged,
that, notwithilanding some symptoms of his submission, he com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mel-
vil, being summoned before the privy council to answer for the
doctrine he had uttered in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused
of comparing the present grievances of the nation with those under
James III. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be rcdref-

VOL. IJ. N fed

fed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave
with greater firmness. He declined the jurisdiction of a Civil court,
in a cause which he maintained to be purely Ecclefiafical; the Pref-
bytery of which he was a member had, as he contended, the sole
right to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the first instance, of
the doctrine delivered by Preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the Church. This exemption from civil jurifdiAion was a
privilege, which the Popish Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of what-
ever contributed to increase the lustre or power of their body, had
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergy would have become inde-
pendant on the civil magistrate; and an order of men, extremely
useful to society while they inculcate those duties which tend to
promote its happiness and tranquility, might have become no less
pernicious by teaching, without fear or controul, the most dangerous
principles, or by exciting their hearers to the most desperate and law-
less aions. James jealous to excess of his prerogative, was alarmed
at this daring encroachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning
and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of head of the
party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour, which that pre-
eminence rendered necessary, and to discourage, by a timely fe-
verity, the revival of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England ; and the pulpits resounded
with complaints that the King had extinguished the light of learn-
ing in the kingdom, and deprived the Church of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline *.

* Spots. 330. Cald. 3. 304.

cgo
n0 vs
Book Vs

i584.

THESE

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, againit the measures Book VI.
of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-'.o

1584.

fpiratbrs, though driven out of the kingdom, still possesed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of
Arran, they never ceased folliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had sub-
mitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, oon repented of a
ftep, which loft him the efleem of one party, without gaining the
confidence of the other. And, after suffering many mortifications
from the King's neglect, and the haughtiness of Arran, he was
at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for furprizing the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little persuasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the
execution of their enterprize. His lingering so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the con-
fpiracy. Colonel William Stewart Surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his refiitance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized
the calle of Stirling, and ereaing their standard there, published a
manifesto declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove from the King's pretence, a minion who had acquired power
by the most unworthy aions, and who exercised it with the moit
intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment
itruck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to treachery on
his part, and suspected that as he had formerly deserted, he had

N 2 now

Book VI. fed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave

5-8- with greater firmness. He declined the jurifdiEion of a Civil court,

in a cause which he maintained to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Pref-
bytery of which he was a member had, as he contended, the sole
right to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the first instance, of
the dotrine delivered by Preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the Church. This exemption from civil jurisdiction was a
privilege, which the Popish Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of what-
ever Contributed to increase the lustre or power of their body, had
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Proteflant Clergy would have become inde-
pendant on the civil magistrate; and an order of men, extremely
useful to society while they inculcate those duties which tend to
promote its happiness and tranquility, might have become no less
pernicious by teaching, without fear or controul, the most dangerous
principles, or by exciting their hearers to the mofl desperate and law-
less actions. James jealous to excess of his prerogative, was alarmed
at this daring encroachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning
and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of head of the
party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour, which that pre-
eminence rendered necessary, and to discourage, by a timely fe-
verity, the revival of fich a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England ; and the pulpits resounded
with complaints that the King had extinguished the light of learn-
ing in the kingdom, and deprived the Church of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline *.

* Spots. 330. Cald. 3. 304.

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measures Book VI.

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con- 1584.
fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, fRill possessed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of
Arran, they never ceased folliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had sub-
mitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, oon repented of a
ftep, which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining the
confidence of the other. And, after suffering many mortifications
from the King's neglect, and the haughtiness of Arran, he was
at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for furprizing the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little persuasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the
execution of their enterprize. His lingering so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the con-
fpiracy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized
the cafle of Stirling, and ereting their flandard there, published a
manifesto declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove from the King's pretence, a minion who had acquired power
by the most unworthy actions, and who exercised it with the moss
intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to treachery on
his part, and fufpeted that as he had formerly deserted, he had

N 2 now

BookVIl

1584.

May 22.
A parliament
held.

Severe laws
against the
Church.

THE HISTORY

now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fum of money, with which
Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly paid, and
their friends and vaflals coming in slowly, they appeared irresolute and
difheartned; and as the King, who aed with great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men, they fled pre-
cipitately towards England, and with difficulty made their escape
This rash and feeble attempt produced such effets, as usually follow
disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause, for which it
was undertaken, but added strength and reputation to the King;
confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their mea-
fures with more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie was the first
victim of their resentment. After a very informal trial, a jury of
peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publickly beheaded
at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next ftep, But as it became

necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the legislative au-
thority, a parliament was hastily summoned. And while so many
of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom, or forbidden to
appear in the King's presence; while Arran's haughtiness kept some
at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting confidfed only
ofthofe, who were absolutely at the devotion of the court. In
order to conceal the laws which were framing from the knowledge
of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were sworn to secrecy.
And when some of the Ministers, who either fufpeeted, or were
informed of the danger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was seized at the palace-gate,
and carried to a distant prison. Others, attempting to enter the parlia-

' Home's Hill. ofHoufe of Dougl. 379. Spots. 330.

ment
5

meit house, were refuSed admittance ~. And such' laws wereBookVI.
passed, as totally overturned the conftitutipn and-ifipline of the -5'
Church. The refusing to acknowledge the jurifdi&ion of the privy May 22.
council the pretending an exemption from the authority of the civil
courts; the attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of any
of the three eflates in parliament, were declared to be high.treafon.
The holding Assemblies, whether Civil, or Ecclefiaffical, without
the King's permission or appointment; the uttering, either privately,
or publickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any false and scan-
dalous reports against the King, his anceflors, or ministers, were.
pronounced capital crimes -.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross of Edinburgh,.

according to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St.
Cuthberts, and one of the Lords of session, solemnly protetfed
against them, in the name. of his brethren, because they had been
passed without the knowledge or content of the Church. Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories had
both been effeemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had been.
accustomed to censure, and admonish, with unbounded liberty. In
the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and independant jurifdic-
tion, The blow was now aimed at both these privileges. These
new fatutes were calculated to render churchmen as inconsiderable,
as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the nobles had firipped
them of the wealth, the King's ambition was about to deprive them
of the power which once belonged to their order. No wonder:
the alarm was universal, and the complaints loud. All the Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and fled into England.
The most eminent Clergymen, throughout the kingdom, imitated

Cald. 3. 365. - Parl. 8. Jac. VI.

their
-

Book VI.

1584.

THE HISTORY

their example. Desolation and astonishment appeared in every part
of the Scottish Church; the people bewailed the Joss of Pastors,
whom they efleemed; and full of coniternation, at an event so un-
expeted, openly expressed their rage against Arran, and began to
fufpeat the King himself to be an enemy to the Reformed Re-
ligion *.

e Spots. 333 .

»-s w wwv «
.Ifs

m#

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VII.

THE
H I STORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOO K VII.
.WxIa1HILE Scotland was torn by those intestine factions, Book VIV

VV Elizabeth was alarmed with the rumour of a project in ~' '
agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Throgmor-

ton's confpi-
Cheshire gentleman, was fufpeaed of being deeply concerned in theracy agaiift

Elizabeth,

design, and on that suspicion he was taken into custody. Among
his papers were found two lifts, one of the principal harbours in
the kingdom, with an account of their ituation, and of the depth
of water in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman Catho-
lics in England. This circumrtance confirmed the suspicion against
him, and some dark and desperate conspiracy was supposed just
ready to break out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and
declared that the two papers were forged by the Queen's Ministers,
in order to intimidate or insnare him; and he even endured the
rack with the utmost fortitude. But being brought a second

time

Book VI.

1584.

THE HISTORY

time to the place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not
only acknowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with
the Queen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to in-
vade England. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnish
troops, and to conduA the enterprize. The Pope and King of
Spain were to supply the money, necessary for carrying it on; all the
English exiles were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics at
home would be ready to join them, at their landing; Mendoza the
Spaniff ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared no
pains in fomenting the spirit of difaffedion among the English, or
in hastening the preparations on the Continent; and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his polfeffion. This confefiion he retracted at his trial;
returned to it again, after sentence was passed upon him; and re-
traaed-it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming our opinion

of this matter, by the light which time and history have thrown upon
the designs and characters of the Princes of Guise, many circum-
flances in Throgmorton's confeflion appear to be extremely remote
from truth, or even from probability. The Duke of Guise was, at
that jundure, far from being in a situation to undertake foreign
conquests. Without either power or office at court; hated by the
King; and persecuted by the favourites; he had no leisure for any
thoughts of disturbing the quiet of neighbouring states, and his vast
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the foundation
of that famous league, which flook the throne of France. But
about the time Elizabeth detected this conspiracy, the close union
between the house of Guise and Philip II. was remarkable to all

* Holing(hed, 1370.

Europe,

Europe, and as their great enterprize against Henry III. was. not Book VII.
yet disclosed, as they endeavoured to conceal that under their -534
threatnings to invade England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared
to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently
all the parties mentioned by him wished her downfal, thought that
lhe could not guard her kingdom with too much care. The indif- Designs of

Mary's adhe-

creet zeal of the English exiles increased her fears. Not satisfied rets againt
with incessant outcries. against her severity towards the Scottish Elizabtb'
Queen, and her cruel persecution of her Catholic subjeCts, nor
thinking it enough that one Pope had threatned her with the fen-
tence of excommunication, and another had aually pronounced
it, they now began to disperse books and writings, in which they
endeavoured to persuade their disciples, that it would be a merito-
rious acion to take away her life; they openly exhorted the maids.
of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holofernes, and by such an
illustrious deed, to render their own names honourable and sacred
in the Church, throughout all future ages *. For all there reasons,
Elizabeth not only inflicted the punishment of a traitor on Throg-
morton, but commanded the Spanish ambassador instantly to leave
England; and that she might be in no danger of being attacked
within the island, he determined to use her utmost efforts, in order
to recover that influence over the Scottish councils, which ihe had
for ome time entirely loft.

THERE were three different methods, by which Elizabeth might She ndca-

hope to accomplish this; either by furnishing such effectual aid ablin het.
to the banished nobles, as would enable them to refumc the chieftcotland by
direcion of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with Mary, gli"ig A\-
as might intimidate her son, who being now accuffomed to go-

Camd. 497.
VOL. II.

0

vcrnl

BooklVi.vern, would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than resign the

fceptrc, or admit an afibciate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl
of Arran, to secure the diredion of the King his master. The
latl was not only the easiest, and fpeedieft, but the most certain of
success. This Elizabeth resolved to purlfe; but without laying
the other two altogether aside. With this view, lhe ent Davison,
one of.her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and address, into,
Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hated by his own'
countrymen, and holding his power by the most precarious of all'
tenures, the favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers:
without hesitation, and eeemed the acquisition of her prote6tion,
to be the most solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon after,.
Augur. 13. he consented to an interview with Lord Hunfdane the Governor of'

Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous title of Lieute-
nant General. for the King, he appeared at the place appointed, with,
a splendid train. In Hunfdane's pretence, he renewed his promises.
of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English interest,.
and afiured him that James should enter into no negociation, which.
tended to interrupt the peace-between the two kingdoms; and as Eli-
zabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jealousies concerning the.
King's marriage, which had formerly disquieted her with regard to
his mother's, he undertook to prevent James from liflening to any
overture of that kind, till he had previously obtained the Qeen
of England's content *.

Severe pro- THE banished lords and their adherents oon felt the effets of
(eedings a-
gaeinf the ha. Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
ninficd Lords. them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of her Ministers.

were of opinion that fle ought to employ her arms in defence o£

m Cald, 3. 491. Melv. 315. Sec Append. NO. IX:

their
98

their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which restrained Book VIi
James and his favourite, from proceeding to such extremities against 584
them, as might have excited the pity-or indignation of the Engliff,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in their
behalf. But every apprehension of this kind being now removed,
they ventured to call a parliament, in which an a was passed, at- August 2.
tainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of their followers.
Their estates de/volved to the Crown, and according to the practice
of the Scottifl Monarchs, who were obliged to reward the faCion
which adhered to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the
vanquished, James dealt out the greater part of tlefe to Arran, and
his associates .

NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigorous. All Minis- Agaii t.

ters, readers, and professors in Colleges were injoined to subscribe,
within forty days, a paper teflifying their approbation of the laws
concerning the Church, enacted in last parliament. Many, over-
awed, or corrupted by the Court, yielded obedience; others flood
out. The stipends of the latter were fequeflered, some of the
more aive committed to prison, and numbers compelled to fly the
kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the suspicion of ating
from mercenary or ambitious motives. Those who suffered, ac-
quired high reputation, by giving such convincing evidence of their
firmness and sincerity. The judicatories of the Church were almost
entirely suppressed. In some places, scarce as many Ministers re-
mained, as to perform the duties of religious worship; they soon
funk in reputation among the people, and being prohibited not only
fiom discoursing of publick affairs, but obliged, by the jcalout of
the adminifiration, to frame every fentirnnt and expreflion in such a

* Cal. 3. 527.

nl2i1nnc Cr>

a
0 2

Book VII. mannei, as to give the court no offence, thetr fertrns were-deern

o8^ ed languid, insipid, and contemptible. And it became the general

opinion, that together with the most virtuous of the nobles, and
the most faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigour of Religion
were now banished out of the kingdom *.

MIEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitIef

negociations with the Queen of Scots, which it had become almost
matter of form to renew every year. They served not only to
amuse that unhappy princess with some profped of liberty-; but
furnished an apology for eluding the follicitations of foreign powers
in her behalf; and were of use to overawe James, by shewing him
that he could, at any time set free a. dangerous rival to dispute his
authority. These treaties she suffered to proceed to what length he
pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking them off, when
they became no longer neceflary. The treaty now on foot was
not, perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it; the
reasons, however, which rendered it ineffectual were far from being
frivolous.

New confpi-
racy z~int
s!izalcthi.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scotland,

the ship on board of which he was a pafenger happened to be
chased by pirates, who in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some papers in his cuf-
tody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary accident,
the wind blew them back into the (hip, and they were immediately
taken up by some of the passengers, who carried them to Wade,
the Clerk of the privy council. He, with great indutlry and pa-

* Cald. 3. 589.

tience,

tience, joined them together, and they were found to contain: the Book VIt.
account of a plot, said to have been formed by the King of Spain, 184
and Duke of Guise, for invading England. The people were not yet
recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy,
in which Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his discoveries ap-
peared now to be confirmed by additional evidence, not only all
their former apprehensions recurred, but the consternation became
general and excefive. As all the dangers, with which England
had been threatned for ome years, flowed either immediately from
Mary herself, or from those, who made use of her name to justify
-their infurretions and conspiracies, this gradually diminished the
compafion due to her situation, and the English, instead of pitying,
began to fear and to hate her. Elizabeth, under whose wife and
pacific reign the English enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened sources
of wealth unknown to their ancestors, was extremely beloved by
all her people; and regard to her safety, not less than to their own
interest, animated them againff the Scottish Qeen. In order to Occafionsan

afsbciation in

discourage her adherents, it was thought necessary to convince them, opposition to
by some public deed, of the attachment of the English to their la.y'
own Sovereign, and that any attempt againt her life would prove
fatal to her rival. With this view, an Ajociation was framed, theOalobcr .
subscribers of which bound themselves by the most solemn oaths,

to defend the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and dolnef-
tic; and if violence hould be offered to her life, in order to
favour the title of any pretender to the Crown, they not only en-
gaged never to allow or acknowledge the person, or persons, by

"whom, or for whom, such a detestable a should be committed,
"but vowed, in the presence of the Eternal God, to prosecute

filch person, or persons, to the death, and to pursue them,
"with their utmoil vengeance, to their utter overthrow and ex-

"tirpa-

BookVII." tirpation ." Persons of all ranks subscribed this combination,
- --- with the greatest eagerness and unanimity .

.J584.

Which great- 'MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed
lv ,'idans
&.Ir. design to exclude her from all right of succession, but as the certain

and immediate forerunner of her destruction. In order to avert
this, fle made fuch.feeble efforts as were still in her power, and ent
Naue her secretary to court, with offers of more entire refigna-
tion to the will of Elizabeth, in all1 points, which had been the
cccafion of their long enmity, than her past sufferings had been
hitherto able to extort . But whether Mary adhered inflexibly to her
privileges, as an independant Sovereign, or yielding to the necessity
of her situation, endeavoured, by concefions, to ooth her rival,
lhe was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was imputed to obfti-
,nacy, or to the secret hope of foreign affifance; her conceflions
were either believed to be insincere, or to flow from the fear of ome
imminent danger. Her present willingness, however, to comply
with any terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly urged his
mistress to come to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth was
persuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the afficiation, which
had rendered her so pafive and compliant. She always imagined
that there was omething mysterious and deceitful in all Mary's ac-
tions, and fufpeEted her of carrying on a dangerous correspondence
with the English Catholics, both within and without the kingdom,
Nor were her suspicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had,
about this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging
him to hatsen the execution of what file calls the Great plot or Dc-
Aignment, without hesitating on account of any danger in which it

9 State Trials, i. 122.

t Canld. 499.

: Camd. Ibid.

might

might. involve her life, which he would most willingly part with, BookVIt.
if,. by that sacrifice, he could procure relief for o great a number 584
of the oppressed. children of the Church *. Instead, therefore, ofShe is treated;

with greatet

hearkning to. the overtures which the Scottiih Queen made, orrigo
granting any mitigation of the hardships of which she complained,
Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewibury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury,
to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust with great
fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treated Mary
with gentleness and refpet, and had always sweetened harsh com-
mands, by the humanity, with which he put them in execution..
The fame politeness was not to be expeted. from men of an inferior-
rank, whose evere vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommen-
dation to that employment, and the only merit, by which they
could pretend to gain favour or preferment- {.

As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive. tha baniffed Gray, anew

favourite of

nobles of Elizabeth's protection, he appointed the Maiter of Gray the King's,
his ambassador to the court of England, and intruded him with
the conduct of a negotiation. for. that purpose. An honour for
which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl of
Arran. Gray possessed all the talents of aCourtier; a graceful per-
son, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France, he had been ad-
mitted into the most. intimate familiarity with the Duke of Guise,
and in order to gain his favour, had renounced the Protelsant Re-
ligion, and professed the utmoi zeal for the captive Queen, who
carried on a secret correspondence with him, from which he ex,
peaed great advantages. On his return into Scotland, he paid.

Strype, 3 .
246 Camd. o00,

court,

k

Book VWI. court to James with extraordinary assiduity, and his accomlilh.

534 menats did not fail to make their usual imprefion othe King's heart.

Arran, who had introduced him, began quickly to dread his grow-
ing favour; ands flattering himself, that absence would efface any
tentiinents of tenderness from the mind of a young prince, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in the
kingdom, for an embassy of such importance: and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to hafien his fall, Eliza-
beth, who had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper in-
firuments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and
by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The former flattered his
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied his profuseness, which
was still greater. e abandoned himfelf.without reserve to Eli-
zabeth's diretions, and not only undertook to preserve the King
under tha influence of England, but aded as a spy upon the Scot-
tiflb Queen, and betrayed to her rival every secret, that he could
draw from her by his high pretensions of zeal in her service *.

.His interet GRAY'S credit with the English court was extremely galling to
'with the court
-f England. the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing

her power to restore them; fle found it easier to govern Scotland,
by corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with Gray's
follicitations, he commanded the exiles to leave the north of Eng-
Dccember3.land, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This ren-

dered it difficult for them to hold any correspondence with their
partizans in Scotland, and almost impossible to return thither with-
out her permifion. Gray, by gaining a point which James had so
anuch at heart, rivettcd himself more firmly than ever in his fa-

Strypc, 3. 307. Mclv. 316.

vour;

your; and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable offerv- Book VII.
ing Elizabeth with greater iuccefs , x584.

ARRAN had now poffefied, for ome time, all the power, the 585.

riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could desire,. Arrs arnd
or the fondnes ofaPrince, who set no limits to his liberality towards incence,
his favourites, could bestow. The office of Lord Chancellor, the
highest and.mofi important in the kingdom, was conferred upon
him, even during the life, of the Earl of Argyll, who ucceeded
Athole in that dignity -. And the public beheld, with astonish-
ment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of fortune, ig-
norant of law, 'and a contemner of justice, appointed to preside in
parliament, in, the privy council, in the court offeffion, and intrust-
ed with the supreme disposal of the property of his fellow fubjeds.
He was, at the fame time, governor of the castles of Stirling and
Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Provost of the city
of Edinburgh; and as if by all these accumulated dignities his me-
rit were not sufficiently recompenced, he had been created Lieute-
nant General over the whole kingdom. No person was admitted into
the King's pretence without his permission; no favour could be
obtained but by his mediation. James, occupied with youthful
amusements, devolved upon. him the whole regal authority. Such
unmerited elevation increased his natural arrogance, and rendered
it intolerable. He was no longer content with the condition of a
subjec, but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo Duke of
Albany; and boasted, openly, that his title to the Crown was pre-
ferable to that of the King himself. But, together with these thoughts
ofroyalty, he retained the meanness, suitable tohisprimitive indig.cnce.
His venality as jdge was scandalous, and was exceeded only byv
that of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made herself a 1pnl ty

' Cald. 3. 643. 1' Crawf. Offic. of State. App. 447.
VOL, II. P

J i

Book VII. in almof every quelliun which came to be decided, employed her

1585. influence to corrupt, or to overawe the judges, and almost openly

dictated their decisions . His rapaciousness as a Minister was in-
satiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many ofAices; with
the eiate, and honours which belonged to the house of Hamilton;
or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his
hare; he grasped at the poifeffions of several of the nobles. He
required Lord Maxwell to exchange part of his estate,. for the for-
feited lands of Kinneil; and because he was unwilling to quit an
ancient inheritance for a possession so precarious, he stirred up againt
him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of Johnston, and involved that
corner of the kingdom in a civil war. He committed to prison the
Earl of Athole, Lord Home, and the Maifer of Caffils; the first,
because he would not divorce his wife, a daughter of the Earl of
Gowrie, and entail his eate on him; the second, because he was
unwilling to part with ome lands, adjacent to one of his estates;
and the third, for refusing to lend him money. His spies and in-
formers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves into every
company. The nearest neighbours distrusted and feared each other.
All familiar society was at an end. Even the common intercourses
of humanity were interrupted, no man knowing in whom to con-
fide, or where to utter his complaints. There is not. perhaps in
history, an example of a minister so universally detestable to a na-
tion, or who more justly deserved its detestation t.

ARRAN, notwithstanding, regardless of the sentiments, and de.

spifing the murmurs of the people, gave aloofe to his natural tem-,
per, and proceeded to ads still more violent, David Home of Ar-
gaty, and Patrick his brother, having received letters from one of

Cal4. . · SCOtftarvct's Suggering, State, m
6

St. 337, 338.

the
ro6

the banished Lords, about private business, were condemned and Book VII.
put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels. Cunning- --
hame ofDrumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of
honour and reputation, were accused of having conspired, with
the exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A ingle witness only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence was un-
answerable; their accuser himself not long after acknowledged that
he had been suborned by Arran; and all men believed the charge
against them to be groundless: they were found guilty, notwith.- ebruary9
standing, and suffered the death of traitors '.

ABOUT the fame time, that these gentlemen were punished for Parry's con-

fpiracy again&

a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was indangered by a real one. Elizibcth.
Parry, a Doctor of laws, and a Member of the House of Com
mons, a man vain and fantastic, but of, a resolute spirit, had lately
been reconciled to the Church of Rome; and fraught with the
zeal of a new convert, he offered to demonstrate the sincerity of his
attachment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Eli-
zabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a book, to prove the mur-
der of an excommunicated Prince to be not only- lawful, but a
meritorious action. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits both
there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the defignm
The Pope himself exhorted him to persevere; and granted him, for
his encouragemnent, a plenary indulgence, and remission of his fins,
Cardinal diComo Wrote hii -a letter to the fame purpose. But
though he often gdtaeccefs:tb heQ^ er, or some remaining
sense of duty, refthaied him feoi perpcating the crime. Hap-
pily, his intention was at last ifctvered : Nevil, the only. person
in England, to whom he had communicated it; and he himself

* Spotfw. 3c 'Cald. 3. 794-

P having

0o7

eBokVTII. having voluntarily ccnfefTed his guilt, he fufTered the punfllfr.ent

,085 which it dcferved '

.. arch z.

A *vere ha- THESE repeated conspiracies again . theirSovereign awakened the
tute, which indilgnation of the English parliament, and prolc d a very extra-
prwed fatal s
o0 Miar. ordinary flatute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of

Scot. By this law theAfiociation in defence of Elizabeth's life was
ratified, and it was further enaded; { thatif any rebellion shall be
" excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of
( her MajefCy's person, by orjfr any person pretending a title to

the Crown, the Queen hall empower twenty four persons, by a

" commiflon under the great eal, to examine into, and pass fen-
" tence upon such offences; and after judgment given, a procla-

mation shall beiffued, declaring the persons whom they find guilty,
"excluded from any right to the Crown; and her Majesty's sub-

jets may lawfully pursue every one of them to the death, with

·' all their aiders and abettors. And if any design against the life
"C of the Queen take effet, the persons, by orfor whom, such a

detestable aft is executed, and their ifites, being any wife afient-
ing or privy to the fame, shall be disabled for ever from pre-
tending to the Crown, and be pursued to death in the like man-

( ner t." This a was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots;
and whether we confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal
and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we im-
pute it to the influence, which that artful Princefs..preferved over
her parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general
principles ofjuftice, or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered
accountable not only for her own aftions, but for those of others;

* State Trials, Vol. . 0o3.

t State Trials, Vol. . 123.

in

in consequence of which, she might forfeit her right of fuccef- BokVIT.
sion, and even her life itself. -585.

MARYjutly confidered this a, as a warninkg to prepare forThe rigour

vwith which
the worst extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had mle was trelt-

cd, increased.

resolved, by this time, to take away herlife; and suffered boQks to
bepublifhed, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel and
unprecedented measure was not only neceflary, but jus *. Even
that short period of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which it was in
their power to inflic. Almost all her servants were difmiiTed; he
was treated no longerwith the refped due to a Qeen; and though
the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
ftitution, he was confined to two ruinous chambers, scarce habita-
ble, even in the middle of summer, by reaofn of cold. Notwith-
flanding the scantiness of her revenue, fie had been accustomed
to diffribute regularly ome alms among the poor in the village ad-
joining to the castle. Paulet, now, refuted her liberty to per-
form this pious and humane office,. which had afforded her great
consolation, amidst her own sufferings. The castle, in which flie
resided, was converted into a common prison; and a young man,
fufpededofPopery, was confined there, and treated with iuch rigour,
under her eye, that he died of the ill usage. She often complain-
ed to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries, and expoifulated as
became a woman, and a Quieen; but as no political reason now
obliged that Princess to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes,
far from granting her any redress, lte did not even deign to give
her any answer. TheKing of France, closely allied to Elizabeth,
on whom he depended for afnifance, was asiaid of espousing Mary's

Strype 3. 299.

cau fe

Book VII.

1585.

THE HISTORY

cause, with any warmth; and all his follicitations in her behalf
were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French
ambaflador, whose compassion and zeal for the unhappy Queen
supplied the defects in his infirutions, remonstrated with such vi-
gour against the indignities, to which he was exposed, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her removed to Tuth-
bury; though lhe was confined, the greater part of another winter,
in her present wretched habitation *.

A beach be- NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the neglect of her
twven Mary
and her oI. friends, made such an impreflion on Mary, as the ingratitude of her

son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpe&,
and had even entered into negotiations with her, which gave um-
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this good
correspondence should continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly increased by the
success of his embafly, persuaded him to write a harsh and unduti-
ful letter to his mother, in which lie exprefly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her ma-
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow, and defpairi
" Was it for this, said lhe, in a letter to the French ambaifador,
March 24. that I have indured so much, in order to preserve for him the in-

heritance, to which I have a just right ? I am far from envying
his authority in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor wish to
f et my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure of
( once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto loved with too ten-

der affetion. Whatever he either enjoys, or expects, he derived
" it from me. From him, I never received affiflance, supply, or

* Jebb, v. z. 576-598.

"benefit

'- benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him any longer as a
:, King; he holds that dignity'by my consent; and if a speedy
" repentance does not appease my juit resentment, I will load him

with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with all my pre-
" tensions, to one, who will receive them with gratitude, and ds-

fend them with vigour*. The love which James bore to his mo-

ther,whomhehad never known, nay whom he had been early taught
to confider as the most abandoned person of her sex, cannot be sup-
posed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any pains
to regain her favour. But whether her indignation at his undutiful
behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Popery, prompted
Mary at any time to think ferioully ofdifinheriting her son; or whe-
ther thee threatnings were uttered in a sudden sally of disappointed
affection, it is now no easy matter to determine. Some papers which
are fill extant seem to render the former not improbable-.

Book I

Book VI.
t -, 1

I5.

CARES of another kind, and no Iefs disquieting, occupied Eliza- Dangerous

beth's thoughts. The calm, which he had long enjoyed, seemed now Efituatio
to be at an end; and such torms were gathering in every qu-arter,
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring nations had
undergone revolutions, extremely to her disadvantage. The great
qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his youth, and which
raised the expectations of his fubjeds so high, vanished on his as-
cending the throne; and his acquiring supreme power seems not
only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his under-
flanding. He oon loft the efeem and affeCtion of the nation; and
a life divided between the aufterities of a superstitious devotion,
and the extravagancies of the most dissolute debauchery, rendered
him as contemptible as he was odious on account of his rapacious-

* Jebb, . 57 1. See Append. NOX.

tt See Appentl. NO XI.

Book VII

J585.

THE HISTORY

cause, with any warmth; and all his follicitations in her behalf
were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French
ambaflador, whose compafion and zeal for the unhappy Queen
supplied the defects in his inilrudtions, remonitrated with such vi-
gour against the indignities, to which he was exposed, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her removed to Tuth-
bury; though he was confined, the greater part of another winter,
in her present wretched habitation *.

A breachbe- NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the neglect of her
twi'n Mary
a d her so friends, made such an impreflion on Mary, as the ingratitude of her

son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpet,
and had even entered into negotiations with her, which gave um-
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this good
correspondence ihould continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly increased by the
success of his embassy, persuaded him to write a harsh and unduti-
ful letter to his mother, in which lie exprefly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her ma-
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow, and despair.

Was it for this, said he, in a letter to the French ambassador,
March 24. that I have indured so much, in order to preserve for him the in-

"heritance, to which I have a just right ? I am far from envying

his authority in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor with to
f et my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure of
once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto loved with too ten-
der affection. Whatever he either enjoys, or expecs, he derived
it from me. From him, I never received affiltance, supply, or

Jebb, v. 2. 576-598.

" benefit

', benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him any longer as a BookVIi.
As King; he holds that dignity'by my content; and if a speedy
,, repentance does not appease my juit resentment, I will load him
" with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with all my pre-
" tensions, to one, who will receive them with gratitude, and de-

fend them with vigour*. The love which James bore to his mo-

ther,whomhehad neverknown, nay whom he had been early taught
to confider as the mofi abandoned person of her sex, cannot be sup-
posed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any pains
to regain her favour. But whether her indignation at his undutiful
behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Popery, prompted
Mary at any time to think seriously ofdifinheriting her son; or whe-
ther these threatnings were uttered in a uidden ally of disappointed
affection, it is now no easy matter to determine. Some papers which
are still extant seem to render the former not improbable t.

CARES of another kind, and no Iefs disquieting, occupied Eliza-

beth's thoughts. The calm, which he had long enjoyed, seemed now
to be at an end; and such storms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring nations had
undergone revolutions, extremely to her disadvantage. The great
qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his youth, and which
raised the expecations of his fubjets so high, vanished on his as-
cending the throne; and his acquiring supreme power seems not
only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his under-
standing. He soon loft the esteem and affection of the nation; and
a life divided between the aufterities of a fuperflitious devotion,
and the extravagancies of the most dissolute debauchery, rendered
him as contemptible as he was odious on account of his rapacious-

Dangerous
situation of
Elizabeth.
'Jebb,2. 571. See Append. NX.

t See Append. No XI.

nc sis

Book VIT

I585·

from the pro.
grefs of the
league;

from the
power of Phi-
lip II.

THE' HISTORY

ness, his profusion, and the fondness with which he doted on many
unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother, those fen-
timents of the people burst out with violence. Henry had no chil-
dren, and though but thirty two years of age, the succession of the
Crown was already confidered as open. The King of Navarre, a
diflant descendant of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to
the Crown, was a zealous Protestant. The prospect of an event,
so fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France,
alarmed all the Catholics in Europe, and the Duke of Guite,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romifl faith, and the asserter of the
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In order to unite the
party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diftinguiflhed by the name
of the Holy League. All ranks of men joined in it with emulation.
The spirit fpread.with the irresistible rapidity, which was natural
to religious paflions, in that age. The defirution of the Reforma-
tion not only in France, but all over Europe, eemed to be the ob-
jet and wifl of the whole party. And the Duke of Guise, the
head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority in the
kingdom, far superior to that, which the King himfelfpoffefied.
Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly increased the
naval power of Spain, and had at las reduced under his dominion
that portion of the Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean
mountains, and which nature seems to have destined to form one,
great Monarchy. William Prince of Orange, who first encouraged
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whose
wisdom and valour formed and proteded the riling commonwealth,
had fallen by the hands of an affaiin. The superior genius of the
Prince of Parna, had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in
the ow Countries; all his enterprizes, concerted with confiummate
Ikill, andl executed \vith equal bravery, had been attended with un-

inter-

interrupted success; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, BooklVIL
were on the point of falling under the dominion of their ancient '
matter.

NONE of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto Her wife and
owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive no - ad- vdigrous con-

duc.

vantage from thejealoufy, which had fubfifled between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke of
Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms. The
Hugonots were unable to contend with the power of the
league; and little could be expeted from any diversion they
might create. Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could long
employ the arms, or divide the strength of Spain. In this situation
of the affairs of Europe, it became necefary for Elizabeth to form
a new plan of condutc; and her wisdom in forming it, was not
greater than the vigour with which he carried it on. The mea-
fures, most suitable to her natural temper, and which the had hi-
therto pursued, were cautious and safe; those ihe now adopted
were enterprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was not
afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by necessity, not
only of defending herself with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness, which averted danger from her own domi-
nions. She immediately furnifled the Hugonots with a con-
fiderable supply in money. She carried on a private negociation
with Henry III. who, though compelled to join the league, hated
the leaders of it, and wished for their deftrucion. She openly
undertook the proteAion of the Dutch commonwealth, and ent a
powerful army to its assistance. She endeavoured to form a general
confederacy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to the Popish Resolve to
league. She determined to proceed with the utmost rigour against alln to gain
the Queen of Scots, whose sufferings and rights afforded her ene- the ling.

VOL. II. Qn mes

Book VII.

r585.

T H E H I S T O R Y

mies a fpeciqus pretencefor invading her dominions. She.refolved to
redouble her endeavours in order to effect a closer union with Scot-
land, and to extend and perpetuate her influence over the councils
of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce most of the Scottish

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, Sir John Maitland,
who had been advanced to the office of Secretary, which his brother
formerly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden the Justice Clerk, who had
May 29. succeeded Gray as the King's resident at London, were the persons

in whom he chiefly confided. In order to direct and quicken their
motions, he dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along with Bellenden
into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, and entertaining;
he excelled in all the exercises, for which James had a palfion; and
amused the young King by relating the adventures he had met
with, and the observations he had made, during a long residence in
foreign countries; but under the veil of these superficial qualities, he
concealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon grewinto highfa-
vour with James, and while he was seemingly attentive only to plea-
sure and diversions, he acquired influence over the public councils,
to a degree which was indecent for a firanger to posess *.

Proposes a
league with
Scotland.
July 29.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to the nation,

than the proposal he made of a trift alliance between the two
kingdoms, in defence of the Reformed Religion. The rapid and
alarming progress of the popish league seemed to call on all Protef-
tantPrinces, to unite for the preservation of their common faith.
James embraced the overture with warmth, and a Convention of
estates impowered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to

* Melv. 317.

ratify

ratify it in parliament t-. The alacrity with' which James con-
curred in this measure, must not be wholly ascribed either to his own
'zeal, or to Wotton's address; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's
liberality. As a mark of her motherly affec&ion for the young
King, he fettled on him an annual pension of Soco pounds; the
fame fum which her father had allotted her, before he ascen'ded
the throne. This circumstance, which he took care to mention,
rendered a um, which in that age was far from being inconfide-
rable, a very acceptable present to the King, whose revenues, dur-
ing a long minority, had been almost totally dissipated *.

115
Boolk Vr.

158.

BUT the chief objec of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Arran. Undermines

While a minion' so odious to the nation continued to govern the power.
King, his assistance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunfdane, had ap-
peared extremely zealous for her interest, Ihe could place no great
cc ence in a man, whose conduct was so capricious and irregular,
and who, notwithstanding his protestations to the contrary, frill
continued a secret correspondence both with Mary, and with the
Duke of Guise. The banished Lords were attached to England
from affection, as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency, he could
thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left London, they had been
summoned thither, under colour of vindicating themselves from his
accusations, but, in reality, to concert with him the most proper
measures for restoring them to their country. Wotton pursued this
plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for execution; and it wasgreatly
facilitated by an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft, the English and Scottifli war-

'I Spotfw. 339.

' Cald. 3. 505.

dens

BookVII. dens of the middle marches, having met, according to the custom
.'_-. of the borders, about mid-summer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruflel,

the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be killed. This scuffle
was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design
formed by Ker, at the initigation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them hould be deli-
vered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he was
obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen.

Afifts the During his absence from court, Wotton and his associates carried
banished no-
bles. on their intrigues without interruption. By their advice, the banish-

ed nobles endeavoured to accommodate their differences with Lord
John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons, whom
Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom. Their com-
mon sufferings, and common interefl, induced both parties to bury
od. 16. in oblivion the ancient discord, which had subsisted between the

houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's permission, they
returned in a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, who 1ad
again recovered favour, insisted on putting the kingdom in apop're
of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted
all his measures. Some necessary orders they prevented from being
iflued.; others they rendered ineffectual, by the manner of exe-
cution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and with reluc-
tance *.

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano-

ther, and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize the
King, and to carry him by force into England. But the delign

* Spotfw. 340.

was

was happily discovered and in order to avoid the punishment his BoOk VII:
treachery merited, he departed wvithout taking leave . 5

·

, · i585 '
MEAN while the banished Lords hastened the execution of their They return

:*** "

-

. „ , i rri . i * in~~~~~~~~~illto Scotland,
enterprize; and as their friends and vassals were now ready to join andare recon-

cled to the

them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were ng'.
welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the most fervent
prayers were addrefled to Heaven for the success of their arms. They
advanced, without losing a moment,. towards. Stirling at the head
of Io,ooo men. The King, though he had assembled an army,
£uperior in number, could not venture to meet them in the field,.witlh
troops, whose loyalty was extremely dubious,, and. who, at best,
were far fromnbeing hearty in the cause; nor.was either the town.
or castle provided for a siege. The gates, however, of both were
Shut, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night they Nov. 2,
furprized the town, or more probably itwas betrayed into their
hands; and Arran, who had undertaken to defend.it, was obliged
to save himself by a precipitate flight. Next morning. they invest-
ed the catle, in which there were not provisions for twenty four
hours.; and James was necessitated immediately to. hearken to. terms
of accommodation. They.were not so elated with. success, as to
urge extravagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to make
every reasonable concession. They obtained a pardon in the most
ample form, of all the offences they had committed; the prinT
cipal forts in the kingdom were, by way of security; put into their
hands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart were removed
from the King's pretence; and a parliament was called, to establish
tranquillity in the nation .-.

Mclv. 335. t Cald.'3, 795.

THOUGH,.

I 8
Book VII.

I585.

A parliament.
December lo.

THE HIST'ORY

THOUGH a great majority in this parliament confifted.of the con-

federate nobles, and their adherents, they were far from difiovering
a vinditive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an a, restoring them
to their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying the pardon grant-
ed by the King, they seemed willing to forget all past errors in the ad-
ininiration, and spared James the mortification of feeing his Mi-
nifters branded with any public note of infamy. Arran, alone,
deprived of all his honours, stripped of his borrowed spoils, and
declared an enemy to his country by public proclamation, funk back
into obscurity, and must, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive
title of Captain James Stewart. As he had been, during his un-
merited prosperity, the objet of the hatred and indignation of his
countrymen, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all his sus-
ferings mitigate their resentment in the least degree.

Church as- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no redress of
fairs. their grievances by this revolution. The confederate nobles had, all

along, affected to be confidered as guardians of the privileges and dif-
cipline of the Church. In all their manifestos they had declared their
resolution to restore these, and by that popular pretence, had gained
many fiends. Itwas nownatural to expefrome fruitofthefepromifes,
and ome returns of gratitude towards many of the most eminent
preachers who had suffered in their cause, and who demanded the
repeal of the laws paifed the preceding year. The King, how-
ever, was resolute to maintain these laws in full authority; and as
the nobles were extremely follicitous not to disgust him, by infifcing
on any disagreeable request, the claims of the Church in this, as well
as in many former instances, were faorificed to the interest of the
laity. The Ministers gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and

7 their

their impatience under te: dapQinetmet fbr.oke .§ut in some ex- Book VII.
pressions, extremely difre.pedl ieeyeo,;owards the King himself*. 5

. . . (' i'J .ó..

TH Archbiihop of St. Andrew's, -tg,;. -eit the effeds of their

anger. The Provincial Synod of Fife, irgmnoned him to appear,
and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former Assem-
blies, in presuming to exercise the function of a Bishop. And
though he refused to acknowledge t-he }urifd-icion of the court, and
appealed from it to the King, a sentence of excommunication,
equally indecent and irregular, was pronounced against him. April 13.
Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his archiepiscopal ex-
communication againfl Melvil, and some other of his oppo-
nents.

SOON after, a General Assembly was held, in which the King,

with some difficulty, obtained an a, permitting the name and
office of a Bishop fill to continue in the Church. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched. The exercise
of discipline, and the inspection of the life and dotrine of the
Clergy, were committed to Prebyteries, in which Bishops should
be allowed no other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as per-
petual moderators. They themselves were declared to be fubje, in
the fame manner as other pallors, to thejurifdidtion of the General
Affemby. And as the discussion of the Archbishop's appeal might
have kindled unusual heats in the assembly, that affair was terminat-
ed by a compromise. He renounced any claim of supremacy over
the Church, and promised to demean himfell suitably to the cha-
racter of a Binlop, as described by St. Paul..The Assembly, with-
out examining the foundations of the sentence of excommunica-

* Spotfv. 343.

tion,

1-II9

Book VII. tion, declared that it should be held of no effect, and restored him

i 86 to all the privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.

Notwithstanding the extraordinary tenderness hewn for the honour
of the fynod, and the delicacy and respect, with which its jurifdic-
tion was treated, several members were so zealous as to protest a-
againit this deciiion .

Aleague with THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons, so warmly
England con-
cluded. attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the two kingdoms,

which had been proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efieval the French Envoy. James himfelffirft offered to re-
new the negociation. Elizabeth did not susser such a favourable op-
July 5'

portunity to flip, and instantly despatched Randolph to conclude
a treaty, which she so much desired. The danger to which thePro-
teftant religion was exposed, by the late combination of the Popish
powers for its deftrucion, and the necessity of a ftric confederacy a-
mong those, who had embraced the Reformation, in order to obftrud
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as the foundation of the
league. The chief articles in it were, that both parties hould bind
themselves to defend theEvangelicReligion; that the league should
be offensive and defensive against all, who shall endeavour to disturb
the exercise of religion in either kingdom; that if one of the two
parties be invaded, the other, notwithstanding any former alliance,
should not direfly, or indireEtly aft the invader; that if England
be invaded in any part remote fiom Scotland, James should assist
the Qeen with 2000 horse, and 5000 foot; that if the enemy
landed or approached within sixty miles of Scotland, the King hould
take the field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as he
would do in defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return,

* Cald. 3. 894. Spotfw. 346.

under-
5

undertook to a in defence of Scotland, if it ffiould be invaded. BookVII.
At the fame time, he assured the King that no ftep should be taken, i 586.
which might derogate in any degree frotn his pretensions to the
English Crown *. Elizabeth expressed geat satisfaction with a
treaty, which rendered Scotland an ufefiul ally, instead of a dange-
rous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of security on that fide,
which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none of them had been
able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with the blessings of
peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable pe-
riod, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, that the
King's conduct was universally acceptable to his own peoplet.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time, expofedJames

to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply engaged-in
the conspiracy against the life of the King his father. Both Mor-
ton and Binny one of his own servants, who suffered for that crime,
had accused him of being present at the murder 11. He had escaped
punishment by flying into England, and James had often required
Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her protetion. He
now obtained a licence, from the King himself, to return into Scot-
land; and after undergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal ra-
ther than to dete6t his guilt, he was not only taken into favour by
the King, but sent back to the court of England, with the honou-
rable characer of his ambafTador. James was now of such an age,
that his youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse for this
indecent tranfaEion. It mufl be imputed to the exceflive facility
of his temper, which often led him to gratify his courtiers at the
expence of his own dignity and reputation t.

* Spotfw. 351. t Camd.5s3. II See Append. NO XII.
t Spotfw. 348. Cald. 3. 917.
VOL. II. R Nori

Book VI. NOT long after, the inconliderate affeaon of th EnglifihCatho-

i 56. licks towards Mary, and iheir implacable resentment against Eliza-

P.ife of Bab- beth, gave rife to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the omnQeieen,
ington's con-
fpiracyagaint left an indelible itain on the reputation of the other, and presented

Eli2eth a fpetacle to Europe, of which there had hitherto been no example

in the history of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priests educated

in the seminary at Rheims, had adopted an extravagant and enthu-
fiatic notion, that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dicated
immediately by the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion they instilled
into Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted for his furious
zeal, and daring courage; and persuaded him that no service could
be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of an' excom-
April . municated Heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the Ci'wn of mar-

tyrdom, bound himself, by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal.
lard, a trafficking priest, had -at that -timre come over to PPtis, and
solicited Mendoza the Spanish ambailador there, to procure an in,
vafion of England, while the affairs of the league were so profpe-
rons, and the kingdom left naked by fending so many of the Queen's
best troops into the Netherlands. Paget and the English exiles de-
monftrated the fruitlefnefs offuch an attempt, u nlefs Elizabeth were
first cut off, or the invaders secured of a powerful concurrence on
their landing. If it could be hoped that either of these events would
happen, effetual aid was promised; and in the mean. time Ballard
May iS. was ent back to renew his intrigues.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Babington, a young

gentleman in Derbyflire, of a plentiful fortune, and many amiable
qualities, who having contra&ed, during his refidcnce in France, a
familiarity with the Archbiflop of Glasgow, had been recoinnend-

~~~~~5 ed
1 ' ,

ed by him to.thp Queen of Scots. He concurred with Paget in Book.VII.
confidering the death of Elizabeth as a neceflary preliminary to any 586
invasion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would soon be put to
her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now in Lon-
den waiting for an opportunity to firike the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of too much importance, to rely on a tingle
hand- for the execution of it, and proposed that five resolute gen-
tlemen should be joined with Savage in an enterprize, the success
of which was the foundation of all their hopes. He offered to
find out persons willing to undertake the service, whose honour,
feerecy, and courage, they nmight fifely trust. He accordingly
opened the matter to Edwardl-Windfor; Thomas Salisbury, Charles
Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John Travers, Robert
Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert
Polly, all of them,:except Polly, whose bustling forward zeal intro-
duced him into'their society; gentlemen of good families unite. to-
gether in the bonds of private friendship, ftregthened by the more:
powerful tie of religious zeal. Many consultations were held; theirJune.
plan of operations was at last fettled; and their different parts as-,
signed. Babington himself was appointed to rescue the Queen of
Scots; Salisbury, with some others; undertook to excite several coun- of ,he cone
tries to take arms; the murder of the Qeen, the most dangerous fpirators.
and important service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with
four associates. And so totally had their bigotted prejudices extin,
guifhedthe principles of'honour, and the sentiments of humanity,
suitable to their rank, that without scruple or'compunCion, they un-
dertook an acaion, which is viewed with horror, even when conmmit-
ted'by the meanest and most profligate of nankind. This attempt,
oli the contrary, appeared'to them no less honourable than it was dcl'
perate, and in order'to perpetuate the memory of it, they had a
picture drawn containing the portraits of the lix afaflilns, with that

K 2 of

BookVII. of Babington in he middle, and a motto intimating that they were

86 jointly embarked in ome hazardous design.

I586'

Discovered
by Walfing-
ham.

They are
seijd and
punished.
August 4.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in--

fiance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarce possible,.
and neither distrusted the fidelity of their companions, nor doubted
the success of their undertaking. But while they believed that their
machinations were carried, on with the molt profound and impene-
trable secrecy, every ftep they took was fully known to Walsingham..
Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into, the conspiracy.
with no other design than to betray his associates. Gilbert Gifford,,
too, having been ent over to England to quicken the motions. of.
the conspirators, had been gained by Walfingham,.and gave.him sure
intelligence of all their projecs. That vigilant minilfer immediate-
ly imparted the discoveries which, he had made to Elizabeth; and,
without communicating the matter to any othert:of the Counsellors,,
they agreed, in order to undeirand the plot more perfectly, to wait.
till it was ripened into ome form, and. brought near the point of.
execution..

AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to expose'

her own life, and to tempt providence any farther. Ballard, the
prime mover. in. the whole conspiracy, was arrested. His associates,
disconcerted and struck with astonishment,. endeavoured to save
themselves by flight. But, within a few days, all of them, except
Windsor, were seized in different places of the kingdom, and com-
mitted to the Tower. Though they had undertaken the part, they
wanted the firm and determined spirit of assassins; and, influenced,
by fear or by hope. discovered all they knew. The indignation of
the people, and their impatience to revenge such an execrable com-

bination

bination againit the life of their Sovereign, haflened their trial, BookVII.
and all of them suffered the death of traitors *. 86.

Sept. o.
THus far Elizabeth's condua may be pronounced both prudent Mary is ac-

cured of being
and laudable, nor.can she be accused of violating any law of hu- acuac oplice

in the con-

manity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were necessary fpirtacv.
for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with.regard to.
which, posterity will pass a very different judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts fuficiently for-

all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But this was
not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose to place
-the conspiracy. They represented Babington and his associates to
be infiruments employed by the Queen of Scots, the real though
secret author of so many attempts againlt the life of Elizabeth, and
the peace of her:kingdoms.. They produced letters, which they
ascribed to her, in support of. this charge. These, as they gave
out, had.come into their hands, by a very singular, and mysterious
method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into England, had
been intrusted with letters toMary; but in order to make a trial of his
fidelity or address, they were: only blank papers made up in that
form. These being- safely delivered, he was afterwards employed
without farther scruple. By Walsingham's permiflion, and the
connivance of Paulet. he bribed a tradesman in the neighbourhood
of Chartley, whither Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the
letters in a hole in the wall of the castle, covered with aloofe itone.
Thence they were taken by the Queen,. and in the fame manner,
her. answers returned., All there were carried to Wallinghamn,

Canid. 515. State Trials, Vol. . lio.

opened

BookVII. opened by him, decyphe'ed, fealed again so de xtroufly that te'

5i86. fraud could not be perceived, and:then tranmitted to the perfolns

to whom they were directed. Two letters toBabington, with several
tto Mendoza, Paget, Englefield,'and theEnglilh fugitives, were pro-
cured by this artifice. It was given out that in these letters Mary ap-
proved of the conspiracy, and even of the aafflnation; that he
directed them to proceed with the tmbft circumfpeEion, and
not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to join them; that
she recommended the Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young
Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons to condut and to add
reputation to their enterprize; that'fe advif d' them, if possible,
to excite at the fame time rome commoti'on;in Ireland'; and above
all, besought them to concert with care the mieans of her escape,
suggesting to them several expedients for that' porpbiofd

The indigna- ALL the'se circumItances wree oened'at the trial of the-confpi+i
tion of the
English a- rators. And while the. ntion was- unierzthe riiflueice' of those
gainfl her on
thataccount. terrors which the association had raiied, and the late danger .had

augmented, they were believed without hesitation or enquiry, and
spread a general alarm. Mary's. zeal 'f6r 'her ieligion was well
known; and in that age, ex'amjles 'of'he vi6lent, and sanguinary
spirit which it inspired, were numerous. All'the cabals against the
peace of the kingdom for many years had been carried on in her
name; and it now appears evidently, fid the Erglqifh, that the safety
of the one Queen is incompatible with that of the other. Why
then, added they, flould the tranquillity of Englafd be sacrificed
for the fake of a tranger ? Why s a life f6 dear to the nation
exposCd to the repeated alfaults of an eiafperated rikval. 'The caic
fulppofed in the afociation, has now happened, the, sacred person
of our Sovereign has been treatened, and why hould not an

injured

injured people execute that juRf revenge which they had BookVI.
vowved? .
'"

1.5:. 6.
No sentiments culd be more agreebl.e than thee to. Elizabeth liz beth re-

·

'. " ' °ifolves to pro-
and her Ministers. They themselves had at sirss prop'agated them cecd to the

utmofl cxtre-

among the people, and they now served both as an apology, and a mitiesagainfl
motive, for their proceeding to such extremities against theScottiflh
Queen, as they had'long meditated. The more'inj uries :EIizab'etlh
heaped onMary, thb mr6e fmo e feared and hated that unhappy Q.een,
and came at lat- to be persuaded that there could be no other fe-
curity for her own life, but the death of her rival; Burleigh and
Walsingham had promoted so zealously all her measures with regard
to Scottih affairs; and had afted, with so little reserve, in oppbfition
to Mary, that they had reason to dread the mofft violent effects of
her resentment, if ever he hould mount the throne of England ;
and therefore they endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal to-them-
selves, by confirming their Mistress's fear and hatred of the.Scttih
Queen.

MEAN while, Mary was guarded with unusual vigilance, and great Herdomeffics,

papers, &c,.

oare was taken to keep her ignorant of the discove-ry of the con- are seized.
fpiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges- was.at lat ent from court, to ac-
.quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with which ie was
loaded as acceflary to that crime; and he furprized her with the ac-
count, just as she had got on horfehack to ride! out along with her
keepers. She was struck. with aonifhment, and would have re-
turned to her apartment. But the was not permitted; and i her
-absence, herprivate closet was broke open, her cabinet and papers were
seized, fealed, and ent up to court. Herprincipal domeffics, too,
were arrested, and committed to different keepers'. Naue and Curie,

her

BookVII. her two secretaries, the one a native of France, the other of Scot-'

i86. land, were carried prisoners to London. All the money in her,
Sept. 10. custody, amounting to little more than 2000 pounds, was secured.

And after leading her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
'house to another, he was conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong castle
in Northamptonfh're .

concerning No farther evidence could now be expeced againfl Mary, and
the methodof nothing remained but to decide what should be her fate. With re-
proceeding.

gard to this, Elizabeth and those Ministers in whom she chiefly con-
fided, seem to have taken their resolution; but there was still great
variety of sentiments among her other Counsellors. Some thought
it sufficient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her under
such close restraint, as would cut off all poilibility ofcorrefponding
with the enemies of the kingdom; and as her constitution, broken
by long confinement, and her spirit dejeEted with so many cares,
could not long support such an additional load, the Queen and na-
tion would oon be delivered from all their fears. But though it
might be easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible to di-
minifh the reverence which the Roman Catholics had for her name,
or to extinguish the compaiflon with which they viewed her sus-
ferings; while.thefe continued, infurretions and inva£ions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effecd of any new ri-
gour would be to render them more frequent and dangerous. For
this reason the expedient was rejected.

Determines A public and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was judged
to try her
publickly. the most unexceptionable method of proceeding; and it had at the

* Cancd. 517.

fame
128

tfme time, a semblance of juflice, accompanied with an air of dig- Book VII.
nity. It was in vain to search the ancient records, for any flatute 5.
or precedent, to justify such an uncommon flep,. as the trial of a
foreign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but had
fled thither for refuge. The proceedings against her were founded
,on the ad of lalt Parliament, and by applying it in this manner, the
intention of those who had framed that revere flatute became more
·apparent *.

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumflance of pomp or solemnity

should be wanting, which could render this tranfadion such as be-
came the dignity of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
commission under the great eal, forty persons, the most illustrious
in the kingdom, by their birth or offices, together with five of the
judges, to hear and decide this great cause. Many difficulties were
flarted by the lawyers, about the name and title by which Mary
hfould be arraigned; and while the essentials of justice were so
grofly violated, the empty forms of it were the objes of their care.
They at length agreed that he should be filed, <" Mary, daughter
< and heir of James V. late King of Scots, commonly called Queen
<' of Scots, and Dowager of France --."

AFTER the many indignities which she had lately suffered, Mary

could no longer doubt but that her deftrudion was determined. She
.expeded, every moment, to end her days by poison, or by tome of
those secret means, usually employed againfl captive Princes. And
left the malice of her enemies, at the fame time that it deprived
her of life, flhould endeavour likewise to blast her reputation, ile

* Camd. 9. Jolinf. Hist. 113, 't Strype, 3. 362.
VOL. II.

8

wrote

Book VII. wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in the firongeft.

~ ...A terms, from the imputation of encouraging or of being accessory to

the conspiracy for affafiinating Elizabeth *. In the solitude of her
prison, the strange resolution of bringing her to a public trial had
not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so unprecedented,
and so repugnant to regal Majefly, once enter into her.thoughts.

'Tle tri.i at ON the eleventh of Otober, the commissIoners appointed by
'othcring. Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they delivered a

letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches
and accusations, she informed her, that regard to her own safety
had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a- public enquiry into her
condu&t, and therefore required her, as Ohe had lived so long under
the protection of the laws of England, to submit now to the trial,

Mary refuses which they ordained to be taken of her crimes. Mary, though fur-
at firfl to
plead. prized at this message, was neither appalled at the danger, nor un-

mindful of her own dignity. She protested, in the most solemn
manner, that he was innocent of the crime laid to her charge,
and had never countenanced any attempt againit the life of the
Queen of England; but, at the fame time, refused to acknowlege
the jurifdidion of her commissioners. " I came into the king-
" dom," said fle, " an independent Sovereign, to implore the

Queen's assistance, not to fubje myself to her authority. Nor
is my spirit so broken by its past misfortunes, or so intimidated
" by present dangers, as to stoop to any thing unbecoming the

Majesty of a crowned head, or that will disgrace the ancestors
from whom I am descended, and the son to whom I ihall leave
"my throne. If I must be tried, Princes alone can be my Peers.

Jebb, 2. 283.

" The

( The Queen of England's fubjets, however noble their birth BookVII.

may be, are of a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival 5,

" in this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner. Its laws
" never afforded me any protection. Let them not now be per-
(" verted, in order to take away my life."

THE commissioners employed arguments and intreaties to over-

come Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed according
to the forms of law, and to pass sentence againfl her on account of
her contumacy in refuting to plead he persisted, however, for two
days to decline their jurifdidion. An argument urged by Hatton,
the Vice-Chamberlain, at last prevailed. He told her, that by
avoiding a trial, the injured her own reputation, and deprived her-
self of the only opportunity of setting her innocence in a clear light;
and that nothing would be more agreeable to them, or more ac-
ceptable to the Queen their Mistress, than to be convinced, by un-
doubted evidence, that he had been unjustly loaded with foul
aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible flould impose on the unwaryonfents

however to

Queen, or that he, unafflifed, at that time, by any friend or coun- do so.
fellor, should not be able to detect and elude all the artifices of
Elizabeth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally melancholy, and
under circumstances nearly similar, her Grandson, Charles I. re-
fused, with the utmofl firmness, to acknowledge the usurped jurif-
didion of the High Court of Justice; and posterity has approved
his conduct, as suitable to the dignity of a King. If Mary was
less confrant in her resolution, it must be imputed solely to her anxi-
ous desire of vindicating her own honour.

S

\ r

Book VII. AT her appearance before the Judges, who were feated in the

i86. great hall of the cafle, where they received her with much cere-
0n. 14. mofiy; ihe took care to.:proteft, that by condescending to hear and.

to give an answer to thi accusations, which should be offered
againfi her, file neither acknowledged the jurifdidion of the court
nor admitted of the validity and justice of those ads, by which they
pretended to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-protefation, endeavoured to vin-

dicate the authority of the court.

The ac.cufa-
tion againt
her.

THEN the Qeen's Attorney and Sollicitor opened the charge.

against her, with all the circumitances of the late conspiracy. Copies.
of her letters to Mendoza, Babington,. Englefield and Paget were.
produced. Babington's confession, those of Ballard, Savage, and
the other conspirators, together with the declarations of Naue and
Curie her fecretaries,.were read, and the whole ranged in the most
specious order, which the art of the lawyers could devise, and..
heightened by every colour, their eloquence could add.

MARY liffened to their harangues attentively, and without emo-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who was,
then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being accessory to the
conspiracy, fle broke out into this tender and generous exclamation:
"c Alas! how much has the noble house of Howard suffered for
" my fake! "
eIcr defence.

WHEN the Queen's council had finished, Mary flood up, and

with great magnanimity, and equal presence of mind, began her
defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her. own fituatior, that,
after a captivity of nineteen years, during which she had suffercd

treatment

I

treatment no less cruel than unmerited, the was at last loaded with Book VIL
an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her right of 158
succession, and to deprive her of life itself, but to transmit her name
with infamy to future, ages: That,. without regarding the sacred
rights of sovereignty, he was now fubjeaed to laws framed against
private persons; though an anointed Queen, commanded to ap-
pear before the tribunal of fubjets; and, like a common crimi-
nal, her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers, ca-
pable of wresting her words, and of misrepresenting her ations :
That, even in this diflionourable situation, she was denied the pri-
vileges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her
own defence, without the pretence of any friend with whom to'
advise, without the aid. of council, and without the use of her own
papers..

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in the accusation..

She absolutely denied any correspondence with Babington: The
name of Ballard was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretended letters to them were produced: Though nothing
less than her hand-writing or subscription was fufiicient to convict
her of such an odious crime: No proof could be brought that the
letters were delivered into her hands, or that any answer was re-
turned by her direcion: The confefions of wretches condemned
and executed for such a deteflable ation, were of little weight;
fear or hope might extort from them many things inconsistent with
truth,. nor ought the honour of a Queen to be stained by such vile
testimony. The declaration of her ecretaries was not more con-
clufive: promises and threats might ealily overcome the resolution of
two firangers; in order to screen themselves, they might throw the
blame on her; but they could discover nothing to her prejudice,
without violating, in the firfl place, their oath of fidelity; and their

prCjury,

Book VII. pejturly, ione instance, rendered them unworthy of credit in an-
'-JCt other: The letters to the Spanish ambaifador were either nothing

J$86.,

more than copies, or contained only what was perfetly innocent:

I have often," continued lie, " made such efforts for the re-

" covery of my liberty, as are natural to a human creature. And
"convinced, by the fad experience of so many years, that it was vain

to exped it from the justice or generosity of the Queen of Eng-

"land, I have frequently follicited foreign Princes, and called on
"all my friends to employ their whole interest for my relief. I

have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the English Catho-

( lies ome mitigation of the rigour with which they are now
" treated; and if I could hope, by my death, to deliver them fiomn
( oppreffon, I am willing to die for their fake. I wish, however,
" to imitate the example of Esther, not of Judith, and would
"rather make intercefiion for my people, than shed the blood of
' the meanest creature, in order to save them. I have often

checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents, when either the

cc severity of their own persecutions, or indignation at the unheard-
"of injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate them
"into violent councils. I have even warned the Queen of dangers

to which there harfli proceedings exposed herself. And worn
out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the profpet of a
( Crown is not so inviting, that I should ruin my foul in order to

obtain it. I am no ftlranger to the feelings of humanity, nor

"unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor the detest-
,' able crime of aflafination, as equally repugnant to both. And,
" if ever I have given content by my words, or even by my
" thoughts, to any attempt against the life of the Quccn of Eng-
-' land, far from declining the judgment of men, I (hall not even
( pray for the mercy of God '."

Cand. 520, &c.

Two

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and in Book VII.

every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity of a -
Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

THE commiffloners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjournr Sentence a-

gainft her..

ed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in o&. s
Westminster. When assembled in that place,. Naue and Curie were
brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration upon
oath. And after reviewing their whole proceedings, the commis-
fioners unanimously declared Mary " To be acceifory to Babington's

conspiracy, and to have imagined diverse matters, tending to the

"hurt, death, and deftrue&ion of Elizabeth,. contrary to the ex-
( press words of the flatute, made for the security of the Queen's
" life *."

IT is no easy matter to determine whether the injuflice in ap- Irregularitie

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conducting it, were great- te tral.
elf and most flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim authority
over an independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply with the
laws of a foreign kingdom ? I-Iow could the fubjeas of another
Prince become her judges ? Or if such an insult on royalty were
allowed, ought not the common forms of justice to have been ob-
served'? If the testimony of Babington and his associates was o
explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a few weeks, and
by confronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with the full con-
vidion of her crimes ? Naue and Curie were both alive, wherefore
did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for what reason were they
produced in the Star-Chamber, where Mary was not present to hear
what they deposed? Was this ufpicious evidence enough to con-

* Camd. 525.

dcln.

Baok viI.dena a Q.een Ought the meane criminal to have been found

--86
" ' guilty, upon such feebleand inconclusive proofs

'IT was not, however, on the evidenceproducedat her trial, that the
sentence against Mary was founded. That served as a pretence to jus-
tify, but was.not the cause of the violent lteps taken by Elizabeth
.and her Ministers towards her deftrudion ; and was employed to give
A.ome appearance ofjuftice, to what was the offspring ofjealouvf and
fear. And the nation, blinded with resentment againtf Mary, and
:solicitous to secure the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and attended to no de-
fees in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and probabilities, as if
they had been irrefragable demonstrations.

The parlia- TimE parliament met a few days after fentene was pronounced
mnnt confirm
tle entence, againt Mary. In that illustrious aembly more temper and dif-

cernment, than are to be found among the people, might have
been expeced. Both Lords and Commons, however, were equally
under the dominion of popular prejudices and paflions, and the
fame excesses of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are
apparent in all their proceedings. They entered with impatience
upon an enquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers which threat-
ned the Queen's life, and the peace of the kingdom. All the pa-
pers, which had been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before
them. And aftei many violent invetives againfl the Qeen of
Scots, both houses, unanimously, ratified the proceedings of tht
commiflioners by whom the had been tried, and declared the fen-
tence against her to be just and well-founded. Not satisfied with

nnd demand this, they presented a joint addicfs to the Qeen, beseeching her,
tic execution
of it. as he regarded her own safety, the preservation of the Protcflant

religion,

,eligion, the welfare and wishes of her people, to publics the en- Books VI.
tence; and without farther delay.to;infli .ona. rival, no,lefs irre- .58
claimable than dangerous, the punishment which she had merited
by so many crimes. This request, dictated by fears unworthy of
that great Afembly, was enforced by reasons fill more unworthy,
They were drawn not from justice, but from conveniency. he
mot rigorous confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's
intriguing pirit; her address was found, by long experiences to be
an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of.all her keepers: The
severest penal laws could not restrain her adherents, who, while
they believed her person to be sacred, would despise any danger to
which themselves alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes were
ready to second their attempts, and waited only a proper opportu-
nity for invading the kingdom, and aerting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons, was incompatible
with Elizabeth's safety; and if she were spared out of a false cle-
mency, the Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the king-
dom, could not be one moenet secure. Neceflity required that (he
Should be sacrificed in order to preserve there; and to prove this fa-
crifice to be no less just than necessary, several examples in history
were produced, and many texts of scripture quoted, but both
the one and the other were misapplied, and distorted from their
true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth than Elizabeth's

.an address in this itrain. It extricated her out of a situation, ex-
tremely embarrassing; and without depriving her of the power of
sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less appearance of
blame. If she chore the former, the whole honour would redound
to her own clemency. If fle determined on the latter, whatever

VOL. II. T was

*Book VIt. was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by the solicitations of

'-: her people, rather than to flow from her own inclination. HAe

answer, however, was in a stile, which ihe often used, ambiguous
and evasive under the appearance-of openness and candor; full of
such professions of regard for her people, as served to heighten their
loyalty; of such complaints of Mlary's-ingratitude, as were calcu-
lated to excite their indignation; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their fears.
In the end, he besought them to save her the infamy and the paih
of delivering up a Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment;.
and to confider whether it might not fSill be possible to provide
for the public security, without forcing her to imbrue her hands i.
royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily. underflood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former. request, with additional
importunity, which was far from being either unexpeced, or of-
fenfive. Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit,;
and having obtained such a public fanaion of her proceedings, there
was no longer any reason for protrading this scene of dissimulation,;
there was even ome danger that her feigned difficulties might at
last be treated. as real ones; he therefore adjourned the parlia-
ment, and reserved in her own hands the sole disposal of her rival's
fate *.

France nter- ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceedings against
poles feebly
in behalf of Mary, with astonishment and horror; and even Henry III. notwith-
Mary. standing his known aversion to the house of Guise, was obliged to

interpose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the common

* Camd. 526. D'Ewcs 375.

rights

ights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambaflador, and; Bellie. Book VIH.
vere who was sent with an extraordinary commission. to the fame i586r
purpose, interceded for Mary with great .appearance of warmth. Nov. zt.
They employed all the arguments which the cause naturally fug-
gested,; they pleaded from justice, generosity, and humanity; they
intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all these Elizabeth
continued deaf and inexorable, and having received some intima-
tion of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of the Scottilh Qeen,
and knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, she trusted,
:that these loud remonstrances ;:would be followed by no violent
resentment. *

SHE paid no greater regard to the follicitations of the Scottiff James enea.

vours to save.

King, which, as they were urged with more sincerity, merited more lis. mother's
attention. Though hercommiffioners had been extremely carefule
to tooth James, by publishing a declaration that theirfentence against
Mary did, in no degree, derogate from hishonour, or invalidate
any title which he formerly posseed; he beheld the indignities to
which his Mother had been exposed with filial concern, and with
the sentiments which became a King. The pride of the Scottish
nation was rouzed, by the insult offered to the blood of their Mo.
narchs, and called upon him to employ the moll vigorous efforts,
in order to prevent or to revenge the Queen's death.

AT first, he could scarce 'believe that Elizabeth would venture
upon an aion so' unprecedented, which tended so visibly to

C- CaNd. 531.

render
T 2

Book VII. render the persons of Princes less sacred in the eyes of the peoples

O8 and which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times

ihe was so remarkably jealous. But as oon as the extraordinary.
steps which she took discovered her intention, he despatched Sir
William Keith to London4 who, together with Douglas his am-
baflador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the firongeft terms, againfl
the injury done to an independent Queen, in fubje&ting her to. be:
tried like a private person, and by laws to which he owed: no.obe-
dience; and besought Elizabeth not to add.to thi&injury, by susser--
ing a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dishonourable to the King;
of Scots, to be put in execution*..

ELIZABETH. returningno answer to these remonstrances of hit

ambassador, James wrote: toher with his own hand, complaining.it-
the bitteref. terms of her condu&, not without threats that b6th' his
duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her friendship,
and to a& as became a son when called to revenge his mother's.
wrongs -. At the fame time he assembled the nobles, who promised
to sand by him in so good a cause. He appointed ambassadors to:
France, Spain, and Denmark; in order to implore the aid of these
courts; and took other fleps towards executing' his threats with vi--
gour. The high strain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to such a de-
gree, that she was.ready to. dismiss his ambassadors without any reply..
But his preparations alarmed and embarraffed.her Ministers, and at,

* See Append. N. XIII. Birch. Mem. . z52

their,

their intreatyshe returned a soft and evasive answer; pronifingitoiBok :VI.
liften to any overture from the King, that tended to his mother's C586.
safety; and to fulpend the execution of the.fentence, till the arrival
of new .ambaffdors from. Scotland $.

MEANWHILE, the commanded the sentence against Mary to beDecemb. 6.

The sentence

published, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was ex- against Mary
torted from her by the repeated intreaties of both houses of parlia-
ment. At the fame time, she despatched Lord.Buckhurft and Beale
to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how importunately the
nation demanded the execution of it, and, though he had not
hitherto yeilded. to these follicitations, mhe advised her to prepare for
an event,, which might become neceifary for securing the Protestant
religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary re-
ceived the message. not only without symptoms of fear, but with,
expressions of triumph. " No wonder, said She, the English hould.
" nQw. thirds for the blood of a foreign Prince, they have often
" offered violence to their own Monarchs. But after so many sus-
"ferings, death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am proud
"to think that my life is esteemed of importance to the Catholic
' religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing to die -."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was stripped of She is treated.

with the ut-

every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of slate in hermoftrigour.
apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap-
proached her person without ceremony; and even appeared covered
in her presence. Shocked with these indignities, and offended at
this gross familiarity, to which he had never been accustomed,
Mary once more complained to Elizabeth; and at the fame time,

*' Spotfw. 251. Cald. 4..5. f Camd. 528. Jcbb, 291.

8

Book VII. as her last request, intreated that ihe would' permit herfervants t,,

1586. -carry her dead body into France, to be laid among her ancestors,
Decemb. '9. in.hallowed ground; that some of her domestics might be present

at her death, to bear witness of her innocence, and firm adherence
to the Catholic faith; that all her servants might be suffered to leave
the kingdom, and to enjoy those small legacies, which he flould
bestow on them, as tefRimonies of her affe&ion; and that, in the
mean time, her almoner, or fore other Catholic Priest, might be
allowed to attend her, and to assist her in preparing for an eternal
world. She besought her in the name of Jesus, by the foul and
memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their near
consanguinity, and the royal dignity with which they were both in-
veited, to gratify her in these particulars, and to indulge her so far
as to signify her compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whe-
ther Mary's letter was ever delivered to Eizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid to her requests. She was
offered a Protestant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them she re-
je&ed; and without any Clergyman to dire& her devotions, she pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which Ih
now believed to be at no great distance .

15i7. JAMES, without losing a moment, ent new ambassadors toLon-

jiams frllic s don These were the master of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In
his follicita- *uol.
tions in her order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Mafler
behalf.
January i. would become bound that no conspiracy lhould be undertaken

against her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's con-
sent; and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver some
of the most considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hostages. If this

Camd. 528. Jebb, z. z95.

were

were not thought-fuficient,. they proposed. that Mary hould refignBo'okVlI.
all her rights and pretensions to her son, -fromwhom nothing inju. 587g
rious to the Proteftant-religion,. or. inconsistent with Elizabeth's
safe.ty,. could be feared . The former.propofal, Elizabeth .reje&ed
as insecure; -the latter, as dangerous.. The ambassadors were then
inftruded to talk in an higher tone and Melvil executed the con-
mifion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray,, with his usual per-
fidy, deceived his Master who;trufted him with a negociation of so
much importance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was employed
to save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth, to. execute the fen-
tence against her rival. He often repeated the old proverbial fen-
tence; " The dead-cannot bite." And whatever should happen,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage,, or at least to prevent any
violent effects of his resentment *-

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the Eiizbeth's

most violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She shunned dfo-imu uiLL
ciety, she was often found in a melancholy and muting poflure, and
repeating, with much emphasis, thefe;fentences which [he borrowed
from some of the devices then in vogue;, Aut ser aut feri; ne
feriare, feri. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness muff
be imputed to dissimulation; it was impossible, however, that a
Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, hould venture on an
action, which might expose her memory to infamy, and her life
and kingdom to danger, without reflecting deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited her determination in fufpence and anxie-
ty; and left their fear or their zeal should subside, rumours of
danger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmost in-
duftry; Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was accused of having

* Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 568. Sec Append. N. XIV.

fubornedJ

Book VII.fuborned an afaffin to murder the Queen. The Spanifh-fleet was

57 ' said by ome to be already arrived at Milford-haven. ' Others as-

firmed that the Duke of Guise had landed with a strong army, in
Suflex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were up
in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with all their
forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing
the Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew every day more
violent; and the people, astonished and enraged, called for the exe-
cution of the sentence against Mary, as the only thing which could
relfore tranquility to the kingdom *.

Warrant for WHILE these sentiments prevailed among her fubjecs, Elizabeth
Mary's execu-
tion igned. thought he might safely venture to strike the blow, which he had
February . so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fecreta-

ries of slate, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and her behaviour,
on that occasion, plainly shewed that it is not to humanity, that we
must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment he
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman, a Queen, and her
own nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner, he was
capable of jesting. Go, fays he, to Davison, and tell Walfing-
ham what-I have now done, though I am afraid he will die for
grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety was how to secure the
advantages which would arise from May's death, without appear-
ing to have given her content to a deed so infamous. She often
hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as to some other courtiers, that
now was the time to discover the sincerity of their concern for her
safety, and that she expected their zeal would extricate her out of
her present perplexity. But they were wife enough to eem not to
understand her meaning. Even after the warrant was signed, he

Camd. 533, 534.

com-
7

commanded a letter to be. written to Paulet, in less ambiguous Book VII.
terms; complaining ofhi's remiflnefs in fparingTo long the life of 5j
her capital enemy, and begging. him to remember'at last what was
incumbent on him as an affectionate subjed, and to deliver his So-
vereign from continual fear and danger, by hortening the days ot
his prisoner. Paulet, though rigorous and harlh, and often brutal
in the discharge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. . He rejeEed the
proposal with disdain; and lamenting.that he should ever have been
deemed capable of afting the part of an assassin, he declared that
the Queen might dispose of his life at her pleasure, but he would
never slain his own honour, nor leave an everlafring mark of in-
famy on his posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a
crime. On the receipt of this- answer, Elizabeth became extremely
peevish; and calling him a dainty and precise fellow, who would
promise much, but perform nothing, he proposed to employ one
Wingfield, who had both courage and inclination to firike the blows.
But Davison remonstrating against this method, as no less dangerous
than dishonourable, (he again declared her intention that the fen-
tence pronounced by the commissioners flould be executed accord-
ing to law; and as fle had already signed the warrant, fle begged
that no farther application might be made to her on that head. By
this the privy counsellors thought themselves sufficiently authorized
to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for the
Qeen's safety, or instigated, as is more probable, by the apprehen-
sion of the danger to which they would themselves be exposed, if
the life of the Queen of Scots were spared, they assembled in the
Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their hands, empowered
the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, together with the High Sheriff
of the County, to fee the sentence put in execution .

t' Biogr. Britan. Article Davison. * Came(. 534. Strype, 3. 361, 364.
VOL. I . U ON

ON

Book VII.

1587.

Mary's beha-
viour at her
death.

T H HISTORY

ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived at So-

theringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her presence
the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare to die next
morning. Mary heard them to the end without emotion, and
crossing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son, arid of
the Holy Ghost. " I hat foul, said he, is not worthy of the joys
of Heaven, which repines because the body must endure the stroke
of the executioner; and though I did not expect that the Qeen of
England would set the first example of violating the sacred person
of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that which providence
has decreed to be my lot." And laying her hand on a Bible, which
happened to be near her, fle solemnly protested that she was inno-
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carried on againftEli-
zabeth's life -. She then mentioned the requests contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfacory answer. She en-
treated, with particular earneffnefs, that now in her last moments,.
her Almoner might be suffered to attend her, and that he might
enjoy the consolation. of those pious institutions prescribed by her
religion. Even this favour, which is usually granted to the vilest
ciminals, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,

and though overawed by the pretence of the two Earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and burst out into
the most passionate exprefflons of tenderness and sorrow. Mary,
however, not only retained perfect composure of mind, but en-
deavourcd to moderate their excessive grief. And falling on her
knees, with all her domcftics around her, file thanked Heaven that

"s Jebb. 2. 3.

her

her sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that he might Book VII.
be enabled to endure what flill remained with decency, and with 87
fortitude. The greater part of the evening the employed in set-
tling her worldly affairs. She wrote her Testament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her cloaths, he distributed
among her servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote a
short letter to the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guile, full of tender but magnanimous sentiments, and recom-
mended her foul to their prayers, and her afflidted servants to their
protection. At supper, he eat temperately, as usual, and converted
not only with ease, but with chearfulnefs; the drank to every one
of her servants, and asked their forgiveness, if ever ihe had failed
in any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time flme
went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning
she retired into her closet, and employed a considerable time in de-
votion. At eight o'clock, the High Sheriff and his officers entered
her chamber, and found her still kneeling at the altar. She imme-
diately started up, and with a majestic mien, and a countenance un-
dismayed, and even chearful, advanced towards the place of exe-
cution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in a
mourning habit, but with an elegance and splendor, which she had
long laid aside, except on a few festival days. An Agnus Dei hung
by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her girdle; and in
her hand Mfe carried a crucifix of ivory. At the foot of the stair,
the two Earls, attended by several gentlemen from the neighbouring
Counties, received her; and there Sir AndrewMelvil, the master
of her houfhold, who had been secluded, for some weeks, from
her presence, was permitted to take his last fare\vel. At the fight
of a Mifirefs whom he tenderly loved, in such a situation, he
melted into tears; and as he was bewailing her condition, and com-
plaining of his own hard fate in being appointed to carry the accoult

U 2 of

BookVIi. of such a moiurnful event ito Scotland, Mary replied, " Weepnot,

5. ,_
good Melvil, there is at present greater cause for rejoicing. Thou

lhalt this day, fee Mary Stewart delivered from all .her cares, and
such an end put to her tedious sufferings as he has long expeaed
Bear witness that I die constant in my religion ; firm in my fidelity
towards Scotland; and unchanged in my affecion to France. Com-
mend me to my son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious to his.
kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; and God forgive all .those
who have thirsted, without cause, for my blood."

With much difficulty, and after many intreaties, she prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men.
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was erected in the fame hall where She had been tried, raised alittle
above the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cushion, and
block, with black cloth. Mary mounted the steps with alacrity,
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered countenance,
and signing herself with the cross, she fat down in the chair. Beale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which she-
listened with a careless air, and like one occupied in other thoughts,
Then the Dean of Peterborough. begana devout discourse, fiiitable
to her present condition, and offered up prayers to Heaven in her
behalf; but the declared that he could not in conscience hearken
to the one,. nor join with the other; and falling on her knees re-
peated a Latin prayer. When the Dean had finished his devotions,
(le with an audible voice, and in the Englifl tongue, recommended
unto God the affliaed slate of the Church, and. prayed for prof-
perity to her son, and for a long life, and peaceable reign to Eliza-
beth. She. declared that he hoped for mercy only through the death
of Christ, at the foot- of whose image she now willingly shed her
blood; and lifting up, and kissing the Crucifix,. isle thus addressed

it,

it, " As thy arms, O Jesus, were extended' on.the Cross.; so with Book'VII;
the outitretched arms of thy mercy, receive. me, and forgive my '58
fins."'

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off her'veil, and'

upper garmeits; and one of the executioners rudely endeavouring
to assist, he gently checked him, and said, with a Pmile, that she
had not. been accustomed to undress before so many fpeadators, nor -
to be served by such valets. With calm but undaunted fortitude,.
the laid her neck on .the block.; and while one executioner held her.
hands, the other at the second ftroke,.cut off her head, which.
falling outlof its attire, discovered her.hair already grown quite gray,.
with cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up still ireaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, "So perifl all Queen Eliza--
beth's enemies," the Earl of Kent alone answered Amen. The.
reft of the fpeAators continued silent, and drowned in tears; being.
incapable. at that. moment, of. any other sentiments, but.thofe of
pity, 'or admiration ..

SucH was the tragical death' of Mary Queen of Scots, after a life Sentiments of

historians
offorty four years and two months, almost nineteen years of which concerning

her.:

the passed in captivity. The political parties which were formed
in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsisted, under various
denominations, ever since that time.. The rancour, with which
they were at first animated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been perpetuated, and
even augmented. Among Hiflorians, who were under the domi-
nion of all these passions, and who have either ascribed to her.
every virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed to her all the.

Carnd. 534. SpQtf. 355. Jebb. z. 300. Strype, 3. 383,

vices ,,

BookVII. vices, of which the human heart is susceptible, we search in vain
'~o' for Mary's real charader. She neither merited the exaggerated
I587.

praises of the one, nor the undiftinguifling censure of the other.

Her charac- To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of exter-
tecr nal form, he added those accomplishments, which render their

impression irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating, prightly, and
capable of speaking and of writing with equal ease and dignity.
Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachments; because her
heart was warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contradition;
because {he had been accustomed from her infancy to be treated as a
Qeen. No firanger, on some occasions, to dissimulation; which,
in thatperfidious court where she received her education, was reckon-
ed among the necelfary arts of government. Not insensible of
flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure, with which almost every
woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we admire;
She was an agreeable woman, rather than an illustrious Queen.
The vivacity of her spirit, not sufficiently tempered with found
judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not, at all
times, under the restraint of discretion, betrayed her both into er-
rors, and into crimes. To fay that fle was always unfortunate,
will not account for that long and almo(t uninterrupted succession of
calamities which betel her; we must likewise add that ihe was often
imprudent. Her passion for Darnly was rah, youthful, and ex-
ceflive. And though the sudden transition to the opposite extreme
was the natural effcct of her ill-requited love, and of his ingrati-
tude, iinfolcncc, and brutality; yet neither these, nor Bothwcl's
artliLl addlrfcs, and important ferviccs, can juflify her attachment to
that nobleman. E1ven the manners of the age, licentious as they
were, arc no apology for this unhappy palion ; nor can they induce

2

US

us to look on that tragical and infamnous scene which followed Book VII.
upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over 587
this part of her character which it cannot approve, and may, per-
haps, prompt some to impute her aaions to her situation, more than
to her dispositions; and to lament the unhappiness of the former,
rather than. accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's sufferings
exceed, both in degree and in duration, those tragical diftrefies,
which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration; and
while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her frailties,
we think of her faults with less indignation, and approve of our
tears, as if they were shed for a person who had attained much
nearer to pure virtue.

WITH regard to the Qeen's person, a circumstance not to be

omitted in writing the history of a female reign, all cotemporary
authors agree in ascribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of shape, of which the human form is capa-
ble. Her hair was black, though, according to the faillion of that
age, he frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different colours.
Her eyes were a dark gray; her complexion was exquisitely fine;
and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to flape and
colour. Her stature was of an height that rose to the majestic.
She danced, she walked, and rode with equal grace. Her taste
for music was just, and he both sung and played upon the lute,
with uncommon kill. Towards the end of her life, Ihe began
to grow fat; and her long confinement and the coldness of the
houses in which he had been imprisoned, brought on a rheuma-
tifm, which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man, fays
Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration and love, or
will read her history without sorrow.

NONE

'Book VIIT

1587.

Elizabeth as
fels to la-
ment Mary's
death.

T H E H I S T O R Y

NoGNE of her women were suffered to come near her dead body,

which was carried into a room adjoining the place of execution,
where it lay, for ome days, 'covered with a coarse cloth torn
from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the
executioners, and every thing stained with her blood, were reduced
to aihes. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body. to be
buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnificence.
But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the pageantry of
a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those injuries,
which laid Mary in her grave. James, oon after his accession to
the English throne, ordered her body to be removed to Weftmin-
fer-abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs of Eng-
land.

ELIZABETH affeEted to receive the accounts of Mary's death,

with the most violent emotions of furprize, and of concern. Sighs,
tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to display
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks of difimula-
tion and artifice may be traced through every period of Elizabeth's
proceedings, against the life of the Scotifh Queen. The com-
mission for bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly extorted
from her, by the intreaties of her privy counsellors. She delayed pub-
lifhing the sentence against her, till fihe was twice follicited by both
houses of Parliament. Nor did she sign the warrant for execution,
without the utmpft apparent relucance. One scene more of the
boldest and most solemn deceit remained to be exhibited. She
undertook to make the world believe that Mary had been put to
death without her knowledge, and against her will. And Davi-
son, who neither fufpeaed her intention, nor his own danger, was
her infl-rument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a victim to it.

3 IT

IT was his duty as secretary of state to lay before her the BookVII.

'warrant for execution, in order to be signed; and by her command, 587.
he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
she had charged him not to communicate what ihe had done to any
person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands, without
her express permission; that, in contempt of this order, he had not
only revealed the matter to several of her Ministers, but had, in con-
cert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors, by whom, with-
out her content or knowledge, the warrant was issued, and the
Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to put it in execution.
Though Davison denied all this, and with circumstances which bear
the cfrongeft marks of truth and credibility; though it can scarce
be conceived that her privy council, composed of the persons in whom
fle most confided, of her Ministers and favourites, would aifemble
within the walls of her palace, and venture to tranfad a matter of
so much importance, without her privity, and contrary to her in-
clination yet so far did the carry he; difimnulation, that, with all
the signs of displeasure and of rage, the banished most of herCoun-
fellors out of her pretence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, o
harshly, and with such marks of disgust, that he gave up himself
for loft, and in the deepest afflition wrote to the Queen begging
leave to resign all his places, that he might retire to his own estate.
Davison ihe intfantly deprived of his office, and committed him a
close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a March.
solemn trial in the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a fine of
io,ooc pounds, and to be imprisoned during the QOeen's pleasure.
He languiflled, several years, in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the Quen of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part
of her condut, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the repu-

VOL. II. X putation

'BookVII. NONE ofher women were suffered to come near her dead body,

587 .wvhich was carried into a room adjoining the place of executin,

,where it lay, fr some days, covered, with a coarse cloth tor
.from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the
.executioners, and every thing stained with her blood, were reduced
to aihes. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body, to be
buried in the Cathedral, of Peterborough, with royal magnificence.
But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the pageantry of
a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of thQfe injuries,
which laid Mary in her grave. James, oon after his accefion to
the English throne, ordered her body t be removed to Wefmin-
lter-abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs of Eng-
land.

Elizabeth as- )ELIZABETH affected to receive -the accounts of Mary's death,
set tM, 's with the moil violent emotions offurprize, and ofconcern. Sighs,
death. tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to display

the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks of diffimula-
tion and artifice may be traced through every period of Elizabeth's
proceedings, against the life of the Scotifh Qieen. The com-
mission for bringing Mary, to a public trial was -seemingly extorted
from her, by the intreaties of her privy counsellors. She delay;ed puh-
lifhiing the sentence against her, till mhe was twice follicited by both
houses of Parliament. Nor did he sign the warrant for execution,
without the utmpft apparent reluctance. One icene more of the
boldest and most solemn deceit remained to be exhibited. She
undertook to make the world believe that Mary had been put to
death without her knowledge, and against her will. And Davi-
son, who neither fufpeed her intention, nor his own danger, was
her inltrument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a victim to it.

IT
3

IT' was his duty as secretary of state to lay before her the BookViT.

warrant for execution, in order to be signed ; and by her command, 587.
he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
lhe had charged him not to communicate what Se had done to any
person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands, without
her express permission; that, in contempt of this order, he had not
only revealed the matter to several of her Ministers, but had, in con-
cert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors, by whom, with-
out her content or knowledge, the warrant was issued, and the
Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to put it in execution.
Though Davison denied all this, and with circumstances which bear
the strongest marks of truth and credibility; though it can scarce
be conceived that her privy council, composed of the perons in whom
ale most confided, of her Ministers and favourites, would assemble
within the walls of her palace, and venture to tranfad a matter of
so much importance, without her privity, and contrary to her in-
clination yet so far did the carry he; dissimulation, that, with all
the signs of displeasure and of rage, she banished most of herCoun-
fellors out of her pretence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so
harhly, and with such marks of disgust, that he gave up himself
for loft, and in the deepest affliction wrote to the Qeen begging
leave to resign all his places, that he might retire to his own estate.
Davison she instantly deprived of his office, and committed him a
close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a March.
solemn trial in the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a fine of
io,ooc pounds, and to be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure.
He languished, several years, in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the OQeen of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part
of her conduct, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the repu-

VOL. 11. X putation

Book VII. putation and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men in

-587. her kingdom*.
587.

Elizabeth THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furnished
endeavours to
sooth James. Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As the

profped of his mother's danger had excged the King's filial care
and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief and
resentment. His fubjeds feltr-the dishonour done to him, and
to the nation. In order to ooth both, Elizabeth instantly dif-
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter
expressing her extreme afflicion on account of that miserable ac-
cident, which, as she pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment, or intention. James would not permit her messenger
to enter Scotland; and with ome difficulty, received a memorial
he ent from Berwick. It contained the tale concerning Davison,
drefled up with all the circumstances, which tended to exculpate
Elizabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his rashness or treach-
ery. Such a defence gave little fatisfadion, and was confidered as
mockery added to insult; and many of the nobles, as well as the
King, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely
follicitous to pacify them, and neither wanted instruments, nor rea-
sons to gain her end. Leicester wrote to the King, and Walling-
ham to ecretary Maitland. They represented the certain deftruc-
tion, to which James would expose himself, if with the forces of
Scotland alone, he flould venture to attack a kingdom, so far fupe-
rior in power; that the history of past ages, as well as his Mother's
fad experience, might convince him that nothing could be more
dangerous, or deceitful than dependance on foreign aid; that the

e Camd. 536. Strypc 3. 370.

King

King of France would never wish to fee theBritifh kingdoms united Book VI.
under one Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince so nearly I587-
allied to the house of Guise, with such formidable power; that
Philip might be a more active ally, but would certainly prove
a more dangerous one, and under pretence of assisting him, would
assert his own right to the EngliffCrown, which he already began
openly to claim; that the fame statute, on which the sentence of death
against his Mother had been founded, would justify the excluding
him from the succession to the Crown; that the English, naturally
averse from the dominion of strangers, would not fail, if exafpe-
rated by his hostilities, to apply it in that manner ; that Eliza-
beth was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother had sus-
sered, by her tenderness and affecion towards the son; and that by
engaging in a fruitless war, he would deprive himself of a noble
inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he must infalli-
bly obtain. These representations, added to the consciousness of his
own weakness, to the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous
spirit of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and
to the influence of that faction, which was entirely at Elizabeth's
devotion, convinced James that a war with England, howeverjuft,
would in the present juncture be altogether impolitical. All these
considerations induced him to isle his resentment; to appear satis-
fled with the punishment inflicted on Davison; and to preserve all
the semblances of friendflip with the English court . In this
manner did the cloud which threatned such a storm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, remained unavenged
by any Prince; and whatever infamy Elizabeth might incur, lie
was exposed to n new danger, on that account.

Spotfwv. Strype 3, 377.

MIArY'S

Book VIT. MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the Master of Gray, and

587 loft him the King's favour which he had for some time pofiefled.

Disgrace of He was become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire
the Maller of
Gray power without merit, and exercise it without discretion, usually are.

The treacherous part, whi:h he had ated during his late embassy,
was no secret, and filled James, who. at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers, obfeyved the fymp-
toms of disgust arising in the King's mind, his enemies seized the
opportunity, and Sir William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy
May o. with which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain James, publickly

accused him before a Convention of nobles, not only of having
contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to take away the life of
the Queen, but of holding correlpondence with Popish princes, in
order to subvert the religion established in the kingdom. Gray, un-
supported by the King, deserted by all, and conscious of his own
guilt, made a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual ba-
nifhment, a punishment very unequal to his crimes. But the King
was unwilling to abandon one, whom he had once favoured so
highly, to, the rigour ofjuftice;. and Lord Hamilton his near rela-
tion, and the other nobles who had lately returned from exile, in
gratitude for the zeal with which he had served them, interceded
warmly in his behalf.

HAV I NG thus accomplished the destruction of one of his enemies,

Captain James thought the juncture favourable for prosecuting his
revenge on them all. He singled out secretary Maitland, the mos
eminent both for abilities and enmity to him; and offered to prove
that he was no less acccffary than Gray to the Queen's death, and
had even formed a design of delivering up the King himself into
the hands of the Englif. But time and ablence had, in a great
measure, extinguifiled the King's affecion for a minion, who so little

defervedc

deserved it. All the courtiers combined against him as a common BookVII.
enemy. And-inftead of gaining his point, he had the mortifica-
tion to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon Maitland, who,
together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and influence of a
prime Minister.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Bishops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their encroachments, appeared. But as the King was now of full
age, and a parliament was summoned on that occasion, the Clergy
remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to repre-
sent their grievances to that court, from which great things were
expeted.

PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, James attempted a work The King at.

worthy of aKing. The deadly feuds which subsisted between manyof p to u-
the great families, and which were tranfinitted from one generation to bles.
another,weakened the strength oftbe kingdom; contributed,more than
anyother circumfiance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit among
.the nobles; and proved the occasion of many disasters to themselves,
and to their country. After many preparatory negotiations, he invited
the contending parties to a royal entertainment in the palace ofHoly-
rood-houfe; and partly by his authority, partly by his intreaties,
obtained their promise to bury their dissentions in perpetual oblivion.
From thence he conducted them, in solemn procession, through the
streets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand with
his enemy. A collation of wine and sweet-meats was prepared at
the public Cross, and there they drank to each other, with all the
signs of reciprocal forgiveness, and of future friendship. The peo-
ple, who were present at a fpetacle o unusual, conceived the moss
1'.aguine hopes of secing concord and tranquillity eltablifed in

evlry

BookVII.

1587.

THE HISTORY

every part of the kingdom, and testified their fatisfa&ion by re-
peated acclamations. Unhappily the effets of this reconciliation
were not correspondent either to the pious endeavours of the King,
or the fond wishes of the people.

THE firfl care of the parliament was the security of the Protef-

tant religion. All the laws passed in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified; and a new and severe one was enacted against
seminary Priests and Jesuits, whose restless indutry in making pro-
felytes brought many of them into Scotland about this time. Two
adts of this parliament deserve more particular notice, on account of
the consequences with which they were followed.

General an- THE one refpe&ed the lands of the Church. As the public reve-
nexation of
Churchlands. nues were not sufficient for defraying the King's ordinary charges; as

the administration of government becamemore complicated and more
expensive; as james was naturally profuse, and a stranger to cecono-
my ; it was necessary, on all these accounts, to provide some fund
proportioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum could be
levied on the Commons, who did not enjoy the benefit of an ex,
tensive commerce. The nobles were unaccustomed to bear the bur.
den of heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church were the
only source whence a proper supply could be drawn. Notwith-
standing all the depredations of the laity since the Reformation, and
the various devices which they had employed to seize the Church-
lands, some considerable portion of them remained still unalienated,
and were held either by the Biflhops who possessed the benefices
or were granted to laymen during pleasure. All there lands were,
in this parliament, annexed, by one general law *, to the Crown,

Parl. 11. Jac. VI. c. 29.

and
4

O F S C O T L A N D. 159

and the King was impowered to apply the rents of them to his BookVII.
own use. The tithes alone were reserved for the maintenance of `%`

1587.

the persons who served the cure, and the principal Manfion-houfe,
with a few acres of land, .way of glebe, allotted for his refi-
dence. By this great acceflion of property, it is natural to conclude,
that the King, must have acquired a vast increase of power, and the
influence of the nobles have suffered a proportional diminution. The
very reverse of this seems, however, to have been the cafe. Almost
all grants ofChurch-lands, prior to this ad, were thereby confirmed;
and titles, which were formerly reckoned precarious, derived from
thence the fanaion of parliamentary authority. James was like-
wife authorized during a limited time, to make new alienations; and
such was the facility of his temper, ever ready to yield to the fol-
licitations of his servants, and to gratify their most extravagant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but throughout his
whole reign, he was continually employed in beitowl'g, d his
parliament in ratifying grants of this kind to his nobles; hence lit-
tle advantage accrued to the Crown from that which might have
been so valuable-an addition to its revenues. The Biihops, however,
were great sufferers by the law. But at this jundure neither the
King nor his Ministers were follicitous about the interests of an or-
der of men, odious to the people, and persecuted by the Clergy.
Their enemies promoted the law with the utmost zeal. The prof-
ped of sharing i their spoils induced all parties to content to it;
and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and power of the dignified
Clergy, it was no difficult matter to introduce that change in the
government of the Church which oon after took place .

* Spotfw. 365.

Book VII. THE change, which the other statute produced in the civil con-
'--"- ftitution, was no less remarkable. Under the Feudal system, every

1587.

Lesser Barons Freeholder, or vafial of the Crown, had a right to be present in par-
admitted into
parliament by liament. These Freeholders were, ,briginally, few in number
thetativere but pofeffed of great and extensive property. By degrees, their

vait poffefiions were divided by the proprietors themselves, or par-
ceiled out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The number
of Freeholders became greater, and their condkion more unequal;
beiides the ancient Barons, who preserved their estates and their
power unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were far inferior.
But, in those rude ages, when the art of government was ex-
tremely imperfect, when parliaments were seldom aflembled, and
deliberated on matters little interesting to a martial people, few of
the Leser Barons took their feats, and the whole parliamentary
jurifditioa.as exercised by the Greater Barons, together with
the Ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imitating the forms of
the English constitution, to which he had been long accustomed,
and desirous of providing a counterpoise to the power of the great
nobles, procured an at in the year 427, dispensing with the
personal attendance of the lesser Barons, and impowering those
in each county, to chufe two commiflioners to represent them in
parliament. This law, like many other regulations of that wife
Prince, produced little effed. All the King's vassals continued,
as formerly, possessed of a right to be presen:t in parliament, and,
unless in ome extraordinary conjunctures, none but the greater
Barons attended. But by means of the Reformation, the conili-
tution had undergone a great change. The ariftocratical powerof
the nobles had been much increased, and the influence of the Ec-
clefiaftical order, which the Crown usually employed to check their
usurpations, and to ballance their authority, had diminished in

7 pro-

proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had een e:reted into BookVii.
temporal peerages; and the Protestant Bimops' an indigent race ofe
men, and odious to the nation,: were far from po'ieflng the weight
and credit, which their predeceifors derived from the exorbitant
wealth, and the superstitious reverence of-the people. In this si-
tuation, the King had recourse to the expedient employed by
James I. and obtained a law reviving the statute of 1427; and from
that time the Commons: of Scotland have ent their representatives
to parliament. An ad, which tended so visibly to abridge their au-
thority, did not pass without opposition from many of the nobles.
But as the King had a right to summon the lesser Barons to attend
in person, others were apprehensive of feeing the house filled with
a multitude of his dependants, and consented the more willingly
to a law, which laid them under the reftriion of appearing only
by their representatives.

THE year 1588 began with an universal expetation throughout i588.

all Europe, that it was to be difinguifhed by wonderful events The appranh
and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of Arado.
cotemporary historians, had predited this; and the situation of affairs
in the two principal kingdoms of Europe was such, that a sagacious
observer, without any supernatural intelligence, might have hazard-
ed the predition, and have foreseen the approach of some grand
crisis. In France, it was evident from the aftonilhing progress of
the league, conducted by a leader whose ambition was restrained by
no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto surmounted all difficul-
ties; as well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic councils of
Henry III. that either that Monarch must submit to abandon the
throne, of which he was unworthy; or by some sudden and daring
blow, cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in the beginning
of the year, the Duke of Guise drove his Matter out of his capital

VOL. II. Y city,

Book VII

1588.

C'onrAuit ,f
Jam on that
occasion.

T H E H I S T O:.R Y

city, and forced him to conclude a peace; which left .him only
the shadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he himself
fell a viaim to Henry's fears, and to his own security.. In Spain,
the operations were such as promised something lillimore uncom-
mon. During three years, Philip had employed all the. power of
his European dominions, and. exhausted the treasures of the Indies,
in vast preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that -had ever
appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from Lilbon, and a nu-
merous land army was assembled to embark on board of it. Its
detination was still unknown, though many circumitances made it
probable that the blow was aimed, in the first place, againif Eng-
land. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the revolted provinces
in the Low. Countries, and now openly afforded them her protec-
tion. A numerous body of her troops was in their service; the
Earl of Leicester commanded their armies; she had great sway- in
the civil government of the republic; and ome of its most confi-
derable towns were in her possession. Her fleets had insulted the
coasts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the Weft Indies, and
threatened the colonies there. Roused by so many injuries, allured
by views of ambition, and animated by a superstitious zeal for pro-
pagating the.Romifh Religion, Philip resolved not only to invade,
but to conquer England, to which his descent fiom the houie of
Lancaster, and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in
his own opinion, a double title.

ELIZABETH- saw the danger approach, and prepared to en-

counter it with the utmost intrepidity. The measures for the
defence of her kingdom were concerted, and carried on, with
the wisdom, and vigour, which diftinuiihlcd her reign. Her chief
care was to secure the friendship of the King of Scots. She
had treated the Qucen his Mother with a rigour unknown among

Princes
a

Princes; 'The had often ufed-himfelf harshly, and with contempt; Book VII.
andLthoughi he had:hitherto prudently suppressed his iefentment of 5 588
these injuries, she did not believe it t be altogether extinguilmed,
and was afraid that in her present situation, it- might burif out
with a fatal violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance with
Scotland would facilitate his enterprize, courted James with the ut-
mot afliduity. He excited him to revenge his Mother's wrongs
he flattered him with the hopes of sharing his conquers; and offer-
ed him in marriage his Daughter the Infanta Isabella. At the fame
times Scotland swarmed with prierts his emissaries, who educed
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes and
promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a faction,
which openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwel,
arriving from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In order
to counter-ballance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest profef-
sions of friendship to the King; and Afaby, her embaffador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promises. He auredhim
that his right of succession to the Crown hould be publickly ac-
knowledged in England; that he.ihould be created a Duke in that
kingdom; that he hould be admitted to some (hare in the govern-
ment; and receive a considerable pension annually. James, it is
probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on these promises. But he understood his own interest in
the prefentjuncture, and pursued it with much steadiness. He re-
jeted an alliance with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit
into his presence an ambaflador from the Pope. He seized Colonel
Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma. He drove many of
the traffiquingPriefts out of the kingdom. He marched uddenly
to Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a convention of the nobles he declared his resolution to adhere

Y 2 inviolably

-163

BookVII. inviolably to.the league with England; and, without listening to the

c88 ' suggestions of revenge, determinedto at in concert with Elizabeth,

against; the common enemy of the Protelfant faith. Heput the
kingdom in a posture of defence, and levied troops to obstruct the
landing of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's
assistance, and told her ambassador that he expe&ed no other favour
from the King of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised to
Ulysses, that when he had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his last morsel *.

A national
covenant in
defence of
Religion.

THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not inferior to

that of the King; and the extraordinary danger, with which they
were threatened, suggested to them an exttaordinary expedient for
their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
Religion, and the defence of the king's person and government,
in opposition to all enemies foreign and domestic. This c6ntained
a confession of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the mot solemn promises, in the name, and
through the frength of God, of adhering to each other in sup-
porting the former, and contending against the latter, to the utmot
of their power -. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon
as such a combination may now appear, many circumstances con-
tributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. When rouzed by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of Israel were accuf-
tomed to bind themselves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhere to that
Religion, which the Almighty had established among them; this
the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to

' Camd. 544. Johni. 139. Spotfw. 369.
t Dunlop's Collet. of Confe. Vol. z. 108.

.imitate. In that 'age, no doiitderale eitrprie' was-uriertaken BookVl.
in Scotland, without a'bond of mutual defence, which ll concerned
reckoned neceflryi' for their security. The;form of tHlis religi'ous con-
federacy is plainly borrowed from 'those politicai ones, 'of which
so many instances have occurred; the articles,' stipulations, and pe-
culiar. modes of expression, are exatly the fame in both. A lmoft
all the considerable Popish Princes were then joined in a league for
extirpating the Reformed religion, and nothing could be more na-
tural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-affo-
ciation, in order to oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy.
To these causes, did the Covenant, which was become so famous
in hiflory, owe its origin. It was renewed at different times during
the reign of James *. It was revived with great solemnity, though
with considerable alterations, in the year 638. It was adopted by
the English, in the year 1643, and enforced by the civil and eccle-
fiaftical authority of both kingdoms. The political purposes to
which it was then made subservient, and the violent and unconfti-
tutional measures which it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at the junture, in which it was firfl
introduced, we may pronounce it to have been a prudent and lau-
dable device for the defence of the religion and liberties of the na-
tion; nor were the terms in which it was conceived, other than
might have been expeced from men alarmed with the impending
danger of Popery, and threatned with an invasion by the moit bi-
gotted, and most powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him either

with the vigour or dispatch necesary to ensure the success of so
mighty an enterprize. His fleet, which ought to have failed in April,

*Cald4. 129.

did

lBook VII. did not enter the English channel till the middle of July. It h.o-

88- vered.many days on the coast, in expectation of being joined by
5 88' the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of Flanh

The Armado ders by a Dutch squadron. Continual disasters puirfued the Spa-
defeated. niards during that time; successive forms and battles, which' are

well known, conspired with their own ill condu&t to disappoin!t
their enterprize. And by the blessing of Providence, which
watched with remarkable care over the Proteflant Religion, and
the liberties of Britain, the English valour Scattered and deitroyed
the Armado on which they had arrogantly bestowed the name of
Invincible. After being driven out of the Englifl eas, they were
forced to fleer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and Ire-
land. Many of them suffered ihipwreck on these dangerous and
unknowu coasts. Though James kept his fubjeas under arms-to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in
an hostile manner, he received withgreat humanity 700 who were
forced ashore by a tempest, and after supplying them with necef-
saries, permitted them to return into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent anambaffador

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generolity, he had discovered during a conjuncture- o dan-
gerous. But none of Afhby's promises were any longer remem-
bered; that Minifler was even accused of having exceeded his
powers, by these too liberal offers; and conscious of his'own false-
hood, or ahamed of being disowned by his court, he withdrew
fccretly out of Scotland *.

PiililP's in- PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own raflnefs in
trimits in attempting the conquest of England, by a naval armament, equipped
scotlan Johnmd, 54

' Johnfl. 134. Camd 5.

J

at so great: a distance, and. fubjectedin a its operations, to the
delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arilipg from eas and winds,
resolved to make his attack.in another form, and to adopt the plan
which the Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of'invading Eng-
land throughScotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might
be easily wafted over from the Low Countries to.that kingdom, and
if they could once obtain footing, or procure assistance there, the
frontier of England was open and defenceless, and the northern
counties-full of Roman Catholics,- who would receive them with
open arms. Mean while, a descent might be threatened on the
southern coast, which would divide the English army, diftrat their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions-
In order to prepare the way for the execution of this deiign, he
remitted a considerable fum of money to Bruce, a seminary Priest
in Scotland, and employed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits, so gain over as many perions of diftindion
as poflible to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful infinua- j
tions of these emifaries, induced several of the nobles to favour C
a measure, which tended so manifetly to the deftrudion of their i
Country. Huntly,. though the King had lately married himnto the
daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warmly
attached to the Romish Church. Crawford and Errol were ani-
mated with the zeal of new converts. They all engaged iri. a
correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and in their letters to
him, offered their service to the king of Spain, and undertook,
with the aid of 6000 men, to render him master of Scotland, and
to bring so many of their Vaflals into the field, that he should be
able to enter England, with a numerous army. Francis Stewart,
grandibn of James V. whom the King had created Earl of Both-
well, though influenced by no motive of religion, for he still
adhered to the Proteslant faith, was prompted merely by caprice,

, 2 tand

167
BookW L~S

1589.

'opih noblea
:onfpir-c a-
,ainfl the
ing.

BookVII.and the restlessness of his nature, to join in this treasonable corref£

589 pondence ., .
February 17. ALL these letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth, alarm.

ed at the danger which threatned her own kingdom, sent them
immediately to the King, and reproaching him with his former
lenity toward the Popish party, called upon him to check this for-

The King's midable conspiracy, by a properfeverity. But James, though firmly
-m S with
egad to Po- attached to the Proteltant religion, though profoundly versed in the

tneological controversies between the Reformers and the. Church of
Rome, though he had employed himself, at that early period of
life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in which he
proved the Pope to be Antic.hrist, had nevertheless adopted, already,
those maxims concerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics,
to which he adhered through the reft of his life. The Roman
Catholics were at that time a powerful and ative party in Eng-
land; they were far from being an inconsiderable faction in his own
kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain were ready to take part
in all their machinations, and to second every effort of their bigo-
try. The opposition of such a body to his succession to the Crown
of England, added to the averseness of the English from the go-
vernment of strangers, might create him many difficulties;. In
order to avoid these, he thought it necessary to sooth, rather than to
irritate the Roman Catholics, and to reconcile them to his succession,
by the hopes of gentler treatment, and ome mitigation of the ri-
gour of those laws, which were now in force against them. This
attempt to gain one party by promises of indulgence and ads
of clemency, while he adhered with all the obstinacy of a dif-
putant, to the doctrines and tenets of the other, has given an air
of mystery, and even of contradition, to this part of the King'
character. The Papists, with the credulity of a set struggling

to

to obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly theirs; and the Book VII
Protestants, with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al- - '8
ready in possession, viewed every at of lenity, as a mark of indif-
ference, or a symptom of apofRacy. And in order to please both,
James often aimed at an excessive refinement, mingled with diffi-
mulation, in which he imagined the perfection of government, and
of king-craft, to consist.

His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general His excefive

lenity to the

maxims. Notwithstanding the follicitations of the Queen of Eng- conspirators.
land, enforced by the jealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a
lhort imprisonment was the onlypunifllment heinflited on Hunt-
ly and his associates. But he soon had reason to repent an a of
clemency, so inconsistent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to assemble
their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor Mait-
land, an able miniter, but warmly devoted to the English interest,

'April .

from the King's councils and preence, they attempted to seize
James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by Mait-
land's vigilance, and partly by their own ill conduct, they were forced
to retire to the North, where they openly ereced the itandard of
Rebellion. But as the king's government was not generally un-
popular, or his ministers odious, their own vasals joined them
slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause. And the King, in per-
son, advancing against them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity of their troops,
which though superior in number, followed them with relutance,
as to hazard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they furren- Apiil 2.
dered to the king, and threw themselves on his mercy. Huntly,
Errol, Crawford and Bothwell were all brought to a public trial.
Repeated ats of treason were easily proved against them. The

VOL. II. Z Kilg,

Book VII. King, h>wever, did not permit any sentence to be pronounced;

I589. and after keeping them a few months in confinement, he took oc-

cafion, amidst the public festivity and rejoicings, at the approach
of his marriage, to set them at liberty*.

The king's As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of
marriage vith Scotland, in the direct line; as all hopes of uniting the crowns ofthe
Anne of Den-
mark. two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the Earl of Arran,

the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the king's mar-
riage was, on all there accounts, an event which the nation wished
for with the tmoft ardour. He himfelfwas no less desirous of ac-
complifhing it; and had made overtures, for that purpose, to the
eldest daughter of Frederick II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth,
jealous of every thing, that would render the accefilon of the
house of Stewart more acceptable to the English, endeavoured to
perplex James, in the fame manner he had done Mary, and em-
ployed as many artifices todefeat or to retard his marriage. His Mi-
nifers, gained by bribes and promises, seconded her intentions; and
though several different ambassadors were ent from Scotland to
Denmark, they produced powers so limited, or insisted on condi-
tions so extravagant, that Frederick could not believe the king to
be in earnell; and fufpedting that there was ome design to deceive,
or amuse him, gave his daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brunf-
wick. Not discouraged by this disappointment, which he imputed
entirely to the conduct of his own rninifters, James made his addref-
fes to the princess Anne, Frederick's second daughter. And though
Elizabeth endeavoured to divert him from this, by recommending
Catherine the King of Navarre's sifter, as amore advantageous match;
though fle prevailed on the privy council of Scotland to declare
against the alliance with Denmark, he persisted in his choice. And
despairing of overcoming the obitinacy of his own ninifters, in

Spots. 373. Cald. 4. 103.

5 any
170

any other anner, he secretly encouraged the citizens f Edin- Book V1I.
burgh to take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the Chan- 1 5.g
cellor, whom they accused as the person, whose artifices had hither-
to disappointed the wiflies of the King, and the expectations of
his people. In confeqtuence of this, the Earl Marshal was sent into
Denmark, at the head of a splendid embassy. He received ample
powers and inftrudions, drawn with the king's own hand. The
marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and the young queen
set fail towards Scotland. James made great preparations for her
reception, and waited her landing with all the impatience of a
lover; when the unwelcome account arrived, that a violenttempeft
had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condition
so fllattered, that there was little hope of its putting again to lea,
before the spring. This unexpected disappointment, he felt
with the utmost sensibility. He instantly fitted out ome ships,
and without communicating his intention to any of his coun-
cil, failed, in person, attended by the Chancellor, several noblemen, oa. z,
and a train of 300 persons, in quest of his bride. He arrived safely
in a finall harbour, not far distant from Upflo, where the Queen then
resided. There the marriage was solemnized. And as it would have Nov. 24,
been rafl to trust those boisterous eas, in the winter season, James
accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark, and repairing
to Copenhagen, passed several months there, amidst continual feait-
ing, and amusements, in which, both the Queen and himself had
great delight*.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider deviation from

his general character, than this sudden ally. His son Charles I.
was capable of that excessive admiration of the other sex, which

* Melv. 35z. Spotfw. 377.

17I
Z 2

arises

Book VII. arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by elegance of

589. taste; and the romantic air of his journey to Spain suited such a dif-

position. But James was not fuiceptible of any refined gallantry,
and always expressed that contempt for the female character, which
a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire.
He was fretted, however, at the many obfsacles which had been
laid in his way. He was anxious to secure the political advantages,
which he expected from marriage; and fearing that a delay might
afford Elizabeth, and his own ministers, an opportunity of thwart-
ing him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of pre-
venting them, by a voyage from which he expected to return in a
few weeks. The nation seemed to applaud his conduc, and to be
pleated with this appearance of amorous ardour, in a young Prince.
Notwithstanding his absence so long beyond the time he expeted,
the nobles, the clergy, and the people, vied with one another in
loyalty and obedience; and no period in the King's reign was more
remarkable for tranquility, or more free from any eruption of those
fations, which so often disturbed the kingdom.

THE
172

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOO K VIII.
O N the first of May the King and Queen arrived at Leith, Book VIII.

and were received by their fubjeds, with every possible ex- 590.
pression of joy. The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was con- The king and

Queen -arrive

duaced with great magnificence; but so low had the order ofBifhops in Scotland.
fallen, in the opinion of the public, that none of them were pre-
sent on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Prebyterian Mi-
nifter of great reputation, set the Crown on her head, adminiitred
the sacred unction, and performed the other cuflomary cere-
monies.

THE zeal and success, with which many of the clergy had

contributed towards preserving peace and order in the kingdom,
during his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their per-
.sons, and even to the Preflyterian form of government. In pre-

lence

Book VIII. fence of an afiembly, which tnet this year, he made high enco-

590. miums on the discipline, as well as the docrine of the church,
Auguf 4 promised to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the assembly

to framre such as, as gradually abolished all the remains of epif-
copal jurifdidion, and paved the way for a full and legal etablifh-
ment of the Presbyterian model *.
1591. AN event happened soon after, which afforded the Clergy no small

triumph. Archbifllop Adamson, their ancient enemy, having fallen
under the King's displeasure, having been deprived of the reve-
nues of his fee in consequence of the a of annexation, and being
oppressed with age, with poverty, and diseases, made the meanest
submission to the clergy, and delivered to the assembly a formal re-
cantation of all his opinions concerning Church government,
which had been matter of offence to the Presbyterians. Such a con-
session, from the most learned person of the order, was confidered
as a testimony, which the force of truth had extorted from an
adversary-.

Disorders in MEAN while, the king's excefllve clemency towards offenders
the kingdom. nultiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such ats of vio-

lence, as brought his government under contempt, and proved fa-
tal to many of his fubjeds. The history of several years, about
this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between
the great families, and of murders and aafrfinations perpetrated
in the most audacious manner, and with circumstances of the ut-
most barbarity. All the defets in the feudtl aristocracy were now felt
more sensibly, than at any other period in the history of Scotland,
and universal licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce con-
itent with the preservation of focicty. While the king, too

-I Spotfiv. 385 Cd. 4. 14.
* Cald. 4. 204.

gen tle
74

gentle to punifl, or too feeble to a with vigour, fiffered all thee BookVIII
enormities to pass with impunity.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, which An attemptoF

'

-

. . Bothwell's a-

is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and those gaintl the
fufpeted of it, felt the whole weight of his authority. ManyKing
persons neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which were
usually held to be certain indications of this crime, but matters of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age of
life, were seized and tortured; and though their confefilons con-
tained the most absurd and incredible circumstances, the King's pre-
judices, those of the clergy, and of the people, conspired in be-
lieving their extravagancies without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy sufferers
accused Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and having employed their art, to
raise the orms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and had
detained James so long in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that no-
blemen was committed to prison. His turbulent and haughty spirit
could neither submit to the restraint, nor brook such an indignity.
Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, and imputing the
accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancellor, aembled
his followers, under pretence of driving him from the King's
councils. Being favoured by ome of the King's attendants, he
was admitted, by a secret paflage, under cloud of night, into the
court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfe. He advanced directly to-
wards the royal apartment, but happily, before he entered, the
alarm was taken and the doors shut. While he attempted to burl Decenber 27
open ome of them, and to set fire to others, the citizens of Edin-
burgh had time to run to their arms, and he escaped with the ut-

mrot

Book VIII. most difficulty; owing his safety to the d arknefs .of the night, and

592. the precipitancy with which he fled*.

HE retired towards the North, and the King having unadvisedly

given a commifion to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him, and his
followers, with fire and sword; he, under colour of executing that
commission, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded the house
of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray
Feb. 8 himlf. The murder of a young nobleman of such promising

virtues, and the heir of the regent Murray, the darling of the
people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh
rose in a tumultuous manner; and though they were reftraned, by
the care of the magistrates, from any at of violence, they threw
aside all respect for the King and his minifers, and openly insulted
and threatened both. While this mutinous spirit continued, James
thought it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
dence for some time at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered him-
self to justice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his crime,
and the clamours of the people, the power of the chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and the King's regard for
the memory of the Duke of Lennox, whose daughter he had mar-
ried, not only proteded him fi-om the sentence which such an odi-
ous action merited, but exempted him even from the formality of
a public trial .

.trcill A flep of much importance was taken, soon after, with regard

Church go-
vcrlnmnter- to the government of te church. The Clergy had long com-
tabliflicd by
llw.c y aplaincd of the encroachments made upon their privileges and

Mclv. 388. Spot'. 386. 1t Spot. 387.

Jurif-

jiurifdiaion, by the ads of the, parliament ' 5-84, and though these
laws had nw loft much of thir force,. they resolved to peti-
tion' the parliament, which was appoaching, to iepeal th¢ in
form. The juncture for puflliig such a measure .was .well'chofen.
The king had lort much of the public favour, by his lenity to-
wards the Popish facion, and flill more by his remifinefs in pur-
.iuing: the nmnrtdeers of the Earl of hMrtay. - The cha4eeIlor had
not only a powerful party of 'Ithe courtier' combimed against 'hil
but was become odious to the people, who imputed to him every
false ftep in the King's conduct. Bothwell ifill lurked in the kingg-
doh'om aidg b&ing ectetly fuppote- by all the enemies .'of Mafi't-
land's adnimiffration, was ready, every :momenti to renew hei a-
dacious enterprizes. James, for all these reasons, was extremely
willing to indulge the. Clergy in their requefr, and not. only con-
sented to a law,, whereby the as.1-584 were rescinded or.expIla4-ed)
but he carried his cpmplaifance fiill further, and permitted the par-
liament to eablifh the Prefbyteriangovernment, its General Aifem-
blies, Provincial synods, Prefbyteries and Kirk feflions, with all
the different branches of their discipline and jurifdidion in the mot
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the administration of Regents, from whom they might have
expected the molt partial favour, could not obtain the fandion of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclesiastical government.
No Pri.ice was ever les disposed than James to approve a fyfteni,
whose: epublican genius inspired a passion for liberty, so repugnaiit
to his exalted notiois of royal prerogative. Nor could any aver-
sion be more inveterate than his, to the austere and uncomplying
chaladter of the Presbyterian Clergy in that age; 'rh;o, m'nrc
eminent for zeal, than for policy, often contradided his opinions,
and cc'fiurecd his conduct, with a freedom, cqually ocnlive to his

VOL. II. A al-

C !
1 7
BooK V 115.

1592.

Book VIII. dogmatism as a Theologian, and to his pride as a King. His fitua-

592. tion however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to dissemble

his sentiments; and,as he often disgusted his subjects, by indulging
the Pbpifh faction more than they approved, he endeavoured to
attone for this, by concessions to the Prelbyterian Clergy, greater
than he himself would otherwise have chosen *.

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were attainted.

But he oon made a new attempt to seize. the King at Falkland.;
and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly defended
by others, who wished well to Bothwell, as the Chancellor's avow-
ed. enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert
Melvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's associates t..

A new con-
fpiracy ofthe TfIS danger was scarce well over, when the nation was alarmed
1opil Lords. with the discovery of a new and more formidable conspiracy.

George Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, being feizec as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were found in
his custody, and among there, several blanks signed by the Earls
of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By this extraordinary precaution,
they hoped to escape any danger- of difrovery. But Ker's refolu-
tion shrinking when torture was threatened, he confessed that he
was employed by these noblemen,.to carry on a negociation with
the King of Spain; that the blanks subscribed with their names
were to be filled up by Crichton' and Tyrie; that they were in-
frutaed to offer the faithful service of the three Earls to that Mo-
narch; and to follicit him to land a body of his troops, either in
Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the first place, to establish the. Roman Catholic Religion in Scot-
land, and. then to invade England, with the whole forces of the

Cald. . 2 8, 2 5z. Spots. 3S8.

t Melv. 492-,

kingdomn.
178

kingdom. Sir David Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of Lady- Book VIII.
land, whom he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were 1592.
taken into cuftbdy,' and confirmed all the circumstances of his
confefiion*.

THE nation having been kept for some time in continual terror 1593.

and agitation by so many successive conspiracies, the discovery of peaopef t
this new danger compleated the panic. All ranks of men, as if
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to stand forth in defence of their country. The Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commission, assembled a
considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide an
instant remedy aainft the impending danger. They seized the
Earl of Angus, and committed him to the castle; they examined
Ker; and prepared a remonitrance to belaid before the King, con-
cerning the state of the nation; and the neceflity of prosecuting
the conspirators with becoming vigour. James, though jealous And proceed-

ings of the

of every encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with sub - King againf
jess, who instead of petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him, them.
found it necessary, during the violence of the ferment, not only
to adopt their plan, but even to declare that no confiderationfhould
ever induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty of so odious lj. 8
a treason. He summoned the Earls of Huntly and Errol to fur-
render themselves to justice. Graham of Fintry, whom his peers
pronounced to be guilty oftreafon, he commanded to be publickly
beheaded; and marching into the North at the head of an army,
the two Earls, together with Angus, who had escaped out of pri-

'* Rymer, 16. 190.

fonl,
A a 2

Book YI I. son,. retired to the- mountains. -He placed garrisons in the caTtles

. _..- which belonged to them; compelled their vassals, and the Barons,

in the adjacent counties, to subscribe a bond.containing profieffons
of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence ,Q he
Proteflant faith; and, the better to secure the tranquillity of that
part of the kingdom, constituted the, Earls of'Athol,,andMarfhal,
his Lieutenants there.

. ,

March 8. n

- b

Llizaeh H HAVING finifried.this expeditioQn Jame returned to Edinburgh,
follicits him where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
to treat them '

.--
with rigour. the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a

conspiracy, which he confidered as no less formidable to her own.
kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his, former.
remifnefs, and urged him, as he regarded ,the preserv.ation .of the
Protestant religion, or the dignity of his own Crown, (to.punih
this repeated treason with rigour; and if he could not, apprehend,
tle. person,. at least to. confiscate the estates of such audacious re-
bels.. She weakened, however, theforce: of theef requests, by
interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom, ac-
cording to her usual policy in nourishing a fatious spirit among
the Scottish nobles, Ihe had taken under her protecion. Jrmes ab-
folutely refuted to liften to any intercession in favour of one, who
had to often, and with so much outrage, insulted both his go-
vernment and his person. With regard to the popish conspirators,
he declared his resolution to prosecute. them with vigour; but that
he might be the better able to do so, he demanded a small fum of
money from Elizabeth, which she, distrustful, perhaps of the
manner in which he might apply it, shewed no inclination to grant.
The zeal, however, and importunity of his own fubjeds. obliged

a Spots. 391. Cald. 4. 291.

hilr
6

him to call a parliament, in order to pass an ad of attainder against BcokV.III;
the three Earls. But before it met, Ker made his escape out of -5?3

1593.

pri.on', and on pretence, that legal evidence of their guilt could not
be produced, nothing was concluded agaihf fthem.; The King him-
self was universally suspected of haying contrived this. artifice, on
purpose to elude the requests of the Queen of England, and to,
difapppilt the, ,wifes of his own people. And terefore, in.order
to sooth the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly agaiinft his condut,'
he gave· way to the passing of an at, which ordained those who.
obstinately condemned the censures of the Church, to be declared
o,utlaws% .

WHIL! the terror excited by the Popih conspiracy poffelned the'othwclI
nation, the court had been divided by two rival factions, which fuzes tl

King.

contended' for the chief diretion of affairs. At the head of one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason., perhaps, he had fallen early under the .ieen's
displeasure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Atho6l,. Lord
Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, and
widened the breach. And James, fond no less of domestic tran-
quillty, than of public peace, advised his favourite to retire, for
frme time, in hopes tlat the Qeehn's resentment would subside.
But as he flood in need, in the present juncure, of the aBiitance
of so able a Minister, he had recalled him to court. In order to
prevent him from recovering his former power, the Stewarts 'had
recourse to an expedient no less illegal, than' desperate. Having'
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame surname, they ul
brought him back secretly into Scotland.; and seizing the'gates of
the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment with a. nurre-

Cald. 4. 343. Spot£ 393. Parl. 13. Jac -VI. c. 164.

rous

Book II.-Tous :train of armed followers. James, though deserted by all his

courtiers, and incapable of refifance, discovered more indignation
than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called on the
Earl to finish his treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored pardon. The king
was not in a condition to refue his demands. And a few days
after he signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, to whom
he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound himself to grant him
a remifion for all pafi offences, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament; and in the mean time, to dismiss the chancellor,
the master of Glamis, Lord Home, and Sir George.Home, from
his councils and pretence. Bothwell, on his part, consented to
remove from court, though he left there as many of his afro,
ciates, as he thought sufficient to prevent the return of the adverse
faction.

He recovers
his liberty.
September 7.

BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the King under the

fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often subjed during
his minority. He discovered Ib much impatience to shake off his
fetters, that thoe who imposed, durst not continue, the reitraint.
They permitted him to cll a Convention of the nobles at Stirling,
and to repair .thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the king's favour by appearing to be
so, obeyed the simmons. They pronounced the insult offered
to the King's perbn and authority to be high treason, and declared
him absolved from any obligation to observe conditions, extorted
by force, and which violated so essentially his royal prerogative.
James, however, still proffered him a pardon, provided he would
sue for it as an at of mercy, and promise to retire out of the king-
dom. These conditions Bothwell rejected with disdain, and be-

3 takilng

taking him-self once more to arms, attem.pted to furpize the King, Book Vli.
but finding him on his guard, fled to the borders *. C593

THE King's ardour againit BothweII, compared with his flow and SurpeRe of
evasive proceedings againt the Popish Lords, occasioned. a general favouring the

Popih Lonls,

disgust among his fubjeds; and was imputed either to an exceflive
attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or. to a.fecret par-
tiality towards their opinions; both which gave rife to no. unrea-
fonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the
Proteflant Religion, thought themselves bound, in such ajundure,
to take extraordinary fleps for its preservation. And the.provincial
fynod of Fife happening to meet at that time,. a motion was made
to excommunicate all concerned in. the late conspiracy, as obilinate Sept. zS.
and irreclaimable Papists, And. though none of the conspirators
resided within the bounds of the.fynod,.or were subjet to its ju-
rifdidion, such was the zeal of the members, that, overlooking
this irregularity, they pronounced againt them, the sentence of ex-
communication, to which the ad of last parliament added new.
terrors. And left this. should be imputed to a few men, and ac_.
counted. the ad of a small part of the Church, deputies,.were apr
pointed to attend the adjacent synods, and.to desire their. approba-
tion and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which increaSed theHis lenity to--

people's suspicions of the King. As he was marching on an ex.w ds the.
pedition against the borderers, the three Earls coming suddenly
into his presence, offered to submit themfelves-to a legal trial; and
James, without committing them to custody, appointed a day for
that purpose. The conspirators prepared to appear with a formi-
dable train of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean-tim-,.

0 Cald. 4. 326. Spots. 395.

thlg;,

*BoolkVII. the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, assembling at

J593 Edinburgh, remonifrated againf the King's extreme indulgeice

with great boldness, and demanded of him, according tq the re-
gular course ofjuftice, to commit to sure cutody persons charged
with the highefi ats of treason,. who could not be brought to a egal
trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the Church;
and to call a Convention of cflates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding againfl them. At the fame time they offred
to accompany him in arms to the place in trial,. les such auda-
cious and powerful criminals should overaw justice, and dictate
to the judges, to whom they pretended to submit. James, though
extremely ffended both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, 'found it expedient to.put
off the day of trial, and to call a Convention of eates, in order to
quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their suspicions began gradually to abate, and the
Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully, that he himself,
together with a few other members, was impowered to pronounce
a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much deliberation,
Nov. z6. they ordained that the three Earls, and their associates, ihould be

exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on account of
their correspondence with Spain; that, before the first day of
February, they flhuld either submit to the Church, and publickly
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of the Kingdom-;
that, before the first of January, they llould declare which of
these alternatives they would embrace; that they hould find surety
for their peaceable demeanour, for the future; and that if they
failed to signify their choice in due time, they hould lose the be-
nefitof this a of bolition, and remain exposcd to all the pailis
of law *.

C;kl,. 4. 330. Spots. 397.

By

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much BookVII.

reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the Popish super-59
ftition, submissive to all the dictates of their priests, and buoyed
up with hopes and promiSes of foreign aid, the three Earls refused to
accept of the conditions, and continued their treasonable correfpon-
dence with the court of Spain. A Convention of eflates pronounced Jan. 8
them to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which were of-
sered; and the King required them, by proclamation, to surrender
themselves to justice. The presence of the English ambassador
contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of these proceedings. Eliza-
beth, ever attentive to James's motions, and imputing his re!uctance
to punish the Popish Lords to a secret approbation of their designs,
had sent to Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger to which
he exposed himself, by this false moderation; and to require him to
exercise that rigour, which their crimes, as well as the posture of as-
fairs rendered necessary. And though the steps how taken by the
King silenced all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful
of his character as an ambassador, entered into private negocia-
tions with such of the Scottish nobles, as disapproved of the King's
measures, and held almost an open correfpondenee with Bothwell,
who, according to the usual artifice of malecontents, pretended
much follicitude for reforming the disorders of the commonwealth;
and covered his own ambition with the specious veil of zeal against
thoe Counsellors, who refrained the King from purfuingthe avowed
enemies of the Protestant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the
name of his Mifirefs, to take arms againit his Sovereign.

MEAN while, theKing and theClergy were filled with mutual dif- A new at.

truftofeach other. They were jealous, perhaps, to exces, thathisaf- Botwclf's.
fecions leaned too much towards thePopifh fation; he ftiipccecd them,
without good reason, of prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even

VOL. II. B b of

Book VIIi. of fupplyinghim with money for that purpose. Little infiigafiorrn

594- indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent spirit as Bothwell's,

to any daring enterprize. He appeared suddenly within a mile of
Edinburgh, at the head of 400 horse. The pretences, by which
he endeavoured to juifify this infurredion, were extremely popular;
zeal for religion, enmity to Popery, concern for the King's honour,
and for the liberties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, and was accompanied
only with a few horsemen of Lord Home's train. In this extre-
mity, he implored the aid of the citizens of Edinburgh; and, in
order to encourage them to a with zeal, he promised to proceed
against the Popish Lords with the utmost rigour of law. Animated
by their Ministers, they ran chearfully to their arms, and advanced
with the King at their head against Bothwell; but he, notwith-
flanding his success in putting to flight Lord Home, who had rashly
charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry, retired to Dal-
keith without daring to attack the King. His followers abandon-
ed him soon after, and discouraged by so many successive difap-
pointments, could never afterwards be brought to venture into the
field. He betook himself to his usual lurking places, in the Nort'
ofEngland; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's remon-
firances, obliged him to quit that retreat *.

Fresh dangers No sooner was the King delivered from one danger, than he was
from the Po- called to attend to another. The Popish Lords, in consequence
pish Lords.
April 3. of their negotiations with Spain, received, in the spring, a supply

of money from Philip. What bold designs this might inspire,
it was no easy matter to conjecture. From men under the do-
minion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim, the

*Spots. 403. Cald. 4. 359.

most

mofl desperate aions were to be dreaded. The assembly of the Book VII.
Church immediately took the alarm; remonstrated againf them 594
with more bitterness than ever, and unanimously ratified the en-
tence of excommunication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife.
James himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only be gene-
rally displeasing to his own fubjets, but give rife to unfavourable
suspicions among the English, exerted himself with unusual vigour.
He called a parliament laid before it all the circumstances, and June .
aggravations of the conspiracy; and though there were but few
members present, and several of these connected with the confpi-
rators by blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his influence
and importunity, to pronounce the mofl rigorous sentence the law
can inflict. They were declared to be guilty of high treason, and
their etates and honours forfeited. At the fame time, statutes,
more evere than ever, were enaaed against the professors of the
Popish Religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of greater Battle of
`difficulty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of the

country almost inaccessible, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an over-
match for a Scottish Monarch. No intreaty could prevail on Eli-
zabeth to advance the money, necefary for defraying the ex-
pences of an expedition against them. To attack them in person,
with his own forces alone, might expose him both to disgrace and
to danger. He had. recourse to the only expedient which remain-
ed in such a situation, for aiding the impotence of Sovereign au-
thority; he delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll, andLord
Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity with the conspirators;
and gave them a commiflion to invadc their lands, and to fcize the

B b 2 caf-les

BookVIII. castles which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all

1594. his high pretensions of zeal for the Proteitant Religion, having

now entered into a close confederacy with them, the danger became
every day more urging. Argyll, follicited by the King, and rouzed
by the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7000 men. Huntly
and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in num-
ber, but composed chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries,
mounted on horse-back, and who brought along with them a train
oa. 5. of field-pieces. They encountered each other with all the fury,

which hereditary enmity and ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined
courage. But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the first discharge
of the cannon, to which they were little accustomed, and un-
able to resist the impression of cavalry, were oon put to flight,
And Argyll, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation at their dif-
grace, and calling on them to tland, and to vindicate the honour
of their name .

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged to.

pawn his jewels in order to raise money +, assembled a small body
of troops, and marched towards the North. He was joined by the
Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and other clans at enmity with
Huntly and Errol, who having loft several of their principal fol-
lowers at Glenlivat, and others refuting to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the mountains. James
wafted their lands; put garrisons in some of their castles; burnt
others; and left the Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that
part of the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to restrain them
from gathering to any head there, or from infesting the low

Cald. 4.408. t Birch, Memn.. . 186,

country.

country. Reduced at last to extreme distress, by the rigoiurBookVIII.
of the season, and the desertion of their followers, they obtained 1594
the King's permission to go beyond seas, and gave security that they Popifil Lords
mfould neither return without his licence, nor engage in any new the kingdom.
intrigues against the Protestant Religion, or the peace of the
kingdom *.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-established in the North of I595.

Scotland; and the firmness and vigour, which James had displayed TheRoman
in his last proceedings against them, regained him, in a great degree, cenfed againr
the confidence of his Protestant fubjeds. Buthe funk, in the
fame proportion, and for the fame reason, in the esteem of the
Roman Catholics. They had afierted his mother's right to the
Crown of England with'fo much warmth, that they could not
with any decency, reje his. And the indulgence, with which
he affected to treat the professors of that religion, inspired them with
such hopes, that they viewed his accession to the throne as no
undesirable event. But the rigour with which the King pursued
the conspirators, and the revere statutes against Popery to which he
had given his content, convinced: them that these hopes were vifio-
nary; and they began to look about in quest of some new successor,
whose rights they might oppose to his. The English Papists turned
their eyes towards the Earl of EfTex, whose generous mind, though
firmly established in the Protestant faith, abhorred the everities
inflided in that age, on account of religious opinions. Those of
the fame set, who were in exile, formed a bolder scheme, and one
more suitable to their situation. They advanced the claim of the
Infanta of Spain; and*Parfons the Jesuit publiihed a book, in which,
by false quotations from history, by fabulous genealogies, and, ab-

Spotfw. 404. Cald. 373, &c.

ltrdi

BookVIII.

1595.

Bothwell
forced to fly
into Spain.

T H E HlI S T O R Y

surd arguments, intermingled with bitter invedives against theKing
of Scots, he endeavoured to prove the Infanta's title to the English
Crown to be preferable to his. And Philip, though involved
already in a war both with France and England, and scarce able
-to defend the remains of the Burgundian Provinces against the
Dutch commonwealth, easily grasped at this airy proje&. The
dread of a Spanish Pretender to the Crown,- and the opposition
which the Papists began to form against the King's succession,
contributed not a little to remove the prejudices of the Protestants,
and to prepare the way for that event.

BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often mentioned as the

disturber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the king-
dom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen
of England, on account of his confederacy with the Popish Lords;
excommunicated by the Church for tne fame reason; and deserted,
in his distress, by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for
safety to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after re-
nouncing the Proteflant faith, he led, many years, an obscure and
indigent life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery.
The King, though extremely ready to sacrifice the firongeft resent-
ments to the slightest acknowledgments, could never be softened
by his submissions, nor be induced to liften to any intercession in his
behalf *.

THIS year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an able Minifler,

on whoIm he had long devolved the whole weight of public affairs.
As James loved him, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of verses, which, when compared with the com-
positions of that age, are far si-on being inelegant .f

* Winw. Mem. . Spots. 410.

I Id. 411.

SOON

SOON after his death, a considerable change was made in the

adminiflration. At that time, the annual charges of government
far exceeded the King's revenues. The Qeen was fond ofex-
pensive amusements. James himnelf was a tranger to economy.
It became necessary for all there reasons, to levy the public re-
venues with greater order and rigour, and to husband them with
more care. This important trust was-committed to eight gentle-
men of the law , who, from their number were called Oiarvians.
The powers veiled in them were ample, and almost unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
fipply any vacancy that might happen, without their content: and
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alienation
of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or order on the'treafury,
should be held valid, unless it were ratified by the subscription of
five of the commissioners; all their as and decisions were declared
to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in civil courts;
and in confequeuce of them, and without any other warrant, any
person might be arrested, or their goods seized. Such extensive
jurifdiion, together with the absolute disposal of the public
money, drew the whole executive part of the government into their
hands. United among themselves, they gradually undermined the
reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every lucrative or honou-
rable office. The ancient servants of the Crown repined, at being
obliged to quit their stations to new men. The favourites, andl
young courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality stinted by
their prescriptions. And the Clergy exclaimed against some of
them as known apostates to Popery, and fufpeaed others of secretly
favouring it. They retained their power, however, notwithfland--

191
Book VIII.

1596.

A change in
the adminif-
tration.

b Alexander Scaton President of the Scfllon, Waltcr Stewnrt Commendator of Blantyre

Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy, John Lindsay, James Elphingflon, Thomas Hamilton,
John Skene Clerk Register, and Peter Young Elemofynar.

ing
5

Book VIII. ing this general combination against them; and they owed it intirely

1596. to the order and ceconomy which they introduced into the adminif-

tration of the finances, by which the neceafiry expenices of go-
vernment were more easily defrayed, than in any other period of
the King's reign .

Violence of THE rumour of vast preparations which Philip was said to be
the nation carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with the
a ainft the
i'Qoif Lords. dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the de-

fence of his kingdom. But there did not satisfy the zeal of the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive;
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their etates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the acd of forfeiture ineffetual, by supporting
March 24. the avowed enemies of the Proteflant faith. The assembly of the

Church took under consideration the slate of the kingdom, and
having appointed a day of public fasting, they solemnly renewed
the Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to the
Protestant faith, and to defend it againfl all aggressors. A com-
mittee, consisting of the most eminent Clergymen, and of many
Barons, and gentlemen of diftintion, waited on the King, and laid
before him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the pre-
servation of religion. They urged him to appropriate the eates
of the banished Lords, as a fund for the maintenance offoldiers;
to take the ftriteft precautions for preventing the return of such
turbulent fubjees into the country; and to pursue all who were
fufpeted of being their adherents, with the utmost rigour.

'The in's NOTIIING could be more repugnant to the King's schemes, of

inithregard more disagreeable to his inclination, than there propositions. Averse
t tni.

* Spots. 43. 435.

through
6

through his whole life, to any course, where he expected oppofi- Book VIII.
tior or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the charaEter 596.
of moderation, and by the arts of policy) he observed with con-
cern the prejudices against him, which were growing among the
Roman Catholics, and resolved to make ome attonement for that
part of his condut, which had drawn on him their indignation.
Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her life had lately been
in danger; if any Popifl competitor should arise to dispute his right
of fuccefilon, a faction, so powerful as that of the banished Lords,
might be extremely formidable; and any division among his own
subjects might prove fatal, at a juncture, which would require
their united and mot vigorous efforts. Instead, therefore, of the
additional severities which the assembly proposed, James had
thoughts of mitigating the punishment, which they alreadyfuffered.
And as they were surrounded, during their residence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment might dispose them to
liften more favourably, than ever, to their suggestions; as despair
might drive them to ftillmore atrocious acions he resolved to recall
them, under certain conditions, into their native country. Encou-
raged by these sentiments of the King in their favour, of which they
did not want intelligence, and wearied already of the dependant and
anxious life of exiles, they ventured to return secretly into Scotland.
Soon after, they presented a petition to the King, begging his
permission to reside at their own houses, and offering to give fecn-
rity for their peaceable and dutiful behaviour. James called a
Convention of estates to deliberate on a matter of such importancei
and by their advice he granted the petition.

So foonas they wereinformed of this, the membersofa committee, The rafl pro.
appointed by thelaft afembly, met at Edinburgh, and with all the pre- cedings of

VOL~~~. I7. C ~~~C~~the Clcpitargyn
VOL. II. C c cipitancy and people.

Book VIII cipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions as they thought

596. necessary for the safety of the kingdom. They wrote circular

letters to all the Prefbyteries in Scotland; they warned them of the
approaching danger; they exhorted them toftir up their people to the
defence of their just rights; they commanded them to publish, in-
all their pulpits, the at excommunicating the Popish Lords; and'
enjoined them to lay all- those who were fufpeaed of favouring Po-
pery under the fame censure, by a summary sentence, and without-
observing the usual formalities of trial. And as the danger feemedi
too prefling to wait for the ifated meetings ofthejjudicatories of the
Church, they made choice of the most eminent cergymen in
different corners of the kingdom, appointed them to reside constant-
ly at Edinburgh, and' to meet every day with the Ministers of that
city, under the name of the Standing Council of the Church, and'
vefted--in this: body the supreme authority, by enjoining it, in imita-
tion of the ancient Roman forms to take care that the Church.
flouldreceivc no detriment,

THESE proceedings, no less unconstitutional than unprecedented;.

were manifest encroachments on the royal prerogative, and boldt
steps towards open rebellion. The King's conduct, however, jus-
tified in ome degree fuch-exceffes.. His lenity towards the Papists,
to repugnant to the principles, of that age; his pardoning the con-
fpirators, notwithstanding repeated promises to the contrary; the:
respect he paid to Lady Huntly, who was attached to the Romifl'
religion, no less than her husband; his committing the care of his
daughter, the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady Levingfton, iwho was
inseted with the fame fuperflition; the contempt with which he
talked, on all occasions, both of the character of Ministers, and
of their function; were circumrtances which. might have filled

minds,

llntds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with ome fufpiciohs; -andBook V II
might have precipitated into rafli councils, those, who were far re- 596.
moved from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful-the motives
might be which influenced the Clergy, or however laudable the
end they had in view, they conducted their measures with no ad-
dress, and even with little prudence. James discovered a itrong
inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and jealous as he
was of his prerogative, would willingly have made manyconcefions
for the fake of peace. By his command, some of the Privy Couh--
fillors had an interview with the more moderate among the Clergy,
and enquired whether Huntly and his associates might not, upon
making proper acknowledgments, be again receivedinto the bofom'of
the Church, and beexempted from anyfurtherpunifhment, on account
of their past apofacy and treasons. They replied, that though-the
gate of mercy flood always open for those who repented and re-
turned, yet as these noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime
deserving death both by the law of God, and of man, the civil ma-
giftrate could not legally grant them a pardon; and even though the
Church ihould absolve them, it was his duty to inflic punishment
upon them. This inflexibility in thofe,.who were reckoned the
most compliant of the order, filled the King with indignation,
which the imprudence and obstinacy of a private Clergyman height-
ened into rage.

MR. David Black, Minister at St Andrew's, discoursing in one Seditious

, dosrine

of his Sermons, according to custom, concerning the ltate of the taught y
nation, affirmed that the King had permitted the Popish Lords to Blck.
return into Scotland, and by that action, had discovered the trea-
chery of his own heart; that all Kings were the Devil's children;
that Satan had now the guidance of the court; that-the Qzeen of

C c 2 England

Book VIII. England was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and bri-

.596. bers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the Privy Counsellors

cormorants and men of no religion; and in his prayerforthe Qeen,
he used thee words, We mulf pray for her for faflion fake, but
we have no cause, bhe will never do us good. James commanded

Nov. o0. him to be summoned before the Privy Council, to answer for such
The Clergy
espouse his Seditious expressions; and the clergy, instead of abandoning him
defence.

to the punishment, which such a petulant and criminal attack on
his superiors dcferved, were so imprudent as to espouse his cause,
as if it had been the common one of the whole order. The con-
troverfy concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to testify against vices of every kind, which had
been agitated in I584, was now revived. It was pretended, that
with regard to their sacred function, Minifiers were subjet to the
Church alone; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical Superiors
to judge of the truth or falfhood of doctrines, delivered in the
pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, the King usurped this
jurifdidion, the church would, from that moment, fink under
servitude to the civil magistrate; that instead of reproving vice,
with that honest boldness, which had often been of advantage to
individuals, and salutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the paflions of the Prince, and to connive at the vices of
others; that the King's eagerness to punish the indiscretion of a
Protestant Minifler, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of
Popish conspirators, called on them to fland on their guard; and
that now was the time to contend for their privileges, and to pre-
vent any encroachment on thoie rights, of which the church had
been in pofleffion ever since the Reformation. Influenced by these
considerations, the council of the Church enjoined Black to decline
the jurifdidion of the Privy council. Aild he, proud of such an

O 1PP1
I96

opportunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose, BookVIII.
and with the utmost firmness refused to plead, or to answer the 596
questions which were put to him. In order to add greater weight
to these proceedings, the council of the Church transmitted the
declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom, and
commanded every Minifler to subscribe it, in testimony of his ap-
probation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour than they were at-

tacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority must
fall, if the clergy hould be permitted, publickly, and with impu-
nity, to- calumniate his ministers, and even to censure himself; and
knowing, by former examples, what unequal reparation for such
offences he might expect from the judicatories of the church, he
urged on the inquiry into Black's conduCt, and issued a proclama-
tion, commanding the members of the council of the church to
leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own parishes. Black, in-
slead of fabmitting, renewed his declinature; and the council, in
defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as they met by the
authority of the church, obedience to it was a duty shill more fa.-
cred, than that which they owed to the King himself. The Privy
council, notwithstanding Black's refuting to plead, proceeded in the
trial; and, after a solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the
crimes of which he had been accused; but referred it to the King,
to appoint what punishment he flould suser.

MEAN while, many endeavours were used to bring matters to

accommodation. Almost every day produced some new fchemc of
reconcilement; but through the King's fickleness; the obtinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all proved incf-.
fcaual. Both parties appealed to the people, and ly reciprocal

3 andl

. Book VILi

1596.

A tumult in
Edinburgh.

.'rs11, L~, 1 S TOs) 0 R

and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to relnder each other
odious. Infolence,-fedition, treason, were the crimes, with which
James charged the Clergy; while they made the pulpits resound
with complaints ofhis excetfive lenity towards Papists, and of the no
lcs excessive rigour, with which he opprefied the eflablifled Church.
Exasperated by their bold invectives, he, at last, sentenced Black
to retire beyond the river Spey, and to reside there during his plea-
sure; and once more commanding the members of the anding
council to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the ministers
in the Kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to submit,
in the fame manner as other subjects, to the jurifdidion of the ci-
vil courts, in matters of a civil nature.

THIS decisive measure excited all the violent pafflons, which

possess disappointed facions; and deeds nolefs violent immediately
followed. These must be imputed in part to the artifices of some
courtiers, who expeted to reap advantage from the calamities of
their country, or who hoped to lessen the authority of the Oa-
vians,.by-ingaging them in hostilities with the church. On one
hand, they informed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh
were under arms every night, and had planted a strong guard round
the houses of their ministers. James, in order to put a flop to this
imaginary insult on his government, issued a proclamation, com-
manding twenty four of the principal citizens to leave the town,
within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to the Ministers,
advising them to look to their own fafcty, as Huntly had been fe-
cretly admitted to an interview with the King, and had been the au-
thor of the severe proclamation against the citizens of Edinburgh*.

They

* Though matters were industriously aggravated by persons, who wified both par-
tics to pursue violent meafilres; neither of 'these reports were altogether destitute of

foun-

They doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than the BookVIIL
King had done of that which he received, and fell as blindly into 1596.
the snare. The letter came to their hands, jut as one of their num-
ber was going to mount the pulpit. They resolved that he hould Dec. 17.
acquaint the people of their danger; and he painted it, with all the
strong colours,. which men naturally employ, in describing any
dreadful and instant calamity. When the sermon. was over, he de-
fired the nobles and gentlemen to aemble in the Little ChuZ-ch.
The whole multitude, terrified at what they had heard, crowded.
thither;, they promised and vowed to stand by the Church; they
drew up. a petition to the King, craving the redress of those grie-
vances, of which the Clergy complained3, and beseeching him to
deliver them from all future apprehensions of danger, by removing
fuch-of his Counsellors, as were. known to be enemies of the
Protestant religion. Two. Peers, two. Gentlemen,. two Burgesses,
and two Minifters,.were appointed to present it. The King hap-The King iii
pened to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court ofanger
session was fitting. The manner in which the petition was de-
livered, as well as its contents,. offended him... He. gave. an
haughty reply.; the-petitioners insisted with warmth; and a pro-
mifcuous multitude pressing into the room, James retired abruptly
into another apartment, and commanded the gates to .be hut be-
hind him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who were
still assembled, and to whom a minister had been reading, in their
absence, the story of Haman.. When they reported that the King
had.refufed to liften to their petitions, the Church was filled in a

foundation. As their Ministers were supposed to be in danger, ome of the more zealous
citizens. had determined to defend them, by force of arms, Birch. Mem. . 250. Huntly
had been privately in Edinburgh, where'he had an interview, if ot with the King, at leCa .
with some of his Ministers, Birch. Ibid. 30..

inoment..

Bok VIII. moment with noise, threatnings, execrations, and all the outrage

596. and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their arms;

some to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried, the sword, of
the Lord and of Gid*n; and rufling out with the most furious
impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatening the King him-
self, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The magistrates of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell the tu-
mult; the King attempted to ooth the malecontents, by promising
to receive their petitions, when presented in a regular manner;
the Ministers, sensible of their own rashness in kindling such a
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the populace, subsiding as
iuddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed, and the King returned
to the palace; happy in having escaped from an infurretion, which,
though the inflantaneous and unconcerted effet of popular fury,
had exposed his life to imminent danger, and was confidered by
him as an unpardonable affront to his authority *.

As oon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents assembled,

in order to prepare their petition. The punifiment of the Popish
Lords; the removal of those Counsellors, who were fufpeted of
favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the late ats
of council, subversive of the authority of the Church; together
with an a approving the proceedings of the flanding council;
were the chief of their demands. But the King's indignation was
still so high, that the deputies, chosen for that purpose, durst not
venture, that night, to present requests which could not fail of kind-
ling his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with all his at-

Spotfw. 417, &c. Cald. 5. 54, &c. Birch, Mem. 2. 235.

tendants,

attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the session, and other courts Book VII.
ofjutice, were required to leave a city, where it was no longer con- I596
iftent either with their safety, or their dignity to remain; and the He leaves
noblemen and barons were commanded to return to their own androceeds

with feveritv
houses,, and not to reassemble without the King's permiflion. The againit the

citizens.

vigour, with which the king acted, struck a damp upon the spirits ctz
of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
susser by his absence, and the removal of the courts ofjuftice, re-
pented already of their conduct. The Ministers alone resolved to
maintain the contest. They endeavoured to prevent the nobles
from dispersing; they inflamed the people by violent invectives
against the King; they laboured to procure subscriptions to an as-
fociation for their mutual defence; and conscious what lulfre and
power the junAion of some of the greater nobles would add to their
cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that
the people, moved by the word of God, and provoked by the in-
juries offered to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to protect the Protestant Religion, which
owed its establishment to thepiety and valour of their ancestors; that
they wanted only a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less than his noble birth,
entitled him to that honour: They conjured him therefore not to
disappoint their hopes and wishes, nor to refute the suffering Church
that aid, which she so much needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of
complying with their desire, carried the letter diretly to the King,
whom this new insult irritated to such a degree, that he commanded
the magistrates of Edinburgh inflantly to seize their Ministers, as
manifest incendiaries, and encouragers of rebellion. The magif-
trates, in order to regain the King's favour, were preparing to

VOL. II. D d obey;

Book VIII obey; and the Ministers, who aw no other hope of safety, fled

towards England *.

I$97.

The King
humbles the
power of the
Church.
Jan. 3.

Tilis unficcefsful infurretion, instead ofoverturning, eabliih-

ed the King's authority. Those concerned in it were confounded
and dispersed. And the reft of his fubjets, in order to avoid sus-
picion, or to gain his favour, contended who hould be most for-
ward to execute his vengeance. A Convention of estates being
called, pronounced the late infurretion to be high treason; ordained
every Minister to subscribe a declaration of his submission to the
King's juriididion, in all matters civil and criminal; impowered
magistrates to commit, instantly, to prison any Minister, who
in his sermons, Should utter indecent reflections on the King's
condut; prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet, without
the King's licence; commanded that no person should be elected a
magistrate of Edinburgh, for the future, without the King's ap-
probation; and that, in the mean time, the present magistrates
should either discover, and inflic condign puuifhment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself hould be fubjeded to
all the penalties of that treasonable ationt.

ARaMED with the authority ofthefe decrees, James resolved tocrufh

Abidgo6 the
privilegesof entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjeds. As the Clergy had, hi-
the citizens of therto, derived their chiefcredit and strength from the favour andzeal
Edinburgh.

of the citizens of Edinburgh, hisfirffcare was to humble them. Though
the magistratcs fuibmittcd to him in the most abjec terms; though
they vindicated themselves, and their fellow citizens, from the most
distant intention of violating his royal person or authority; though,
after the firiccft scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix on them

E Spotfwv. 451. Cald 5. 126. 1 Cald. 5, 147.

the

the fufpicioh of premeditated rebellion had been discovered; though Book VIII.
many of the nobles, and such of the Clergy as still retained any 1593
degree of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither acknowledge-
ments, nor intercessions, were of the least avail*. The King
continued inexorable, the city was declared to have forfeited its pri- Feb. 28.
vileges as a Corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties of trea-
son. The capital of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, de-
ferted by its ministers, abandoned by the courts of Justice, and pro-
fcribed by the king, remained in desolation and despair. The
courtiers even threatened to raze the city to the foundation, and to
erea a pillar where it stood, as an everlasting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in
compliance with Elizabeth, who interposed in their favour, and
moved by the continual follicitations of his nobles, James absolved March zi.
the citizens from the penalties of law, but, at the fame time, he
firipped them of their most important privileges; they were neither
allowed to eled their own magistrates, nor their own Miniflers;
many new burdens were imposed on them; and a great umn of
money was exaded by way of peace-offering -.

JAMES was, mean while, equally assiduous, and no less fucces- New regula-

tions with re-

ful, in circumscribing thejuriidicion of the Church. Experience had gard to the
discovered that to attempt this, by a(s of parliament, and sentences Church.
of privy council, was both ineffectual, and odious. He had re-
course, now, to an expedient more artful, and better calculated for
obtaining his end. The Ecclefiaflical judicatories were composed
of many members; the majority of the clergy were extremely
indigent, and unprovided of legal stipends; the minifers in the

* Cald., S 149. 1 Spotfw. 434, 444.

D d 2

nleigh-

Book VIII. neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithltanding the parity eitablifh-

~' 597- ed by the Presbyterian government, had assumed a leading in the

Church, which filled their brethrenwith envy; every numerous body
of men is susceptible of sudden and firong impressions, and liable to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these confide-
rations, James thought it poflible to gain the Clergy, whom he had
in vain attempted to subdue. Proper agents were set to work all
over the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were employed;
the usurpations of the brethren near the capital were aggravated;,
the jealousy of their power, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different General Aiemblies were
held, in both, which, notwithflanding the zeal and boldness, where-
with a few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of the Church,
a majority declared in favour of those measures, which were agree-
able to. the King. Many practices, which had continued since the
reformation, were condemned.; many points of discipline, which
had hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given
up; the licence, with which ministers discoursed of political mat-
ters, was restrained; the freedom, with which they inveighed
against particular persons, censured; sentences offummary excom-
munication declared unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly,
without the King's permission, prohibited; and the right of no-
minating ministers, to the principal towns, vested in the Crown.
Thus, the Clergy themselves surrendered privileges, which it
would have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted
to. a yoke, more intolerable than any James would have ventured to
impose by force; while those who continued to oppose his mea-
fures, instead of their former popular topic of the King's violent
encroachments on a jurifdition which did not belong him, were

5 ob-

obliged to turn their outcries againfl the corruptions of their own Book VIII-
order . 587.

BY the authority of these assemblies, the Popiih Earls were al- Popifl Lords.

towed to make a public recantation of their errors; were absolved pardoned.
from the sentence of excommunication; and received into the
bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to the church of
Rome, and by their apoftacy justified, in ome degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE Minilfers of Edinburgh owed to the intercefion of thee

assemblies, the liberty of returning to. their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridged
their power.. The city was divided into diftin- pariihes; the num--
ber of Ministers doubled; persons on whose fidelity the King could
rely were fixed in the new parishes; and these circumstances, ad-
ded to the authority of the late decrees of the Church, contributed,
to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefiatical affairs, which
James poffefied during the remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that-

the other tranfafions of this period scarce deserve to be remem--
bered. The Otavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split--
ing into factions among themselves, resigned their commission; and
the administration of the revenue returning into itsformer channel,
both the king and the nation were deprived of the benefit of their
regular and frugal ceconomy.

*Spotfw. 43 3. Cald. 5. 189, 233.

TOWARDS

2D05

Book VIII. TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was held in order

1597 to restore Huntly, and his asociates, to their estates and honours,
Dec. 19. by repealing the at offorfeiture passed againit them. The authority

of this supreme court was likewise imployed to introduce a farther
innovation into the Church; but conformable to the system which

Ecclefiaftcs the king had now adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife
restored to a from the Clergy themselves. As the as of general annexation, and
feat in par-
lialnent. that eflablifhing the Presbyterian government had reduced the few

Bifflops, who flill survived, to poverty and contempt; as those
who poiffeied the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere laymen, and
many of them temporal Peers, few or none of the Ecclesiastical
order remained to vote in parliament, and by means of that, the
influence of the Crown was considerably diminished there, and a
proper balance to the power and number of the nobles was want-
ing. But the prejudices, the nation had conceived against the
name and characer of Bishops, were so violent that James was ob-
liged, with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a design to
revive that order. He prevailed therefore on the commission ap-
pointed by last assembly to complain to the parliament, that the
Church was the only body in the kingdom destitute of its repre-
fentatives in that filpreme court, where it so nearly concerned every
order to have some, who were bound to defend its rights; and
to crave that a competent number of the Clergy should be ad-
mitted, according to ancient custom, to a feat there. In compliance
with their request, an act was passed, by which tlofe Ministers,
on whom the King flould confer the vacant Billopricks and Ab-
beys, were intitled to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy
might conceive no jealousy of any encroachment on their privileges,
it was remitted to the General Afinh'bly, to determine what fpiri-

tual
2b6.

tual jurifdiion-or authority in the governimnt of the Church these Book VIII.
persons hould poless *. 598.

THE King, however, found it, no easy matter .to obtain the con-

currence of the Ecclesiastical judicatories, in which the adt of par-
liament met with a fierce opposition.. Though the Clergy per-
ceived how much lustre this new privilege would reflect upon their
order; though they were not insensible of the great acceflion of
personal power and dignity, which many of them would have
acquired, by being admitted into the supreme council of the na-
tion, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and to that,
they sacrificed every consideration of interest or ambition. All the
King's professions of regard for the present constitution of the
Church did not convince. them of his sincerity; all the devices that
could be invented for reifraining and circumscribing the jurifdidion
of those, who were to be raised to this new honour,, did not dimi-
nifh their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy advances,
and though admitted at first with moderate authority, and under
specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion. " Varniih
over this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen, with what
colours you please; deck the intruder with the utmost art; under
all this disguise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments
prevailed among many of his: brethren, and induced them to re-
jet power, and honours, with as much zeal, as ever those of their
order courted them. Many, however, were allured by the hopes
of preferment; the King himself and his Ministers employed the
fame arts, which they had tried so successfully last year; and after March 7.
long debates, and much opposition, the General Assembly declared

* Spotfw. 450. Parl. tli Jac. VI. c. 235.

that

2Q7,

Book VIII. that it was lawful for Minitiers to accept of a feat in parliament

-598 that it would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have its re-

presentatives in that supreme court; and that fifty one persons, a
number nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics, who were an-
ciently called to parliament, hould be chosen from among the
Clergy for that purpose. The manner of their election, toge-
ther with the powers to be vested in them, were left unde-
cided for the present, and furnished matter of future delibe-

ration *.

1599. As the profped of succeeding to the Crown of England drew

James endea-
vours with nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it certain.
success togain And as he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
a party in
England. marriage, he sent ambassadors extraordinary to their several courts,

in order to explain the justness of his title to the English throne,
and to desire their afliftance, if any competitor should arise to dif-
pute his undoubted rights. These Princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid they could afford him was
distant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of
Kinlofs, his ambassador at the Englifl court, follicited Elizabeth,
with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by some public deed,
and to deliver her own subjects from the calamities, which are
occasioned by an uncertain or disputed fucceflion. But age had
strengthened all the passions, which had, hitherto, induced Eliza-
beth to keep this great question obscure, and undecided; and a
general and evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As no
impression could be made on the Quen, the ambassador was com-
manded to found the disposition of her fubjeas, and to try what
progress he could make in gaining them. Bruce possessed all the

*Spots. 450. Cald. 5. 7 8.

talents

talents of fecrecr, judgment, and address, requisite for conducing Book VIII'
a negociation, no less delicate, than important. A Minister of 59 9
this charaacer was intitled to the confidence of the English. Ma-
ny of the highell rank unbosomed themselves to him without re-
serve, and gave him repeated assurances of their resolution to afrert
his master's right, in opposition to every pretender *. And as fe-
veral pamphlets were dispersed, at this time in England, contain-
ing objections to his title, James employed ome learned men in
his kingdom to answer these cavillers, and to explain the advantages
which would result to both kingdoms, by the union of the Crowns.
These books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little to re-
concile the English to that event. A book published this year, by
the King himself, produced an effec fRill more favourable. It was
intitled Bafilicon Doron, and contained precepts concerning the art
of government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Notwithftand-
ing the great alterations and refinements in national taste since that
time, we mufl allow this to be no contemptible performance, and
not to be inferior to the works of most cotemporary writers, either
in purity of style or justness of composition. Even that vain pa-
rade of erudition with which it abounds, and which now disgusts
us, railed the admiration of that age; and as it was filled with those
general rules, which speculative authors deliver for rendering a people
happy, and of which James could discourse with great plausibility,
though often incapable of putting them in pratice; the English
conceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expected an increase
of national honour and prosperity, under a Prince so profoundly
skilled in politics, and who gave such a specimen both of his wis-
dom, and of his love to his people -.

* Johnfl. 242. 1- Calnd. Spots 4'-.

TirE
VOL, II.

1E c

Book VIII. THE Quen of England's sentiments concerning James, were

599. very different from these of herfubjets. His excessive indulgence

towards the Popith Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popish Archbishop of
Glasgow, who had -fled out of Scotland at the time of the Reforma-
tion, to the possession of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap-
pointing him his Ambassador at the court of France; the applause
he bellowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the
Queen his mother, Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of
a mind alienated from the protestant religion; and fufpeaed that
he would soon revolt from the profeflon of it. These suspicions

_cc es him- efcorrefpond-feemed to be fully confirmed, by a discovery which came from the
ingth the Master of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and who, ra-

ther than susser his intriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himfelffo
far as to a as a py for the Engliih court. He conveyed to Eli-
zabeth the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Clemient VIII.
in which the King, after many expressions of regard for that pontiff,
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in order to, render the
intercourse betwen the court. of Rome and Scotland more frequent
andfamiliar,hefollicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop of
Vaizon. a Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardinal**. Elizabeth, who
had. received, by another channetlt, some imperfect intelligence of
this correfpondenee,. was filled with justfurprize, and immediately
despatched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into the truth
of the matter, and to reproach James for an action- so unbecoming
a Prcteftant prince. He was no less astonished at the accusation,
and with a confidence, which nothing but the confcioufiefs of in,
nocente could inspire, affirmed the whole to be a mere calumny,

*Cald. 333.. t Winw. Mem. vol. i. 37, 52,

and

and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpose to Book VIII.
bring his sincerity in Religion to be fufpeced. Elphingfton the Se- 9
cretary of lfate denied the matter with equal solemnity. It came
to be known by a very singular accident, which happened some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth had received was
well founded, though at the fame time the King's declarations of
his own innocence were perfectly consistent with truth. Cardinal
Bellarmine, in a reply which hepublifhed to a controversial treatise,
of which the king was the author, accused him of having aban-
doned the favourable sentiments which he had once entertained of
the Roman Catholic religion, and as a proof of this quoted his let-
ter to Clement VIII. It was impossible, any longer, to believe this
to be a fiction; and it was a matter too delicate to be pased over
without ftrit inquiry. James immediately examined Elphingfton,
and his confession unravelled the whole mystery. He acknowledged
that he had huffled in this letter, among other papers, which he
laid before the King to be signed, who, fufpeting no such deceit,
subscribed it together with the refr, and without knowing what it
contained; that he had no other motive, however, to this aion,
but zeal for his majesty's service; and, by flattering the Roman Ca-
tholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government, he
imagined that he was paving the way for his more easy acceflion
to the English throne. The Privy Council of England entertained
very different sentiments oftheSecretary's condu&. In their opinion,
not only the King's reputation had been exposed to reproach, but
his life to danger, by this rafih imposture; they even imputed the
gun-powder treason to the rage and disappointment of the Papists,
upon finding that the hopes which this letter inspired were fruf-
trated. The Secretary was sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried

E e 2 for

Book VIII. for high treason. His peers found him guilty; but, by the Qeen's

599. interceflion, he obtained a pardon*.

ACCORDING to the account of other historians, James himself

was no firanger.to this correspondence with the Pope; and, if we
believe them, Elphingflon being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of the Earl of Dun-
bar, concealed ome circumstances in his narrative of this tranf-
adion, and falsified others; and, at the expence of his own fame,
and with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a veil over
this part of his mailer's conduct --.

Jamesatgreat BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre-
pains to gain
the Roman tary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that,

Catholics about this time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the friendship

of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precaution towards
facilitating his acceflion to the English throne. Lord Home, who
was himself a Papist, was entrufled with a secret commiflion to
the Pope+; the Archbishop of Glasgow was an aive infirument
with those of his own religion |. The Pope expressed such fa-
vourable sentiments both of the King, and of his right to the Crown
of England, that James thought himself bound, ome years after,
to acknowledge the obligation in a public manner**. Sir James
Lindsay made great progress in gaining the English Papists to ac-
knowledge his Majesty's title. Of all these intrigues Elizabeth re-
ceived obscure hints, from different quarters. The more imper-
fectly she knew, the more violently the fufpedd the King's de-
signs, and the natural jealousy of her temper increasing with age,
the orvcd his conduct with greater solicitude than ever.

* Spots 456, 507. Johnfl. 448. t Cald. vol. v. 322. vi. 147.
Winw. Mcm. vol. i 57. 11 Cald, vol. vi. 147. *' Ibid. vol. v. 604.

2t

'rIlE

. THI queflions with regard.to the ele&ion and power of the re-Book VIII.
presentatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by the i60.
General Assembly, which met at Montrose. That place was March 28

His regula-
chosen, as moit convenient for the ministers of the north, amongtions with re-

garct to the

whom the King's influence chiefly.lay. And although great num-church.
bers retorted from the northern provinces, and the King employed
his whole interest, and the authority of his own presence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with difficulty agreed
on. That the General assembly hall recommend fix persons to
every vacant benefice,' which gave a title to a feat in Parliament,
out of whom the King shall nominate one; that the person so elect-
ed, after obtaining his feat in parliament, hall neither propose, nor
content to any thing there, that may affect the interest of the church,
without special inftrucions to that purpoe e; that he hall be answer-
able for his conduc to every General assembly; and submit to its
censure, without appeal, upon pain of infamy and excommunica-
tion; that he hall discharge the duties of a Pastor, in a particular
congregation; that he hall not usurp any ecclefiafticaljurifdi&ion,
superior to that of his other brethren; that if the church inflic on
him the censure of deprivation, he hall, thereby, forfeit his feat in
Parliament; that he hall annually resign his commiflion to the
General assembly, which may. be restored to him, or not, as the
Assembly, with the King's approbation, hall judge moRt expedient
for the good of the Church . Nothing could be more repugnant
to the idea of Episcopal government, than there regulations. It
was not in consequence of rights derived from their office, but of
powers conferred by a commission, that ecclesiastical persons were
to be admitted to a feat in Parliament; they were the reprefenta-
tivcs, not the fupcriors of the clergy. Destitute of all spiritual au-

Spots. 453, 457. Cald. vol. v. 368.

thority,

Book VIII. thority, even their civil jurifdition was temporary. James, how-

J 00. ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able to shake off

thee fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges which belonged
to the episcopal order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And
he contended for, and they opposed the nomination of thee corn-
miflioners, not so much on account of the powers then vested in
them, as of thoie, to which it was believed they would soon at-
tain *.

Gowiy's con- DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil-
plracy. lity. The clergy, after many struggles, were brought under great

fubjeaion; the Popish earls were restored to their estates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the consent of
the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace among themselves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midst of this fe-
curity, the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a con-
fpiracy altogether unexpeced, and almost inexplicable. The au-
thors of it were John Ruthven Earl of Gowry, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1584. Nature had adorned both these young men, especially the
elder brother, with many accomplishments, to which education had
added its most elegant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than is common at
their age of life; generous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far
from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the
most sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwithitanding all
these noble qualities, some unknown motive engaged them in a
conspiracy, which, if we adhere to the account commonly received,

Spots. 454.
6

mult

mull be transmitted to poflerity, as one of the mofl wicked, as-well Book VIII.
as one of the worst concerted, of which hitorymakes anymention. I600

ON the fifth of Auguf, as the King, who resiled during the

hun ting season in his Palace of Falkland, was going out to his sport
early in themorning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruthven,
who, with an air of great importance, told the King, that the even-
ing before he had met an unknown man, of a suspicious afpe&,
walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a
vast quantity of foreign gold; that he had immediately Seized both
him and his treasure, and without communicating tie matter to any
person, had kept him confined and bound in a foIitary house; and
that he thought it his duty to impart such a singular event, first of
all to his Majesty. James immediately fufpeed this unknown per-
for to be a traffickingIrieft, supplied with foreign coin, in order to
excite new commotions in the kingdom; and resolved to impower
the Magistrates of Perth to call the person before them, and inquire
into all the circumstances of the story. Ruthven violently opposed
this resolution, and with many arguments urged the King to ride di-
resly to Perth, and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mean
while the chace began; and James, notwithfianding his passion for
that amusement, could not help ruminating on the ftrangenef of
the tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At la/t, he called him,
and promised when the sport was over, to set out for Perth. The
chace, however, continued long; and Ruthven, who all the while
kept close by the king, was still calling on him to make haste. At
the death of the Buck, he would not allow James to flay till a fresh
horse was brought him; and observing the Duke of Lennox and
the Earl of Mar preparing to accompany the King, he entreated
him to countermand them. This James restsed; and though

Ruth.-

16oo

THE HIEST RY.

Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the apparent perturb
bation in his whole behaviour, raised ome suspicions in his mind;
yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on him
to set out for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruthven
rode forward to inform his brother of the King's arrival, though
he had already derpatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by several of-the
citizens, met the King, who had only twenty persons in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and -embarrassed, and was at no pains 'to attone,
by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he treated
his guests. When the King's reparf was over, his attendants were
led to dine in another room, and he being left almoit alone, Ruth-
ven whispered him, that now was the time to go to the chamber
where the unknown person was kept. James commanded him to
bring Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, instead of that,
Ruthven ordered him not to follow: and conducting the King up
a stair-case, and then through several apartments, the doors of which
he locked behind him, led him at last into a small study, in which
there stood a man clad in armour, and with a sword and dagger
by his fide. The King, who expected to have found one disarmed
and bound, started at the fight, and enquired if this was the per-
son; but Ruthven snatching the dagger from the girdle of the
man in armour, and holding it to the King's breast, " Remember,

said he, how unjustly my father suffered by your command; you
( are now myprifoner; submit to my dilfofal without resistance, or

outcry; or this dagger flall inflandy avenge his blood." James

expoftulatcd with Ruthven, intrcatcd,. and flattered him. The man
whom he found in the itudy, stood, all the while, trembling,
and dilinayed, without courage cither to aid the King, or to fe-

cond

cond his aggressor. Ruthven protested that if the King raised no out- Book VIII.
cry, his life ihould be safe; and, moved by some unknown reason, 600.
retired in order to call his brother, leaving to the man in armour the
care of the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make any noise
during his absence.

WHILE the King was in this dangerous situation, his attendants

growing impatient to know whither he had retired, oneof Gowry's
attendants entered the room hatily, and told them that the King had
just rode away towards Falkland. All of them rushed out into the
fireet; and the Earl, in the utmost hurry, called for their horses.
But, by this time, his brother had returned to the King, and swear-
ing that now there was no remedy; he behoved to die; offered
to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was, he scorned to submit
to that indignity; and closing with the assassin, a fierce struggle
ensued. The man in armour flood as formerly, amazed and mo-
tionlefs; and the King dragging Ruthven towards a window, which
during his absence he had persuaded the person with whom he
was left, to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, Trea-
son! Treason! Help! I am murdered!" His attendants heard,
and knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand which grasped
the King's neck with violence. They flew with precipitation to his
affiflance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal stair-case, where they found all the doors hut, which they
battered with the utmost fury, endeavouring to burst them open.
But Sir John Ramsey, entering by a back-ftair, which led to the
apartment where the King was, found the door open; and rushing
upon Ruthven, who was still struggling with the King, firuck him
twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards the flair-cafe, where
Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hugh Hcrreis met, and killed him; he

Vol. II. F f crying

Book VIII. crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this

óo i. action." During this fcufle, the man, who had been concealed

in the ftludy, escaped unobserved. Together with Ramsay, Erskine,
and Herreis, one Wilson a footman entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to shut the door, Gowrie rulhed
in with a drawn sword in each hand, followed by seven of his atten-
dants well armed, and with a loudvoice threatened them all with in-
ftant death. They immediately thrust the Kinginto the little study,
and hutting the door upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwith-
fianding the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced Gowrie
thro' the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a word; his
followers having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the conflict. A dread-
ful noise continued still at the opposite door, where many persons
laboured in vain to force a palfage; and the King being aured that
they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened on
the inside. They ran to the King, whom they unexpecedly found
safe, with transports of congratulation; and he, falling on his knees,
with all his attendants round him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, however, was not
yet over. The inhabitants of the town, whose Provost Gowrie was,
and by whom he was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the
two brothers, ran to their arms, andfurroundedthehoufe, threatened
revenge, with many insolent and opprobrious speeches against the
King. James endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by
speaking to them from the window; he admitted their magistrates
into the house; related to them the whole circumstances of the
fat; and their fury subsiding bydegrees, they dispersed. On search-
ing the Earl's pockets for papers, that might discover his designs and
accomplices, nothing was found but a finall parchment bag, full

of

of magieal characters, and words of enchantment; and if we may Book VIII.
believe the account of the conspiracy published by the King, " while 6

16oo.

" these were about him, the wound of which he died, bled not;
"but as soon as they were taken away, the blood gushed out in
"great abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of this busy
day, the King returned in the evening to Falkland, having commit-
ted the dead bodies of the two brothers to the custody of the Ma-
giflrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the King gave of The motive
all the circumstances of this conspiracy againtf his life, the motives of the confpi-

'

b ° rators not ea-

which induced the two brothers to attempt an ation so detestable, filyexplained.
the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose aid they
depended, were altogether unknown. The words of Ruthven to
the King gave ome grounds to think, that the desire of revenging
their father's death had instigated them to this attempt. But, what-
ever injuries their father had suffered, it is scarce probable that they
could impute them to the King, whose youth and fubjedion, at that
time, to the violence of a faction, exemptedhim frombeingtheobjed
of resentment, on account of actions which were not done by his com-
mand. James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the
fatherhad suffered, by benefits to his children; and Gowrie himself,
sensible of his favour, acknowledged it with the warnest expref-
sions of gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being convicted
ofaffifting him in this aflaulton the king's servants, were executed at
Perth; but they could give no light into the motives, which had
promptedtheir mater to an ation so repugnant to these acknowledg-
ments. )iligent search was madefor theperfon concealed in theftudy,
and fiom him great discoverics were cxpeccd. But AndrewIenlcr-
Ion the Earl's steward, who, upon a promise of pardon, confessed

F f 2 himself

Book VIII. himself to be theman, was as much a frangertohis master's designs

1600. as the reft; and though placed in the study by Gowrie's command,

he did not even know for what end that flation had been assigned
him. Thewhole tranfadion remained as impenetrably dark as ever;
and the two brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme
without either confident or accomplice, with unexampled secrecy
as well as wickedness.

AN accident, no less strange than the other circumstances of the

cveries ic- flory, and which happened nine years after, discovered that this
cerning it. opinion, however plausible, was ill founded; and that the two

brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone. One
Sprot, a notary, having whispered among feveralperfons that he knew
some secrets relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary, and partly
forced from him by torture. According to his account, Logan of
Retialrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of dissolute
morals, was privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with him, in order to concert the plan of their operations; the
Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose; and one
Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted with the secret, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour were now dead.
But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters written both by Gowrie
and Logan, on that occasion; and in confirmation of his testimony,
several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to himelf had
prompted Sprot to steal from among Bour's papers, were produced*.

Thetf

* Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another to Gowric, and three
of them without any dircclionl; nor could Sprot dilcovcr the name of the person to

whom

2 2

These were compared, by the privy council, with papers of Lo- Book VIII.
gan's hand writing, and the resemblance was manifest. Persons of 6oo.
undoubted credit, and well qualified to judge of the matter, exa-
mined them, and fworeto their authenticity. Death itself did not
exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones were dug up, and tried
for High Treason, and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal*,

his

whom they were written. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Honourable.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the letter, Crom. 95. that
there were several persons privy to the conspiracy. The date of the first letter is
July I8th. Mr. Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan only five days be-
fore. Ibid. It appears from the original summons of Forfaulture against Logan's
heirs, that Bour, though he had letters addressed to him with regard to a confpi-
racy equally dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read.
," Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, dici Georgii opera in legendis omnibus
"c fcriptis ad eum missis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is altogether strange
and nothing but the capricious character of Logan can account for his chufing such
a confident.

h* By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High Treason might be tried

even after death. This practice was adopted by the Scots, without any limitation,
Parl. 1540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was oon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper reftritions, by an at A. D.
1542. which has never been printed. The words of it are, " And because the said
Lords (i. e. the Lords of articles) think the said aa (viz. in 1540) too general, and
prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore fiatutes and ordains that the said
aAt hall have no place in time coming, but against the heirs of them that notori-
oufly commits or hall commit lefe majefly against the King's person, against the
realm for averting the fame, and against them that shall happen to betray the King's
army allcnarly, and being notourly known in their time; and the heirs of thele
persons tobe called and judged within five,years after the dcccafe of the said per-
sons committers of the said crimes; and the said time being bypall, the iaid heirs
never to be pursucd for the fame." The sentence against Logan violated this statute
in two particulars. He was not notourly known during his life to be an accom-
plice in the crime for which he was tied; and his heirs were called in quefiion more
than five years after his death. It is remaikablc that this tatute leceis not to have

been

Book VIII. his lands were forfeited, and his poflerity declared infamous. Sprot

I 600 was condemned to be hanged for mifpriiion of treason. He ad-

hered to his confeflion to the last, and having promised, on the
scaffold, to give the Spectators a sign in confirmation of the truth
of what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was
thrown off the ladder by the executioner *.

BUT though it be thus unexpectedly discovered that Gowrie did

not ae without associates, little additional light is thrown, by this dif-
covery, on the motives and intention of his conduct. It appears
almost incredible that two young men of such distinguished virtue,
should revolt, all at once, from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It appears tfill more
improbable, that they hould have concerted their undertaking with

so

been attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another singular cir-
cumitance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of justice that no person can be tried
in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of tleir forms, and often absurd
in their devices for preserving them, they contrived that in any process againt a
dead person, his corps or bones shall be presented at the bar. Examples of this
occur frequently in the Scottish history. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead
body of the Earl of Huntly was presented in parliament, before sentence of for-
faulture was pronounced againfi him. For the fame cafon the bodies of Gowrie
and his brother were preferred, in order that they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mlackenz. Crim.
Law. Book. . Tit. 6. §. 22.

* It appears that Archbiflop Spotf\rood was prcfent at the execution of Sprot.

Crmo. 15: and yet he seems to have given no credit to his dlitfoverics. The man-
ner in which he speaks of him is rcnmarlkable, '" Whether or not I flhould mention
"the arraignment and execution of (.corge Sprot, who fiffired at Edinburgh,

I amn doubtful. His concicflun, thoil voluintary and coInl.11nt, calrying fillll

*'probability. This man depolfcd, &c. It cned to he; a very fielioll, and a
" mere invention of the main's own brain, fr nither did he fhlew the lcttcr, nor

"' could

OF SCOTLAND.

so little foresight and prudence. If they intended that the deedBcokV I.
flould have remained concealed, they could not have chosen a more 6oo.
improper Icene for executing it than their own house. If they
intended that Henderson mhould have struck the blow, they could
not have pitched on a man more destitute of thecourage, that must
diret the hand of an aaffin; nor could they exped that he, unfo -
licited, and'unacquainted with their purpose, would venture on
fitch a'defperate ation. If Ruthven meant to stab the king
with his own hand, why did lie withdraw. the dagger after it was
pointed at his breast? How'could he leave the King, after such a
plain declaration of his intention ? was it not preposterous to com-
mit him to the keeping of such a timid and false associate, as Hen-
derfon ? For what purpose did he waste time, in binding the hands
of an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched with

" could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went about the treason so secretly
" would have communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be."
p. 508. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had
been tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. He him-
self was probably present in parliament at the trial. 'The earl of Dunbar,.of whom
he always speaks with the highest refpea, was the person who direced the process
against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against the truth of Sprof's evi-
dence, notwithitanding all these circumstances, is furprizing. Sir Thomas Hamil-
ton, the King's, advocate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, repre-
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convincing; and in an ori-
ginal letter of his to the King 2Ift of June I609. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after
mentioning the manner in which the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on.

' When the probation of the fulmmons was referred to the Lords of Article's votes,

they found uniformly, all in one voice, the said fumnons to be so clearly proved,
that they seemed to contend who should be able most zealoully to express the satis-
faction of his heart, not only by the most pithy words, but by tears of joy; diverse
of the best rank confcfling, that that whereof they doubted at their entry into the
house was now so mianifeft, that they behoved to eftecm them traitors, who fllould
any longer refute to declare their assured resolution of the truth of that trealon."

his

Book VIII. his sword? Had providence permitted them to embrue their

i600- hands in the blood of their Sovereign, what advantage could have

accrued to them by his death ? and what claims or pretensions
could they have opposed to the rights of his children*? Inevitable
and instant vengeance, together with perpetual infamy, were the
only consequences they could expec to follow such a crime.

On the other hand, it is impossible to believe that the King had

formed any design againit the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-
gree, the objects of his jealousy or hatred t; nor was he of a spirit

so

* It has been aferted, that, in consequence of the King's death, the Earl of Gow-

rie might have pretended to the Crown of England, as the son of Dorothea Stew-
art daughter of Lord Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce
from the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband. Burnet Hilt.
of his own times. But this assertion is ill founded. It appears, from undoubted evi-
.dence that Lord Methven had only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its
infancy, and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was ot the daughter of Queen Margaret,
but of Janet Stewart Lord Methven's second Wife, a daughter of John Earl of
Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Gowrie had really been descended from the
blood royal of England, the King had at that time a son and a daughter; and besides
them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox had a preferable ti-
tle to the Crown of England.

t Sir Henry Nevile, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes the death of the

two brothers to a cause not mentioned by any of our Historians. " Out of Scot-
land we hear that there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence be-
twixt the King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery of some
affection between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother (who was killed with him)
was the trued cause and motive of that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. . 274. Whe-
ther the following passages in Nicolson's letter be any confirmation of that fufpi-
cion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 22, I6o2, he mentions the re-
turn of Gowric's two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, " The coming in

of
5

so sanguinary, or so noted for rash and desperate valour, as to have BookVIII.
attempted to murder them in their own house, where they were 600oo.
surrounded with many domestics, he only with a slender and un-
armed train; where they could call to their assistance the inha-
bitants of a city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a
distance from all aid; and leafs of all would he have choien for his
associates, in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke
of Lennox, the former connected in close friendhip with the house
of Gowrie, ad the latter married to one of the Earl's fillers.

WHICHSOEVER of these oppolite systems we embrace; whether A conjeure

concerning
we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie, or to the King; the intention

of the con-

insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, myf- fpirators.
tery, and contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole con-
fpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it from
a more remote cause, we may discover it to be less criminal.

To keep the King of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great objet of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this, he ometimes
soothed him; and sometimes bribed his Miniflers and favourites;
and when he failed of attaining her end by these means, he en-

of these two, and the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and
furnishing Mrs. Beatrix [their finer] with such information as Sir Thomas Erskine
has given, hath bred great suspicion in the King of Scots that they come not in
but upon ome dangerous plot." In another letter January I, 603. " The day
of writing my las Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by the Lady Paifly, and Mrs.
of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into the court in the evening, and flowed
in a chamber prepared for her by the Queen's dire&ion, where the Queen had
much time and conference with her. Of this the King got notice, and shewed his
dislike thereof to the Queen, gently reproving her for it, and examining quietly of
the Queen's servants of the fame, and of other matters thereunto belonging with
such discretion and secrecy as requires such a matter.

VOL. II. G g couraged

Book VIi. encouraged the Clergy to render any admitnifration she distrustes

i6oo. unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up some faction of the nobles

to oppose, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with the arts
of undermining a Miniitry by intrigues, had recourse to the ruder
pracice of rendering themselves maiters of the King's person, that
they might thereby obtain the diredions of his councils. Those
nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of Ruthven, were infli-
gated, and supported by her. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts,
enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
conneEtions which James had been forming of late with the Ro-
man Catholic Princes, his secret negociations in England with her
fubjets, and the maxims by which he governed his own king-
dom, all contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded some great
Revolution in Scotland to be approaching, and it was her interefl
to prevent it. The Earl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful
of the Scottifl nobles, and descended from ancestors warmly at-
tached to the English interest. He had adopted the fame fylenm,
and believed the welfare of his country to be inseparably connect-
cd with the subsistence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During hisrefidenceatParis,he had contraced anintimate friendflip
with Sir Henry Nevill, the Queen's ambassador there, and was re-
commended by him to his Court, as a person of whom great use
might be made *. Elizabeth received him, as he passed through.
England, with distinguished marks of refped and favour. From
all these circumniances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the
conspiracy againlt the King was formed at that time, in concert
with her. Such a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears
not to be deftitutc of foundation. An English Ihip was observed
hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the firth of-Forth.

· Winw. i. 156,
226

6

The

The Earl's two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill BookVIIT.
success of the conpiracy, and were proteced by Elizabeth. And i 56
James himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great
umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, ofElizabeth's in-
trigues in Scotland tended to hurt the King's person, but only to
circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained the Popish pre-
tenders to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts,
to which their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged
them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an a of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of the two brothers.
Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. When these proved more numerous than
was expeted, the Earl employed a ratagem in order to separate
them from the King, by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, and by calling haffily for their horses, that they might
follow him. By shutting James up, mean while, in a distant corner
of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands, their design
seems to have been rather to seize, than to assassinate him. And
though Gowrie had not collected his followers, so as to have been
able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom,
by open force, he might oon have been conveyed aboard the
English ihip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and he might
have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house of Logan's, in which,
according to many obscure hints in his letters, ome rendezvous
of the conspirators was to be held. Amidl the furprize and ter-
ror, into which the King must have been thrown by the violence
offered to him, it was extremely natural for him to conclude that
his life was fought. It was the interefl of all his followers to con-
firm him in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add

Gg2 to

227

BookVIII. encouraged the Clergy to render any adminiifration the diflruffetff

600. unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up some faction of the nobles

to oppose, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with the arts
of undermining a Minifiry by intrigues, had recourse to the ruder
practice of rendering themselves masters of the King's person, that
they might thereby obtain the diredtions of his councils. Those
nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of Ruthvez, were inRfi-
gated, and supported by her. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts,
enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connections which James had been forming of late with the Ro-
man Catholic Princes, his secret negociations in England with her
fubjecds, and the maxims by which he governed his own king-
dom, all contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded some great
Revolution in S'cotland to be approaching, and it was her interest
to prevent it. The Earl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful
of the Scottifl nobles, and descended from ancestors warmly at-
tached to the English interest. He had adopted the fame system,
and believed the welfare of his country to be inseparably conne&-
ed with the subsistence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his residence at Paris, he had contraced an intimate friendship.
with Sir Henry Nevill, the Q.ueen's ambassador there, and was re-
commended by him to his Court, as a person of whom great use
might be made . Elizabeth received him, as he passed through.
England, with diflinguiffied marks of refped and favour. From.
all these circumstances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the
conspiracy against the King was formed at that time, in concert
with her. Such a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears
not to be deftitutc of foundation. An Englifl fihip was observed
hovering, for fomc time, in the mouth of the firth of-Forth'.

Winw. . 156,
226

6

The

*the Earl's two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill BookVlf.
success of the conspiracy, and were proteted by Elizabeth. And r86.
James himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great
umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's in-
trigues in Scotland tended t hurt the King's person, but only to
circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest fate-guard of her own, and reitrained the Popish pre-
tenders to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts,
to which their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged
them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an a of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this eem to have been the intention of the two brothers.
Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. When thee proved more numerous than
was expected, the Earl employed a stratagem in order to separate
them from the King, by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses, that they might
follow him. By futting James up, mean while, in a difcant corner
of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands, their design
seems to have been rather to seize, than to affafinate lim. And
though Gowrie had not colleced his followers, so as to have been
able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom,
by open force, he might oon have been conveyed aboard the
English lhip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and he might
have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house of Logan's, in which,
according to many obscure hints in his letters, ome rendezvous
of the conspirators was to beheld. Aid the furprize and ter-
ror, into which the King must have been thrown by the violence
offeired to him, it was extremely natural for him to conclude that
his life was fought. It was the interef of all his followers to con-
firm him in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add

G g2 to

227

BookVIII. to the importance, and merit of their own services. And thus

60. his fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder, which

the contemplation of any great and tragical event, when not fully
underflood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole tranfation. On
the other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the circum-
flances, which were added, detraced from the credit of those,
which really happened; and even furnished pretences for calling
in question the truth of the whole conlpiracy.

Many difbe- THE account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh
lieve the ac-
count pub- next morning. The privy council commanded the Ministers of that
lihe by the city inantly to assemble their people; and, after relating to them.

the circumflances of the conspiracy formed against the King's
life, to return public thanks to God, for the protetion which
he had fovifibly afforded him. But as the first accounts tranfinit-
ted to Edinburgh, written in hurry, and while the circumfiances
of the conspiracy were but imperfectly known, and the paflions
which it excited strongly felt, were indistinct, exaggerated, and'
contradictory, the Ministers laid hold of this; and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's safety, they re-
fused to enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from
the chair of truth, what appeared to be fill dubious and un-
certain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edinburgh; and though

Galloway, the Minister of his ownChapel, made an harangue to the
people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circumflances
of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hearing, confirmed
his account; though he commanded a narrative of the whole
tranfacEion to be published; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, fill continued incredulous, and unconvinced.

^~~~~~3 ~Their

Their high eteem of Gowrie, their jealousy of every part of the Book VIII.
King's condun, added to some false and many improbable circum- 600
flances in the narrative, not only led them to fufped the whole,
but gave their suspicions an air of credibility. But at length, the
King, partly by arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they were convinced
of the truth of the conspiracy. He could be brought no further ,
than to declare, that he reverenced the King's account of the tranf-| / , -
action, but could not fay that he himself was persuaded of the truth -C :
of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a single man would have been
little regarded, but as the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread
among the people, the example of one, in so high reputation for
integrity and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King was
at the utmofa pains to convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it
impossible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his benefice,
and after repeated delays, and many attempts towards a reconcile-
ment, baniihed him the kingdom*.

/

*

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any scruples

of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were produced
there, according to law; an inditment for High Treason was pre-
ferred against them witnesses were examined; and, by an unani-
mous sentence, their estates and honours were forfeited; the
punishment due to Traitors was inflicted on their dead bodies; and
as if the punishment hitherto in use did not express sufficient detefta-
tion of their crimes, the parliament enacted that the surname of
Ruthven hould be abolished; and in order to preserve the memory
of the King's miraculous escape, and to declare the sense which
the nation had of the divine goodness, to all future ages, appointed

Proceedings
of parliament
againit the
conlpirators.
* Spots. 461, &c. Cald. 5. 389, &c.

the

Book VIII. the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day of public

i6oo. thanksgiving*.

THOUGH

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King published a d-

cerf. of their vile and unnatural conspiracy agai/if his life. In the year 1713, George
Eail cfCroincrtie published an " Historical account of the conspiracy by theEarl
" of Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Reftalrig against King James VI." He seems
not to have seen the account which the King himself had given of that matter,
and borrows the whole hiflorical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but he
has extrated from the public records the depositions of the witnefes produced by
the King's Council, in order to make good the charge against the two brothers
and Logan their associate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the ma-
terial circumfiances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which they con-
tain, one would exped to be authentic and decisive. An account of a fad, still
recent, publilhed by royal authority, and the original depositions of persons exa-
mined in pretence of the highefi court in the nation, ought to convey a degree of
evidence seldom attained in hiitorical relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt
and uncertainty. But as every thing with regard to this tranfaCion is dark and
problematical, the King's account and the depositions of the witnesses not only vary
hut contradic each other in o many circumfances, that much room is still left for he-
fitation, and hitforical scepticism. The testimony of Henderson is the fullet and
mofl important, but in several particulars the King's account and his are contra-
divory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the
digger at his breast, " the fellow in the fludy flood quaking and trembling." Disc,
17. But Henderson fays that he himself wrested the dagger out of Mr. Ruthven's
hand. Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson likewise boafled to his wife that he had
that day twice savcd the King from being tabbed. Disc. 54. Crom. 53. II. The
King arts that Henderson opened the window during Mr. Ruthven's absence.
Disc. 23. Henderson dpofes that he was only attempting to open it when Mr.
Ruthven returned, and that during the fruggle between the King and him, he
opened it. Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III. If we may believe the King, the
fellow in the fludy flood, during the struggle, behind the King's back inactive and
trembling all the time. Disc. 27. But Henderson affirms that he tnatched away
the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the King; that he pulled
back Rulthven's hand while he was endeavouring to flop the King's mouth, and
that he opened the window. Dic. 54. Crom, 52. IV. By the King's account,

BMr.

THOUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a fuddden and a great Book VIt.
alarm, it was followed by no consequences. of importance; and 6ci.

havingr E.ix's con-
'''-*N£ ti fpiracyagairlit

Elizabeth.

Mr. Ruthven left him in the fludy, and went away in order to meet with his bro-
ther, and the Earl came up the flairs for the fame purpose. Disc. 23. Hender-
son deposes that when Mr. Ruthven left the King, he believes that he did not pass
from the door.' Crom. r5. It is apparent both: from the situation of the house,
and from other circumstances, that there could not possibly have been any interview
between the brothers at this time. Disc. 23-

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the privy council in A-

gust, and next at Edinburgh before the Parliament in November. Not to mention
some lesser variations between these depositions, we hall point out two which are
remarkable. In his first deposition Mr. Henderson relates the most material circunm-
stance of the whole in these words. " Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's
( dagger and held the fame to his Majeify's breast, faying, remmberyou of iyyfither's
" murder you hall now die fr it, and'minting to his Highnefle's heart, with the dag-
' ger, the deponent threw the fame out of Mr. Ruthven's hands, and fvvcre that
"as God shall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his
" hand, the space a man may go fix fieps, he would havefiricken the King to the
" hilts with it." Dife. 52. But at his second examination he varied from this in two
material circumstances. First the words which he at that.time put in Mr Ruthven's
mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breast are, " Sir you mufJ be my pi-

fojner;; remember on myfatier's death." Secondly when lie threatened him with death,

it was only to deter him from making any noise. " Hold your tongue or by Chrl?7 yo.
" hall die." 2. In his first deposition, the words of Mr. Ruthven when he returned
to the chamber where he had left the King, are " There is no remedy, by Godyou muyi
" die." But in his second deposition. " By God there is no remedy, and offered to
4' bind his Majef'y's hands." Crom. 5 . The material words you muff die are omitted.
The first deposition seems plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to
murder the King. The ccond would lead us to conclude that he had no other de-
sign than to detain him as a prifounr.

There are likewise fume remarkable contraldicions in the teflimonies of the other

witnesss. I. In the difcourfi publlield by authority it is ifinuated that the t-
niult of the inhabitants was railed against the Kting, and that it requircd ulle art

LO

Book VIII. having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any as-

i6o . fociates, or with such as were unknown, and chore to remain To,

the danger wasover, as soon as discovered. But not long a'sei, a
conspiracy broke out in England againrt Elizabeth, which, though
the first danger was initantly dispelled, produced tragical effects,
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal and unhappy.
As James was deeply interested in that event, it merits our parti-
cular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided between two

powerful factions, which contended for the supreme direction of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of
Effex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh, was
at the head of the other. The former was the most accomplished,
and the most popular of all the English nobles; brave, generous,
affable; though impetuous, yet willing to lifen to the councils
of those whom he loved;, an avowed, but not an implacable
enemy; a friend no less constant, than warm; incapable of dif-
guising his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
better fitted for the camp, than for the court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the firfl place in the adminifiration, with a spirit

to pacify them. Disc. 32. The Duke of Lennox confirms this in his deposition.
Crom. 44. An a of privy council summoning the Magistrates of Perth to answer
for that riot is still extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town,
deposes that he himself raised the people, and that they took arms in order to
afift the King. Crom. 66. 2. Henderson deposes that he gave an evasive answer
to Mr. John Moncrief, who enquired where he had been that morning, because the
Earl had commanded him not to let any man know that he had been at Falkland.
Disc. 54. Moncrief deposes to the fame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George
Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, de-
pose that the Earl, in their presence, asked Henderson, Whom he found with the
King at Falkland ?" Crom. o, 71. Which question seems to prove that he did not
aim at keeping that journey a ccrct.

which
3

which scorned the second, as below-his merit. He was oon dif- BookVIII.
tinguifhed by the Queen, who, with a profusion uncommon to her, 6o.
.conferred on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest honours,
and most important offices. Nor did. this diminifhi the eeem and
affection of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he was at once
the favourite of his Sovereign, and the darling of the people. Ce-
cil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a
father, deeply killed in all its arts, was crafty, infinvating, indus-
trious; and though poflefled of talents, which fitted him for the
highest offices, he did not rely upon his merit alone for at-
taining them, but availed himself of every advantage, which his
own address, or the mistakes of others afforded him. Two such
men were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Effex despised the
arts of Cecil, as low and base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity
appeared to be presumption and folly. All the military men, except
Raleigh, favoured EIfex. Most of the courtiers adhered to Cecil,
whose manners more nearly refeibled their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle between these His corref-

pondence

factions became more violent. Effex, in order to strengthen him-with the
(elf, had early ourted the friendship of the King of Scots, forsc°tchKing'
whose right of succession he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correspondence both with him, and with his principal Minis-
ters. Cecil, devoted to the Queen alone, rose daily to new ho-
nours, by the assiduity of his services, and the patience, with
which he expected the reward of them. While the Earl's high
spirit and impetuosity sometimes exposed him to checks from a
Milirefs, who, though partial in her affccdion towards him, could
not cafily bear contradicion, and conferred favours often unwilling-
ly, and always slowly. His own follicitations, however, fcconded
inalicioufly by his enemies, who wished to remove him at a dil-

VoL. 11. I-I tance

BookVIII. tance from court, advanced him to the command of the army em-

i60I' ployed in Ireland, against Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieu-

tenant of that kingdom, with a commission almost unlimited. His
success, in that expedition, did not equal either his own promises,
or the expetations of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevish from her
disappointment, and exasperated against Effex by the artifices of his
enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of accusations and reproaches.
These, his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the first tranf-
ports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part of his
army into England, and by driving his enemies from the Queen's
pretence, to reinstate himself in favour, and in power. But, upon
more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and setting
fail with a few officers, devoted to his person, landed in England,
and polted diredly to court. Elizabeth received him, without
any symptom either of affection or of displeasure. By proper
compliances and acknowledgments, he might have regained his
former ascendant over the Qufeen. But he thought himself too
deeply injured to submit to these. Elizabeth, on. the other hand,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her severity
drew from him the most humble letters, fle confined him to the
Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commniffioners to try him, both
for his conduct during his government of Ireland, and for leaving
that kingdom without her permission. By their sentence, he was
suspended from all his offices, except that of Malter of the horse, and
continued a prisoner during the Queen's pleafurc. Satisfied with having
mortified hispride thus far, Elizabctl did not susser the sentence to be
recorded, andi oon after allowed him to retire to his own houie.
During thef transactions, which occupied several months, ELiex fluc-
tuatcd between the allegiacc he howed to his Sovereign, and the desire
of revenge; and fometines Icaned to the one, and llmctiiles to the

Jam'.s caLti-other. In one of the intcrvals when the latter prevailed, he sent
ou, cor, lult e

a nee-

a messenger into Scotland to encourage the King to assert his own BookVIII.
right to the fucceflion by force of arms, and to promise that, be- 160.
fides the affiflance of the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord
Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
5000 men, from that kingdom. But James did not chute to hazard
the losing a kingdom, which was just ready to fall into his hands,
by a premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the
enterprize, and Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

THIS moderation, which was merely the effect of disgust and The wild at-

tempts of

disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the Queen, Esex.
having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant, which he had
formerly bestowed, but to admit him into her pretence, that new
injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and now much fretted,
to absolute despair. His friends, instead of soothing his rage, or
restraining his impetuosity, added to both, by their imprudent and
interested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he determined
to attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. And conscious how
unpopular such an enterprize would be, if it appeared to proceed
from motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it the
fernblance of public utility, by mingling the Kingof Scotland's interest
with his own. He wrote to James, that the faction which now
predominated in the English court, had resolved to support the pre-
tensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown, that the places of
the greatest importance in the kingdom were put into the hands of
his avowed enemies; and that unless he sent ambassadors, without
delay, to insist on the immediate declaration of his right of fucceflion,
their mcafures were so well concerted, that all his hopcs would be
dcfperate. James, who knew how difagrecable such a propoial
would be to the Queen of England, was not willing raflly to cx-

II h 2 puot

BookVII. pose himself to her displeasure. But Effex, blinded by resentment,

i601. and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to these pafflons, and

acted like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers, incompleatly armed, he attempted to assault a
throne, the best eftabliffied in Europe. Sallying, at their head,
out of his own house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wi(hed to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow his flan-
dard. He advanced towards the palace, with an intention to drive
Cecil and his facion out of the Queen's presence, and to obtain
a declaration of the Scottish King's right of fucceflion *. But,
though almost adored by the citizens, not a man would join him
in this wild enterprize. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted
by ome of his own attendants, and almost surrounded by the
troops, which marched under different leaders into the city, he re-
treated to his own house; and without any bold effort, suitable to
his present condition, or worthy of his former reputation for cou-
rage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As oon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he appointed the

Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his ambalfa-
dors to the court of England. The former of there was the per-
son, by whose means Effex had carried on his correspondence with
the King. He was a passionate admirer of the Earl's character, and
disposcd to attempt every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close fi-iendflip with Mar, was ready to fccond
him with equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the ambafly l'ct
friendly to IEflx, than the choice of the ambaitadors; they were
commanded to follicit, in the wartneft manner, for the Earl's life,

* Bircl. Mcm. 2. 477.

and
2

and if they found that the King, by avowing his friends, couldBookVII.'
either promote their designs, or-contribute to their safety, they were i6oi.
iinpowered to lay aside all disguise, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due to him, by force
of arms *. But before the ambassadors could reach London, Effex
had suffered the punishment he merited by his treason. Perhaps His death.
the fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his pardon, haflened
his death. Elizabeth continued, for ome time, irresolute concern-
ing his fate, and could not bring herself to consign into the hands
of the executioner, a man, who had once possessed her favour so
intirely, without a painful struggle between her resentment againfl
his late misconduct, and her ancient affection towards him. The
distress to which he was now reduced tended naturally to soften the
former, while it revived the latter with new tenderness; and the in-
terceffion of one faithful friend, who had interest with the Queen,
might perhaps have saved his life, and have procured him a remif-
sion, which, of herself, he was ahfamed to grant. But this generous
nobleman had at that time no such fiiend. And Elizabeth, folli-
cited inceiantly by her Minifrers, and offended with the haughti-
ness of EfIlx, who, as fie imagined, scorned to sue for pardon, at
lafi commanded the sentence to be put in execution. No sooner
was the blow struck, than the repented of her own raflanefs, and be-
wailed his death with the deepest sorrow. James always confidered
him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his service, and after his
acceflion to the English throne, restored his son to his honours, as
well as all his associates in the conspiracy, and diltinguifled them
with his favour --.

Johnfi. 289. Birch. Mcm. 2. 510. 1 Camd. Spots. 4.64.

TIlE

BookVIII. TnHE Scottish ambassadors, finding that they had arrived too late

I601. to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not only

James con- concealed that part of their inftruions, with the utmost care;
tinues his in-
trigues in but congratulated the Queen, in their Matter's name, on her happy
England.

escape from such an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no
firanger to the King's correspondence with Effex, or to that no-
bleman's intention of aerting James's right to the Crown, was not
willing that these hould be known to the people, and, for that
reason, received the congratulations of the Scottish ambassadors
with all poflible marks of credit, and good will; and in order to
tooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union between the
two courts, increased the subsidy which fle paid him annually.
The ambassadors resided for ome time in England, and were em-
ployed, with great success, in renewing and extending the intrigues,
which Bruce had formerly entered into with the English nobles.
As Elizabeth advanced in years, the English turned their eyes
more and more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent each
other in courting the favour of their future Monarch. Assurances
of attachment, professions of regard, and promises of support, were
offered to James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil him-
self, perceiving what hopes Effex had founded on the friendship of
the Scottifl King, and what advantages he might have derived
from it, thought it prudent to fland no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his Master. But being sensible,
at the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Mistress naturallyjealous, and whose jealousy grew frongcr
with old age; though he entered into a correspondence with him,
he carried it on with all the secrecy and caution neccfllry in his
lituation, and peculiar to his character. And James, having gained
tle .nlal whose oppoition and influence he had itlhcrto chiefly

dreaded,

dreaded, waited, in perfed&.fecurity, till that event should happen, Book VIII.
which would open his: way to the throne of England. It was, i6ox
with some difficulty, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who labouring to distinguish themselves
by that officious zeal, with which a Prince, who has a near prospect
of mounting the throne, is always served, urged him to allow a
motion to be made in parliament for declaring his right of fucceflion
to the Crown. James prudently diScouraged that design; but it
was with no small fatisfadion that he observed the ascendant he
was acquiring in a court, whose dictates he had been, so long, obliged
to obey; and which had either prescribed or thwarted every ftep he
had taken during the whole course of his reign *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the political sac- 1602.
tions which divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which Attempts t

civilize the

had happened there, since the King firfi took the reins of govern-Highlanders.
ment into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tranquillity,
being undisturbed by any foreign enemy, and free from any intelline
commotion of long continuance. During this period, James endea-
voured to civilize the Highlands and the Isles, a part of his domi-
nions almost totally neglected by former Monarchs, though the re-
formation of it was an object highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of reitraining their de-
predations, often no Icls ruinous to their countrymen, than to their
enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began, gradually,
to forget the ufc of arms, and to become attentive to the arts of
peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their natural fierceness,
averse from labour, and inured to rapine, inseRted their more indus-

Spots. 467, 471. Birch. Mem. z. 514.

triclus

Book VIII. trious neighbours, by their continual incursions. James being soli-

1602. citous not only to repress their inroads, but to render them useful

fubjets *, had at different times enacted many wife laws extremely
conducive to these ends, All landlords, or Chiefs of Clans, were
enjoined to permit no persons to reside in their estates, who could
not find sufficient surety for their good behaviour; :they were re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons under their jurifdic-
tion, to bind themselves to deliver them up tojuftice, and to in-
demnify those, who should suser by their robberies; and, in order
to ascertain the faithful performance of there articles, the chiefs
themselves were obliged to give hostages to the King, or to put
pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a retreat
for the indurtrious, and a nursery for arts and commerce, were ap-
pointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands; one in Can-
tyre, another in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewis; and,
in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all the privileges of Royal
Boroughs were to be conferred upon them. Finding it, however, to
be no easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those countries with
the love of industry, a resolution was taken to plant among them,
colonies of people from the more industrious countries. The first
experiment was made in the Isle of Lewis; and as it was advan-
tageoufly situated for the fi(fling trade, a source from which Scot-
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony transported
thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well
skilled in that branch of commerce. But before they had remained
there long enough to manifcft the good effics of this inflitution, the
illandcrs, enraged at feing their country occupied by those intru-
ders, took arms, and furprizing them in the night-tinme, murdered
Ibole of them, and compelled the rcft to abandon the settlement.

t3afl. il .
Do, 9

Thel

The King's attention being soon after turned to other objets, weBookVIII.
hear no more of this salutary projet. Though James did not pur- r6oz.
sue the design, with that eady application and perseverance, with-
out which it is impossible to change the manners of a whole peo-
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of having firfl conceived
the thought, but of having first pointed out the proper method of
introducing the civil arts of life into that part of the Ifand *.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of health, the effet of aElizbetlh'i

laftillnefs and

found constitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and tern- death.
perance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour decrease,
and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having removed
on a very stormy day from Westminster to Richmond, whither
£he was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She had no
formed fever; her pulse was good; but he eat little, and could not 1603.
leep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from a deep melancholy, Jnar 3
which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour. She de-
lighted in solitude, he fat constantly in the dark; and was often
drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons of

all ranks, and of all different fedts and parties, redoubled their ap-
plications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in
professions of attachment to his person, and in promises of fubmi.
sion to his government. Even some of her own servants, eary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get ridc'bf
the burden of gratitude for pat} benefits, and expecting to hare
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to desert her. And crowds:
of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the favour
of the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

* Parl. 1587, 1594, 1597. Spots. 468.
VOL. 11.

Ii

MEAN

Book VIII. MEAN while, the Queen's disease increased, and her melancholy

603. Pappeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjectures were

formed concerning the causes of a disorder, from which she seemed
to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper. Some
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-
don the Earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion had for many years created
her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from observing
the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her people, who
beheld her health declining with most indecent indifference, and
looked forward to the accession of the Scottifl King, with an impa-
tience, which they could not conceal. The most common opinion,
at that time, and perhaps the most probable, was that it flowed from
grief for the Earl of Eiex. She retained an extraordinary regard
for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman; and though she
often complained of his obstinacy, seldom mentioned his name
without tears *. An accident happened soon after her retiring to
Richmond, which revived her affeAion with new tenderness, and
imbittered her sorrows. The Countess of Nottingham, being on
her death-bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, fhe:could not. die in peace.
When the Queen came into her chamber, she told her,, that while.
Effex lay under sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen herself had prescribed, by.
returning a ring, which during the height of his favour fle had
given:him, with a promise that, if in any future distress, he ent
that back to her as a token, it should intitle him to her protetion;.
that Lady Scroop was the pcrfon he intended to imploy in order to.
present it; that by a mistake, it was put into her hands inflead of
Lady Scroop's; and that fie having communicated the matter to her.
husband, one of Effcx's moll implacable enemies, he had forbid

* Birch. Mcrni 2. oS.

her

3

her either to carry the ring to the Queen, or to return it to the Book VIIL
Earl. The. Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the 1.603.
Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice
of the Earl's enemies, and how unjustly he had fufpeded him of
inflexible obstinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never
can;" and left the room in great emotion -. From that moment,
her spirit funk entirely; he could scarce taste food; the refused all
the medicines prescribed her by her physicians; declaring that she
wished to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail on
her to go to bed; he fat on cushions, during ten days and nights,
pensive, and silent, holding her finger almost continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on'the ground. The only thing
to which he seemed to give any attention, were the acts of devo-
tion, performed in her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and in there ihe joined with great appearance of fervour. Wafted,
at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long abstinence, fie

t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was firll publiflled by Osborne, Mem. of

Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and by the tra-
ditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 206.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Eflex's death as one of the causes of her me-
lancholy. Some original papers remain which prove that this was commonly believed
at the time. Birch Mem. 2. 506. But Efl'ex had been beheaded two years before
her death, and there teems to have been no other rcafon, but that which we have as-
signed, why her sorrow should revive with so much violence at o great a diflance of
time. As the death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about a fortnight before
the Queen's death, the coincidence of there events, together with the other evidence
mentioned, adds so' much probability to the itory related by Osborne, as will entitle it
to a place in hifiory. Tahe only objceioon to the account we have given of Elizabeth's
attachment to Eflcx, arises from her great age. At the age of 63, the amorous
passions are commonly abundantly cool, and the violence of all the palions, except
one, is much abated. But the force of this objecion is entirely removed by an Author
who has illustrated many paflagcs in the Englifll History, andt adorned more. Cata-
logue of Roy. and Nob. Authors. Article Eliikx.

I i 2 expired

Book VIII. expired' without a struggle, on Thursday the 24th day of March ifi

i603 the 70th year of her age, and the 45th of her reign *.

FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indifference and dif-

refpea towards their Princes. But without reason; no people are
more grateful than they to those Monarchs, who merit their grati-
tude. The names of Edward. III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the English of this age, with the fame warmth,, as they were
by those, who shared in the blessings and splendor of their reigns.
The memory of Elizabeth is still adored in England. And the
historians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her
people; her fagacit in discerning their true interest; her steadiness
in pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her Ministers; the
glory he acquired by arms; the tranquillity he secured to her sub-
jedts; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,_ which
were the fruits of all these; justly rank her among the most illus-
trious Princes. Even the defets in her character, they observe,
were not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her exceflive fru-
gality was not accompanied with the love of hoarding; and though
it prevented some great undertakings, and rendered the success of
others incompleat, it introduced economy into her adminifration,
and exempted the nation from many burdens, which a Monarch,.
more profue, or more enterprizing, must have imposed. Her
slowness in rewarding her servants ometimes discouraged useful
merit; but it prevented the undeferving from acquiring power and,
wealth, to which they had no title. Her extreme jealousy of those
princes, who pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led her
to take such precautions, as tended no less to the public safety,
than to her own; and to court the affections of her people, as the

'- CamJl. Birch. Mem. 2, 506. Birch. Negoc. zo6. Strypc, 4, 373.

firmefl

3

Her charac-
ter.

firmest support of her throne. Such is the picture theEnglifhBookVIII.
draw of this great Queen.6

1603.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the History of Scotland finds him-

self obliged, frequently, to view her in a very different,. and in a
less amiable light. Her authority in that kingdom, during the
greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which he
pofleffed in her own. But this authority, acquired at sirs by a
service of great importance to the nation, she exercised in a manner
extremely pernicious to its happiness. By her indufiry in fomenting
the rage of the two contending factions; by supplying the one withl
partial aid; by feeding the other with false hopes; by ballancing
their power so artfully, that each of them was able to distress, and
neither of them-to subdue the other; he rehdered Scotland long the
feat of discord, confusion, and bloodshed: and her craft and in.
trigues, effecing what the valour of her ancestors could not accom---
plifh, reduced that kingdom to a f.ate of dependance on England.
The maxims-of policy, often little confQnant to thoe of morality,
may, perhaps, juffify this conduct. But no apology can be offered
for her behaviour to Queen nlary; a scene of dissimulation without
necessity; and of severity beyond example. In almost all her other
actions, Elizabeth is the objec of our highest admiration; in this,
we muff allow that she not only laid aside the magnanimity,. which
became a Queen, but the feelings, natural to a woman.

THOUGH Elizabeth would never permit the question concerning James pro-

the right of fucceflion to the Crown to be determined in parliament.; olfaled Kinl
nor declare her own sentiments concerning a point, which he wished
to remain an impenetrable myfery; ihe had, however, formed no
design of excluding the Scottish King from an inheritance, to which

hi:

BookVlII. his title was undoubted. A'fhort time before her death,' he-boke

A 603. the silence, which she had so long preserved oon that 'fubje&, and

told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne, was the throne
-of Kings; that he would have no mean person to ascend it,' and
that her Coulin the King of Scots should be her successor." This
flhe confirmed on her death-bed.' And-;as oon as ite breathed her
-last, the Lords of the Privy-Council proclaimed James King of
England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
the Infanta, all the cabals formed, within' the kingdom, to support
the titles of Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford, idifappeared
in a moment; and nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof.
'tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of lfrangers,
.testified their -fatisfadion with louder acclamations than were
.usual at the acceflion of their :native Princes. Amid-t this tumult
-of joy, a motion made by a few. patriots, who proposed to pre-
'-cribe ome conditions to the fuccefibr, and to exact from him the
.redress of ome grievances, before they called him to- the throne,
.was scarce heard; and Cecil, by fitfinig iti added -to his flock of
merit with his new Maifer -Sir.C-harles Percy, brother of the Earl
·of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset the Earl of Worcester's
ifon, were despatched to Scotland, with a letter to the King, signed
.by all the Peers and Privy Couhcellors then in London; informing
him of the Queen's death, of -his Accession to the throne, of their
care to recognize his title, and of the universal applause, with which
the public proclamation of it had been attended. They made the
utmost hafle to deliver: this welcome message; but were prevented
by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord Hunfdane's youngest son,
who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at
Edinburgh on Saturday night, just as the King had gone to bed.
le was immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneel-

ing

lg by the King's bed, acquainted him with the death of Elizabeth, BookVIII.
saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and 63

16o3.

as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented him a ring,; which his fiiter Lady Scroop had'taken from the
Queen's finger after her death. James heard him with a decent
compofiir,e. But as Carey was only a private .messenger, the infor-
mation he brought, was not made public, and the King kept his ap-
partment till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then his titles
were flemnly proclaimed; and his own fubjeds expressed no less
joy,.. than the English, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre-
fence was absolutely necessary in England, where the people were
extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepared to set
out for that kingdom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the government
of Scotland to. his Privy Council. e intrufled the care of his
children to different noblemen. On the Sunday before his depar.
ture, he repaired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the greatness of the divine
goodness in rairing him. to the throne of such a powerful Kingdom
without. opposition. or bloodflhed, and exhorted him to express his
gratitude, by promoting to the utmofi, the happiness and prosperity
of his fubjeds; the King rose up, and addrefiing himself to the peo-
pie, made many profeflions of unalterable affetion towards them;
promised frequently to visit Scotland; assured them that his Scottish
fubjets, notwithstanding his absence,. should feel that he was their
native Prince, no less than when he resided among them; and might
till trult that his ears should be always open to their petitions, which
he would answer with the alacrity and love of a parent. His words
were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audience; who,

thou gh.

3Book.VIII.his title was undoubted. A-ihort time before her death,' fie broke

1603 the silence, which file had o long preserved .on that subjee, and

told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne, was the throne
of Kings; that he would have no mean person to ascend it, and
that her Coulin the King of Scots should be her successor." This
fie confirmed on her death-bed. And;as oon as ihe breathed her
last, the Lords of the Privy-Council proclaimed James King of
England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners, ii favour of
the Infanta, all the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to fpport
the tirles of Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford, disappeared
in a moment; and nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof-
'tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of strangers,
.testified their -fatisfadion with louder acclamations, than were
uifual at the acceflion of :their native Princes. Amidfi this tumult
-of joy, a motion made by a few patribts, who proposed to pre-
scribe some conditions to the fuccefibr, and to exact from' him the
.redress of ome grievances, before they called hinm to- the throne,
.was scarce heard; and Cecil, by ftifi.ing it; added to his stock of
merit with.his new Master. SirCharles Percy, brother of the Earl
of Northumberlan'd, and Thomas Somerset the Earl of Worcester's
odbn, were despatched to Scotland, with a letter to the King, signed
.by all the Peers and Privy Councellors then in London; informing
him of the Queen's death, of his- Accefflon to the throne, of their
care to recognize his title, and of the universal applause, with which
the public proclamation of it had been attended. They made the
utmofi haste to deliver' this welcome message; but were prevented
by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord Hunflane's youngest son,
who fctting out a few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at
Edinburgh on Saturday night, just as the King had gone to bed.
ile was immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneel-

ing

g by the King's bed, acquainted him with the death of Elizabeth, Book VIII.
saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and'- 6
as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented him a ring,; which his sifter Lady Scroop had'taken from the
Queen's finger after her death. James heard him with a decent
composur.e. But as Carey was only a private messenger, the infor-
mation he brought, was not made public, and the King kept his ap-
partment till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then his titles
were solemnly proclaimed; and his own fubjeds expressed no less
joy,. than the English, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre-
fence was absolutely neceifary in England, where the people were
extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepared to set
out for that kingdom, without delay. He appointed his Qeen to
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the government
of Scotland to. his Privy Council. He intrufled the care of his
children to different noblemen. On the Sunday before his depar-
ture, he repaired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the greatness of the divine
goodness in raising him, to the throne of such a powerful Kingdom
without, opposition or bloodfled, and exhorted him to express his
gratitude, by promoting to the utmost, the happiness and prosperity
of his fubjeds; the King rose up, and addrefiing himself to the peo-
ple, made many profeflions of unalterable affection towards them;
promised frequently to visit Scotland; aured them that his Scottish
fubjeds, notwithstanding his absence, should feel that he was their
native Prince, no less than when he resided among them; and might
ltill trust that his ears should be always open to their petitions, which
lie would answer with the alacrity and love of a parent. His words
were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audience; who,

thouhli.

Book VrI. though ,tley exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted into

1603' sorrow by these tender declarations *.
ióo1·

Takes poses- ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a splendid,
fdon of the
throne. but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick.

Wherever he came, immense multitudes were assembled to welcome
him; and the principal persons, in the different Counties through
which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnificence in
entertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Elizabeth had
reigned so long in England, that most of her fubjeds remembered
no other court but her's ; and their notions of the manners and de-
corum suitable to a prince were formed upon what they had ob-
served there. It was natural to apply this standard to the behaviour
and actions of their new Monarch, and to compare him, at firlt
fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he was to be placed.
James, whose manners were extremely different from her's, suffered
by the comparison. He had not that flowing affability, by which
Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people; and though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence could not bear the
fatigue of rendering himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no less a stranger to that dignity, with which Elizabeth temper-
ed her familiarity. And instead of that well-judged frugality, with
which he conferred titles of honour, he bellowed them with
an undiflinguifhingprofufion, that rendered them no longer marks
of distinCtion, or rewards of merit. But there were the reflections
of the few alone; the multitude continued their acclamations;
and amidst these, James entered London on the 7th of May, and
took peaceable poflefflon of the throne of England.

' Spots. 476.

THu;s were united two kingdoms, divided from.the earliest ac- BookVIII.

counts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one great Conclusion.
monarchy. And by this junaion of its whole native force, Great
Britain hath rifei to an eminence and authority in Europe which
England and Scotland could never have attained.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs as next heirs A view of the

Revolutions

to the English throne, that they had full leisure to reflect on all in the confti-
the consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But land fincSthe

,cceflion of

dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful ene- James i.O
mny, relying on the partiality of their native Prince, and in full
expeaation of fharingliberally in the wealth and-honours he would
now be able to bestow, they attended little to the most obvious con-
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his acceflion to the
throne of England, as if it had been; no less beneficial to the king-
dom, than honourable to the King.- They; oon had reason, how-
ever, to adopt very different sentiments; and from that period, we
may date:a total alteration in the political constitution of Scotland.

Ti 'feudal Aristocracy, which had been subverted in moil

'nations of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had
'been undermined by the progress ofcommerce, ill subsisted with
full force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually
to augment the power of the Scottish nobles; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it prevailed added
to the authority of the Monarch, had increased their wealth and
influence. A King, possesed of a fiall revenue, with a prerogative
extremely limited, and unsupported by a standing army, 'could not
exercise much authority over such potent fubjecs. He was obliged to
govern by expedients; and the laws derived their force hot from his
power to cxccute tlhem, but from the voluntary submission of the

VOL. II. K k nobles.

Book-VIII. nobles. But though this produced a species of government feeble

"- ' and irregular beyond example; though Scotland, under the name,

and with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was really sub-
je& to an Aristocracy, the people were not altogether unhappy;
and even in this wild form of a conltitution, there were principles,
which tended to their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no at of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims and
pretensions were many, though his power was finall, were afraid:
of irritating their dependants by unreasonable exactions, and tem-
pered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny, with a mildness and
equality to which it is naturally a itranger. And while the military
genius of the feudal government, remained in vigour, the vassals
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not only free from op-
pression, but courted by their superiors, whose. pbwer andimpor-
tance were founded on their attachment and love.

BUT, by his.acceffion to the throne of England, James acquired

such an immense accession of wealth, of power, and of splendor,
that the nobles, astonished and intimidated, thought it vain to
struggle for privileges. which they were now unable to defend. Nor
was it from fear alone that they submitted to the yoke; James, par-
tial to his countrymen, and willing that they hould partake in his
good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours; and the hope
of his favour concurred with the dread of his power, in taming
their fierce and independent spirits. The will of the Prince be-
came the supreme law in Scotland; and the nobles Ifrove, with emu-
lation, who (hould most implicitly obey commands, which they
had formerly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied with having
fubjeted the nobles to the Crown, the King left them in full pof-

3 feflioe
250

felon of their ancient jurifdiaion over their own vasals. The
extensive rights, vested in a feudal Chief, became in their hands
dreadful instruments of oppression, and the military ideas on which
these rights were founded, being gradually loft, or disregarded,
nothing remained to corret or to mitigate the rigour with which
they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the
expence of frequent attendance upon the English court, and by at-
tempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their more wealthy
neighbours, multiplied exactions upon the people, who durst scarce
utter complaints which they knew would never reach the ear of
their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any redress. And
from the union of the Crowns, to the Revolution in 688, Scot.
land was placed in. a political situation of all others the most fingu-
lar, and the most unhappy; fubjeaed at once to the absolute will
of a Monarch, and to the opprefiive jurifdicdion of an Aristocracy,
it suffered all the miseries peculiar to both these forms of govern-
ment. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were slaves and ty-
rants; and the people groaned under the rigorous domination of
both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

flake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency. After
the death of James, the Scottifl nation was no longer viewed by
our Monarchs with any partial affection. Charles I. educated among
the English, discovered no peculiar attachment to the kingdom of
which he was a native. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to
be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a Prince with whom
they had little connection, and over whose councils they had little
influence, no longer ubmitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on their order, and

K k apprc-

251

BookVIII.
^-_--

Book VII. apprehensive of others, the remains of their ancient spirit began to

'-v- appear. They complained, and remonstrated. And the people

being, at the fame time, violently disgusted at the innovations in
Religion, the nobles secretly heightened this disgust; and their ar-
tifices, together with the ill condu& of the court, raised such a
spirit, that the whole nation took arms againit their Sovereign, with
an union and animosity of which there had formerly been no ex-
ample. Charles brought against them the forces of England, and
notwithstanding their own union, and the zeal of the people, the
nobles must have funk in the firuggle. But, the difaffetion which:
was growing among his English subjects, prevented the King from
aeting with vigour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are well known;
the Scottish nobles, who firfl began the war, were involved in the'
fame ruin with the throne. At the Restoration, Charles II. re--
gained full possession of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the.
nobles, whose etfates were wafted, or their spirit broken by the
calamities to which they had been exposed, were less able and less
willing than ever to resist the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that of James VII. the ditates of the Monarch were
received in Scotland with most abject submission. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always
negleced, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into the government

of Scotland. To increase the authority of the Prince, or to secure
the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole ob-

jed

jit of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce ever men- Book VIH.
tioned, were disregarded, or unknown. Attention began, hence-
forward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By the claim of S
right, their liberties were secured. And the number of their re-
presentatives being increased, they gradually acquired newweight'
and consideration in parliament. As they came to enjoy more fe-
curity; and greater power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and of police. But
the ariftocratical spirit,' which still predominated, together with
many other accidents, retarded the improvement and happiness of
the. nation.

ANOTHER great event completed what the revolution had be-

gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the'
union of the two crowns; was almost annihilated by the union of
the..two Kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly, of the
supreme assembly of the nation, instead of bearing the moit confi-
derable sway there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into the Britifll
Parliament by their representatives 'only', and form but an inconfide-.
rable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative authority is
vested. They themselves are excluded absolutely from the-houfe of
Commons, and even their eldest sons are not permitted to eprefent
their countrymen in that august assembly. Nor have their feudal
privileges remained, to compensate for this extincion of their po-
litical authority. As'commerce advanced in its progress, and go-
vernment attained nearer to perfection, there were insensibly
circumscribed, and at last, by laws no. leis salutary to the pub-
lic, than fatal to the nobles, they have been almost totally abolished.
As the nobles were deprived of power, the people acquired liberty.
Exempted from burdens to which they were formerly. subjet,

Icreencd

Book VIII, screened from oppreflion, to which they had been long exposed,

and adopted into a conititution, whose genius and laws were more
liberal than their own, they have extended their commerce, refined
their manners, made improvements in the elegances of life, and cul-
tivated the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political ltate of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three xras, from each of which we may date
some great alteration, in one or other of the three different mem-
bers of which the supreme legislative assembly in our constitution
is composed. At the Accefion, the Kings of Scotland, once the
most limited, became in an instant, the most absolute Princes in
Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their Parlia-
ments were unable to controul, or their nobles to resist. At the
Union, the feudal aristocracy, which had subsisted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the Scottish
nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar
to their order, and reduced themselves to a condition, which is no
longer the terror and envy of other fubjeds. Since the Union, the
Commons, anciently neglected by their Kings, and despised by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity; and being admitted to a parti-
cipation of all the privileges, which the English had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, must now be esteemed a body not
less considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long been in
the other.

Tn E church felt the effects of the absolute power which the

King acquired by his accefflon; and its revolutions too, are wor-
thy of notice. James, during the latter years of his adminiftra-
tion in Scotland, revived the name and office of Bishops. But they

poffIffcd
254

possessed no ecclesiastical jurisdiction or pre-eminence; their reve- Book VIII.
nues were inconsiderable, and they were scarce diffinguifhed by any
thing, but by their feat in parliament, and by being the object of
the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The King, delighted
with the splendor and authority which the English Bishops enjoyed,
and eager to effct an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved to bring both
Churches to an exad conformity with each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bilhops at London. From them, their bre-
thren were commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed. And though the clergy, less oble-
quious than the nobles, boldly opposed thee. innovations, James,
long pra6tifed and well skilled in the arts of managing them, ob-
tained at length their compliance. But Charles I. a fuperslitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and
precipitant in all the meafureshe pursued in that kingdom, pressing
too eagerly the reception of the English. liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of church lands, kindled the flames of
civil war; and the people being left at liberty to indulge their own
wishes, the episcopal church was overturned, and the Presbyterian
government and discipline were re-eftablifled with new vigour.
Together.with monarchy, Epiicopacy was reftoredin Scotland. A
form of government, so odious to the people, required force to
uphold it; and though the whole rigour of authority, and all the
barbarity of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was infurmountablc, and it fublifled with difficulty.
At the Revolution, the inclinations of the people were thought wor-
thy the attention of the legislature, the Prelbytcrian government
was again established, and being ratified by the Union, is still main-
tained in the Kingdom.

NoR

BookVIII. 'Non did the influence of the Accession extend to thecivil and ec-
.~- ~ cfiaftical conflltutions alone- the genius of thenration, its tafe

-and pirit, things of a nature still more delicate, were sensibly as-
fefled by that event. When learning- -revived in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in a state equal-
ly barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and even of perfpicui-
ty. No author thought of writingin languages so ill adapted to ex-
prcfs and embellish his sentiments, or of erecing a work for immor-
tility, with such rude and perifling materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any original effort
of the human mind, but was excited by admiration of the ancients,
their compositions were efleemed not only the standards of taste, and
of sentiment, but of Rile ; and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar and almost consecrated to learn-
ing and the muses. Not only the manner of the ancients was
imitated, but their language copied; and, extravagant as the attempt
may appear to write in a dead tongue, in which men were not ac-
customed to think, and which they could not speak, or even pro-
nounce, the success of it was astonishing. As they formed their
stile upon the purest models, as they were uninfected with those
barbarimis, which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the as-
fectation of courts, intercourse with strangers, anda thousand other
causes introduce into living languages, many moderns have attained
to a degree of elegance in their latin compositions, which the
Romans themselves scarce pofeffed beyond the limits of the Au-
guftan age. While this was almost the only species of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common language, could be
brought to a nearer comparison, the Scottish writers were not in-
ferior to.thole of any. other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed toexcel in prose and in vcrfe, more various, more ori-

ginal,
2,6

ginal, and more elegant, than that of almoit any other modern Book VIIY.
who writes in Latin, reflects, with regard to this particular, the -----
greatest luitre on his country.

Bur the labour attending the ltudy of a dead tongue was irk-

some; the unequal return for their industry which authors met with,
who could be read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of wafting half
their lives in learning the language of the Romans, began to re-
fine and to polish their own. The modern tongues were found to
be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal to those
of the antient ones, were at least more attainable. And the Ita.
lians having firit set the example, Latin was no longer used in the
works of tafle; it was confined to books of science; and the politer
nations have banished it even from there. The Scots, we may pre-
fume, would have had no cause to regret this change in the public
taste, and would frill have been able to maintain ome equality with
other nations, in their pursuit of literary honour. The English
and Scottish languages, derived from the fame sources, were, at
the end of the sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, differ-
ing from one another somewhat in orthography, though not on-
ly the words, but the idioms were much the fame. The letters
of several Scottish statesmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the English Ministers with whom they
corresponded. James himself was master of a ile far from con-
temptible; and by his example and encouragement, the Scottish
language might have kept pace with the English in refinement.
Scotland might have had a series of authors in its own, as well
as in the Latin language, to boart of; and the improvements
in taste, in the arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the

VOL. II. L 1 other

BookVII. the other polished nations of Europe, would not have been un-

CLN known there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were beginning to drop

the use of Latin in works of taste, and to make trial of the strength
and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to be a king-
dom. The transports of joy which the Accession at first occasioned,
were oon over; and the Scots, being at once deprived of all the ob-
jedrs that reine or animate a people, of the pretence of their Prince,
of the concourse of nobles, of the splendor and elegance of a court,
an universal dejection of spirit seems to have seized the nation. The
Court beingwithdrawn, no domeflic standard of propriety and corret-
ness of speech remained ; the few compositions that Scotland pro-
duced were tried by the English standard, and every word or
phrase that varied in the least from that, was condemned as barbarous;
whereas, if the two nations had continued distinct, each might have
retained idioms and forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these, ren-
dered fashionable by the example of a court, and supported by the
authority of writers of reputation, would have been confidered in
the fame light with the varieties occasioned by the different dialets
in the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties, and,
in many cafes, used promiscuously by the authors of both nations.
But by the Accession, the Englilh naturally became the sole judges
and lawgivers in language, and rejected as solecisms, every form of
speech to which their ear was not accustomed. Nor did the Scots,
while the intercourse between the two nations was inconsiderable *,

and

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the English and Scots,

before the union of the Crowns, is to be found in two curious papers, one publiflhed
by Haynes, the other by Strype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth cormnl:nded the Bi-
shop of London to take a furvcy of all the itrangers within the cities of London and
Weinminicr. By his report, which is very minute, it appears that the whole

number

and ancient prejudices were flill so violent as to prevent imitation, pof- BookVJII.
fess the means of refining their own tongue according to the purity of
the English flandard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age,
were more eminent for piety than for learning; and though there
did not arise many authors among them, yet being in poIfeffion
of the privilege of discoursing publickly to the people, and their
sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hafly pro-
dutions could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrect
modes of expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
profession having furnished more authors, and the matters of which
they treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many
of those vitious forms of speech, which are denominated Scotticifzs,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did either
the language or public taste receive any improvement in parlia-
ment, where a more liberal and more correct eloquence might have
been expeEted. All business was transacted there by the Lords of
Articles, and they were so servilely devoted to the court, that few
debates arose, and none were conducted with the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular assembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the Englifl were

gradually refining their language, and their taste; in Scotland the
former was much debated, and the latter almost entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out of
barbarity; but the distance between them, which was then incon-

number of Scots at that time was 58. Haynes 455. A survey of the fame kind was
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor A. D. 1568. The number of Scots had
then increased to 88. Stripe 4. Supplement N I. On the Acceflion of James a con-
fiderable number of Scots, efpccially of the higher rank, rforted to England; but
it was not till the union that the intercourse between the two kingdoms became great.

L 1 2 fidcrable,

Book VIII. fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after science
-- -' had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking back

into ignorance and obscurity; and aive and intelligent as they na-
turally are, they continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of languor and stupe-
faCtion. This, however, must be imputed to the unhappiness of
their political situation, not to any defect of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to dif-
play itfeif. The ad abolifling the power of the. Lords of Articles,
and other salutary laws pased at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottish Parliament, eloquence, with all
the arts that accompany or perfect it, became immediate objecs
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sus-
ficient to shew that the Scots were fill capable of generous senti-
ments, and, notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were able to ex-
press thenfelves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the two natioas, and

rendered them one people, the diffindions which had subsisted for
many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the fame
manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame authors are
read and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame standard of taste, and of purity
in language, is etablifhed. And the Scots; after being placed,
during a whole century, in a situation no less fatal to the liberty
than to the talle and genius of the nation, were at once put in pof-
fflioii of privileges more valuable than those which their ancestors
had formerly enjoyed; and every obftrudion that had retarded
their purfiit, or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
totally removed.

A P E N-
26o

# APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 80o.)
A ME M 0 R 1 A L of certain points meet for the refioring the

realm of S c o T L A N D to the antient weale.
IMPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity that Scotland can have, 5th A.:gul,

is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to i 9, Cotton.
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one ifand, di- L.ib.Cal.B o.
vided from the reft of the world. fol. 17. From

IF the firfl is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with England, then muff it ne- a copy in fe-

ceffarily be provided, that Scotland be not so subjeS to the appointments of France, crctary Cecil's
as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England, eeketh always to make hand.
Scotland an instrument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England, and to
make a fbot-itool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland shall come into the hands of a mere Scottish

man in blood, then may there be hope of such accord, but as long as it is at the
commandment of the French, there is no hope' to have accord long betwixt these
two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French king's commandment by reason of his

wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that until he have children,
and during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown,'being the
house of the Hamiltons, hould have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted ; and on theother fide, the nobility and commonalty ought to
force that the laws and the old cuforms of the realm be not altered, neither that the
country be not impoverished by taxes, emprefl, or new imposts, after the manner
of France ; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French king
and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and commons joined with

the next heir of the crown, to seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the French grow too firong
and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the three eflates of the land, that

the land may be free from all idolatry like as England is, for jutfification whereof,
if any free general council may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the feat
of judgment, they may offer to hew their cause to be most agreeable to Christ's
religion.

NExT, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules and offices, by
he antient blood of the ralm, without either captains, licutcnants, or soldiers, as

all

Book VIII. fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after science
L--- had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking back

into ignorance and obscurity; and active and intelligent as they na-
turally are, they continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a slate of languor and flupe-
faction. This, however, must be imputed to the unhappiness of
their political situation, not to any defet of genius; or no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to dif-
play itfeif. The a abolifling the power of the. Lords of Articles,
and other salutary laws passed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottish Parliament, eloquence, with all
the arts that accompany or perfect it, became immediate objects
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sus-
ficient to ihew that the Scots were frill capable of generous senti-
ments, and, notwithstanding ome peculiar idioms, were able to ex-
press themselves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the diftindions which had subsisted for
many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the fame
manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame authors are
read and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame standard of taffte, and of purity
in language, is etablifhed. And the Scots; after being placed,
during a whole century, in a situation no less fatal to the liberty
than to the tatle and genius of the nation, were at once put in pof-
fifioii of privileges more valuable than those which their ancestors
had formerly enjoyed; and every obftruCion that had retarded
their pursuit, or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
totally removed.

A PE N-
260

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D I X.

No. . (Vol. I. p. 80.)
A M E M 0 R IA L of certain points meet for the roring the

realm o' S c o T L A N D to the antient weale.
IMPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the befi worldly felicity that Scotland can have, th A::guf},

is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to - 9, Cotton.
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one island, di- L.i.Cal.B o.
vided from the reft of the world. fol. 1 . From

IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with England, then muf it ne- a copy in fe-

ceffarily be provided, that Scotland be not so subjea to the appointments of France, crctary Cecil's
as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England, eeketh always to make hand.
Scotland an infirument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England, and to
make a foot-flool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland hall come into the hands of a mere Scottilh

man in blood, then may there be hope of such accord, but as long as it is at the
commandment of the French, there is no hope' to have accord long betwixt these
two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French king's commandment by reason of his

wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that until she have children,
and during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown,'being the
house of the Hamiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted ; and on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought to
force that the laws and the old customs of the realm be not altered, neither that the
country be not impoverished by taxes, empreft, or new impoirs, ater the manner
of France; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French king
and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and commons joined with

the next heir of the crown, to seek due reformation of such great abufcs as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the French grow too strong
and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by content of the three estates of the land, that

the land may be free from all idolatry like as England is, for justification whereof,
if any free general council may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the feat
of judgment, they may offer to siew their cause to be most agreeable to Christ's
ieligion.

NEXT, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules and offices, by
the antient blood of the realm, without either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, is

A]

all other princes govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in the
hands of mere Scottish men.

THIRDLY, That they might never be occasioned to enter into wars againfi Eng-
land, except England hould give the first cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, That no nobleman of Scotland should receive pension of France,

except it were whilst he did serve in France, for otherwise thereby the French would
Shortly corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given to any but
mere Scottiih men, by the assent of the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, lThat there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the queen's absence, to
govern the whole realm, and in those cafes not to be directed by the French.

SEVENTHLY, That it be by the said three eates appointed how the queen's re-

venue of the realm shall be expended, how much the queen hall have for her por-
tion and estate during her absence, how much flall be limited to the governance and
defence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points, if the French king and the queen be found unwil-

ling, and will withfiand these provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
estates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to the said king and queen their
humble requests; and if the fame be not effeaually granted, then humbly they may
commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown, binding the fame allo
to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen hall be unwilling to this, as it is likely he will, in re-

fpea of the greedy and tyranous affetion of France, then it is apparent that Al-
mighty God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of
it, and this time must be used with great circumfpeation, to avoid the deceipts and
tromperies of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once made free, what

means may be devised by God's goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for
time to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all
princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 88.)

A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus direCted.

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

zoh January I UNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, that discoursing with
1559-6 . j zour countrymen upon the matter of Scotland, and comoditeys may ensew
Cott.Lib.Cal.to that realm, hereafter giffze presently assist ws with zour forces, ze find a nom-
B. ix. 'romn bre of the contrary advise, douting that we fall not at length be found trulty frends,
the til :l;n. in nor mean to contynew in constant ametye, albeit we promise, but only for avoyd-
his own hand. ing the prclent danger make zow to serve our turne, and after being delivered, bccuil

enemies as of before. For prose quhareof, they alledge things have pft betwixt ws
herctofore, and a few presumptiones tending to the far end, all grounded upon miffrutt;
o (quhilks, at the firl ficht, have some fliewe of apparence, gif men wey not the circum-

stances of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyinmpaft with the prcfenlt, confidcr
the nature ( f this caus, and eflate of our contrcy, I doubt not butjugcmcnt fil be able to
bani(ll nilfiuft. And lirft, I wad wifl ze flould cxamyne the cauis off the old inmi-

tye

tye betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our anceflours to
enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhilks by our floreys and regiftres off antiquiteys
appear to be these. The princes of England, rome tyme, alledging a certaine kynde
off foveraintye over this realm; some tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incur-
sions off our bordourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterprifed the con-
quest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force off armes, that we wer dryvcn to great
extramiteys, by loss of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our cuntrey,
fa that experience taught ws that our owne strength was fcarfe sufficient to withfland
the force of England. The Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confidering well.how
nature had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na nation was able fa to annoye
England as we being enemyes, foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that
meane to detourne zour armyes from the invasion off France, and occupy zow in the
defence off zour country at hame, offering for that effeEt to beftowe ome charges
upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the mater,
quhen the frefche memory off injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely
prented on our hartes, that all our myndes were ocupyed how to be revenged, and
arme ourselfes with the powar off a forayne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

THIS wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At quhilk tyme, our

cronicles maks mention, that ome of the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and small frute
should redound to ws thereof at lenth: zit had affection fa blinded jugement, that
the advise of the maift part owercame the best. The maift part of all querells be-
twixt ws since that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came on our fyde, hes ever
fallen out by theyr procurement rather than any one caus off our selfes : and quhen-
faever we brack the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to eschew
the conquest intended by that realm. But now hes God's providence fa altered the
cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous to have zow in theyr rowme.
Our eyes are opened, we espy how uncareful they have been of our weile at all
tymes, how they madaws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maift dangerous weys
for theyr commodite, and nevertheless wad not flyck, oft tymes, against the natour
of the ligue, to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fee that their support,
off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affection they bare to ws, for pytie they had
off our estate, for recompense off the lyke friendship fchawin to theym in tyme off
theyr afflistiones, but for ambition, and infaciable cupidite to reygne, and to mak
Scotland ane accessory to the crown of France. This was na friendly office, but
mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of theyr deserving; a hale
realm for the defence of a part. We fee theym manifefily attempt the thing we sus-
pected off zow; we feared ze ment the conquest off Scotland, and they are planely
fallen to that work; we hated zow for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and
fall we love theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about to bring ws in maift
vile servitude ? Gif by zour frendly support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not
only fute ze not the ruyne off our country, but will preserve the libertie thereof
from conquest by ftrangeares, fall not the occasion of all inimity with zow, and
ligue with theym, be taken away ? The causes being removed, how fall the effedes
remane ? The fear of conquest made ws to hate zow and love theym, the cais chan-
ged, quhen we fee theym planely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw ws frendlhip,
lall we not hate theym, ant favour zow ? Gif we have fcliawne fa great confance,
continuing fa mony zearcs in amity with thcym, off quhome we had fa finall com--

modite,
8

modite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all nationes may do ws
greatelt plefou ?

BUT ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyled, and then frends as off before. I

think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but off this ze may be assured, we will
never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we wil be content to forgo the ametye
of England, nor do ay thing may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes the
lose off estimation and discrediting of ourselfes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maili manifest danger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid
could we implore, being destitute of zour friendship, gif they off new wald attempt
theyr formar enterprise? Quhat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald
giff they might ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will not flick hereafter to tak theyr
tyme off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, fee-
ing ambition has fa impyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had ever done any
thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary pleased theym by right and wrang,
they did not flick to attempte the subversion of our haleftate. I wald ze hould not
efteme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot forefe our awne perril; or fa
foolifche, that we will not study by all gode means to entertayne that thing may
be our fafetye; quhilk consistes all in the relaying of zour frendfiips. I pray zow
confider in lyke cafe, when, in the days of zour princes off maift noble memory
king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes wer opened off amytye be-
twixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the difference of religion the onely flay
they wer not embraced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of theyr
adherents subvert the devises of the better fort? But now has God off his mer-
cy removed that block furth off the way: now is not theyr praQife lyke to tak
place any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off doctrine, and profes the
fame religion with zow, quhilk 1 take to be the ftrayteft knot off amitye can be
devised. Giff it may be alleged, that some off our countrymen, at ony tyme,
violated theyr promis? giff ze liss to way the circumftantes, ze fall fynd the
promis is rather brought on by neceflite, after a great owerthraw off our men,
then comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great incommodite and decay
off our haill state, at leifi fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our
libertie be infeperably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the violation off our
fayth cast ws in maitt miserable servitude. Sa that giff neyther the feare of God,
reverence of man, religion, othe, promise, nor warldly honeftye wes sufficient to
bynd' ws, yet fall the zeale off our native countrey, the maintenance.off our owne
slate, the safety of our wyffes and childrene from slavery, compell ws to kepe
promiffe. i am assured, it is trewly and fincercly ment on our part to continew in
perpetual ametye with zow; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be as
defyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devyfed, quharby all partyes will be out
of doubte. There be gode meanes to do it, fit inftrunents for the purpos, tyme
serves weill, the inhabitants off baith realmes wish it, God hes wrought in the peo-
ple's hartes on bayth parties a certaine still agreement upon it, never did, at any
tyme, o mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the disposition of a few,
quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun
this work, and mainteyncd it quhile now, by the expectation of man, sale perfyte
it.

I pray

3

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in consultation, quhether ze fall sup-

port ws or no. Scyng the mater fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the
defence off our caus, giff ze have any refpea for zour awne weill. Their preparatives
in France, and levying of men in Germany, (quheyroffI am lately advertised) ar not
altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at ; they feke our realme, but
for ane entrey to zours. Giff they should direAly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they
knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme; therefor they do, by indirect meanes, to blind
zow, the thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to
th' end that having assembled theyrhale forces fa nerezourbordours, they may unlok it
to attack zow: It is ane off theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to lyght 0.i
ane other. Remember how covertly zour places about Boulougne c\ ere affizeit, and
carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How the enterprise of Calais was fyney dif-
fembled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent theyr
policy by prudence. Giffze fe not the lyke difpofitin presently in theym, ze fe na-
thing. It is a grosse ignorance to mifknaw, what all nations planely fpeks off. Tak
hede ze fay not hereafter, " Had I will ;" ane uncomely sentence to procede off a
wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zow, quhilk zoxv commonly
wiffed, that this countrey myght be divorfed from the Frenfche, and is fa comme to
pats as was maift expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpecled we would have been ontrufty frends, ad
na langer continued fledfafte, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen off our
self, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that thevr
evil dealing with ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they f fall fd
ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungently hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais
hands we can look for nathing but all extremitye, giffever they may get the upper
hand. Let not this occasion, fa happely offered, escape zow: giffze do, negled-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever gode luk comme fleaping upo;
zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe to great, and fa firang, that aftero ards
quhen ze wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to zour frart, as-
ter the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat
harme cometh off oversight, and trusting to zour enemyes promeffe. We offer zow
the occasion, quheyrby zour former losses may be repayred. Quhilk gif ze let over
flyde, suffering ws to be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the Frclnfche,
that they fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, tick is their lufl to rcevne, th.:t
they can neyther be content with theyr fortune present, nor reft and be satisfied
when they have gode luck, but will still follow on, having in theyr ane brjavnc
conceaved the image of fa great a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end ? Is ther .ny
of fa small jugement, that lie doth not foresee already, that theyr hail force fall then
be bent againf zw ?

It fal not e amis, to confider in quhat care the Frenfche be presently. Theyr eflate

is not always fa calme at hame as every man thinketh. And. trcwly it \vcs nol thc-vr
great relincs fr wcyr made theym to talc this mater on hand, at this tnm, but 1 i-
thc! a vaync trull in their aw re policy, thinking to have found na icfiit-lacc, tl()'r
(plinion hcs dccc.ivcd theyrn, and that makcs them now amafld. 'lhe c (ii.lcs o,lF
tlc empire (as I hcare) has fui(ed reflitution off th' Illperial towns, '.:z, 1 ou l,
and \'crd!u, (Ilhilk may grow to some bcryn)cs; and all thing is not a calmei witlin
thcvirn. :l:x c1 imtrCy, the Ics it they be preflently (or Cwyr, tlic nare (pnorttJunr ll l ,c
)e ite I!'i;c str zow. Gift the like occasion wcrt oltlrcL to the Iricslilc a;.i!Ui!
i.\,

N'~. . L . £lX m c .,

wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour sleuth, to
Ipare theym that hes already compassed your (lefiruSion, giff they wer able ? Confi-
der with your self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against theym out with zour
realme or within ? Gtift quhill ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fayle to fute zow in zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote flole to overloke zow.
But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is folv to think they wald
not giff they wer able, quhen before hand they flick not to giff zour armes, and
ufurpe the flyle of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to camp within zowr
awne bounds or-without, it is manifest. Giff twa armyes flould camp in yowr coun-
trv, but a moneth; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit should zowr loffe be grea-
tar, nor all the charge ze will nede to beflow on our support will draw to, beydes
the dishonour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticular efpects weill

afrecleud to the caus, move zow to fubtrat zour helping hand, by alleging things
not apparent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, unpoffible that we may
rcccave conditiones of peace ; but I fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer
ws fik as will remove all miflruft, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater
had bc:e lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws
rbilles, and diframes our just querell with the name of conspiracy against our so-
veraylne. It is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we
fludy to preserve, with the hazard off ourlyves. We arc not (God knaweth) comme
to this poynt for wantones, as men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zke of governement, but ar drawne to it by neceflite, to avoyde the tyranny of
'.rangeares, feaking to defraude ws off lawful governement. Giff we should susser
fIrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all the fitrenthes of our realme, fortify
the fey-portes, and maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conqueff, now
in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, should we not be thought.
oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill sub-
jcets to hir majelfe ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might he not
juitly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent ministeres ? Giff ftrangeares
should be thus sufFered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and.
pervcrt our lawcs and liberty at theyr plefour ; myght not the people eficem our no-
blemen unworthy the place of counf.ilours ? We mean na wyli' to fubtrak our obe-
licnce from our f(:verane, to defraud hir hyencs off hir dew reverence, rents and
revenues off hir crownV. \Ve feke nathig but that Scotland may remane, as. of be-
ior, a f!e ralline, rewlit by hir hycnes and hir ministeres borne men of the fam;
a; l tiat the fliccci]ion of the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I WAI.I.x not ze 1ould not fa lyttill elteme tle fricndlhip of Scotland, thatze

i'T'ed it not worthy to be embraced. It fall be na finall commodite for zow to be
!lldivcrct off the anoyaincc of so ncir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may more
trouble zow, the i o{I any other nation albeit twy!f as puiant, not lycng dry marche
,\i zow. l elf' les tlit .e f.,11 not ncde to feare the invafi(oi (,' ally plince lackyng
t'lc c,milolite to iv.tle 'ow by lanll, oil our hand. Conllider quh;it fupcrflious
, ..r:':"; ,; ); IL t.,wce on t.lle (forilic.ltion alnd kpiing of Barwici; qluhlil z mav Ic-
it !,'(' lO ;1i ';a n
I {W;ll , ih:1'iia' ws to fri( nle. 'Ihe rcalinc of Irelalil being f na-

it 1 ;1 ti ) c :u1il ' ,till coti l', [, y reaC. llfui (o, the colntitliwalld Ul tlUi 'Lu ICe ;anld lak

't |) licy, : l. t v to bt 1,1' , :

;i - tl

b tIIt i iunto 7> w thell [ c:i ;t l ;l I.;:Le; and g.s'

i wi/re 1 e.le''.l:le ' lIc v'Iry Ocoinu uti il ;. l' r jt:ici;ic.itii)ll

q1ih:)'),l}. it is 1n It
,':;a..') .v : to )W ;1:.!:t !'l,'i c we r abill to dj. / .cu!tlc :1 llit )Iyr c liiiiiodiite's,

blidcs

besides mony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I study not to amplify an
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be
embraced, for that zour aunceftors, by all meanes, mai(t erneftly futed our amity,
and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift carryed me be-
yond the boundes off a lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow, after I have se-
ven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and they that ar learned, ould rede tile
twa former orations of Demosthenes, called Olynthyaca, and confidere quhat coun.
fall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke care; quhilc
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word theroff myght be apply-
ed to our purpos. There may ze learne off him quhat advise is to be followed,
when zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre: Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill. From
Sant Andrews, the 20th of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 96.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from the

camp before Leith, 29th of April, 1560.
I I LL only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the earl of

Huntly, who so defireth to be recommended to you, as one, who with all his

heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half the words that
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak far-
ther in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge
of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself always measure my
thoughts, as he hall deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great pr-
suasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this ac-
tion; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised
to do, with olemn protestation, and many words; he trufteth to adjoin many to
this cause; and faith surely that no man hall lie where he taketh part. He hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith, that there
was never thing that liked him better.

An O i.

Pa,,'ce Clrive.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 207.)

Randolph to Cecil, oth August 1560. From Edinburgh.

INCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote las( to your honour, I have An O i il
heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this present it may please you to know, i, The '2 r

that the mofi part of the nobles are here arrived, as your honour lall receive their OHicc.
names in writing. The carl of Huntly excufeth himfell by an inlirmitv in his ir,.
His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen ft)cakcr of lte p;r li;t-
nent, or harangue-maker as there men term it. The ill[ day of their li:tin in
paili Iment will be on Thursday next. Hitherto, as many as haive bl)n prfi:nt of
the lords have conimuncd and dlevired of certain heads thien to be propounJlld, a,
who Ihiall be fcnt into France, who into England. It is mucli calicr to l;inl tlhen
iliii the other. It fcclmcth alnloft to be rCfIol\vd ulon itht for t:1li;ild I !i
r.lalr ,: lw cl, at laird of ,idititon. l:or France, l'it.irrowv a. lld t [ls-
tice Ierk. A lo they have confiultcd worn thuy think micctcl to imiic tir 1 e

1 2 X V.

7

XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors must be chosen. They intend, very
shortly, to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with the names ofthofe they
snail chute; and also to require the king and queen's consent unto this parliament.
They have deviled how to have the contrac with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agreement between them and'
their king and queen ratified. These things yet have only been had in communica-
tion. For the confirmation of the contract with England [ have no doubt; for that
I hear many men very well like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Suther-
land, the L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with the lord James. The L. James
requefied me this present day to bring the contract unto him. I intend allo, this day,
to speak unto the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he promiled in my
hlcaring to subscribe, and then prdekntly would have done it, if the contra&d could have
been hid. For the more assurance against all inconvenients, I would, besides that,
that I trust it shall be ratify'd in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotland had put
his hand and set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monument, tho' the ad
of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it might, therefore, fland with your advice,
that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here present to that effet, or
that I might receive from your Honr. some earnest charge to travel herein, I doubt
not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known with what fubftan-
tial and effe6fious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed, I think no great
difficulty would be made. The Earl Marshal has oft been moved to subscribe, he
ufeth mo delays than men judged he would. His son told me yesterday, that be
would speak with me at leisure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to what pur-
pose: 1 have caused lord James to be the earnester with the L. marshal, for his
aucority's fake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be
wrought, that the amity between these two realms might be perpetual; and among
diverse men's opinion, one said that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have ever
been granted; the earl of Argyll advised him earnestly to flick unto that, that he
had promised for it, that it should pass his power and all the crafty knaves of his
counsel, (I am bold to use unto your H. his own words) to break so godly a
purlpof;. 'I his talk liked well the assisters, howsomever it pleated him to whom it
was fpokcn unto. The barons, who in time past have been of the parliament,
had cltcrchda a convention among themselves in the church, in very honest and quiet
fort; they thought it good to require to be restored unto their ancient liberty, to
have voice in plarliament. They prcented that day a bill unto the lords to that es-
sect, a copy whereof shall be ent as soon as it can be had. It was answered unto
gently, and taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when
they arc chosen, to resolve threuponreupon Here follws a Ingparagraph concerning
ihe forifications f Duibar, &c.- This present morning, viz. the 9th, I undcr-
Itood, tht the lords intended to be at the parliament, which causcd me omewhat
to flay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your
llownr. 'the lords, at ten of the clock, aernmbled themselves at the palace, where
the duke licth; from thence they departed towards the Talbooth, as they were in
(digaity. Each one being fat in his feat, in filch order as your H. shall receive
themlc in tis froll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were laid in the queen's feat.
Silence bcing commanded, the L. of Lidington beg:n his oration. Hle xcufcd his
infiiflicicncy to occupy that placc. 1Ic madc a brief difcourfc of things past, and of

what

whlat ncceffly men were forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy
and support it pleased God to fend them in the time of their necefity, how much
they were bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took away the
pcrFuafion that was in many men's minds that lay back, that misdeemed other things
to be meant than was attempted. He advised all estates to lay all particulars apart,
and to bend themselves wholly to the true service of God and of their country.
He willed them to remember in what state it had been of long time for lack of
government, and exercise of juflice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity
and hearty friendship, and to live with one another as members all of one body -
He prayed God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially
betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended. The
clerk of register immediately frood up, and asked them to what matter they would
proceed : It was thought necessary, that the articles of the peace should be confirmed
with the common content, for that it was thought necessary to fend them away with
speed into France, and to receive the ratification of them as soon as might be.
The articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day was appointed to
have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and to put to their eals, to be ent
away by a herald, who ihall also bring the ratification again with him. The ba-
rons, of whom I have above written, required an answer to their request, somewhat
was said unto the contrary. The barons alledged for them custom and authority.
It was in the end resolved, that there should be chosen fix to join with the lords of
the articles, and that if they, after good advisement, hould find it right and necefliary
for the commonwealth, it should be ratify'd at this parliament for a perpetual law:
The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the arti-
cles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chute the temporal, and the temporal the
spiritual, and the burgefles their own. There were chosen as in this other paper I
have written. This being done, the lords departed and accompanied the duke, all as
far as the Bow, (which is the gate going out of the high fireet) and many down into
the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour, the trumpets founding, and
other mufick such as they have. Thus much I report unto your honour of that
that I did both hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been used saving in times
long past the lords have had parliament robes, which are now with them wholly
out of use.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporal as are assembled at
this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls, Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erskine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawford. Sommnervill. The bishop of the Isles.
Cafils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors, I
Marshall. H-ume. know not how many.
Morton. Livingflon.
Glencairn. Inncrmcth.
Sutherland, Boyd.

Cath-

9

Earls.

Cathnefs.
Rothes.
Monteith.

APPEND

Lords.

Ogilvy.
Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltrie.
Gordon.

Spiritual.

Athens.
Isles.
Lord James.
Arbroath.
Newbottle.
Lindoris.
Cowpar.
Kinross.
Kil winning.

So that with

The Lords
Temporal.

of the Articles.

Barons eleEted to be of the

Articles.

The Duke. Maxwell.
Argyll. Tillibardine.
Marshall. Cunninghamhead,
Athole. Lochenvar.
Morton. Pitarrow.
Glencairn. Lundy.
Ruthven. Ten Provosts of the chief
Erskine. towns, which also are of
Boyd. the Articles.
Lindsay.

the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and chiefly the

affcetions of there men, that are at this time chosen Lords of the articles. May it
satisfy your Honr. for this time, to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubfancialler or more sufficient number of all forts of men chosen in
Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good to infue.
This present morning, viz. the oth, the L. of Lidington made me privy unto
your letter; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He himself is determined not to go into France. He alledgeth
many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that moveth him most, which is the
example of the laif, that went on a more grateful message than he hall carry, and
flood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth
what the world judgeth.

Ietition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. 560.

*j 1

sl I

1 ~ ~

(ic J.
J Ii1 \ti n .

T Y lords, unto your lordflips, humbly means and flnows, we the barons and

frceholders of this realm, your brethren in Chri,', That whereas the causes

of true clicion, and common well of this realm, arc, in'this prcfent parliament,
to be ircatedo, ord:rCd, and eflablifhcd, to the glory of God, and maintainancc of
th! c(lnlmonwca;!th ; and we being the g cate fl number in proportion, where the said
ctinlcs; concern, anl h;is bccn, and yet alrc ready to hear the grcatetl part of
tlie cil,.sl

thl;eculltil, a.; well il pce, as in war, both vith our bodies, and

with our od:, ; andl fecill( there is no place IIwherc we ni;i y do better lervice
no 0W t};) i 2u icl'; councils anil pa)alianients, in giving our bit advice, and rcaion,

vote
I .

II

Vote and counfell for the furtherance thereof, for the maintainance of virtue, and
punishment of vice, as use and cuflom had been of old by ancient ats of parlia-
ment observed in this realm; and whereby we understand that we ought to be heard to
reafbn, and vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as well in counfells as
in parliaments; otherwilb we think that whatfomever ordinances and flatutes be
made concerning us and our eflate, we not being required and suffered to reason
and vote at the making thereof, that the fame hould not oblige us to fland thereto.
Therefore it will please your lordships to take consideration thereof, and of the
charge born, and to be born by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our eflate, that ye will, in this present parliament, and all
counfells, where the common well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, coun-
fell and vote, so that, without the fame, your lordships would susser nothing to be
passed and concluded in parliament or councils aforesaid; and that all ats of par-
liament made, in times pait, concerning us for our place and effate, and in our fa-
vour, be at this present parliament, confirmed, approved, and ratified, and at of
parliament made thereupon. And your lordships answer humbly beseeches.

Of the Jacefs f this petition, the following account is given by Randolph ; Lett.

to Cecil, 19 Aug. 156o. The matters concluded and pall by common consent
on Saturday last, in such solemn fort as the first day that they assembled, are there.
First, that the barons, according to an old a of parliament, made in the time of
James I. in the year of God 1427, hall have free voice in parliament, this a pafled
without any contradiction.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the English resident, to the right wor-

lhipful Sir William Cecil, knt. principal secretary to the queen's ma-
jefty.
I Have received your honour's letters of the firfl of this month, written at Ofyes Aug. 156,i

in Effex, and also a letter unto the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come out Cott. Lib.

of France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed B. io. so. 32.
of her purpose in home coming. I assure your honour that will be a flout adven-
ture for a sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may happen
unto her upon the eas, as alto how heartily he may be received when he cometh
to land of a great number, who are utterly persuadcd that she intendeth their utter
ruin, come when he will; the preparance is very small whensoever that she arrive,
scarcely any man can be perfiraded that file hath any such thought in her head. I have
shown your honour's letter unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Ledington, they
wifl as your honour doth, that fle might be flayed yet for a itace, and if it were
not for their obedience fake, ome of them care not tho' they never saw her face.
They travel what they can to prevent the wicked devifcs of the/e mischievous pur-
poses of her inifers, but I flar that that will always he found that filij huijus e-
culi, they do what they can to ibind with the religion, and to maintain amity with
their ineghlbours ; they have alto need to look unto themselves, for their hzard is
'rI.cIt, a111i that they f(c there is no remcdy nor iafety for theiniclvcs, hut to rcpofe
themlfclvcs ul on the luccn's mnajeily, our Ibvercign's favours and upport. Friends

abroad
S

abroad they have none, nor many in whom they may trust at home. There are in
mind flortly to try what they may be aflured at of the queen's majesty, and what
they may afiuredly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties. This the
queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth; this he feeketh by all means to
prevent; and hath caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly to write to charge him
that no such things be attempted before her coming home ; for that it is said, that
they too already arrived here out of England for the purpose, what femblant fom-
ever the noblemen do make, that they are grieved with their queen's refusal, that
cometh far from their hearts. They intend to expostulate with me hereupon. I
have my answer ready enouC.h for th.m. If she thrust all Engliihmen out of this
country. I doubt not but there will be some of her own that will bear us some kind-
ne's. Of me she hall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth the queen's majefly my mif-
trefs no longer to use my service in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had,
with the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that they are of mind that
immediately of the next convention, I hall repair towards you with their determi-
nations, and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice is earnestly re-
quired, and shortly looked for. W hatfomever I desire myself, I know my will
ought to be subject unto the queen my sovereign's pleasure, but to content myself,
would God I were so happy as to serve her majesty in as mean a slate as ever poor
gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of
her majefly's service, but because my time and years require some place of more re-
pose and quietnes than find in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when
other troubles in this country arise, or ought (hall be required of me to the advance-
ment of her majesty's service, that either my will is not able to compass, or my
credit sufficient to work to that effct, as perchance shall be looked for at my hands.
As your honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, so I trust that
I shall find that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it shall stand with
the queen's majefly's pleasure, I may give this place unto some far worthier than I am
myself, and in the mean season, have my course dire-'ed by your good advice how
I may by my contrivance do ome such service, as may be agreeable to her majesty's
will and pleasure.

THESE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of myself. For the reft,

where that is wished that the lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I assure
your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old and accustomed manner of
doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and should now pre-
vail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I FIND not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I doubt more her mo-

ney, than I do her fair words; and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her own here I know there is
no fuic or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington Icaveth nothing at this
time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to 'atisfye your desire, in knowledge
of the prctlnt state of things here. Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it
ever best, that fle cone nut; but if she do come, to let her know, at the first,
\vh:t fle shall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if flie embrace
(.hI;-1l, alld dillre to live in peace with her neighbours. Bly such letters as you have
lat ruecivcel, your honlour rfolewluht undler;lindeth of Mr. Knox himflf, and aln l
of o! her:,, lvhat is dcterminecl, he himfillf to abide the uttrmiiofl, and otlier never
to leave him un til (Goud hoave taken Ihis life, an tlus togeth.r with what comlfort

cj~~~~~~ui
12

bomever it will please you to give him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth
not utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he is so fore charged with
by his own queen, that her majefly will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will
be a great comfort unto him, and will content many others; his daily prayer is for
the maintenance of unity with England, and that God will never susser men to be o
ungrate, as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the defiruCtion of them, that have
saved their lives, and restored their country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time,
to trouble your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between these two realms,
that God may be glorified to them of this world.-At Edenbourgh the 9th of August,
1561.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 224.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefle, our right dear and well-

beloved filler and cousin the queen of Scotland.

I G H T excellent, right high, and mighty princefie, our right dear and right
well beloved sifter and cousin, we greet you well. The lord of St. Cofme

brought to us your letters, dated the 8th of this present at Abbeville, whereby ye
signify, that although by the answer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might
have had occasion to have entred into some doubt of our amity, yet after certain pur-
poses passed betwixt you and our ambassador, you would assure us of your good mean-
ing to live with us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require us to give credit
to the said St. Cofme. We have thereunto thought good to answer as followeth.
The fame St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on your part, for your excuse
in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself made to our ambassador, and we have briefly
answered to every the fame points, as he can hew you; and if he shall not so do,
yet leafl in the meane season you might be induced to think that your reasons has fa-
tisfied us, fomerally we aflure you, that to our requests your answer cannot be re-
puted for a satisfaction. For we requre no benefit of you, but that you will perform
your promise whereunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the refusal
whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither covet we any thing, but that
which is in your own power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words and
speech doth confers, that which your late htfband's our good brother's ambassadors
and you concluded, that which your own nobility and people were made privy unto,
that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea that, without which, no
perfec amity can continue betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt not
but ye will perceive, allow and accomplish. Nevertheless, perceiving by the report
of the bringer, that you mean furthwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the advise of your council in Scotland, we are content to suspend our conceipt of all
unkindness, and do aflure you that we be fully resolved upon this being performed,
to unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood with you as quietly, friend-
ly, yea ,s assuredly in the knot of friendhip, as we be in the knot of nature and
blood. And herein we be so earnestly determined, that the world should fee if the
contrary should follow, (which God forbid) the very occasion to be in you and not
in us; as the story witneffeth the like of the king your father, our uncle, with whom

VOL. II. N n our

'3

16th of Aug.
I 61..
Paper Office
from a Copy.

6ur father fbught to have knitt a perpetual bond, by inviting to come in this realm to,
York, of which matter we know thee remain with us, and we think with you-,
sundry witneles of our father's earnest good meaning, and of the error whereunto
divers evil councellors induced your father; or finally where it feemfeth that report
hath been made unto you, that we had tent our admiral to the eas with our navy to
empeache your pafihge, both your servants do well understand ho.w false that is,
knowing for a truth that we have not any more than two or three small barks upon
the eas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost compelled,
by the earneit complaint of the ambafiador of our good brother the king. of Spain,
made of certain Scottifhmen haunting our eas as pirates, under pretence of letters of
marque, of which matter alto we earnefily require you, at your coming to your realme,
to have ome good coniideration, and the rather for rfpecq that ought to be betwixt
your realme and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and of the house of Bur-
gundy. And o, right excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend us
to you with most earnest request, not to neglect these our friendly and sisterly offers
of fricndfnip, which, before God, we mean and intend to accomplifl. Given under
our signet at Henynghan the i6th of August, in the third year of cur reign.

No. VII. (Vol. . p. 253.)
A letter of Ranolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majcfty.

r5th of May, "F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had nothing worth the writing
i>563. unto your honour.-Before his coming, we had so little to hint upon, that we
Paper Oilice did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, marking, and running at the
from the Ori- ring, and such like. He brought with him such a number of letters, and such abun-
ginal. dance of news, that for the space of three days, we gave ourselves to nothing else but

to reading of writing;, and hearing of tales many so truely reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus. Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor, moved a mar-
riage between his youngest son, the duke of Auftruche, and this queen; wherein he
hath so far travailed, that it has already come unto this point, that if he find it good,
the (aid duke will out of hand fend hither his embaffador, and farther proceed to
the consummation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, la Croch is ent unto her with this mefage from the
cardinal, who hith promised unto the emperor, to have word again before the end of
llay; and for this cause la Croch is ready for his departure, and his letters writing
both day and ight. T'his queen being before advertized of his towardners, by many
means, hath fought far off; to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but would
never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is, or how he
is bent. She ulcth no man's council, but only this man's that last arrived, and as-
turcdly until the L. of Lidington's return, she will do what fle can to ceep that
fecrct, and because resolution in his abencie cannot be taken,. fle will, for this time,
return lu Croch with requcfr, to have longer time to devise; and after, with the
most speed hc can, she fully purpofeth to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardi-

nal,
14

nal, of her mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since his arrival
in France, divers letters have pased between her grace and him, whereof as much
as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some, as
much as was written in sypher, is kept unto themselves. Whether also the
L. of Lidington hath had conferrence with the Spanish ambassador in England
of this matter, or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means, to get true
knowledge thereof. Guesses or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loth to
write for verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the emperor
hath offered with his son, for this queen's dower, the county of Tyroll, which is said
to be worth 30,000 franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a let-
ter unto this queen, out of France, not long since. This is all that presently I can
write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
shall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scottish man, that ]aft came into

there parts, he brought also letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that
Newhaven is forre closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis ti-
' midus fortius latrat.' From hence I do assure them, what means fomever they
make, or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to receive but small com-
fort, for all their long allie. We stand daily in doubt what friendship we shall need
ourself, except we put better order unto our misruled papists, than yet we do, or
know how to bring to pals, that we may be void of their comber.

To morrow, the i5th of this initant, the queen departeth of this town, towards

Edenbourgh. If my hap be good, you hall thoroughly hear some merry tidings of
the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next he hail be arreigned, and five
other priests, for their massing at Easter last. Thus most humbly 1 take my leave;
at St. Andrews the i5th of May, 563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 261.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

AY it please your honour, the 7th of this inifant, Rowlet, this queen's fecre-
tary, arrived here; he reportcth very honestly of his good usage, he brought

with him many letters unto the queen that came out of France, full of lamentation
and sorrow. She received from the queen mother two letters, the one contained
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the state of France as then it was,
in what fort things were accorded, and what farther was intended for the appearing
of the discords there, not mifirufting but that if reason could not be had at the queen
of England's hands, but that the realm of France should find her ready and willing
to upport and defend the right thereof, as by fricndfhip and old alliance between the
two realms ihe is bound.

How well thcfc words do agree with her doings, your honour can well confider,
and by her writings in this fort unto this queen, (which I aflure your honour is true)

N n 2 you

oth of:.1piil,

Paper Office
friom the Ori-
ginal in his
ow\n -l1nd.

15

you may assuredly know, that nothing shall be left undone of her part; that may
move debate or controverfie between this queen and our sovereign.

IT as much mufedat by the queen herself, how this new kindness came about,

that at this time he received two long letters written all with her own hand, faying,
all the time since her return he never received half so many lines, as were in one of
the letters, which I can myself testify by the queen's own faying, and other good as-
furance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can also farther aflure your ho-
nour, that this queen hath fayed that (he knoweth now, that the friendship of the
queen's majefly my sovereign may stand her more in flead, than that of her good
mother in France, and as he is desirous of them both, o will he not lose the one
for the other. I may also farther assure your honour, that whatfomever the occasion
is, this queen hath fcme what in her heart that will burst out in time, which will ma-
nJifeft that ome unkindness hath paiTed between them, that will not be easy forgotten.
In talk fornetimes with myself, he faith that the queen mother might have used the
matter otherwise than he hath done, and doth much doubt what hall be the success
of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing then that
presently they stand in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her
in that mind, (this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause her to
conceive better of the other. And yet I am assured she shall receive as friendly let-
ters, and as many good words from this queen, as the other did write unto her.
Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Lydington of that
purpose, he did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if she do, I think it hard
if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I perchance by some means
here. It may, perchance, be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, or underhand what mind he bareth unto the queen's majefiy our
sovereign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothewell is ent for to London.
She caused a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause ; I answered, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it should be
judged there. I know that the thinketh much that he is not ent into Scotland. Itis
yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil instrument.
If the lord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour herein, he is in the
wrong to those who are his friends here, but most of all to himfllf. There comes
a vulture in tins realm, if ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 269.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger ecretary

for the time, in the parliament holden by our sovereign the king's mo-
ther, queen of this realm for the time, the time of the reflitution of
Umquile Matthew Earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has pleated her nijcfty
molt graciously to utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have sufficiently

conceived the cause of this your prefcnt afiembly; yet having her majesty's com-
mandment to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye ee decealfd,
I am willed to express the fame somewhat more at large.

NOTOUR

NOTOUR it is, how, in her Highness's minority, a process of forfaltour was

decreed againt my Lord of Lennox, for certain offences alledged committed by him,
specified in the dome and cenfement of Parliament given thereupon; by reason
whereof he has this long time been exiled, and absent forth of his native country,
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared by divers his suites,
sundry ways brought unto her Majelty's knowledge, not only containing mofi humble
and due fubmiflion, but always bearing witness of his good devotion to her Majefly
his natural princess, and earnedl affection he had to her Highness molt humble
service, if it should please her Majefly of her clemency to make him able to enjoy
the benefit of a subjed.; many refpeAs might have moved her Highness favourably
to incline to his requell, as the antiency of his house, and the firname he bears,
the honour he has to appertain to her majesty by affinity, by reason of my Lady
Margaret her highness's aunt, and divers other his good considerations, as also the
effeduous requeft.of her good filter the Queen's Majesty of England, whose earnest
commendation was not of least moment, besides that of her own natural, her ma-
jelly has a certain inclination to pity the decay of noble houses, and as we heard, by.
her own report, has a great deal more pleasure to be the inftpument of the uphold,
maintenance, and advancement of the antient blood, than to have matter rninifred
of the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, her majesty the
more tenderly looked upon his request, and her good filler the Queen of England's
favourable letter, written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration whereof
not only has she granted unto him her letter of restitution, by way of grace, but
also licenied him to pursue, by way of reduction, the remedies provided by the law
for such as think themielves grieved by any judgment, unorderly led, and to have the
process reversed; for examination whereof, it has pleated her majesty presently to
assemble you the three eflates of this her realme, by whose advice, deliberation, and
decision at her majesty's mind, to proceed forward upon his compl. ints, as the
merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and practice obCerved in such cafes, will
bear out. The um of all your proceedings at this time, being by that we have
heard, thus as it were pointed out,. I might here end, if the matter we have in hand
gave me not occasion to fay a few more words, not far different fiom the fame sub-
je6, wherein I would extend the circumstances more largely. If I feared not to
offend her highness, whose presence and modest nature abhors long speaking and
adulation, and so will compel me to speak such things, as may fcme to tend to any
good and perfect point; and Icaft it hould be compted to me, as that I were obli-
vious, if I hould omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this,
and the like demonstrations of h r gentill nature; whole gracious behaviour towards
all her fubjedls, in general, may fcrve for a good proof of that felicity, we may
look for under hr happy government, so long as it flall please God to grant her
unto us; for a good harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices L.etwcen
the prince and the fubjefis mutt be reciprocquc; as by her Inajefly's prudence we
enjoy this prefcnt peace with all foreign nations, and quietness among yourfclvcs, in
such fort, that I think juflly it may.be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age that pre-
tently lives, was in greater tranquility; so is it the duty of all us her loving fubjeAds
to acknowlcge the fame as a most high benefit, proceeding from the good govern-
ment of her miajefty, declaring ourcelvcs thankful for the fame, andt rendering to her
niajefty uch due obedience, as a just prince may look for at the hands of f;iithful
and obedient ubjetls. I mean no forced nor unwilling obcdicnce, which 1 knnw

!ckz

her nature does detest, but such as pr:ceeds from the contemplation of her modest
kind of regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good
proof have we all in general had of her majesty's benignity these three years, that
the has lived in the government over you, and many of you have largely tassed of
her large liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her highness has had large
appearance of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to continues as we have
begun, in consideration of the many notable examples of her clemency above others
her good qualities, and to abhor and detest all false bruites and rumours, which are
the most peflilent evils that can be in any common well, and the towers and inven-
tors thereof. Then may we be well assured to have of her an most gracious princefle,
and fh.- mooft faithful and loving subjects; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of the politick bodies, whereof
I made mention before, as the glory thereof hall partly appertain to her majesty, so
illall no small praise and unspeakable commodity redound therethrough to you all
univerlally her fu.;jets.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 278.)
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in time to come

follo v, to the Quen's majeily of England, and state of this realm,
upon the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Lord Darley.

I RST, the minds of such as be affeaed to the Queen of Scotts, either for her-
F elf, or for the opinion of her pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have

charge of the form of religion in this realm, or for the difcontentation they have of
the Queen's majesty, or her succession, or of the succession of any other beside the
Queen of Scotts, hall be, by this marriage, erected, comforted, and induced to
devise and labour how to bring their desires to pass; and to make some estimate
what persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed;
the fame may be compafled in those forts eithir within the realm or without.

TIHE first are such as are specially devoted to the Queen of Scotts, or to the Lord

Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as firit all the house of Lorrain and GCuife
for her part, and the Earl of Lenox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be of their
blood, and have reccived difpleafrcs by the Duke of Chaltlreault and the Hamil-
tons. The second arc all manner of persons, both in this realm and other coun-
tries, that are devoted to the authority of Rome, and mislike of the religion now re-
ceived ; and in there two forts are the substance of them comprehended, that ihall
take comfort in this marriage.

NEXT' therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles there kind of men
iLall intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their efires is, and always shall be, to

bring the Qu een of Scotts to have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devifces may vary amonglt themselves for the comparing hereof, accord-
ing to the accidents of the times, and acording to the impediments which they shall
find by means of the queen's majclty's actions and governments, yet all their pur-
polc:s, drifts, (levises, and plradcices, fhiall wholly and only tend to make the queen
of 'cotts queen of this realm, and to (deprive our ovcrcign lady thereof; and in their
procccdings, there arc two manncrs to be confidercd(, whereof the one is far wor}f than

the

4
1.8

the other: the one is intended by them, that either from malicious blindness in
religion, or for natural affetion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darley, do per-
fuade themselves that the said queen of Scotts hath presently more right to the crown
than our sovereign lady the queen, of which fort be all their kindred on both fides,
and all such as are devoted to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-
wheie ; the other is meant by them, which, with less malice, are persuaded that
the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majesty
and her iue, of which fort few are without the realm, but here within, and yet of
them, not so many as are of the contrary, and from there two forts shall the peril
devises and practices proceed. From the first, which imagine the queen of Scotts to
have perpetually right, are to be looked for these perils. Firfi, is it to be doubted
the devil will insed rome of them to imagine the htfrtof the life of our dear fove-
reign lady, by such means as the devil shall fuggefl to them, although it is to be
assuredly hoped, that almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graciously protec and
preserve her from such dangers. Secondly, there will be attempted, by perfiafions,
by brutes, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good subjes from
the queen's majesty, and to counciliate them to the queen of Scotts, and on this be-
half the frontiers and the north will be much solicited and laboured. Thirdly, there
'will be attempted causes of onme tumults and rebellions, specially in the north to-
wards Scotland, so as thereupon may follow some open enterprizs set by violence.
Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's council and friends, a new league made
with Frane, or Spain, that ihall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance to
their title. And it is also very likely, that they will set a foot as many practices
as they can, both upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majesty
to encreafe and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty or
pottnt, and for the attempting of all these things, many devises will be imagined,
from time to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen of Scotts, but

that he hould succeed in title to the queen's majefly, is not much to be feared,
but that they will content themselves to fee not only the queen's majesty not to marry;
and so to impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts shall have issue, which
they will think to be more pleafible to all men, because thereby the crowns of.
England and Scotland hall be united in one, and thereby the occasion of war
fiall cease; with which persuasion many people may be seduced, and abused to
incline themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

'I'r.E remedies againit there perils.

A Duplicat.
A fuminary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and others 4thlunecófi

of the privy council. Collcted out of the sundry and fcveral fpceches to t.Liib.Cal.
of the aid counsellors. B. o. b. 290.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroler,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,

s Derby, Mr. .'ecretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Leicester, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

QIucfiionis

Queflions propounded were these two.
. 1F I R S T, what perils might ensue to the queen's majesty, or this realm, of the

ri marriage betwixt the queen of Scotts, and the Lord Darnly.
2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the Sirss.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by some counsellors into
only one.

i. First, that by this marriage, the queen of Scotts, (being not married) a great

number in this realm, not olthe worfi fubjets, might be alienated in their minds
*from their natural duties to her majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage
of Scotland. as a mean to etablifh the fucceflion of both the crowns in the issue of
the fame marriage, and so favour all devises and praaices, that should tend to the
advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of them, which furthered the

marriage of the lord Darnley, was laid upon the trufi of such as were papifis, as the
only means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both
in this realm and Scotland, the papists would most favour, maintain, and fortify
this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would for furtherance of faction in religion,
devise all means and pracices that could be within this realm, to diflurb the elate
of the queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchieve
their purposes by force, rather than fail. By some other, there perils having indeed
many branches, were reduced, though forewhat otherwise, into two forts, and these
were in nature such as they could not be easily fevered the one from the other, but
were knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the one with the other.
The first of there fort of perils was, that by this marriage with the lord Darnley,
there was a plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen of Scotts, not
only to succeed the queen's majefly, as in her best amity he had pofleffed, but that
to occupy the queen's estate, as when ihe was in power, he did manifefily declare.

THE second was, that hereby the Romish religion should be erected, and increased

daily in this realm, and these two were thus knit together, that the furtherance and
maintenance of the title flood, in furthering of the religion of Rome within this
realm; and in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the title,
for otherwile the title had no foundation.

Proves of the firfi.) And to prove that the intention to advance the title to disturb

the queen's majcfly, mufl needs ensue, was confidered that always the intention and
will of any person is most manifest, when their power is greatef, and contrary when
power is small, then the intention and will of every person is covered and less flen.
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatest, by her marriage with the dol-
phin of France, being afterwards French king, it manifestly appeared of what mind
/he, and all her friends were, using then maiiifefily all the means that could be de-
vised to impeach and difpoflefs the queen's majesty, first by writing and publithing
hcrfllf in all countries queen of England ; by granting charters, patents, and corn-
miflinns with that Itile, and with the arms of England, both the French and Scotts,
which charters remain fill undefaccd ; and to prosecute it with effect, it is known
what preparations of war were made, and sent into Scotland ; and what other forces
were allscmblcd in foreign countries; yea, in what manner a lhameful peace was

made
20

made by the French with king Phillip, to employ all the forces of France, to pursue
all the matters by force, which by God's providence, and the queen's majesty con-
trary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune and
power being changed, the intention began to hide itself, and altho' by the Scottish
queen's commissarys an accord was made at Edenbrough, to reform all those titles,
and claims, and pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations, the ratifica-
tion of that treaty hath been deferred. And so now, as oon as she Shall feel her
power, he will set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such errors as were
committed in the firif, her friends and allies will amend the fame, and proceed sub-
ftantially to her purpose. By rome it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a fubje& of this realm, than with the
mightiest prince abroad; for by this, he being of this realm, and having for the
cause of religion, and other refpeas, made a party here, hould encreafe by force
with diminution of the power of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could make
by the fadion of the papist, and other discontented persons here, ihould be as it
were deducqed out of the power of this realm; and by the marriage of a firanger,
The could not be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage he should have a
portion of her own power to serve her turn, and a small portion of adversaries at
home in our own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble the like abroad;
whereof the examples are in our own stories many, that foreign powers never prevailed
in this realm, but with the help of ome at home. It was also remembered, that
feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifestly seen, that in
every corner of the realm, the faction that most favoureth the Scottish title, is grown
flout and bold, yea seen manifeffly in this court, both in hall and chamber, it could
not be (but except good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage, and by
the pratice of the fautors thereof, the fame faaion would shortly encreafe, and
grow so great and dangerous, as the redress thereof would be almost desperate. And
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in perusing of the fubitance of the
jufiices of the peace,, in all the countrys of the realm, cantly a third was found fully
assured to be trusted in the matter of religion, upon which only firing the queen of
Scotts title doth hang, and some doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Le-
nox, and his, had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and thereby made avant
now in Scotland, that their party was o great in England as the queen's majesty durst
not attempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was the fum of the perils
declared, being notwithflanding more largely and plainly set out, and made so ap-
parent by many lure arguments, as no one of the council could deny them to be but
many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

TI-E question of this consultation was what were meet to be done to avoid these

perills, or clfe to divert the force thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there
were a great number of particular devises propounded, and yet the more part of them
was reduced by ome into three heads.

i. 'iH-le first thought neceflary by all persons, as the only thing of the most moment

and efficacy, to remedy all there perrils, and many others, and such as without it,
no other remedy could be found sufficient, and that was to obtain that the queen's
majesty would marry, and make therein no long delay.

VOL. II. 0 o2. 1IIE

2. THE second was to advance, eltablifh, and fortify indeed the profefilon of re-

ligion, both in Scotland, and in England, and to deminifh, weaken, and feeble the
contrary.

3. THE third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to disappoint and break this

intended marriage, or, at the leat, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful
to this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE first of there three hath no particular rights in it, but an earnefl and unfeigned

desire and suite, with all humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majefly, that she would differ no more time from marriage,
whereby the good fubje6ts of the realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
jefly, and the iflue of her body, without which no surety can be devised to ascertain
any person of continuance of their families or pofteries, to enjoy that which other-
wife fiould come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both truth and policy were
joined together, had these particulars.

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realm have taken occa-

sion to comfort and increase their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad,
with a rumour and expectation that the religion hall be hortly changed in this realm,
by means thict the bishops, by the queen's nmajefly's cominalncdm-ent, have of late dealt
ftreightly with ome perfbns of good religion, because they had forborn to wear cer-
tain apparel, and such like things, being more of form and accidents, than of any
fubilance, for that it is well known that her majefly had no meaning to comfort the
advcrlhrics, but only to maintain an uniformity as well in things external, as in the
inbflitce; nor yet hath any intention to make any change of the religion, as it is
efRablifiled by laws. It was thought by all men very nccefary, for the suppressing of
the pride and arr gancy of the adversaries, itd(irectly hereby to notify, by her special
letters to the two arch-bishops that her fonrier commandment was only to retain
an uniformity, and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of her majesty,
iln the change of any part of religion, but that she did determine firmly to
maintain the form of her religion, as it was eablifhed, and to punish fuich as
did therein violate her laws. And in there points, ome also wished that it miiht
please her archbishops, that if they should fee that the adverfrtries continued in taking
occasion to fortify their faction, that in that cafe they should uie a moderation therein,
until the next parliament, at which time, ifome good, uniform, and decent order
might be devised, and eflablinfied, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity and
gravity might be retained amongIt the clcrgy.

- TIE second means was, that the quond.inm biflops, and others, which had refused

to acknlowlcde the queen's mn;ijcly 's power over theni, according to the law, and
were of late (dilierfcd in the; l.. guc time to sundry places abroad, where it is known
they ceale not to advance their ftdion, might be returned to the tower or fiome other
pill, whe c they milht not have such libcrty to fcduce and inveigle the queen's
majefly', frilrjce's, as they daily (do.

'TI'H third meanls was, that where the bishops do complain that they dare not exe-

cute the ceclcfiaficial laws, to the furtherencce of rcligion, for fear of the prcn'mtlitl,
lwherewith tile judlgis ad lawyers of the realmi, being not bcft asseted in religioln,
(1o Ilin.aten them, andl in nially cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that i C.11i
fnich cafes opcnedl, some ,' .venielt atitholity nm ght be given them, from the q.tlcii's
n :jcflv, to continue dluring her
i pleasure.

T;'K

T H- E fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and unlawful books in

English brought fiorm beyond seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and especially
in the North, educing of great numbers of good fubjets, the like boldness whereof
was never suffered in any other princess's time, that ome fireight order might be given
to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by the judges, what manner of
crime the fame is, to maintain such books, made directly againt her majefly's autho-
rity, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

'IHE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryers, and such lewd per-

sons are fled out. of Scotland, and do serve in England, especially in the North, as
curates of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest and conformable,
may be banished out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the
realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

T'HE ixth, where lundry having ecclefiallical livings are on theother fide the tea,

and from thence maintain sedition in the realm ; that livings may be better befowed,
to the commodity of the realm, upon good fubjeas.

TiiE fevn rth is, that the judges of the realm, having no finall authority in this

realm in governance of all property of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's
majesty, accorJing to the laws of the realm, and so thereby they hould for conference
fake maintain the queen's majefly's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this marriage, or to di-
vert the perrils.

FlRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do it, but force, or

fear of force, it is thought by tome that there means following might occasion the
breach of the marriage.

I. THA'r the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.
4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order with speed, to be ready at an
hour's warning.

5. THAT some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl of Salop, or
such other, be sent into Yorkshire, to be lieutenant general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in readiness to serve, either at
Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

8. THAT presently the lady Lenox be committed to some place, where he may
be kept'from giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. T'IrAT the earl of Lenox and his son may be ent for, and required to be sent home

by ihe queen of Scotts, according to the treaty; and if they shall not come, then to
denounce to the queen of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter with
hoflility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (o the fame be done in deeds and
not in hews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the cafn that it may be quali-
sied from many perils; and vwhatfoevrr is to be done herein, is to be executed with
ipeecd, whilst she has a party in Scotland that favoureth not the marriage, and bc-
lore any league made by the queen of Scots with i'r: nce or Spain.

SOME other allows well of all the:e procedings, Living of proceeding to hofility,
but all o agree in the relf, and alib to tihele particularitics following.

lo. TIAT'r the earl's lands upon his reluIal, or his oin's refuing, should be fcized
and bectowed in gift or cuflody, as shall plealf her majcety, upon good ubjeds.

() o 2 I 1. 'J1 Il.\ '

23

I I. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North, or elsewhere, be i-
quired for, and that they be, by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have the fleward{hip of the queen's

majesty's lands there, and that no person, deserving mifirufl, be suffered to have
governance or rule of any of her fubjeds or lands in the North, but only to retain
their fees, and more. trusty person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. THAT all frequent passages into this realm, to and from Scotland, be restrain-

ed to all Scottish men, saving such as have safe condud, or be especially recommend.
ed from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. THAT some intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as favour not the mar-
riage, and they comforted from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majefly's houfhold, chamber, and pensioners be better seen

unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used by sundry against the ltate of the
realm.

x6. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles, be removed to
some place, where he may be forth coming.

17. THAT confidering the facion and title of the queen of Scotts hath now, of

long time received great favour, and continued, by the queen's majesty's favour here.
in to the queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Catharine, whom the said
queen of Scotts accompted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it may please
the queen's majesty, by some exterior ad, to hew rome remiflion of her displeasure
to the lady, and to the earl of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find
some change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein.

i8. THAT whosoever (hall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph Sadler may ac-
company him.

i9. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed to a new go-
vernor.

20. FINALLY, that these advises being confidered by her majesty, it may please

her to choose which of them she liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be aured, that her adversaries will use all means to put their intention

in execution. Some by pracice, some by force, when time hall serve, and no time
can serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt the perils, as now at the firfi, before
the queen of Scotts purposes be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 288.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edinburgh the 3ift of July

I565.

Cott, lib. Cal. / A Y it please your lordship, I have received your lordship's letter by my ser-
B. 9. fol. z 8. vant, sufficient testimony of your lordship's favour towards me, whereof I
An Original. think my self always o assured, that what other mishap soever befall me, I have

enough to comfort my self with; though I have not at this time received neither ac-
cording to the need I stand, nor the neceflity of the fervife that I am imployed in, I
will rather pass it, as I may with patience, than trouble your lordship to be further
futer for me, when there is 'o little hope that any good will be done for me. I doubt

not

iot but your lordfJlip ath heard by flch information, as I have given from hence,
what the present sta'te of this country i'sh how this queen is now become a married' wife,
and her hifband, the self fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires,
hitherto, they have found so much to their contentment, that if the reft succeed and
prosper accordingly, they imay think themselves much happier, than there is appear-
ance that they shall be, so many discontented minds, so much mifliking of the sub-
jecSs to have these matters thus ordered, and in this fort to be brought to pars; I never
heard of any marriage, so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk, was never
seen, at any time, when men hould most have hewed themselves to rejoice, if that
consideration of her own honour and well of her country had been had as appertained
in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the overthrow of religion, the breach of
amitie with the queen's majesty, and the deftruEtion of as many of the nobility as she
hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a quarrle unto. To fee all these inconve-
niencys approaching, there are a good number that may sooner lament with them-
selves, and complain to their neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them,
some atempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do any good, what is
required otherways, or what means there is made your lordship knowethi; what will
be anfweared, or what will be done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though your
intent be never o good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that our
ruin shall prevent your support when council is once taken. Nothing so needfull, as
speedy execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly depend, in her majesty's
hands it flandeth to save our lives, or to susser us to perish; greater honor her ma-
jefty cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her majety's power to do for us; the fums
are not great, the numbers of men are not many that we desire; many will dayly be
found, though this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at this time, I
think her majeffy hall loose but few; her friends here being once taken away, where
will her majesty find the like; I speak least of that which I think is mrioft earnestly in-
tended by this queen, and her husband, when by him it was lately said, that he cared
more for the papists in England, than he did for the proteflants in Scotland; if there-
fore, his hops be so great in the papiffs of England, what may your lord/hip believe
that he thinketh of the protestants there; for his birth,for his nurritour, for the honor
he hath to be of kine to the queen my mifitefs, if in preferring those that are the
queen's majesties worst fubjeEtS to th6fe that are her best, he declareth what mind he
beareth to the queen's majesties self, any man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his
duty evil forgotten; he would now feeml to be indifferent to both the religions, he to
use her mars, and he to come sometimes to the preaching; they were married with
all the olemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mass; his speech
and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to the world that he were of
some religion; his words to all men, against whorh he conceiveth any displeasure
how unjust soever it be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of
the world, than he that, not long since, we have seen and known the lord Darnley;
he looketh now for reverence of many, that have little will to give it him; and ome
there are that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All honor that may be
atributed unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly and fully; all praises that may
be spoken of him, he lacketh not from herself; all dignities that he can indue him
with, which are already given and granted; no man pleafeth her that c6ntenteth not
him; and what nmy I fay more he hath given over to him her whole will, to be
ruled and guided as himself belt liketh; he can as much prevail with him, in any

tlhing

thing that is againfi his will, as your lordship may with me to perfwade that I hould
hang my self; this last dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, fie would
have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, orhe had been hiinfelf of 2'1 years
of age, that things done in his name might have the better authority. He would,
in no cafe, have it deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt
is risen amongfl our mcn of law whether she being clade with a husband, and her
husband not twenty one years, any thing without parliament can be of strength, that
is done between them ; upon Saturday at afternoon, thele matters were long in de-
bateing. And before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three
heralds, at found of the trumpet, he was proclaimed king. This was the night before
the narriage; this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were
in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of him again, where nI man said so much
as amen, saving his father that cried out aloud 'od ave his queen. T'he manner of
the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and fix, she
was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell ; she had upon her back the great
mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that,
which she wore the doulfull day of the buriall of her hulband ; he was led into the
chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was he left untill her husband
came, who also was conveyed by the fame lords, the minifler priefis, two, do there
receive them, the bands are aked the third time, and an ir{ftrument taken by a Notour
that no man said againit them, or alledged any caufl why the marriage might not pro-
ceed. The words were ipoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich dia-
mond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and many prayers aid over
them, he tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kits, and leaveth her there, and went
to her chamber, whither within a space fle followeth; and being required, according
to the solemnity, to cars off her cares and leave aside those forrowfull garments, and
give herself to a more pleasant life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for maner
fake than grief of heart, he fuffereth them that flood by, every man that could
approach to take out a pin, and so being commited to her ladies, changed her gar-
nients, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that it was not lust that moved
them to marry, but only the necessity of her country, not, if God will long to leave
it destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given of all things to make the
worst, would that it should be believed, that they knew each other before that they
came there, I would not your lordship should so believe it, the likelihoods are o
great to the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an a done, I would not be-
lieve it. After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and dancing: to their
dinner they were conveyed by the whole nobility; the trumpets Ibund ; a larges
cried ; mony thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as were happy to
get any part; they dine both at one table, he upon the upper hand, there serve her
these earls Athole Sewer, Morton Carver, Craufoord cupbearer; there serve him in
like offices, calls Eglington, Caflils, and Glencairnl; after dinner they danced
awhile, ;nd then retired themselves till the hour of flipper; and as they dined so do
they I'upc, onme danciig there was and so they go to bed; of all this I have written
to your lord(hip I am not Oculatus testis, to this, but of the verity your lordfllip
ihli;l not need to doubt, howfocver I came by it; I was sent for to have been at the
Iuji)pcr, htt lill a crrith or ucourtly carle I refuted to be there; and yet that which
youtr olrdlhi; r.i:iy think might move me much, to have had the fight of my mitlcfs,
of \whonl tlicel: cLihteen days by jult account I got not a fight, 1 am my lord take by

aii l

all that fort as a very evill person, which in my heart I do well allow, and like of
myself the better, for yet can I not find either honest or good that liketh their do-
ings; I leave at this time further to trouble your lordlhip, craving pardon for my
long silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad
by night than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of that which I con-
ceive, or receive in the night. As your lordship, I am sure, is partaken of such
letters as I write to Mr. Secretary, o that I trust that he hall be to this, to save
me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I take my leave at Edin-
burgh, the last day of July, 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 29i.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir William Cecil, knt.

her majesty's principal fecrerary, and one of her highness's privy
council.

A FTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon, captain Brickvell came 2d of Sept.

JAj hither, 'rho brought with him the queen's majesty's letters containing her full 565·
refclution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to give information of, sav- Papel-Ofice.
ing that for the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing determined, from the Oi-
or at the least exprefned in the fame letters, and for that purpose received i, this ga.
morninr a letter subscribed by the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others,
craving to be holpen with co harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better
defence. And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's
niajeffy our sovereign's good will, and care towards them; and do also underfand
that it were very requisite to have them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in
this manner decided, and that it now flandeth upon their utter overthrow and un-
doing, since the queen's part is at the leafi 5000, and they not much above Ioo ;
besides, that the queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do yet
want the power that the earl of Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet'
joired with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her majesty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I shall answer them; or
otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their extreme neceflity. For, on the
one fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow, and the miserable sub-
version of religion there; and, on the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty
a matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few foldiiers, for a small time) without good
warraunte, and thereby to bring, peradvcnture, upon our heads tome wilful warrs,
ami in the mean time to leave the place uiiiifrnifhed, (having in the whole but Soa)
'vi'llut any grant of new supply for the lanme; and by that means also, to leave tile
imai lies here the more fubjcct to invasion, whilc in the n,'lan season new helps are
prparing ; to this know not I what to fay, or how to do. And tlb inimch more I
n:,r-cl thereof, as that having so many times written touching this matter, no refb-

tle dctrlilinilation conieth. Anti lbetween the writing, and looking for anlwcr,

tile occa:oi(l callinot pals, but nmuft needs proceed andi have fitcccs. (od turn it to
his glory ; hut ilticly all mens renfon h1lth great caulfi to scar it. Such a push it is
'wkv conme iiito, as this little flipply woulIl do mnich good to advance CGod's honour,
to con tiruie er majcfvy's gre it and careful memory of thcn, and to prclcirvc a great

il;.I )'y

many noblemen and. gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your
good will and affetion that way, I do nothing mifinuft, and herein hall take such
good advice, as by any means I can. I received from these lords two papers inclosed,
the effe6t whereof hall appear unto you. For those matters that captain Brickwell
brought, I shall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you two letters from Mr.
Randolph, both received this day. By him you shall hear that the protetfants are
retired from Edenborough further off. So as I hope your resolution for their aid
shall come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so presently
need them; and o with my hearty thanks commit you to God. From Berwick,
this 2d of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 291.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

12Sept. 156. T TPON the advertizements lately received from you, with such other things as
Paper Office. ) came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole

matter well confidered, we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed that
we can, fend to you 30001. to be thus used. If you shall certainly understand that
the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the impresting to him of oool.
might stand him in stead for the help to defend himself, you ihall presently let him
secretly to understand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have o much, and so
we will that you let him have, in the most secret fort that you can, when the said
fum shall come to you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him some part
there before hand.

The other 2000 1. you hall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if it be not that you

shall fee necessary cause to imprest ome part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen, and Ioo horsemen; or to the casting out of wages of such workmen,
as; by sickness, or otherwise ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl of Murray and his associates,
that they might have, at the least, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you
also write, that tho' we would not command you to give them aid, yet if we would
but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempting such things,
as you with the help of others hould bring about, you doubt not but things would
do well; you shall understand for a truth, that we have no intention, for many re-
fpecas, to maintain any other princes fubjets, to take arms against their sovereign;
neither would we willingly do any thing to give occasion to make warrs betwixt us
and that prince, which hath caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any power
to let them be aided with any men. But now, confidering we take it, that they are
pursued, notwithflanding their humble fubmifion, and offer to be ordered and tried
by law and juflice, which being refused to them, they are retired to Domfrefe, a
place near our weft marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and adding
thereunto the good intention that presently the French king pretendeth, by fending
one of his to join with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, and
to induce her to forbear this manner of violent and rigorous proceeding againtt her
subjes, for which purpose, the French ambafiador here with us hath lately writ-
ten to that queen, whereof answer is daily looked for, to the intent in the mean

time
28

time the said lords should not be opprefTed and ruined, for lack of ome help to de-
fend them, we are content, and do authorize, if you lhall fee it neceflary for their
defence, to let them (as of your own adventure, and without notifying that you
have any diretion therein from us) to have the number of 300 soldiers, to be taken
either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you hall fee caufc.
And to cover the matter the better, you hall fend there numbers to Carlisle, as to
be laid there in garrison, to defend that march, now in this time that such powers
are on the other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you shall
fee cause to dire& of, the fame numbers or any of them may most covertly repair to
the said lords, when you hall exprefly advertize, that you fend them that aid only
for their defence, and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any
thing that may offend her person, wherein you hall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it hould otherwise appear, your dan-
ger should be so great, as all the friends you have could not be able to save you to-
wards us. And so we aflure you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to
proceed with them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield
to give them aid of money or men: And yet we would not that either of these
were known to be our aót, but rather to be covered with your own desire and
attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 300.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 1565-6.

Y humble duty confidered; what to write of the present state of the country An Original.
I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it

maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
some good hope that this queen would have shewed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin hould have returned unto them with comfort, upon ome
conditions. Since that time, there are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Thorneton by Tea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the bihop of Glaf-
gow. Since whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appearance
of any good intended them, except that they be able to perfwade the queen's ma-
jefly our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of England. I write of
this nothing less than I know that The hath spoken. And by all means that he
thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pas. There is a band lately devised, in
which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen-mother fufpcted to be of the fame confederacy
to maintain papistry throughout Chriftiandom; this band was ent out of France
by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof remaining with
her, and the principal to be returned very fhortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon,
a fit minister for such a devilifl devise; if the coppie hereof may be gotten, that
flall be sent as I conveniently may. Monsieur Rambollet came to this toun upon
Monday, he spoke that night to the queen and her husband, but not long; the next
day he had long conferences with them both, but nothing came to the knowledge
of any whereof they intreated, I cannot speak with any that hath any hope that
there will be any good done for the lords by him, though it is said that he hath very
good will to do so to the uttcrmoft of his power. He is lodged near to the court,

VOL. II. P p

and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the order 'is given, whereat
means made to many to be present that day at the mass. Upon Candlemass day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her huband, the earle of Lenox, and
earle Athole; divers other lords have been called together and required to be at the
mars that day, ome have promised, as Cassels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs.
Others have refused, as Fleming, Livingflon, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and
of them all Bothell is the flouteft, but worst thought of; it was moved in council
that mass should have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather to tempt
men's minds, than intended indeed: She was of late minded again to fend Robert
Melvin to negotiate with such as (he trufteth in amongst the queen's maiefty's sub-
je&s, of whose good willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than the truth,
but in there matters, her majesty is too wife not in time to be ware, and provide
for the worst; ome in that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, whereof I am sure there is ome things,
though perchance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers quarles,
contentions, and debates; nothing so much fought as to maintain mischief and dif-
order, David yet retaineth still his place, not without heart grief to many, that fee
their sovereign guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to do
any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that hall be the first voyage that s(he
will make after (he is delivered of her being with child; the bruit is common that
{he is, but hardly believed of many, and of this, I can arc you, that there have
of late appeared ome tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 308.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph to

the lords of the council of England from Barwick, 27th of March,
1566. An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B. Io. fol. 372.

May it pleas yur Honours,

27 March, TT ERING of so maynie matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varietie in the
566. reports, we have myche ado to decerne the veritie: which maketh us the

flower and loother to put any thing in wrytinge, to the entente we wold not that
your honours, and by you the queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, hould not be ad-
vertired but of the verie trothe as we can poflible. To this end we thought good
to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Edinbourge at the tyme of the last attemp-
tate, who spoke there with diverse, and after that with the queen's self and her
husband conforme to that, which we have learned by others, and know by this re-
porte, we fend the fame, confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
anfyfiers unto these that were executors of the ae.

THIS we fynde for certain, that the queen's howfband being entred into a veh-

ment suspicion of David, that by hym some thynge was commytted, which was
inoft agynfle to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte, fyrfte commu-
nicated his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding his sorrowes o great fought all
the means he coulde to put some remedie to his griefs; and communicating the
fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's commandment, no other waye coulde be

found

found then that David hould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he was o ear-
nest and daylye pressed the fame, that no refe could be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton and lord Lindfaye
should be made previe to th' intente that theie might have their friends, at hande, yf
neade required; which caused them to assemble so mayny, as thaie thought fuffici-
ent againfi the tyme, that this determination of theirs should be put in executione;
which was determined the ixth of this inflante 3 daies afore the parliament hould
begyne, at which time the fayde lordes were assured, that the erles Argyle, Mor-
raye, Rothes and their complyces fholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not
be persuaded through this means to be their friends: who for the defyre he hade
that this intent should take effea th' one waye, was content to yielde without all
difficultie to t' other, with this condition, that thaie should give their consents, that
he might have the crowne matrimonial. He was so impatient to fee these things he
saw, and were daylye brought to his eares, that he dayly pressed the said lord Ru-
then, that there might be no longer delaye; and to the intent y myght be mani-
fefte unto the world, that he approved the ae, was content to be at the doing of
that himself.

UPoNSaturdaye at night neire unto vIIi of the clock the king conveyeth himfellf,

the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and two others, throwe his owne chamber by
the privy' sayers up to the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet
about xii foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at the supper the queene, the lady Argile, and David with his
capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen,
who willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him, The queen
said, that it was her will. Her howfband anfwerede, that yt was against her
honour. The lord Ruthen faide, that he should lerne better his deutie, and offer-
ing to have taken him by the arm, David took the queen by the blychtes of her
gown and put himself behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him:
But the king having loosed his hand, and holding her in his arms, David was
thrust out of the cabinet throw the bed chamber into the chamber of prefens,
whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who intending that night to have referv-
ed hym, and the next day to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore
hym evill will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hym a
great many others, so that he had in his bodie above wonds. It is told for
certayne, that the kinges own dagger was left flicking in him. Wheather he fluck
him or not we cannot here for certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prefens,
as was said, but going down the flayres out of the chamber of prefens.

'HERE rrmayned along tyme with the queen her howfband and the lord Ruthen.

She made, as we here, great interceflion, that he shold have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her howfband that was thee acqor of so foul a deed. It is said, that he did
answer, that David had more companie of her boddie then he for the space of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own contentment he gave his content
that he lhould be taken away. " It is not" (faythe she) " the woman's part to seek
·" the husband," and therefore in that the fault was his own. lie said that when he
came, he either wold not or made herself sick. " Well," faythe file, " you have
" taken your last of me and your frewell." Then were pity, fayth the lord Ru-
then, he is your majesty's husband and muf yield dutie to each other. " Why
"' may I not,'' faythe fie, " leave him as well as your wife did her husband ?"

p 2 Other

3

Other have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that he was lawfully divorced
from her husband, and for no such cause as the king found himself greve. Be-
fydes this man was mean, bafNe, enemie to the nobilitie, shame to her, and de-
ftruQion to herself and country. 'l Well, faith he, that hall be dear blude to
L some of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen; for the more
your grace howe yourself offended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weepeth. The lord

Ruthen being ill at ease and weak cal'eth for a drink, and faythe, " This I must do
" with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in the best fort he could, that
she would pacifie herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacifie which there went

down the lord Ruthen, who went ftrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl
to quiet them, and to assure them for the king that nothing was intend against
them. These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord of Mur-
ray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both
get out of a window and so depart. Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and
Glandores (who was lately called Dyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
wold, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord of Lidington. Theie went
that night to such places, where they thought themselves in most fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the lord Ruthen she

was contents that he hold lie with her that night. We know not how he * * him-
self, but came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so fleepie,
that he could not wake in due season.

THERE were in this companic two that came in with the king; the one An-

drewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would have firoken her with a
dagger, and one Patrick Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who also her grace
fayth, offered a dag against her belly with the cock down. We have been ear-
nefily in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he affoureth us of the
contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin,
olle or two others. They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen
drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor fecn in her
prefens, as we are by this lord aflured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dunbar-Caftlc, whither

resorted unto the lords Huntly and Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord
Ruthven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promires, bonds and fubfcrip-
tions. That he had protefled before the council, that he was never consenting to
the death of David, and that it is fore againit his will: " That of the great sub-

fiance David had there is much spoken, some fay in gold to the value of I ims".
His apparel was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hoe. His chamber
well furniflicd, anour, dagger, pyftoletts, harquebuses, 22 swords. Of all this

' nothing fpoyld or lacked faying 2 or 3 dagger. He had the custody of all the
·' que n's Iclttrs, which all were delivered unlouked upon. \We hear of a juill, that
" he had hanging about his neck of foine price, that cannot be heard of. He had
" upon l.is back, when hie was flayn a night gown of dalnask furred, with a fatten
" dublt, a holl of ruilct velvet."

No. XVI.

No. XVI. (VoL. I. p. 315.)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 6, I565-6.
-- CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been between her grace

and her husband, he preffeth earnestly for the matrimonial crown, which

The is loath ha/lily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat in fiore, until he know
how well he is worth to enjoy such a sovereignty: and therefore it is thought that
the parliament for a time liall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to Secretary Cecil.

HE juflice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's .cause than any desert, 4April. 1566.
and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worst, for neither hath the Paper Office,

queen good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was against her will, from the ori-
nor the people that he hath denied so manifef a matter, being proved to be done by ginal.
his commandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pursuer of them that did
as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and Murray that was yesterday
arreigned, were both accused by him. It is written to me, for certain, by one, that
upon Monday laif spoke with the queen, that he is determined that the house of
Lennox ihall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continueth ick, fore
troubled in mind; he ftaith in the Abby, his son has been once with him, and he
once with the queen, since he came to the castle. The queen hath now seen all the
covenants and bands that pafled between the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, before her and council, of his innocency of the death of David,
was false; and grievously offended that, by their means, he should seek to come to
the crown matrimonial.

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 25 April, 566.
-- | H E RE is continually very much speech of the discord between the queen

- and her husband, so far that, that is commonly said and believed of him-

f:lf, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a divorce between them.
It is very certain that Malevafier had not spoken with him within there three days.
He is neither accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman: atended upon by
certain of his own ervants, and fix or seven of the guard ; at liberty to do, and go
where and what he will, there have no hope yet among themrelves of quictnefs.

-DAVID's brother, named Joseph, who caime this way with alevaficur, un-
known toany man hicre is become lcrctary in his brother's p:acc.

No. XVI.

No. XVII, (Vol. I, p. 319.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 566.
tr H E.queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather worse. She

eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him,

nor loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her going out
of the castle of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what he said of him.
One Hickman, an Englith merchant there, having a water-fpaniel which was very
good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who.afterwards, for the pleasure which he
saw the king had in such kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The queen thereupon
fell marvellously out with Melvil, and called him diflembler and flatterer, and said
The could not trust one, who would give any thing to such one as she loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, August 8.

H E disagreement between the queen and her husband continueth, or rather
increafeth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of

Edi'nburgh, could not tell where to find the Queen; sith which time he is come to
Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then, nor
that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company. The
king her husband is gone to Dumfermling, and paffeth his time as well as he may;
having at his farewell, such countenance as would make a husband heavy at the
heart.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

H E queen hath her husband in small estimation, and the Earl of Lennox
came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, i th Dec.

H E 'Earl of Bothwcll is appointed to receive the ambafladors, and all things

1 for the christening are at his lordship's appointment, and the fame is scarcely

well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen is presently at Craigmil-
lar, but in little greater familiarity than he was all the while past.

Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

Au gut 1 66. T7 IH A T the king and the queen agreed well together two days, after her coming

uPaper Office, from-- , and after my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new
from the ori- discord has happened. The queen hath declared to my lord of Murray that the
fineal. king bears him evil will, and has said to her, that he is determined to kill him,

find-
34.

flnding fault that he doth bear him so much company: and in like manner, hath
willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king, which he did a few nights since in
the queen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The king confessed, that reports
were made to him, that my lord of Murray was not his friend, which made him
speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, that the king had spoken such
words unto her, and confessed before the whole house, that he could not be content that
either he or any other should be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of Murray
enquired the fame floutly, and used his speech very modestly, in the mean time the
king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that the queen should use familiarity
either with man or woman, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Marre,
who keep mots company with her. My lord of Murray and Bothwell have been at
evil words for the L. of Ledington, before the queen, for he and fir James Balfoure
had new come from Ledington, with his answer upon such heads or articles as
Bothwell and he should agree upon, which being reported to the said earl in the
queen's pretence, made answer, that ere he parted with such lands as was desired,
he should part with his life. My lord of Murray said floutly to him, that twenty
as hones men as he should lose their lives ere he reafte Ledington. The queen
spake nothing, but heard both ; in these terms they parted, and since, that I hear of,
have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and carryeth the
prince thence to Stirling with her. This lah Saturday was executed a servant 'of
the lord Ruthven's, who confessed that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of
the faA. The queen hath also opened to my lord of Murray, that money was ent
from the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for what purpose it w.s
brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. )
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, 569. A copy inter-

lined by Cecil. It contains an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bishop of Ross.
- ti FTER this [i e. Mary's landing in Scotland] how patiently did I bear

sXA. with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your own

commiflioners, whereby I received no mall unkindefs, betides the manifold cause
of suspicion that I might not hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice my subjet and near kinfinan, the lord Darnly,
under colour of private suits for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowlege, yea to conclude the fame without my
assentor liking. And how many unkind parts accompany'd that fa ; by receiving of
my fubjeds that were base runnagates and offenders at home, and enhanfing them
to places of credit against my will with many such like, I will leave, for that the
remembrance of the fame cannot but be noyfomc to you. And yet all there (lid I
as it were suppress and overcome with my natural inclination of love towardls you;
and did afterwards gladly, as you knoW, chriftci your loib, the child of my lil
kinfnan, that had before so unloyally offended me, both in marriage of you, and ill
other undutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How flicdly also dealt I by mcet
fagesto reconcile him, being your husband, to you, when others nourished lifcorl

bctwixt,
4

35

betwixt you, who as it seemed had more power to work their purposes, being evil to
you both, than I had to do you good, in refpea of the evil I had received. Well
I will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of following my council.
And then in your most extremity, when you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of
yourlife from your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remem-
brance of any former unkindness you had (hewed me. Nay how void was I of
refpea to the designs which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown, and
the security that might have ensued to my state by your death, when I finding your
calamity to be great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatned ome as were irritated against
you, that I only may fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 348.)
Letter Q Elizabeth to Q. of Scots. Thus marked on the back with

Cecil's hand.-Copia Literarum Regie Majejtatis ad Regindm Scoto.
rum. VIIo. Aprilis.

A D A M E, vous ayant trop moleftl par M. de Crocq, je n'euffe eu si peu de
consideration de vous fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les rui-

nez, et les prieres des miserables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je entens que un edit a ete
divulgue de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult justifier que ons ef*e les
meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire le xiime de ce
mois. La quelle chore, comme c'eft plus honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas
fe pourra faire, ne y eftant cache quelque miftere ou finefle, ainfi le pere et amis du
mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe de prolongue le
jour, pourcequ'ilz cognoiffent que les iniques fe font combines par force de faire ce
que par droi& is ne pourront pas faire ; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour
de vous meme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vous
exhorter le leur conceder cette requcfie, laquelle, si elle les feroit nie, vous tourneroit
grandement en foupcon, de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volontiers
ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, usez do telle fincerite & prudence en ce cas
qui vous touche de si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in-
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chore que si ne fifles, feriez dignement efbloye hors de
rancz de princesses, & non fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela
vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable, qu'unevie maculee;
vous voiez madame, que je vous traite comme ma fille, et vous promets, que fij en
euffe, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx, que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me
porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon ceur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera
plus a honneur, et a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles recom-
mendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus de bien, qui vous pourra en cc
monde avenir. De Welt. ce 8jour de Janvier * en haftc.

* A mifaktc in the d. te corrcEted with Cecil's hand VIII0. Ayr:lis.

No.

.3
Pap. Office.

No. XX. (Vol I. p. 362.)

A letter from England concerning the murder of king Henry Darnley.
H AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to write a few E.ofMort ,s'

words unto you. I have recd. ome writs from you; and ome I have een Archieves,

lately Cent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of the I6th. of May. I Bundle B.No.
have participat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mekle I can aure 2 .
you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for there was not one
papist nor protestant which did not consent that justice should be done, be the queen
my fovns. aid and support, againtf such as had committed that abominable ill murder
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack & coldness did not rife from such as
were called to council, but from such as should give life and execution thereunto.
And further, I assure you, I never knew no matter of estate proponed which had o
many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto you, no man
promoted the matter with greater affection, than the Spanish ambassador. And ure
I am, that no man dare openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever
is guilty of this murder, handfasted with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I lhall not
need to tell you, which be our letts and flayes from all good things here. You are
acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I must confers, that howsoever we omit
occasions of benefit, honour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and namely
such as before, and after the murder, were deemed to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute
with sword and justice the punishment of those abominable ats, though we lend you
but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both honourable and honeit, be
well known to me, and sundry others here, to bejustifiable in all their ations and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation is blemished and infamit by
these doings which lately pawed among you. What we shall do I know not, neither
do I write unto you afluredly, for we be subjet unto many mutations, and yet I think
we shall either aid you, or continue in the defence and safeguard of your prince,
ib as it appear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
of France, which will be your own deftrution, if you be unadvised. I know not
one, no not one of any quality or estate in this country, which does allow of the
queen your sovereign, but would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the fame
were done without farther flaider, that is to fay by ordinary ju(tice. This I fend the
23d of May.

No. XXI (Vol. . p. 370.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil, i th of July,

1567, from Berwick.
- - IR, Your lctterof the 6th ofJully, I received the ot'h at Berwick. I am sorry An Origiiiil.

O to fee that the queen's majcfty's lifpofition altereth not towards the lords, for Pl'pci Oilice.
when all is done, it is they which lmuft sand her more in ftcad, than the queen,

Vor- . t11. he

Q! ¢

her cousin, and will be better infiruments to work Come benefite and quietners to her-
majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scotland which is void of good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil from Fatcaftle, izth of

July, I567.
SIR, as yow might perceive by my letter of the Iit" July, I lodged at Fast.

castle that night, accompanyed with the lord flume, the lord of Ledington,

and James Melvin, wsv'ere I was intreated very well, according to the state of the
place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, o it
is very firong. By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington I find the
lords his afficiates and he hath left nothing unthought of, which may be either to thir
dangiTer, or work them Lferty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and likehife they confider the fame of England ;, but as farr
as 1 can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto them
through the queens inajeftys dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary faAion amongeft themselves, for they assure themselves the queen will leave.
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though they do acknowledge great
benefit as well to them, as to the realm of England by her majesty's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms have received great fruit;
vet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they have observed such things in-
her majestys doings, as have ended to the danger offuch as. she hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own designments, and little to the fuerty of any party; and upon
there considerations and discourses at length, methinketh I. find a disposition in them,.
that either they mind to make their bargain-with France,. or else to deal neither with
France nor vow, but to do what they hall think meet for their slate and fuerty, and
to use there remedys as occation flall move them ; meaning neither to irritate France
nor England, untill such time as they have made their bargain assuredly with one of'
¥ow; fur they think it convenient. to proceed-with yow both for awhile pari palfu,.
for that was my lord of Ledington's ternms. I do perceave they take the matter very
unkindly, that no better answer is made to the letter, which.the lords did fend to her
majesty, and likewi'e that they hear nothing from yow to their fatisfation, I have
answered as well as I can, and have alledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with
the queen, and their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet happened, and there-
fore her majeffy hath sent me to the end I may inform her throughly. of the state of.
the matters, and upon the declaration of their minds and intents to fuch.purpofes as.
shall be by me proposed on their majestys behalf unto them, they Shall be reasonably
and resolutely answered. At there things the lord of Ledington smiled and shook his,
head, and said it were better for us yow would let us alone, than neither to do us nor
your selves good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; S if their be any truth in
Ledington, La Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a man off
like quality, and to deliver them of their queen for ever, who shall lead her life in France
in a abbay reclufed, the prince at the French devotion, the realm governed by a
council of their election of the Scottish nation, the forts committed to the custody of.
such as shall be chosen amongst themselves, as yet I find no great likelihood that I
lhall have access to the queen, it is objected they may not so difplcafc the French king,,
unkfs they were sure to find the queen of England a good friend and when they

ouac
4

once by my access to the queen have offended the French, then they ay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queens liberty, which was
the firfl head that I proposed, they aid that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly to talk of them
the liberty going before; but said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for our selves. In the end they said, we hould refute our own
commodity, before they concluded with any other, which I hould hear of at my
coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the band concluded by Hamiltons,
Argyll, Huntly, and that faqlion, not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edint,
as that which was Tent into France; thus having no more leasure but compell'd to leap
on horseback with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from Faftcaftle
the 2zth of July 567.
To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland. By the queen the 4:h

Jully 567.

rT RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think that the causes
T will often charge upon variety of accidents, yet we think, for sundry refpets,
not amiss, that as yow shall deal with the lords having charge of the young prince
for the committing of him into our realm, so shall yow also do well, in treaty with
the queen, to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be subjeR to sundry trou-
bles from time to time, and thereby (as it is manifest) her son cannot be free, if ihe
liall be contented that her foil may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this our realm,
being To near as she knows it is; we shall not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein
for her child, as can be devised for any that might be our child born of our own
body, and.fhall be glad to flow to her therein the trew effeEt of nature; and herein
ihe may be by yow remembred how much good may ensue to her on to be nourished
and acquainted with our country; and therefore, all things confidered, this occation
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by
us; and to this end, we mean that yow shall so deal with her, both to flay her in
deed from inclining to the French praise, which is to us notorious to convey her
and the prince into Fiance, and alfb to avoid anyjuft offence, that he might hereafter
conceive, if she should hear that we should deal with the lords for the prince.

Paper Office.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, I4th July 567, from

Edinburgh.

T may please your maiefty to be advertied, I did fignifie unto Mr. Secretary by my An Or; i I.
letters of the I 'h and 12th of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the Paper OGtice.

causes of my flay, my lodging at Faficaflle a place of the lord Humes, where 1 was
met by the aid lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had pafwed in conference
betwixt us, whileft I was at the said Faftcaftle. Since which time, accompanyed
with the lords aforesaid, and with 400 horses by their appointment for my better
conduct, I came to Edinr the 12'' of this present. The 3th being Sunday appointed
for a folemne communion in this town, and also a folemne fast being publificd, 1
could not have conference with the lords which be aflembled within this town as 1

Q q Jefirecd,

defited, that is to fay the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of
Lidington, Sir James Balfour captain of the castle, Mr. James McGill and the prefi-
dent of the fetfion.

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the lord of Lidington that they would use no,

protrade of time in mine audience, so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom
I met by chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit the day were defined to
sacred exercises, such as were there of the council would consult upon any moyen
touching my access unto them and my conference with them, and said also that in
the afternoon either they would come to me, or I should hear from them. About 4
of the clock in the afternoon, the said 13th day, the lord of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and others, that they re-
quired me to have patience though they had defferred my conference with them, which
was grounded principally upon the absence of the earles of Mar, and Glencairn, the
lords Semple, Crighton and others of the council, faying also that they did confider
the matters which I was on your behalf to treate with them of, were of great.
importance, as they could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor give me
answer without the advice of the lords, and others their associates; the lord of Liding-
ton also said unto me, that where he perceived, by his private conference with me in.
my journy hitherwards, that I pressed greatly to have speedy access to the queen their
sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in that matter
.there was great difficulty for many refpecs, but specially because they had refused to
-the French ambafiador the like access, which being granted unto me, might greatly
'offend the French, a matter which they desired and intended to eschew; for they did
not find by your majestys dealings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate
the French king, and to loose his favour and good intelligence with him; I answered
that as to their refusal, made unto the French ambassador, monsieur de Ville Roye
was dispatched forth of France before these accidents here happened, and his special
errand was to impeach the queens marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so indeed
since my coming hither I learned his commiflion tended to that end, and to make of-
ser to the queen of another marriage) and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could have no
order forth of France concerning these matters since they happned; and therefore they
might very well hold them fufpeóted to have conference with the queen, leafi they might
treate of matters in this time without infirutions and so rather do harm then good ;.
but your majesty being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent me hi-
ther to treat with them, for the well of the realm, for the conservation of their ho-
nors and credit, and for their fuerty; and I might boldly fay unto him, that your
majesty had better deserved than the French had. He said, for his own part, he was much
bound unto your majesty, and had always found great favour and courtesy in Eng-
land, but to be plain with you, Sir fayed he there is not many of this assembly that
have found so great obligation at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the French
kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be the only persons which took benefit
by the queens majestys aid at Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the action,
and we think said he, the queens majesty your Sbvereign, by the opinion of her own
council, and all the world, took as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scot-
land, or any particular person; and not to talk with yow as an ambafl(ldor, but with
Sir Nicholas 'l'hrogmorton, my lord Morton, and such as were in pain for the death
of Davie, found but cold favour at the queens majestys hands, when they were ba-
nifi'd forth of their own country ; but I would all our whole company were as well

willing

willing to accomplih the queen your sovereign intents and desires as I am, for mine
own part, I am but one, and that of the meanest fort, and they be many noblemen
and such as have great interest in the matter, mary yow shall be assured I will imploy
myself to imploy my credit, and all that I may do, to fatisfie the queen your mifirefs,
as much as lyeth in me, and for your own part you have a great many friends in this
aflembly, with many other good words. But for conclusion I muff take this for an
answer to flay untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I thought meet to ad-
vertize your majesty what hath palsed, and how far forth I have proceeded; your
expectation being great to hear from hence.

AND now to advertize your majefly of the slate of all things, as I have learned
since my coming hither, it may please your majesty to understand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the castle of Lochleven, guarded

by the lord Linfay and Lochleven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed in another commission, because he began to show great favour to the queen
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewo-
men, and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. The earle of Buchan,
the earle of Murray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her at his pleasure ; the
lords aforesaid, which have her in guard, .doe keep her very straitly, and as far as I'
can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their order from -there men, because that the
queen will not by any means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the mur-
der, nor will not consent by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her hus-
band, but avoweth constantly that he will live and die with him; and faith that if it
were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the lord Bdthell, he
would leave her kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with him, and that
she will never content that he shall fare worse, or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principall cause of her detention is, for that there

lords do fee the queen being of so fervent affeftion towards the earle Bothell as he is,
and being put at, as they should be compelled to be in continuall arms, and to have
occasion of many battles, he being with manifefi evidence notoriously detected to be
the principall murderer, and the lords meaning prosecution of justice against him ac- -
cording to his merits,

THE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as a marriage not to

be suffered for many refpels, which separation cannot take place if the queen be at
liberty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoin'd with the danger of the prince,

but as far as I can perceave, they intend not either to touch the queen in fuerty or in
honor, for they do speak of her with refped and reverence, and do affirm, as I do
learn, that the conditions aforesaid accomplished, they will both put her to liberty,
and restore her to her estate.

THESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harqubufhers which be in very

good order, for the entertainment of which companys, untill all matters be com-
pounded, they did sue unto your majefly, to aid them with such fum of mony, as
hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons writting, amount-
ing as I perceive to ten or twelve thoufald crouns of the

THIEY were latly advertized that the French King doth mind to fend hither mon-

fieur de la Chapell dez Ursine, a knight of the Fench order, and always well assec-
tionate to the house of Guyfe, ad howsoever la Forcft, Villaroye, and du Crocq have
uled language in the queens favour and to thefr lords disadvantage there, to your ma-

jeily
4

jely ; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as shall be little to the queens advan-
tage; so as it is thought the French king, upon his coining to his pretence, will ra-
ther fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they have their party so well made,
.as the French will rather make their profit by them, than any other way,

HEREWITH I fend your majesty the last bond agreed on, and signed by the
.Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHIELESS, since my coming to this town, .the Hamiltons have fentunto me

a gentleman of their surname named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the bilhop
of St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend your majesty and
;mine arrfwer unto thm, referring to the bearer the declaration of ome things, as
these did by him unto me.

1THE earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another unto me with a letter and

-credit, I have used him as I did the others, the coppy of both which letters I fend
*your majesty alb. The lord Harrys hth also ent unto me but not written, and
have returned unto him in like fort.

AG AINSTr the 20th day of this month there is a generall assembly of all the churches,

;{hires, and boroughs towns of this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
there lords to.this town, where it is thought the whole state of this matter will be han-
deled, and I fear me much to the queens disadvantage and danger; unless the lord of
Lidington and rome others which be belt affecded unto her do provide rome remedy;
for I perceave the geat number, and in manner all, but chiefly the common peo-
ple, which have aflfifted in these doings, do greatly dishonour the queen, and mind
seriously either her deprivation, or her deftruEtion; I used the best means I can (confi-
dering the furie of the world here) to proroge this assembly, for that appeareth to me
to be the best remedy: I may not peak of dilfolution of it, for that may not be abiden,
and I flhould thereby bring my self into great hatred and perril. The chiefeft of the
lords which be here present at this time dare not how so much lenity to the queen as
I think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people. The women
be molt furious and impudent against the queen, and yet the men be mad enough;
so as a firanger over bufie may oon be made a acrifice amongeft them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their adherents would put their

force into the fields.againft the 24'h of this month, but I do not siad that intent so true,
as the common bruit goeth.

THE earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trouble among his own
countrymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired here, and I do believe your

majefly may so use him, and dirct him,.as he hall be able to promote yourl urpofe
with there men.

THIE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.--- I do find
amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company two firange and sundry humours.

HAMIL'rONS do make show of the liberty of the queen, and prosecute that with

great carneflnefs, because they would have there lords destroy her, rather than fle
Thould be recovered from them by violence; another time they seem to dcfire her li-
berty, and Bothell's deltrucdion, because they would compass a marriage betwixt the
queen and the lord of Arbroth.

TH- carle of Argyll doth affWet her liberty, and Bothell's deflruction, bccaufe he
would arry the queen to his brother.

AND

AgD yet neither of them, notwithitanding their open concurance, (as.appeareth

by their bond) doth discover their minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox is
not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of the miniflers will be here at the
great assembly, whos austerity against the queen r fear as much as any man's.

BY some conferrence which I had with Come of this councill, me thinketh that

they have intelligence that there is a disposition in the queen of Scotland, to leave this
realm, and to retire herself either into England, or into France, but most willingly
into England, for such - and miflikings as he knoweth hath been, and is meant
unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to a. number of persons deleagued,.
and authorized by her or to ome one or more.

AND it please your majesty, I think it not amiss to put yow in remembrance,

that in cafe the said queen come into England by your allowance, without the French
king's conlent, she hall loose her dowery. in France, and have little or nothing from
hence to entertain her;; and in cafe. she do go into France with the king's content-
nent, she may be an infirument (if She can recover favour, as time will help to can-
cell her disgrace) either by matching with ome husband of good quality, or by ome
other devise, to work new unquietness to her own contry, and so consequently to
your majefly.'s.

THEREFORE it may please your majesty to confiderof this matter, and to let me

know your pleasure with convenient speed, how I hall answer the fame, if it be
propounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end
and composition. For I am sure, of late, he hath seemed very desirous. to have the
matter brought to pats, that fie might go into England, retaining her estate and
jurifdiaion in herself, though he do not exercise it ; and likewise I understand that
tome of this council which be least affeaed to her safety do think there is no other
way to save her. Thus Almighty God preserve your majefly in health honor and
all felicity; at Edinr the q14h July 1567.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Queen Elisabeth the 1.8th of July 1567, from.

Edinburgh.
IT may please your majefly, yow might perceave bymy letters of the 16th, how An O.iginal.

far I had proceeded with there lords, and what was their answer;. since which Paper Office.

time I have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and
Sir James Balfour captain of this caflle, at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet
access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted me, flaying themselves flill by the
absence of the lords and others their aflociates, which (they fay) they look for with-
in two days; and for that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that
mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have thought good not to defer
this dispatch untill 1 have a resolute anfwcr in that matter.

MAY it therefor please your majelly to underhand Robert Melvin returned from

the queen in Lochleven, to this town, the 6th of July, and brought a letter from her
written of her own hand to there lords, which doth contain as I underhtand matter as
followeth-A rcqueft unto them to have consideration of her health, and if they will
not put her to liberty, to change the place of restraint to the castle of Stirling, to the
end fihe might have the comfort and company of her son, and if they will not change

hex

her from Lochleven, he required to have omne other gentlewomen about her, nam
ingl none,

To have her apothecary, to have rome modest minifler.-To have an imbroiderer

to draw forth such work as he would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
chamber.-Touching the government of the realm, she maketh two offers, which
are but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but refered
to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and wholly to the earle of Mur-
ray; the other is to the lords whole names ensue, aflifted with such others, as they
flall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the earls of Morton,
Murray, Marr, and Glcncairn.

SHE hath written unto them that I mi ht have access unto her.-She requireth

fuirthcr that if they will not treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to use her
as the king their sovereigns daughter, (whom many of them knew) and as their
prince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her husband,
nor relinquifl him; which matter will do her mot harm of all, and hardeneth these
lords to great severity against her.

SHE yieldeth, in words, to the prosecution of the murder.
I -HAV E the means to let her know that your majesty hath sent me hither for her
relief.

I HAVE alto perfwaded her to conform herself to renounce Bothell for her husband,

and to be contented to susser a divorce to pals betwixt them; she hath sent me word
that (he will in no ways consent unto that, but rather die; grounding herself upon
this reason, taking herSelf to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing Bothell,
the should acknowledge herself to be with child of a bastard, and to have forfeited
her honor, which she will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save her own
life and her child, to choose the least hard condition.

MR. Knox arrived herein this town the 6 of this month, with whom I have had
some conference, and with Mr. Craig also, the other minister of this town.

I AVE perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I find them both very

austere, in this conference, what they flall do hereafter know not, they are fur-
nifhed with many arguments, some forth of the scripture, some forth of histories,
some grounded (as they ay) upon the laws of this realm, rome upon praLtices used
in this realm, and tbme upon the conditions and oth made by their prince at her
coronation.

THE bishop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley hath font hither to there

lords, that his nephew the earle and some others of that fide, may, at Linlithgow or
at Stirling, have some communication with ome appointed on this fide, afluring
them that there is a good disposition in the lords (of the other party to concurre with
these, airing further that they will not diflent for triffles or unncceflhry things, and
(as I am given to understand) they can be plea;icd the queen's restraint be continu'd,
untill the murder be pursued in all pcrfons, whereby the separation of the queen and
Bothell is implyed, the prelsrvation of the prince, the fccurity for all men, and a
good order taken for the governance of the rea.lm in tranquility.

CA PTAIN Clerk, which hath so long Ifrvcd in Denmark and served at Newhaven,

did the 16lh of this month (accompanyed with one of his soldiers, or rather the fol-
dier as the greater fame goeth) kill one Vilfon a seaman, and such a one as had
great etiimation with thcft lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, honefly, and wil-
ligne s in this a'tion
i whereupun Clerk hath retired hinicff; their quarrel was about

tl;C
44

the hip which took Blacketer, which ship was appointed by there lords to go to the
north of Scotland to impeach the passage of the earle Bothell, in cafe he went either
to the iles, or to any other place; by the death of this man this enterprize was
dashed.

THE bilhop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth desire to speak with
the lord of Lidington.

THE abbot of Killwinning hath ent for Sir James Balfour, captain of the caflle,
to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majesty in my last, the Hamiltons now find no matter to

difever these lords and them asunder, but would concurr in all things (yea in any
extremity againfi the queen) o as that they might be assured the prince of Scotland
were crouned king, and hould die without issue, that the earle of Lenox's Ton living
hould not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors speak reverently, mildly, and charitably

of their queen, so as I cannot gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or vio-
lence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her life,
by reason that the people aflembled at this convention do mind vehemently the de-
ftruaion of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and amongst all estates, (Caving of

the counselors) that their queen hath no more liberty nor priviledge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither by God's law, nor by the
laws of the realm.

THE earl Bothwell, and all his adherents and associates, be put to the horn by

the ordinary juflice of this town, named the lords of tie feflion; and command-
ment given to all firriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend him, and all other
his followers and receiptors.- The earl of Bothel's porter, and one of his other
servitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confessed such sundry circum-
stances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said earl was one of the principal exe-
cutors of the murder, in his own person, accompany'd with sundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three of them, that is to fay,
two of the Ormifton's of Tivotdall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would
be glad that none of the murderers should have any favour or receipt in England,
and hereof their desire is, that the officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell
doth still remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fleming, which have
been there, have utterly abandoned him, and do repair hitherwards.-The intelli-
gence doth grow daily betwixt there lords, and those which held of; and notwith-
standing there lords have ent an hundred and fifty harqubufhers to Stirling, to keep
the town and passage fiom furprize; and o have they done in like manner to St.
Johnflon, which be the two paflages from the north, and weft to this town, I do un-
derland the captain of Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do mervile
the carriages be not impeached otherwise than they be.

OF late this queen hath written a lettcr to the captain of the said castle, which

hath been furprized; and thereby matter is discovered which maketh little to the
queen's advantage.

THUS, having none other matter worthy your majelty's knowledge, I beseech

God to prosper your majefly with long life, perfect health, and prosperous felicity.
At Edinburgh the l8th of July, 1567.

VOL. Il. . . ...

1-.,C.LLC
J. L

A P P E N D

X.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Thrcgmorton to the right honourable the earl of

Leicester, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of her majesty's
most honourable privy Council.

' ' Y my former dispatches ent to her majesty, and Mr. Secretary, since the i2th

2thlofJu'y, I of July, your lordships might have perceived, the slate ofthis country, and to
X i6-. what end thelt matters be like to come; so as not to trouble your lord/hip with

l :p r r, many words; this queen is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her
r(.,::'!c O;i- ton to be crowned king, and he detained in prison within this realm, and the fame

to be governed, in the young king's name, by a councel, confifiing of certain of
the nobility, and other wile men of this realm; so as it is ealy to be seen that the
power and ability to do any thing to the commodity of the queen's majesty, and the
realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the hands of these
lords, and others their aflociates, aflembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's ma-
jefty will fti;l persist in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland, (unto
whom fie shall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that these lords and all
their accomplices will become as good French, as the French king can wish, to ail
intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlye,
and that faction, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is the'ftate of things so
come to pass of this country, that France has Scotland now as much conjoined un-
to them, to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an instrument, the yo;ing prince
will prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lordships wisdoms, and there-
fore confidering the weight of the matter, and all the circumfiances, I trust your
lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her majesty,
to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her possession,
or, at the least, to be at her devotion. And amongst other things, that I can ima-
gine, for the firlt degree, nothing is more meet to bring this to effet, than to al-
lure this company here assembled, to bear her majesty their favour. Some talk hath
passed between the lord of Liddington and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty shall have won there men to her
devotion, the principal point that will make them conformable to deliver their prince
into England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling him to the fuc-
cession of the crown of England, for fault of issue of the queen's majesty's body,
some other things will also be required, as the charge of the said prince and his train,
to be at the charge of England. I do well perceive that there men will never be
brought to deliver their prince into England, without the former condition, for the
succession of England ; for (faith Liddington) that taking place, the prince shall be
as dear to the people of England as to the people of Scotland ; and the one will be
as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise, he faith, all things confider-
td, it will be reported that the Scottifnmen have put their prince to be kept in safety,
as those which commit the fhecp to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion,
your lordlhips may perceive here will be the scope of this matter. As unto the de-
livering of hiun upon hofige:i, he fayeth, let no man think, that the condition of

the
6

the fucceflion not being accomplished, the nobility and the gentry will never content
to leave themselves destitute of their sovereign, upon any hostages, neither upon any
promises, nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It were not good for your-
selves (faith he) that the matter were o handled; for then you should adventure all
your goods in one ship, which might have a dangerous effeEt, confidering the unwil-
lingnefs of the queen your sovereign to content to establishing any successor to th
crown. And then; how unmete were it, that her majesty having in her poflflfion
already all such, persons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in her custody. For o there might follow, without good capitula-
tions, a firange and dangerous issue, tho'.the queen your mistress do think that Iuch
imaginations could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us on
her behalf. What is come to pats since my last dispatch, and how far forth things
are proceeded, I refer your lordship to be informed, by my letters sent unto her ma-
jelly, at this time. And o I pray almighty God, preserve your lordihip in much
honour and felicity. At Edenburgh this 24th of July, 567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord Stuard partner of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.

1y the queen.

RUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for as much as we do 6th of Au.,
confider that you have now a long time remained in those parts, without ex- 1567.

pedition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet feeing there hath
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that slate,
which good reason would have required, that you hould continue there any longer,
our pleasure, therefore, is, that you hall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
your servant Middlemore unto the lords and efates of that realm, that are aflembled
together, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but eem very firange
unto us, that you having been ent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them,
in matters tending to much to their own quiet, and to the benefit of the whole
estate of their country, they have o far forgotten themselves, and o slightly re-
garded us and bur good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring
your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which is ftrangetl of all, in not
vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And altho' there dealings be iuch, in-
deed, as were not to e looked for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and
proceedings towards their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the reft, in tb firalnge
a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole world besides, cannot but
think them to have therein gone to far beyond the duty of fubjets, as Imuf needs
remain to their perpetual touche for ever. And therefore he {hall fay, that we have
tho't good, without contuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our pro-
cincec, requiring them to grant you lilccnce and paport to to do, which when you
sha.ll have obtained, we will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as con-
\ciictnt Ipced as you may. Given, &'c.

Illdorlcd 6th Agutl, 1567.

Throg-

47
d 1 2

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight, one of

her majesty's privy council and principal secretary, give these.
z:h AuguR,

1567.

Paper Office,
from the Ori
ginAl.

SIR,

W H A T I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Murray, and Mons.
W\V de Linnerd, you hall underfiand by my letter to her majesty, at this time.
The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water to their-
wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart.
how the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether he be at liberty or in pri.
zon. The mark they hoot at, is, to renew their old league, and can be as well
contented to take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the fame by the
order of these lords, as otherwise. Lyneroll came but yesterday, and me thinketh
he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will seek to displease these
lords, when they changed the coming of La Chappelledes Ourfins for this man,
because they doubted that de la Chappelle hould not be grateful to them, being a
papist. Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me think-
eth the earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitterly against the tragedy,
and the players therein, than he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an
inkling that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as much mislike, as any
thing, for our purpose. I can assure you the whole proteflants of France will live
and die in these mens quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongst you, that aid
should be sent to the adverse party, and that Martigues should come hither with
some force; Mons. Baudelot hath assured me of his honour, that instead of Mar-
tigues coming against them, he will come with as good a force to succour them:
And if that be sent under meaner condut, Robert Stuart {hall come with as many
to fortify them. But the constable hath assured these lords, that the king meaneth
no way to offend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle there lords.
more againfi us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the
J2th of August, 567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.
TR U S T Y and well-beloved we greet you well. We have, within these two

days, received three sundry letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23d, of

this month, having not before those received any seven days before; and do find,
by these your letters, that you have very diligently and largely advertised us of all
the hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we nothing like, so we trust
in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive some reformation. For we cannot
perceive, that they with whom you have dealt, can answer the doubts moved by the
Hamiltons, who howsoever they may be carried for their private refpes, yet those
things which they move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. For if they

a~1~~~~~ may
48

49

may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered to hear the queen their sovereign
declare her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep her
in captivity, how should they believe the reports, or obey them, which do report it ?
and therefore our meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly understand, that
we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
queen their sovereign for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reasonable for
us therein to do, for the queen our sifter, we; will be ready to perform the fame.;
And where it is so required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope should
deal with the lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
well pleated therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof by
your letters, and to will him to hew himself favourable to them in their aftions, that
may appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that upon your message done
to the earl of Murray, you might return, so our meaning is you hail. And if there
our letters shall meet you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the lord
Serope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbiihop of St. Andrew's and the

abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my good commendations to your good lordships, this ThaIl be to adver- X3Aug. r67.

tize you, that the queen's majeffy my sovereign having sent me hither her Paper-Office,

ambassador to the queen her siser your sovereign, to communicate unto her such froma copy
matter as he thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence betwixt which Sir Ni-
them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordships know) contrary to the duty cholas sent to
of all good fubjeds, for the enlargement of whose person, and the restitution of her the queen.
to her dignity, her majesty gave me in charge to treat with these lords assembled at
Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means as might be, for
the safeguard of the young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder, the
diflolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and lastly for
their own sureties. In the negotiation of which matters I have (as your lordships
well know) spent a long time to no purpose, not being able to prevail in any thing
with those lords, to the queen my sovereign's fatisfation. Of which firange pro-
ceedings towards her majefly, and undutiful behaviour towards their fovercign, I have
advertised the queen's majetfy; he (not being minded to bear this indignity) hath
given me in charge to declare her further pleasure unto them, in such fort as they
may well perceive her majesty doth disallow of their proceedings, and thereupon hath
revoked me. And further hath given me in charge to communicate the fame unto
your lordships, requiring you to let me know, before my departure hence, (which
/hall be, God willing, as soon as 1 have received answer from you) what you and
your confederates will assuredly do, to ft the queen your sovereign at liberty, and to
reflore her to her former dignity by force, or otherwise; feeing there lords have re-
fused all other mediation, to the end-the queen's majefly my sovereign may concur
with your lordfliips in this honourable enterprize.

AND

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight, one of

her majesty's privy council and principal secretary, give these.

SIR,

i2:h Anguft, ,
' TH AT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Murray, and Mons.

i567. V / de Linnerd, you hall understand by my letter to her majesty, at this time.

Paper Ofice, The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water to their;
fiom the Ori- wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart
gin.l. how the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether he be at liberty or in pri.

zon. The mark they shoot at, is, to renew their old league, and can be as well
contented to take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the fame by the
order of these lords, as otherwise. Lyneroll came but yeflerday, and me thinketh
he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will seek to displease these
lords, when they changed the coming of La Chappelledes Ourfins for this man,
because they doubted that de la Chappelle hould not be grateful to them, being a
papist. Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me think-
eth the earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitterly against the tragedy,
and the players therein, than he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an
inkling that Ledington is to go into France, which do as much mislike, as any
thing, for our purpose. I can afure you the whole proteflants of France will live
and die in these mens quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongst you, that aid
hould be ent to the adverse party, and that Martigues should come hither with
some force; Mons. Baudelot hath assured me of his honour, that instead of Mar-
tigues coming against them, he will come with as good a force to succour them:
And if that be Cent under meaner conduc, Robert Stuart shall come with as many
to fortify them. But the conflable hath assured these lords, that the king meaneth
no way to offend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle there lords.
more against us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the
2th of Augufl, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.
TR U ST Y and well-beloved we greet you well. We have, within these two

days, received three sundry letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23d, of

this month, having not before those received any seven days before; and do find,
by these your letters, that you have very diligently and largely advertised us of all
the hatty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we nothing like, so we trust
in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive some reformation. For we cannot
perceive, that they with whom you have dealt, can answer the doubts moved by the
Hamiltons, who howsoever they may be carried for their private refpets, yet those
things which they move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. For if they

1 may
48

declare her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep her
in captivity, how hould they believe the reports, or obey them, which do report it ?
and therefore our meaning is, you hall let the Hamiltons plainly understand, that
we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
queen their sovereign for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reasonable for
us therein to do, for the queen our sifter,' we will be ready to perform the fame.;
And where it is so required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope should
deal with the lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
well pleated therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof by
your letters, and to will him to shew himself favourable to them in their actions, that
may appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that upon your meflage done
to the earl of Murray, you might return, so our meaning is you /hall. And if there
our letters shall meet you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the lord
Serope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbilhop of St. Andrew's and the

abbot of Arbrothe.

F TE R my good commendations to your good lordships, this fall be to adver- 13^Aug. r 567

.A . tize you, that the queen's majeify my sovereign having sent me hither her Paper-Office,
ambassador to the queen her finer your sovereign, to communicate unto her such from a copy
matter as The thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence betwixt which Sir Ni-
them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordships know) contrary to the duty cholas sent to
of all good fubjees, for the enlargement of whose person, and the reflitution of her the queen.
to her dignity, her majesty gave me in charge to treat with these lords aflembled at
Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means as might be, for
the safeguard of the young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder, the
dissolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and lastly for
their own sureties. In the negotiation of which matters I have (as your lordships
well know) spent a long time to no purpose, not being able to prevail in any thing
with those lords, to the queen my sovereign's satisfaction. Of which flrange pro-
ceedings towards her majesty, and undutiful behaviour towards their fovercign, I have
advertised the queen's majesty; he (not being minded to bear this indignity) hath
given me in charge to declare her further pleasure unto them, in such fort as they
may well perceive her majefly doth disallow of their proceedings, and thereupon hath
revoked me. And further hath given me in charge to communicate the fame unto
your lordships, requiring you to let me know, before my departure hence, (which
Ihall be, God willing, as soon as 1 have received answer from you) what you and
your confederates will assuredly do, to set the queen your sovereign at liberty, and to
rcftore her to her former dignity by force, or otherwise; feeing these lords have re-
fused all other mediation, to the end-the quecn's majefly my sovereign may concur
with your lordships in this honourable enterprize.

AND
A P P E N IX.

49

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your aflociates, your lordlhips can neither

communicate this matter amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so many of you as may confer
together, within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in this town
by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, being the i9th of this Augut ; for I in-
tend (God willing) to depart towards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I
mot humbly take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the 3th of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the 3:h of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

2j.ug i6;7. y O U R good lordllip's letter of the 13th of August I have received the I9th of
P apcr-Olfic,, t the fame. For answer whereunto it may like your lordship to understand, that
from a c' pv I will signify unto you plainly, how far forth 1 am already thoroughly initruEted of
whlch Si Ni- the queen's majesty my sovereign's pleasure, concerning the detention of the queen
ch )is (ert i yyour lbvereign, and concerning her relief.
',' ct^ > " To the first her majesty hath given in charge, to use all kinds of persuasion in her

name, to move these lords assembled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and un-
dutiful behaviour, which they use toward their sovereign. And in this part, besides
the shew of many reasons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with them, her
majesty hath willed me to use tome plain and revere speech unto them, tending so
far forth, as if they would not be better advised, and reform these their outrageous
proceedings exercised against their sovereign, that then they might be assured her ma-
jetly neither would nor could indure such an indignity to be done to the queen, her
good cousin and neighbour.

A\D notwithstanding these my proceedings with them, they have made proof to

be little moved thereby, for as yet neither will they content to the enlargement,
neither fuffcr me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to
treat an- more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have advertised the
queen's najefty my sovereign, expecting daily her majefly's further order; and as I
ihall be ad'etiCed thereof, so will not fail to signify the fame to your good lordship;
and in the mcean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordship hath written
uInto me. 'I lus with my due commendations to your good lordship, I commit the
fame to almighty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and service that I can
lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 383.)
Account of 1 .): l I.rrcis's Behaviour in the Parliament held December

15, 16 7.
r Ilt 1 lord l l-cr-s manle : notable harange, in lth name of the (duke and him-

l ,
' L1cl, tlr t litills :!ii :a.idhrents, (the tJuke himfelif, the carl of (Ciffillcs, ;and
t!he abbot o l'ilwinil:i!l( being :ilo prcl( nt) to p 'i (Ltade the union of the wilole c;alin

in

part of this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning tuok meanes for punishment
of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing the queen's inordinat affection to that wicked
man, and that fhc could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
fequeitring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen. That their
honourable doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge
their native country from the slanderous reports that were spoken of it among other
nations, had well deserved that all their brethren should join with them in lb good
a cause. That he and they, in whose names he did speak, would willingly, and
without any compulsion, enter themselves in the fame yoke, and put their lives and
lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our cause. And if the queen herself
were in Scotland, accompanied with 2o,ooo men, they will be of the fame mind,
and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder noblemen of their party, Hunt-
ley, Arguile, and others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnestly move them. And if they
will remain obstinate, and refute to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to corre& them, that otherwise will not reform thenfelves.
So plausible an oration, and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord regent, by the name of re-
gent, (there was no mention at all of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at
every word, when his speeches were directed to him, accompanying all his words
with low courtesies after his manner.

No. XXIV. (ol I. p. 402.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Aug. 568, from

Bolton.

- U T surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to favour the form, An Original.
j but also the chief article of the religion of the gospel, namely, justification Paper Office.

by faith only : and she heareth the faults of papeifry revealed, by preaching or other-
wife, with contented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and he doth not seem
to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 2 September, 1x68,

from Bolton.
-- I T came to this queen's ears of late that she was bruited to be lately turned

to the religion of the gofpell, to the great difiking of the papilts here-

abouts, which thing {lhe herself confcfld unto me, and yesterday openly in the great
chamber, when the assembly was full, and Come papifis present, he took occasion
to speak of religion, and then openly lhe profefied herself to be of the papft rcl gion,
and took upon her to patronize the fame, more earnefily than she had done a great
while afore, altho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that the effect of her
speech was only to ihew her zeal ; and afterwards to me alone, when I mifliked to
Iee her become so confidently backward in religion, why, aid flie, would you have

ime
A P E ND X.

51

me to loose France and Spain, and all my friends in other places, by seeming to
change my religion, and yet I am not assured the queen my good fifler will be my
assured friend, to the fatisfadion of my honour and expeLtation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 404.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

Paper-Ofice. I G H T trusty and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well. Where we
^ronr a copy J hear Gay, that certain reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what-
correaed by
secretary Ce- soever hould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in any
cil. proof to convince or to acquit the said queen concerning the horrible murder of her

late husband our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her kingdom and go-
vernment, we do Co much mislike hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive
any credit: and therefore we have thought good to assure you, that the fame is un-
truly devised by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have been always certified
from our said fifler, both by her letters and messages, that she is by no means guilty
or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true, so surely if she hould be
found justly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would be
very sorry, then, indeed, it ihould behoove us to confider otherwise of her cause than
to satisfy her desire in restitution of her to the government of that kingdom. And
so we would have you and all others think, that should be disposed to conceive
honourably of us and our aions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

An Or'ginal.
Paper-Office.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of Otober, 568, from York.
- / Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, to attend upon

LVL him here Thursday last, I made my repair hither accordingly, mean-

ing to flay here until Munday next; as touching the matters of the commission, that
his grace and the reft have from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of
all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed, and altho' the
matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any opinion of
mine own thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a reconcilia-
tion, to be had without the extremity of odious accusations; my lord of Ledington
also faith to me, that he could wish these matters to be ended in dulce maner, o
that it might be done with safety; of the reft you can conceive, by the advertisements
andt writtings, ent up by our commifioners.

No. XXVII.

53
A letter from the bishop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from York,

Ocdober I5-68.

L E I S your majesty I conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night, Cott. Lib.Ca.

r who affurit me that he had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, lig. C. . a
who determinate to him that it was the D. determinit purpose not to end your Copy.
cause at this time, but to hold the fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power,
to make the E. pursue extremity, to the effec F. and his adherents might Utter
all they could to your dishonour, to the effec to cause you come in disdain with
the hail fubjeds of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her disadvantage. And to this effeEt is all her intention, and when they
have produced all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter infantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there, till file think time to shew
you favour, which is not likely to be haffily, because of your uncles in France, and
the fear he has of yourself to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your fubjeAs which
has offendit you.--This in effect that your majesty hearing the estate of your as-
fairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majefly was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your fubjeas in such fort as they might credit you
hereafter, which was a great cause of the fray of this controversy to be ended. And
therefore persuading her D. effeEtually not to trust any who had made such narration.
But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as most tender to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her counfell in all
your affairs, and wald prefer her fricndfhip to all others, as well uncles as others,
and assure her to keep that thing ye wald promise to your fubjeas by her advice.
And if L). discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be removing
within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her G. pleated, until the time
her G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that
in the mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fubje:ts reflor-
ed and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things tending to this effect.
And affirms that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that
ye offer so far; and it may come that within two or three months the may become
better-minded to your grace, for now.fhe is not well minded, and will not hew you
any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following key is added in
another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioncrs.
F. The earl of Murray.
VOL. II.

No. XX VII.
S f

me to loose France and Spain, and all my friends in other places, by eeming to
change my religion, and yet I am not assured the queen my good sifter will be my
assured friend, to the satisfaction of my honour and expectation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 404.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

Paper-Office.
From a copy
correted by
secretary Ce-
cil.

R IG H T trusty and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well. Where we

hear fay, that certain reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what-

soever hould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in any
proof to convince or to acquit the said queen concerning the horrible murder of her
late husband our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her kingdom and go-
vernment, we do so much mislike hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive
any credit: and therefore we have thought good to assure you, that the fame is un-
truly devised by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have been always certified
from our said filler, both by her letters and messages, that she is by no means guilty
or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true, so surely if she should be
found justly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would be
very sorry, then, indeed, it should behoove us to confider otherwise of her cause than
to satisfy her desire in reifitution of her to the government of that kingdom. And
so we would have you and all others think, that should be disposed to conceive
honourably of us and our aions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of OCtober, 1568, from York.

An Or:ginal. - t / Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, to attend upon
lPaper-Office. MVJ him here Thursday last, I made my repair hither accordingly, mean-

ing to flay here until Munday next; as touching the matters of the commiflion, that
his grace and the reft have from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of
all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed, and altho' the
matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any opinion of
mine own thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a reconcilia-
tion, to be had without the extremity of odious accusations; my lord of Ledington
also faith to me, that he could wish these matters to be ended in dulce maner, so
that it might be done with safety; of the ref[ you can conceive, by the advertisements
and writtings, sent up by our commiflioners.

No. XXVII.
52

53
A letter from the bishop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from York,

Odober 1568.

L E I S your majeffy I conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night, Cott. Lib.Ca,
who affurit me that he had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, ig. C. .a

who determinate to him that it was the D. determinit purpose not to end your Copy.
cause at this time, but to hold the fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power,
to make the E. pursue extremity, to the effe F. and his adherents might utter
all they could to your dishonour, to the effeA to cause you come in disdain with
the hail fubjefs of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her disadvantage. And to this effeEt is all her intention, and when they
have produced all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter inflantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there, till he think time to hew
you favour, which is not likely to be hastily, because of your uncles in France, and
the fear he has of yourself to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your fubjeds which
has offendit you.--This in effeEt that your majesty hearing the eate of your as-
fairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majefly was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your fubjeds in such fort as they might credit you
hereafter, which was a great cause of the stay of this controversy to be ended. And
therefore persuading her D. effeatually not to truss any who had made such narration.
But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as molt tender'to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her counfell in all
your affairs, and wald prefer her fricndfhip to all others, as well uncles as others,
and aflure her to keep that thing ye wald promise to your fubjeas by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be removing
within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her G. pleated, until the time
her G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that
in the mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fubjeds reftor-
ed and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things tending to this effect.
And affirms that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that
ye offer so far; and it may come that within two or three months she may become
better-minded to your grace, for now he is not well minded, and will not hew you
any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cccil's hand; the following key is added in
another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioncrs.
F. Thc earl of Murray.
VOL. Ir.

No. XX VII.
S f

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 4 8.)

Deliberation of secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 2 I, 568.
Paper-Office. HE befi way for England, but not the easiest, that the queen of Scotts might re-

main deprived of her crown, and the state continue as it is.

THE second way for England profitable, and not so hard.---- That the queen

of Scotts might be induced, by some perfwafions, to agree that her son might con-
tinue king, because he is crown'd, and herself to remain also queen; and that the
government of the realm might be committed to such persons as the queen of
England flould name, so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered, that
a convenient number of persons of Scotland Should be first named to the queen of
England, indifferently for the queen of Scotts, and for her son, that is to fay, the
one half by the queen of Scotts, and the other by the earle of Lennox and lady
Lennox, parents to the child; and out of those, the queen's majesty of England to
make choice for all the offices of the realm, that are, by the laws of Scotland, dif-
posable by the king or queen of the land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's majesty, the government remain in

the hands of the earle of Murray as it is, providing he shall not dispose of any offices
or perpetuals to continue any longer but to these offered of the premises.

THAT a parliament be summoned in Scotland by several commandments, both of
the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

-- THAT hostages be delivered into England on the young king's behalf, to the

number of twelve persons of the earle of Murray's part, as the queen of Scotts hall
name; and likewise on the queen's behalf to the like number as the earl of Murray_
flall name; the fame not to be any, that have by inheritance or office cause to be
in this parliament, to remain from the beginning of the summons of that parliament,
untill three months after the parliament; which hostages flall be pledges, that the
friends of either part hall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this parliament it be
concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England hall devise for the go-
vernment of the realm, (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor con-
trary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the
parliament at Edinr. the Decemr, 1567) shall be established to be kept and.
obeyed, under pain of high! treason for the breakers thereof.

- '-THAT by the fame parliament also be flablifhed all executions and judgments.
given against any person to the death of the late king.

---'HAT by the fame parliament, a remission to. be made universally from the

queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and also from every one subjet to another,
saving, that restitution be made of lands and houses, and all other things heritable,
that have been, by either fide, taken from them which were the owners thereof at
the committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

THAT by the fame parliament it be declared who shall be fucceWors to the crown

next after the Q of Scots and her iflue; or else, that such right as the D. of Cha-
tclherault had, at the marriage of the Q. of Scots with the lord Darnley, may be
confcrvcd and not prejudized.

T'lHAT the Q( of Scots may have leave of the queen's majesty of England, twelve

months after.the said parliament, and that he shall not depart out of England, with-
out fpecial'licence of the queen's majefly.

THAFT- r the young king hall be nourished and brought up in England, till he be

years of age.

Ir

55

IT is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition between the queen and

her fubjeds may be made with certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world for
her honour, as though all the parts hould come of her, and yet for the surety of con-
trarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's majesty are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 42 .)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. 1568-9.

E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, be any writing, to renew paper-Office.
that which it hath pleased God to make grevious to us and forryfull to yow;

but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having occasion to command yow
in our service, and yow also whileft yow are to serve us. We require yow to con-
fider of this that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hitherto yow
have accuflumate in our fervife; at the time of our last letters written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we had understanding
out of Scotland of certain writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongt
the which one is found to contain great and manifest untruths touching us and others
also, as hall and may plainly appear unto yow by the coppy of the fame, which
likewise we fend yow, and because at the fame time we were advertised, that it should
be hortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not, we thought good firt to
remove the queen, before we would disclose the fame, and then expect the issue there-
of; and now, this day by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained,
that since that time the fame matters contained in the writing, arepublifhed in
diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet, for the dif-
charge of our honor, and to confound the falsehood contained in that writting, not
only to have the fame reproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the coppy
whereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient fort to charge that queen
therewith, so as he may be moved to declare the authors thereof, and persuaders of
her to write in such slanderous fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season, we
have here flayed her commissioners, knowing no other whom we may more proba-
bly presume to be parties hereunto, than they, untill the queen hall name ome
other, and acquit them; who being generally charged, without expressing to them
any particularity, do use all manner of speeches to discharge themselves; wherefore
our pleasure is, that ye hall, after ye have well perused the coppy of this writting
sent to yow, speedily declare unto her, that we have good understanding given us
of diverse letters and writtings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand,
amongit which, one such writting is sent with her commandment expressly as now it
is already publihed, as we are much troubled in mind that a princess as fle is having
a cause in our hands so implicated with difficulties and calamitys, hould either con-
ceave in her own mind, or allow of them that should devise such false, untrue, and
improbable matters against us, and our honor, and pecially to have the aventure to
have the fame being known so untrue to be published; and you shall also fay, be-
cauCe we will not think To ill of her, as that it should proceed of her self, but rather
the hath been counselled thereunto, or by abuse made to think some part thereof to
be true, we require her, even as he may look for any favour at our hands, that
she will disburden herself as much as truly flie may herein, and name them which
have been the authors and perfwaders thereof, and so fle fiall make as great amends
to us as the cafe may require; after you have thus far proceeded, and had rome

S f 2 answer

answer of her, whether she hall deny the writing absolutely, or name any that have
been the advisers thereof, you shall fay unto her that we have stayed her commis-
fioners here, until we may have ome answer hereof, because we cannot but impute
to them some part of this evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may be
known; and as oon as you can have direct answers from her, we pray you to re-
turn us the fame; for as the cafe itandeth, we cannot but be much disquieted with it,
having our honour so deeply touched contrary to any intention in us, and for any
thing we know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in the fame
writting void of thought for the matters, to them therein imputed; you may impart to
the queen of Scots either the contents of the slanderous letter, or shew her the copy
to read it, and you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to join with you
there as you shall think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Wetherby the 28th January,

1568.

An Original - W IL L fuprefs my own griefss, and pass them over with silence, for the
in the Paper present learning of your majefty-and for this queen's answer to the coppie
Office. of her supposed letter sent into Scotland, I must add this unto my brother's let-

ter, sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight late; in process of time, he did not deny
but that the firif lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to a letter that she
had ent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her
son into your majesty's hands, and to avoid that the fame should not be done without
her content, made her, the faith, to write in that behalf; he faith also that she wrote
that they hould cause a proclamation to be made to stir her people to defend my
lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her said son, and impunge his
rebellious government, as he termed it, but mhe utterly denyeth to have written any
of the other slanderous parts of the said letter touching your majesty ; he said also,
that he fufpeaed that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the author of some
Scotch letters devised in her name, but fie would not allow me to write this for any
part of her answer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 428.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the lord of Lid-

dington.

2',th of Jul),

;t of 0O U R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the i5th of the fame. For
irr(t thcOri- yL answer whereunto you hall understand, that friends here to my lord regent
giual. and you do wish such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and circumstances

there arise no dissention, or at the leaf, no more nor other than the difference of
countries doth neceflarily require. We here do think convenient that as few delays
he used as may be, for the consummation of the matter in hand, which principally
to advance, your allowance, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland, is most
rcquilite, for you are so wife, and well acquainted with the state of the wrld, and
with all our humnours, as you know that some do allow and dliillow for ecalon, some
for rcflpCCt of multitude, fume for refpcSt of persons, and so the cause is to go for-
ward as men do like to et it forward. You are not to feck that some will ule cati-

I tions,

tions, ome neutrality, sone delays, and some will plainly impunge it. And yet all
and every of these forts will alter their doings, when they shall fee the regent and his
favourers accord with the best and greatefl part there, and agree with the wires
and itronget party here. Tho' the matter has taken its beginning here, upon deep
and weighty considerations, for the weil of both the princes and their realms, as
well presently, as in time to come, yet it is thought moif expedient, that the regent
and the realm of Scotland, by you, fhuuld propose the matter to the queen our so-
vereign, if you like to use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a
scar, and no wound of the hurts pall. I would be glad that this my letter flould
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it seems your queen's restoration
and marriage to the duke of Norfolk shall be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejetion. To which proceedings, because you pray me to write
frankly, I fay and reason thus, me thinketh you use a propofterous order, to !emand
the content of such persons, in such matters, as their minds to a good end hath ra-
ther been felt or prepared, and therefore there must needs follow either a universal
refusal, or a factious division among f you, whereby a blouftering intelligence mul
needs come to queen Elizabeth of the intended marriage from thence, which ought
to have been secretly and advisedly propounded unto her highness ; hereby you fee
then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majesty shall be made inexorable, and so
bring the matter to such pafle, as this which hould have wrought surety, quietness,
and a stay to both the queens and their realms, shall augment your calamity, and
throw us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy division amongst
ourselves ; for you may not conjecture that the matter is now in deliberation, but
expeeth good occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly of
the managing of this matter, as to think we have not cast the worfl, or to enter
therein so far without the affifance of the nobility, the ablest, the wisest, and the
mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been co.cealed
until you, as the fittell minister, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the re-
gent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far maRler Woddes defamations do carry
them of queen Elizabeth's affeions, and malter secretary's, to affif the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but I do aflu-
redly think, that her majefly will prefer her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and
the conservation of her people, before any device, which may proceed from vain
discourse, or imperfections of paiions, and inconsiderate affcalions. And as for
Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fal: afore, so he
coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and specially when the reliques be of no great
value or power. If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and con-
flancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently, you may repose as
well of him in this matter, as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem-
broke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft of the nobility; all which do
embrace and protefle the accomplifllment of this cafe. I have, according to your
advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame zeal and care of his
well-doing that I owe to him, whom I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath as-
fured unto him the queen of Scotland's fivour and good opinion, wherewith he
ftemeth to be well fatisff'd. If your credit be, a; I trust, halten your coming hither,
for it is very neceflary that you were here presently. Q. Elizabeth both doth write
to my lord Regent in uch fort, as he may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her

majcfly's

57

majeity's affetion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he conjectureth
of him, the effe& of which her majesty's letter you shall underfland, by my lord
Leicester's letter unto you at this dispatch. At the court, 2oth July, 1569.

No. XXX, (Vol. I. p. 430.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. probably Lord Burleigh.

159. -lE CAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on small occasions, and that

IHrl. Lib 37. J the mention of the marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother,
B 9, so. 3. and the D. of Norfolk, hath this while pall been very frequent in both the realms,

and then I myself to be spoken of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the last
come to her majety's ears. I will, for fatisfation of her highness, and the dif-
charge of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto you my interefl, and med-
ling in that matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is prejudical to
her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king my sovereign, this his realm, and me.
What conferrences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were
with me within the realm of England, I am not able to declare; but I am no wife
forgetful of any thing that pawsed betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end her majefly may underfand how I have been dealt with, in this
matter, I am compelled to touch rome circumitances, before there was any men-
tion of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commissioners, I found
very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and others her highness's commissioners,
in the beginning of the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely,
and so further. During which time, I entered into general speech, flicking at our
just defence in the matters that were objected against us, by the said queen's com-
miflioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but summary cognition in the cause
of controversy, with a small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day,
the lord Lithington's ecretary rode with the duke to Howard, what purpose they
had I cannot fay, but that night Lithington returning, and entring in conferrence
with me upon the state of our aion, I was advised by him to pass to the duke, and
require familiar conferrence, by the which I might have rome feeling to what iffuc
our matters would tend. According to which advice, having gotten time and place
convenient in the gallery of the house where the duke was lodged, after renewing
of our firit acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the assize of Leith,
and rome speeches palTed betwixt us; he began to fay to me, how he in England
had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of many, it was
to be tho't there could be none more fit instruments, to travel for the continuance
of the amity betwixt the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the pre-
sent state of both, and how I was entered in that ation tending o far to the queen's
dishonour, I was willed by him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inconveniencies her defimation in the matters
laid to her charge might breed to her poRterity. Her refpe& was not little to the
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my unfriends had the
next refpcet, and that I hould ecem the issue of her body would be the more as-
fectionatc to me and mine, than any other that could attain to that crown. And
so it should be ineeteft, that he affirmed her dimiflion made in Lochlevin, and we

to

to abflraa the letters of her hand write, that he should not be defamed in England.
My reply to that was, how the matter had passed in parliament, and the letters seen
to many, so that the abftrasting of the fame could not then secure her to any pur-
pose, and yet hould we, in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us. Affirming it
would not be fair for us that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majefly of England
was not made privy to the matter as she ought to be, to be in refpe&t we were pur-
pofely come in England for that end, and for the - of the grants of our cause.
The duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle matters well enough at
the court. After this, on the occasion of certain articles, that were required to be
resolved on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very ground of our
a6tion, we came up to the court; where some new commiflioners were adjoined to
the former, and the hearing of the matter ordained.to.be in the parliament house
at Wefimintfer, in pretence of which commiflioners of the said queen, and--
through the-- rebuking of the queen of England's own commiflioners, we uttered
the whole of the action, and produced such evidences, letters, and probations, as
we had, which might move the queen's majesty to think well of our cause. Where-
upon expecting her highness declaration, and ieeing no great likelihood of the fame
to be suddenly given, but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, flanding in hazard and
danger, we were put to the uttermost point off our witt, to imagine whereunto the
matters would tend, .tho' albeit we had left nothing undone for juffification of our
causes, yet appeared no end, but continual motions made to come to some accord with
the queei!, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no other answer to give them,
but that I should neither do against conscience nor honour in that matter. Notwith-
flanding.feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and that I.
was informed that the duke began to mislike of me, aind to speak of me, as that I
had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her -- and murderer, Probably
1 was advised to pals to him, and give him good words and to purge mnyfelf fit.;'r.
of the things objeced to me, that I hould not open the sudden entry of his evil
grace, nor have him to our enemy --- confidering his greatness. It being there-
withal whispered, and mewed to me, that if I departed, he hlanding discontented and
not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble in my way, as my.throat might
be cut before I came to Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough appear
to her marriage, I should not put him in utter despair, that my good will could not
be had therein.. So few days before my departing, I came to the park in Hampton-
court, where the duke and I met togetler, and there I declared unto him that it
was come to my ears, how ome misreport should be made of me to him, as that
I should speak irreverently and rashly of the said queen my sovereign's mother, such'
words as before cxpreffed, that he might -- thereby my affed'ion to be Prohlbly
so alienate from her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her preferment,f jO,7
howbeit he might persuade himself of the contrary, for as she once was the pcrfon
in the world that 1 loved best, having that honour to be so near unto her, and hav-
ing received such advancement and honour by her, I was not so ungrate or so un-
natural ever to wish. her body harm, or to speak of her as. was untruly reported of
me, (howsoever the truth were in the self) and as to the preservation of her son,
now my sovereign, had moved me to enter into this cause, and that her own prcfl.
sing was the occasion of that was uttered to her - whensoever God should move Prnl).ly.
her heart to repent of her by past behaviour and life, and after her known repcit .//.:,,-.

a;111c',
4

A P PE NDI X.

ance, that he hould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful marriage that he
was entred in, and then after were joined with such a godly and honourable a per-
foinare, as were affeiioned to the true religion, and whom we might trust, I could
f;id in my heart to love her, and to flew her as great pleafurc, favour, and good-
will, as ever I did in my life; and in cafe, he should be that personage, there was
none whom I could better like of, the queen--- in----of England being made
privv to the matter, and she allowing thereof, which being done, 1 hould labour in
a!l things that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the
king my sovereign's estate, and prayed him not to think otherwise of me, for my
affection was rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God should direct
her to know herself, than utterly alienated and abftra6ced from her; which he seem-
ed to accept in very good part, faying, Earl of AMurray thou thinks of me that thing,
whereunto I will make none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and all
night, I was in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave myself in
that weighty matter, first, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempt-
ed without the queen's majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this realm
and I myself in particular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's
hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness, since God pofleffed her majetly
with her crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
protesting, none other were or should be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not
find in my heart to utter any thing, that might endanger him; moved to the utter-
most with there cogitations, and all desire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to
fend me ome good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfadcion of my trou-
bled mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the
court, where he began to find frange with me, that in the matter I made so diffi-
cult to him, Hfanding so precisely on conferrence, and how when I had in my com-
munication with the duke, come so far- and there he made ome discourse with

Probably me, about that which was talk betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had--
a)JclI',fi. the matter to my lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby discharged at the

duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in every point to my
lord of Leicester, who desired me to shew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I
refused to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that
he as one --by her majesty, and for many benefits received at her highness's
hands is obliged to wifll her well, flould make declaration of the fame to her ma-
jcety, as I understand by rome speech of her highness to me, he did. 'This my de-
claration to the duke was the only cause, that staid the violence and trouble prepar-
ed for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways underHtand. The fame declaration I
was obliged to renew since in writings of ----sent to my frvant John Wood.
'1'he film whereof, I trufl, he hewed the duke, and fumething also I wrote to him-
tlf, for it was tlio't this hould redeem some time, that the duke should not suddenly
declare Iiini our enemy, for his greatnes was oft laid before me, and what fiicndfhip
hl h1l.1 of tl, chief of the nobility in England, lo that it might appear to the queen's
m:l it \y of l'ii.,lalul-fo cold towards us, and doing nothing publickly that might Icem
.1'4 ou,
" '. ' lor us, we had tome caufc to furpect that her highness flould not be contra-
riou i, tl:i n, llrriage when it should be propocd to her. The sharp mefnage sent by
l;cr I:injclt with the lord Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the duke tending

1o

so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing one manner of conditions
from both, gave us to think that her highness had been foreseen in the duke's de-
sign, and that he might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was devised
in England, that the lord of Lethington should come as from me, and break the
matter to her highness, as her majelty in a letter declared that she looked for his
coming, yet that devise proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the convention Probal':
could no wife accord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether Ath.io-e.
mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great inconveniencies, to the surety and quietnes
of this whole isle; for our proceedings have declared our mifliking and disallowance
of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleased, he was ready for the jour-
ney. And in likewise it was devised to give consent, that the between the
said queen and Bothwell, should be suffered to proceed in this realm, as it was de-
fired by the said lord Boyd, by reason we could not underitand what was the queen's
majelty's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf -- And whereas ye mean, that
her highness was not made privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me.
The first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord of Leicester, and by
him imparted to her majesty, so far as I could perceive by some speech of her high-
ness's to me, before my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I have been
dealt withal for this marriage, and how just necessity moved me not to require diret-
ly, that which the duke appeared o--- unto. And for my threatnings, to
assent to the fame, I have exprefled the manner; the persons, that laid the matter
before me were of my own company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her
majesty, that she let no speeches nor any other thing passed and objecded to my pre-
judice, move her majesty to alter her favour- towards me, or any ways to doubt
of my assured constancy towards her highness; for in any thing which may tend to
her honour and surety, I will, while 1 live, beflow myself, and all that will do for
me, notwithflanding my hazard or danger, as proof hall declare, when her ma-
jefty finds time to employ me.

APPENDIX
VOL. II.

T t

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

A P P E N D IX

To THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.)
William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leiceffer, March 2th,

1570, from Ledington.

H E great desolation threatned to this whole realm, be the divisions thereof An Oi:rinal.
in dangerous factions, doth press me to frame my letters to your lordflip,
in other fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other reifeR, but

only to maintain my private credit; therefor I am driven to furnish them with mat-
ter, which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by misconstruing my meaning,
some there may take occasion of offence, thinking that I rather utter my own pas-
sions, than go about to inform your lordship truly of the state; but I trust my plain
dealing (hall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible,
I will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of this country; which first is divided
into two facions, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign, the other
alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjuffly deprived of her
state; the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gentlemen, and prin-
cipal burroughs of the realme, who hall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in
hand, the queen's majesty your sovereign's allowance and proteEtion; the other hath
in it some moss principal) of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the in-
ferior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look assuredly that all kings do
allow their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What consequence this division
will draw after it, I leave it to your lordflip's consideration, there is fallen out another
division, accedentally, by my lord regent's death, which is like to change the Itate of
the other two factions, to increase the one, and diminish the other, which is grounded
upon the regiment of the realm. Some number of noblemen aspire to the go-
verment, pretending right thereto by reason of the queen's demission of the croun,
and her commission granted at that time for the regiment during the king's mino-
rity, another faction doth altogether repine against that division, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort amongst the earls, shall pre-
fume to challenge to themselves a rule over the whole realme, the next of the blood,
the firit in rank, the greatest alway both for the antientry of their houses, degree,
and forces, being negleckted ; this order they think preposterous, that the meaner
fort shall be placed in publick function to command, and the greater hall continue
as private men to obey; besides that, they think if the commission had in the be-
ginning been valewable, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not be ex-
tended to the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed are ceased, and o
the effect of the whole void; the letter part of this division hath many pretences,
for betides the queen's facion, which is wholly on that ide, a great number of there

T t 2 that

I.-.'

A P P E N D I X.

that have heretofore professed the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will not
yield to the goverment of the other, whose preferment for respects they mislike,
when the queen's fatlion hall be in:reafed, with a part of the king's, and these not
of least fubltance, and yow may judge what is like to inife ; an other incident is
like to move men to enter in further discourses, it is given out here in Scotland,
that the queen's majesty is setting forth fonie forces towards the border, which shall
enter this realm, to countenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and upprefs the
contrary fadtion, and bruts are spread, that the fame shall be here out of hand ;
there that think themselves of equal force with their contrary facLion at home, or
rather an over match to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of another
prince, rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take advise of neceflity,
and evill councillors, and seek also the maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby
her majesty (altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) must be driven to ex-
ceflive charges, and it would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at
one time to set us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces
coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is arrived at
Dumbarton, a galzeon with a meflenger sent exprefly from the king of France, to
that part of the nobility, that favours the queen, to learn the slate of the country,
and what support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her afairs, or for their
own safety; assuredly this message will be well received, and suffered accordingly,
this is the present state of Scotland. Now if your lordship would also know my
opinion, how to choice the best, as the cafe standeth; I will in that also fatisfie
your lordship, I am required from them to deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge
wither I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing, when 1 simply utter my judge-
ment, and go not about to dilguife my intents. 1 trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland, which she hath gone about
to purchase, with bcftowing great charges, and the loss of some of her people;
this desire is honourable for her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and of
none to be disallowed ; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the whole
realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove com-
modious for her to suit the friendship of a faction of Scotland, for in so doing, in
gaining the blft, he may lose the more, and the fame would bring all her actions
with us in suspicion, if she shou!d go about to nourish factions amongst us, which
meaning I am sure never entered into her majesty's heart; then if it be the friend-
ship of the whole she doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one part, go about
to overthrow the remnant, which will not be so faifable, as ome may give her to
underfland ; but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
late, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means to an uniformity, so
shall fle give us all occasion to think well of her doings, that he tcndeth our wealth,
and provoks us univerally to with unto her majesty a most prosperous continuance;
by the contrary, if for the pleasure of a few, he will fend forces to suppress these
whom they mislike, and to consequently offend many; men be not so faint hearted,
but they have courage to provide for their own fafty, and not only will embrace the
ellc:ns partly offered, but will also procure further, at the hand of other princes.
'This for mine own part, I do abhorr, and protest I desire never to fee forces of
si rangers to set foot within this land, yet I know not what point neceflity may drive
nmei into, ;s if men in the middle of the sea were in a hip, which suddenly hould
be fIt on fire, the fear of burning would make them to leap into the fca, and oon after

2 the

the fear of the watter would drive them to cleive again to the fired hip, so for avoid-
ing present evil, men will many times be inforced to have recourse to another, no els
dangerous. Trust me forces will not bring forth any good fruit to her majefly's
behove, it must be ome way of treaty flall serve the turn, wherein by my former let-
ters your lordship doth know already what is my judgement; yow fee how plainly
do write, without consideration in what part my letters may be taken, yet my hope
is that such as will favourably interpret them, fiall think that I mean as well to her
majesty, and that realme, as there that will utter other language. I wish the con-
tinuance of the amity betwixt the two contrys, without other respect, and will not
conceal from her majesty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the prejudice there-
of; if I (hall perceave her majesty taking frank dealings in evil part, I hall fiom
thenceforth forbear; in the mean season I will not cease to trowble your lordship, as
I fnall have occasion to write, and so I take my leave of your lordship.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks, July 2d, 1570.

'R G H T trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this day we have Ca!dercv.
R5k received your letters of 28 the last month, with all other letters, sent fi-om M. S. Iliflory
Scotland, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is desired to be given be- V. . p. S 9.
fore the tenth of this month; which is a very short time, the weightinels of the
matters, and the distance of the places con!idered; nevertheless we have, as the
flortnefs could susser it, resolved to give this answer following, which we will, that
yow, by warrand hereof, hall cause to be given in our name to the earl of Lennox
and the reft of the noblemen conveend with him. Where it is by them, in their
letters, and writings alledg'd, that for lack of our resolute answer concerning the
eflablifhing of the regiment of the realm under their young king, great inconveni-
ences have happned, and therefore they have deferred now at their last convention to
determine of the famine, who hall have the place ofgovernour, until the 2Ift this
month, before which time they require to have our advise, in what person or persons
the goverment of that realm hall be established, we accept very thankfull the good
will and reputation they have of us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our
advise in a matter, that toucheth the slate of their king, their selves, and realm b
near, wherein as we perceive, that by our former forbearing to intermeddle therein,
they have taken tome discomfort, as though that we would not have regard to their
itate and literty, so on the other part, they of their wisdoms ought to think, that it
might be by the whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form of go-
verment, or a governour by name, for that howsoever we flould mean well if we
should do so, yet it could not be without some jealousy in the heads of the estate, no-
bility, and community of that realm, that the govcrment thereof fliould be by me
piecially named, and ordain'd ; so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifik-
ing molt that they Thould take any discomfort by our forbearing to show our mind
therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed, confidcring with ourselves how
now that realmn had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their king, and
hy reason of his base age, governed heretofore by a very carefull and honourable per-
Ill, the earle of Murray, untill that by a mifchicvous perlbii, (;an evil example) he

W'is

65

was muldrcd, wherevy great disorder and confusion of necessity had, and will more
follow, it dctermination be not made of f.me other fpeciall person, or persons, to
take te charge of goverour, or superior ruler fpeciall, for adminifiration of law
and juilice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
fpeciall governour to be chosen; and therefore being well aflilrcd, that their own un-
der,.!!:; ' !r of all others is befr to confider the slate of that rcalnm, and to dilcern the
abilities :.nd qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge, we flall
.better fi.ie ourselves, whom they by their common consent hall firfi choose and
a;ioillt to that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named, and
that blccau'e they fha!l perceave that we have care of the person of their king, who
bv ncarnzes of blood, and in refpct of his so young years, ought to be very tender
nJd dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they shall all ac-
cord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be governor alone,
or jointly with others, (whom we hear to be in the mean time bh their common con-
sent appointed lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none can be cho-
len in that whole realm, that hall more desire the preservation of the king, and be
more meet to have the goverment for his safety, being next to him in blood of any
iioblc an of that realm, or elsewhere ; and yet, hereby, we do not mean to pre-
Icrive to them this choice, except they shall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we ould have them well assured, that whatfover reports
of devises, are, or hall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our
mind to alter the state of the king or goverment of that realm, the fame are
without jut cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertised them,
that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refuse, what
the queen of Scots or her part shall fay and offer, not only for her own assurance,
but for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that hall
be offered, we mean not to break the order of law and justice, by advancing her
cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we hall delliberately and assuredly fee, upon
the hearing of the whole, ome place necessary, and just cause to do; and therefore
finding that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realm,
and thereof invetfed by coronation and other folemnities used and requisite, and ge-
nerally lo received :e the whole estates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the com-
plaints or inormations of the queen against her son, to do any a whereby to make
conclusion of goverments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to continue,
yea not to fuffcr it to be altered by any means that we may impelhe, as to our ho-
nor it doth belong, as by your late ations hath manifestly appeared, untill by some
jiuticc, and clear cause, we shall be diredly induced otherwise to declare our opi-
nion ; and this we would have them to know to be our determination and course that
we mean to hold, whereon we trust they for their king may fee how plainly and ho-
nourably we mean to proceed, and how little cause they have to doubt of us, what-
Iocvcr to the contrary they have or shall hear; and on the other part, we pray
them of their wifldoms to think how unhonourable, and contrary to all human order
it were for u;, when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear her
c.auf, and doth offer to be ordered be us in the fame, as well for matters betwixt
cut ti lvs and her, as betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm, againlf
which uofnis ro reason could move us to refuse to give ear, that we should afore-
hand openly and dirctfly, before the caufcs be heard and confidered, as it were,
give a juldncnt or fcntcnce either for ourselves or for them, whom flc maketh to be

her
59

her 'c6ntraries. Finally ye shall admonish them, that they do not, by mifcon--
ceiving our good meaning toward them, or by indirect aflertions of their adver-
fary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in such fort, that our
good meaning towards them shall not take such effect towards them, as they shall de-
fire, or themselves have need of. All this our answer ye shall cause be given them,
and let them know, that for the fortnefs of time, this being the end of the second
of this month, we neither could make any longer declaration of our mind, nor yet
write any several letters, as if time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
1570o

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

The bilhop of Ross to secretary Lidington from Chattifworth.

IH AVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Chattifworth, the
Ioth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like

as the queen did with my lord Levingtfon, by the which you will be reollved of
many points contained in your said letter. I writ to you that I received your letter
and credit from Thos. Cowy at London, and ent to Leicester to know the queen of
England's mind whether if you hould come here or not. He sent me word, that
the will no ways have you come as one of the commiflioners, because he is yet of-
fended with you; and therefore it appears good that ye- come not hither, but remain
where you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best advance the queen's
affairs, for I perceive your weil and safety depends thereon, in respect of the great
feid and ennimity born againfi you by your Scots people, and the great heirship taken
of your father's landis; both were sure demonilrations of their malice. Yet I am
encouraged by your stout and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no deligence hall
be omitted to procure supports forth off all parts where it may be had. We will not
refuse the aid neither of Papif, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and to this end,
during this treaty, let all things be well prepared. And feeing my lord Seaton is de-
firous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very neceffiry that he so do, for the
duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the king of Spain to give support, and
1 am sure that there he flall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it abides
only on the coming of some men of countenance, to procure and receive the fame.
iHe mufl needs tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty, which
will be a great furtherance to the fame here, The queen has already written tb the
duke D'Alva for this effe6, advertizing of his coming; there is certain lilIs of mo-
ney coming for support of the Englishmen, as I wrote to you before, from the pope.
Whereupon I would he had a general commriiffiori to deal for them, and receive such
fums as hall be given. The means fiall be found to cause you be anfuerit of the
fums you writ for, to be dilponit upon the furnishing of the cafile of Edenburgh, so
being Come honest and true man were ent to Planders to receive it, as haid is, X\ hich
I would you prepared and ent. Orders hall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
We have proponit your avyce in entring to treat with the queen of England, for
retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the Ellglifhmen
are tho t very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands, in that cafr,
eftote prudentes ficut serpentes. You may take experience with the hard dealing
with me, how ye would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of danger,
4 Ilig

5 June 1750.

was muvtiserd, where¼' great dior'der and confusion of neceflty had, and will moe
follvo, if determination be not made of finme other fpeciall person, or persons, to
takc the charge of governoiur, or superior ruler fpeciall, for administration of law
and juilicc, we cannot but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
fpeciall governour to be chosen ; and therefore being well afiurcd, that theirown un-
derP'i.a:nnd: of all others is best to confider the state of that realm, and to discern the
ailitics .nd qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge, we (hall
better qfti:i.e ourselves, whom they by their common consent shall first choose and
a; nilt to th

tt purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named, anl

that lbcr.uc:' they ha.l pcrceave that we have care of the person of their king, who
by ncarnels of blood, and in rfpescd of his so young years, ought to be very tender

Gad !ecar to us, we hall not hide our opinion from them, but if they (hall all ac-

cord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be governor alone,
or jinty with others, (whom we hear to be in the mean time by their common con-
t'iio: appointed lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none can be cho-
tcn in that whole realm, that shall more desire the preservation of the king, and be
more meet to have the goverment for his safety, being next to him in blood of any
olblcman of that realm, or elsewhere ; and yet, hereby, we do not mean to pre-
Icrive to them this choice, except they hall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we ould have them well aflured, that whatfover reports
,f devises, arc, or hall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our
mind to alter the state of the king or goverment of that realm, the fame are
without just cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertised them,
that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refute, what
the queen of Scots or her part hall fay and offer, not only for her own aflurance,
but for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that hall
be offered, we mean not to break the order of law and justice, by advancing her
cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we hall delliberately and assuredly fee, upon
the hearing of the whole, ome place necessary, and just cause to do; and therefore
finding that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realm,
and thereof invefled by coronation and other folemnities used and requisite, and ge-
nerally ( received e the whole estates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the com-
plaints or informations of the queen against her son, to do any at whereby to make
conclusion of goverments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to continue,
yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we may impefhe, as to our ho-
nor it doth belong, as by your late ations hath manifestly appeared, untill by ome
jiufice, and clear cause, we shall be direly induced otherwise to declare our opi-
nion ; and this we would have them to know to be our determination and course that
we mean to hold, whcreon we trust they for their king may fee how plainly and ho-
nourably we mean to proceed, and how little cause they have to doubt of us, what-
fcver to the contrary they have or shall hear; and on the other part, we pray
them of their wisdoms to think how unhonourable, and contrary to all human order
it wceI for u;, when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear her
caufc, and doth or to be ordered be us in the fame, as well for matters betwixt
cut nfil' ' and her, as betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm, again
which ofi't lno re:lon could move us to refuse to give ear, that we fliould afore-
hand openly and dirclly, before the caufcs be heard and confidered, as it were,
give a judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them, whom fhc makcth to be

her
59

her 'cntraries. Finally ye hall admonish them, that they do not, by mifcon-
ceiving our good meaning toward them, or by indirect assertions of their aver-
fary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in such fort, that our
good meaning towards them hall not take such effet towards them, as they shall de-
fire, or themselves have need of. All this our answer ye hall cause be given them,
and let them know, that for the shortness of time, this being the end of the second
of this month, we neither could make any longer declaration of our mind, nor yet
write any several etters, as if time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
1570o

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

The bilhop of Ross to secretary Lidington from Chattifworth.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Chattifworth, the 5 June I750.

oth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like

as the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which you will be resolved of
many points contained in your said letter. I writ to you that I received your letter
and credit from Thos. Cowy at London, and ent to Leicefer to know the queen of
England's mind whether if you hould come here or not. He Cent me word, that
he will no ways have you come as one of the ommiffioners, because the is yet of-
fended with you ; and therefore it appears good that ye- come not hither, but remain
where you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best advance the queen's
affairs, for I perceive your weil and safety depends thereon, in refpec of the great
feid and ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the great heirship taken
of your father's landis; both were sure demonfirations of their malice. Yet I am
encouraged by your stout and deliberate mind. Aflure yourself no deligence shall
be omitted to procure supports forth off all parts where it may be had. We will not
refute the aid neither of Papiit, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and to this end,
during this treaty, let all things be well prepared. And feeing my lord Seaton is de-
firous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very necessary that he so do, for the
duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the king of Spain to give support, and
I am sure that there he hall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it abides
only on the coming of some men of countenance, to procure and receive the fame.
He must needs tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty, which
will be a great furtherance to the fame here The queen has already written to the
duke D'Alva for this effect, advertizing of his coming ; there is certain fluns of mo-
ney coming for support of the Englishmen, as I wrote to you before, from the pope.
Whereupon I would he had a general conilrifliori to deal for them, and receive filch
fums as ihall be given. The means flall be found to cause you be anfuerit of the
fums you writ for, to be difponit upon the furnishing of the cafile of Edenburgh, so
being Come honest and true man were sent to landers to receive it, as fhid is, an hich
I would you prepared and ent. Orders hall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
We have proponit your avyce in entring to treat with the queen of England, for
retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the lingliflmen
are tho't very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands, in that cafe,
cftote prudentes flcut serpentes. You may take experience with the hard dealing
with me, how ye would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of dangrl,
4 benig

being in medio nationes pravae; alway no fear, with God's grace, fllall make me
flirink from her majefly's service. Since the queen of England has refused that you
come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft fedata malitia-amorreorum, &c. and
therefore if Athol or Cathenes might by any means be procured to come, they were
the moll fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet if he and I were not both of one
firname; so the treaty would get the less credit either in Scotland or here. There-
fore avvs, and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come
with them, whoever comes, for so is the queen's pleasure; in my,laft packet, with
lames Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the queen's own
hatnd writing to him, which I trust ye received. I am sorry ye come not for the great
re'ief I hoped to have had by your presence, for you could well have handled the
queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont to do. The reft I refer to
your good wisdom, praying God to fend you health, From Chattifworth the S5th
of January.

No. IVi (Vol. II. p. 26.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grainge and Lethington

zoungare upon the 8th day of Oft. 1571.
W FtHereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's pleasure, what she will do

for appeasing of these controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves to

be at her commandment, touching the common tranquility of the whole isle, and
the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye should leave off the
maintenance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king, whom he
will maintain to the utmofi of her power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and the king's party, to receive
you into favour, upon reasonable conditions for security of life and livings.

ALSO she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she has prat6ifed with the pope

and other princes, and also with her own subje"s in England, great and dangerous
treasons againif the slate of her own country, and also to the deftrusion of her own
person, that she shall never bear authority, nor have liberty while he lives.

IF ye refute there gentle offers, now offered unto you, she will presently aid the

king's party, with men, ammunition, and all necessary things, to be had against
you.

WHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with speed, without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 34.)

Articles sent by Knox to the general assembly, August 5th, I572.

Calderw. MS. F IRST, desiring a new a to be made ratifying all things concerning the king and
Hillory. V. 2. his obedience that were enaaed of before without any change, and that the
3c6. ministers who have contraveend the former as be corrected as accordeth.

T H A T fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility maintaining the king's
cause, that whatsoever procecdeth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk

be

be ot prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they specially of the ministers, that have
been robbed of their pofleflions within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or
otherwise dung and injured, may be restored.

To futeat the regent, that no gift of any bifhopricik or other benefice be given to

any person, contrary to the tenor of the afts made in the time of the first regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the said as, or to any unqualified
person, may be revoked and made null be an aRof secret council, and that all bi-
fhopricks To vacand may be presented, and qualified persons nominat thereunto, within
a year after the vaking thereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the com-
missioners of the nob lity and of the kirk in the month of January las, and in fpe-
cial to complain upon the giving of bifhoprick of Ros to the lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, great or small, be given be simple donation of

any lord regent, without content of the poffefTor of the saids benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admission of the superintendent or commissioners of the province
where this benefice lyeth, or of the bishops lawfully eleced according to the aid
order taken at Leith ; and desire an.ad of council to be made thereupon, until the
next parliament, wherein the famine may be Specially inaóted, with inhibition to the
lords of session to give any letters or decreets, upon such simple gifts of benefices
or pentions not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk presently as-
fembled declare all such gifts null o far as lyeth in their power.

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which were in the first and fe-

cond regents time be not chang'd as now it is commonly; but that this clause be
contained in the presentation, that if the persons presented make not residence, or
be flandrous or found unworthy either in life or docrine be the judgment of the
kirk, (to which alwife he hall be fubjeEt) or meet to be transported to another
room at the fight of the kirk, the said presentation and all that shall fall thereupon
ihall be null and of no force nor effet; and this to have place also in the nomina-
tion of the bishops.

THAT an a be made in this aflembly that all things done in prejudice of the

kirk's alTumptions of the third, either be papists or others, by giving of fews, life-
rents, or taks, or any otherwise difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null
with a solemn protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an act be made decerning and ordaining all bishops, admitted to the order

of the kirk now received, to give account of their whole rents, and intromiflions
therewith once in the year, as the kirk hall appoint, for such causes as the kirk may
easily confider the fame to be most expedient and necefiar.

ANENT thejurifdiaion of the kirk, that the fame be determined in this afiembly,

because this article hath been long pofpond to make fute to the regent and council
for remedy againfl messengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk, who procure againfR
ministers and ministry, and for futting ofjutice of the kirk's actions in the feflion.

VoL. II.

No. VI.
U u

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 39.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace concluded thie

23d Feb. I572.

E it known to all men, by these presents, that II Hent Killigrewe, Efq; am.
baffador for the queen's majesty of England, Forafmutch as, at the earnest mo.

tion and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord and
pacification of the publick troubles and civil war within this realm of:Scotland agreed
and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right honourable George
earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and'Baidzenoch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to
the duke's Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of Abirbrothock,
for the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, their kinfolks,
friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending on themn; in treating of
the which said pacification, the murderers of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the
earl of Levenax grandfather, late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm
and lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the fruais or moveable goods,
which the said persons have taken fra perfonis profefing the king's obedience, or for
the damages done or committed by them, since the l5th day of Junij, 567, and
before the penult day of July last by passed, by reason of the common cause or any
thing depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commifaries nmatteris of such
wecht and importance, as the king's present regent could not conveniently, of him-
self, remit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpet of the neceflity of the present pa-
cification, and for the weil of the king, and common quietness of this realm and
lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of remission of the said murderers, and of
the discharge of the said fruais, moveable goods, and other damages, moved by the
persons desiring the said remiflions and discharge to the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habitation to the king of Scots.
And whatsoever her majesty shall advise and councel touching the said remiflion and
discharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the king and univerfat quietness of
the realm of Scotland, shall perform, observe, and fullfil the fame. And in likewise,
the said earl Huntly, and commendatour of the Abirbrothock, being urged to have
delivered pledges and hostages for observation of the conditions of the said accord
and pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majesty's name,. by vir-
tue!of my commission, to promise for them that they shall truly and faithfully ob-
serve and keep the said pacification, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their
parts, and that it would please her majesty to interpose herself, as surety and cau-
tioner for them to that effe-t, to the king's majesty of Scotland their sovereign and
his laid regent, which I have done, and promise to do, by virtue of his majeffy's
commiflioin, as by the honourable and plain dealing of the aid earl and lord, their
intention to peace well appears, the fame being most agreeable to the mind of the
q(u en's im;jefty my fovcreign, which o long by her miniiers hath travelled for the
fdid pacillation, and in the end, at her motion and solicitation, the fame is ac-
coridel, kowing her majety's godly dcfire, that the fme may continue unviolate,
and that the nrlblemcnl anl others now returning to the king's obedience ilhall have
fufticient furcty for their lives, livings, honours and goods. Therefore in her ma-

jcty's
?7

jefty's name, and by virtue of my commission, promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
and commendator of Abirbrothock, that by her majesty's good means, the said re-
mission and discharge shall be purchased and obtained tothem, their kinfolks, friends,
servants, and partakers, now properly depending upon them, (the persons specified
in the first abitinance always excepted) as also that the said pacification hall be truly
observed to them, and that her majefly shall interpose herself as confervatrix thereof,
and endeavour herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in all points
and articles thereof accordingly, In witpefs whereof, I have to this present fgfcrib-
ed with my hand, and fealed the fame with mine own eal the 3th clay of Febi ,
Anno Domini 1572. And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof
and the parliament which fball be appointed for their restitution, or at the furthelf
before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.

The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of Scotland's dowry.
T HE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowry, betides other 576.

poffeflions, thedukedom of Turene, which was solemnly contracted and given Cott. Lib.

to her by the king and estates of parliament; which dukedom the possessed peace- Cal B. V.
ably till 1S76, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Monfr his
brother to augment whose appennage this dutchy was given, to which the
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who were her near relations,
provided the equivalent which was promised her hould be faithfully performed.
So that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, lhe had grant-
ed her the county of Vermaudaife with the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley and Vetry;
tho' 'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of equal value with Tu-
rene, but was promised to have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an
equal value. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confirmed in the
courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court of aids, chamber of the treasury,
and others necessary; upon which the entered into pofleffion of that county, &c.
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commiflioners of the chamber of accompts, it
was found, that the revenue of that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene
by 3000 livres. But intfead of making up this deficiency according to juflice,
some of the privy council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the presidents of Bellievre, Ni-
cocholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of her aforesaid
losses, did fell and alienate the lands of Senlis, and the dutchy of Eflaimpes, to
madam de Monpenfier, from whom the king received money; of which Sale the
councellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guarantees, which hath hindred
the aforesaid queen to have jutfice done her. So that madam de Monpenfier hath
been put in poffefion of there lands of Senlis, contrary to all the declaration, pro-
teflation, and assurances of the king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So
that the queen of Scotland is difpoffeffed of her dowry, contrary to all equity, with-
out any regard to her quality.

No. VII.
U 2

No. VII. (Vol. If. p. 44)

A letter from the lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

3d March,
1577-
E. of Mor-
toun's Ar-
chieves,.
Bund. B. No.
39.

T will please your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and has confidered the:
fame. The parson of Camsey was here at me before the receit thereof, direEa-

ed fra my lord of Mar, and the master anent my last written, which- was the an-
fwer of the writing that the matier ent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given my answer before the re,
ceit of your grace's letter, that I behuiffit to be besyd Sant Androis, at ane friends
tryst, which 1 might not omit; I underfand by my said cousin, that the king's
majefy is to write to divers of the nobility to come there, anent your ordfhip's
trial, and that he had written before his departing to my lord Monthrois. I under-
stand, likewise, he will write to your grace to come there for the fame effect, which
I tho't good to make your grace forseen of the fame, praying your grace, for the
love of God Aim ghty, to look upon the best, and not to sleep in security, but to
turn you with unfeigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that when the
king's majefly was very young, God made him the instrument to diver his mother.
from her authority, who was natural princess, for offending of his divine majefiy,
and that there ran no vice in her; but that the fame is as largely in. you, except
that your grace condescended not to the deftruEtion of your wife. For as to har-
Ibtry, and ambition, I think your grace has as far offended God,. and far more in
avaritioufnefs, which vycis God never left unplagued, except speedy repentance,
which I pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your.grace.can never have the
love of God nor man. I pray your grace flatter not yourself, for if your grace be-
lieves that ye have the good will of them that are the king's good wil!ers ye deceive.
yourself; for surely I fee perfectly that your own particulars are not contented, lat
by the ref, and that most principally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace,
beir with me that I am thus h'amlie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge,. but.
from the very affection of my heart towards your grace, which has continued since
we were acquainted. And now I fee, because the matter stands in. your grace's
handling with the king's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, 1 fee not how ye hall meet hereafter;. pray I your grace to call to God, and
1ook on the best, and'cat from your grace both your vices, to wit,. ambition and
avaritiofilefs. r am riding this day to Sanc&t Androis, and trufl. to return on Wed-
nefday at the farthest. If your grace will command me in any offices that are ho-
nef, that I'may do. your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise of your grace's:
mind, and .hall do to my power.and knowledge,, and this with my heartlie, &c, &c .

To our trufly cousin the lord Lochleverm

From the Ori- T RUSTY cousin, after our moftlhearty commendations.we received your letter,
eiual, E of of the- 3d of March, and as we take your plainness therein in good part, as pro-
Morton's Ar- ceeding from a friend and kilfinan,. in whose gpod affecion towards us we never,
* hi, vc',13tld. doubted; so ye may not think it firange that we purge ourself so far. of, your accufa-
B. No31. tion,.
72

tion, as in conscience we ftnd not ourself to have offended in. As touching our of.
fence to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to. submit us to his mercy;
for ambition surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in our private etate we
could, and can live as well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, without fur-
ther aspiring. The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm, indeed,
mon lead us, or any other that hall occupy that place, not simply to refpe& our-
self, but his majefly's.rowme which we supply, and therein not transcending the
bounds of measure, as, we trust, it hall not be found we have done, it ought not
to be attributed to any ambition in us. For as soon as ever his majefly hall think
himself ready and able for his own government, none hall more willingly agree and
advance the fame nor I, since 1 think never to et my face againfl him, whose ho-
nour, safety and preservation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never believe to
find otherwise at his hand than favour, although all the unfriends I have in the earth
were about him, to persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our friendly
dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit; as we trust
yourself confiders, but because the ambassadors of England, my lord of Angus, the
chancellor, treasurer, and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we
pray you heartily address yourself' to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye shall find
the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized thereof, with your own advice, by
Alex' Hay, whom we have tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from
Sterling rides to Douglas. And so we commit you in the. protetion of God. At
Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, 1577.

FoR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed 'it lies not in us so liberally to

deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers, nor never shall any sovereign and na-
tive born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them judges
to their own reward; in many causes, I doubt not to find the assistance of my friends,
but where my actions hall appear unhoneft, I will. not crave their assistance, but
let me, bear-my: own burthen..

No. VIII: (Vol. II.. p. 83.)
The coppy of' the king of France his direEions sent to Scotland with

Seineur de la Motte Fenelon. Tranffited out of the French.

I R ST, on their majeflys most chri fian part, he hall make the most honourable Caldcrw.

F salutation and visiting to the moft.ferene king of: Scotland, their good brother M. . Hiltoiv,
and little on, that in him,.is poffable. Vol.3.p. Po.

To give him their letters that are closed, fuch.and such like as they have written

to him with their hands, and to show exprefly the pelfe& friendship and singular as,
fedion, that their majestys bear to him, and. to bring back the answer.

To take head to the.things which touch near the most serene king, to the effect
that his person may be in.no danger, but that it may e most surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindred in the honest libertythat he ought to have, and that
no greater, or ftraiter.guards be.about him than he had before.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the authority, that God hath given

to him of king and prince. sovereign above his subjects, to the effetd he may as
freely ordain and command in his. affairs, and in the.affairs of his country, with his
ordinary council, as he was uscd to do of'before.

T iM AT

TH ATr his nobility, barons and' commonality of his contry may have their free

licrty to resort to his serene majefiy, without suspicion of greater guards or more
armed men about his person then the use was, that.they be not affraid and hindered
to rfort; and further that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely
speak to the said erene king and council, requiring the re-establishing of that that
may or hath been changed or altered.

AND that lie may know if the principalls of the nobility, and other men of good

behaviour of the towns and commonality of the contry conveens, and are content
with the form of government presently with the said serene king, to the end that if
their be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that he return
not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if lie may underfand that there be any who have not used them so reverently

towards the said serene king their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this behalf of his majefly moit christian the said serene king
his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame, and exorting them
to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all refpeEts with the obedi-
ence and true fubjeion they ought him.

AND if the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceves the said serene king to be in any

manner constrained of his person, authority, liberty, and disposition of his effairs,
than he used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty
of a prince does require, that he use all moyen lawful and honest to place him in
the famine, and that he imploy as much as the credit of his most chriflian majeiy
may do toward the nobility, and fubjets of that contry, and as much as may his
name, with the name of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

AND that he wiltnefs to the said serene king, and his estates, of his consent, and

to all the nobility and principall personages of the contry, that his most Christian
majefiie will continue on his part in the most ancient alliance and confedracy,
which he hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobility
and contry, with his principall fubjels, to persevere in the famine, in all good un-
derftanding and fiiendfhip with him; the which, on his part, he ihall do, observing
the famine mos: inviolable.

FURTHER his most christian majesty understanding that the serene king his good

brother was contented with the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said fignieur
De la Motte had charged to pray his serene majesty that he might remain beside
him to his contentment, believing that he should more willing intertain the points
of love and confederace, betwixt their majefys and their contrys, because he was a
good fubjelt to them both; and if he might not remain, without some alteration of
the tranquility of his eflate, that he might retire him to his own house in the said
contry, in furenes, or if he pleated to return to France that he might surely----
and if it pleases his serene majeffy, to cause cease and pfay the impeachments,
that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the effec that the natural Frenchmen
may enter as freely into the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

ANn that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor no speech but honour-

able of the most Christian king, in that contry, but such like as is spoken most ho-
nourably of the fcrene king of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed till a little before his depar-

ture, to wit, that the queen, the king's mother, was content to receive her son in
aflbciation of the kingdom.

No. IX.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 98.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis Walsingham, the 4th of August, 1584.

from Berwick.

S I R,
A CCORDING to my former letters) touching my meeting with the earl ofCalderw.

Arran upon Wednesday last, there came hither to me from the earle, the jus- M. S. Hiito.
tice clerk, and fir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's ry, Vol. 3.

privie council, to treat with me about the order of our metting, referring wholly to p. 374.
me to appoint the hour, and the number we should meet withal; so as we concluded
the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves
to be 13 of a fide; and the reft of our troops to fland each of them a mile from the
town; the one on the one fide, the other on the other fide, o as our troops were two
miles asunder; I was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen, where I
had oo sot on horse, but they were very near 500 horse well appointed : Accord-
ing to which appointment, we met yesterday, and after rome congratulations, the
earle fell in the like protestations of his good will and readines to serve the queen's
majesty, before any prince in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto-
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnest vows, as unless he be worse
than a devil, her majesty may dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I
entered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him, and so near as I could,
left nothing unrehearsed, that I had to charge the king or him with any unkind deal-
ing toward her majesty, according to my inftrudions, which without any delay he
answered presently, as ye shall perceive by the said answers, ent herewith; but I
replying unto him, he amplified them with many moe circumstances, but to this es-
feEt. Then I dealt with him touching the point of her majefly's ftisfadion, for
the uttering such pra&ices as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
majesty and her estate, who thereof made sundry discourses, what marriages have
been offered to his majefiy by fundrie princes, and by what means the earle has fought
to.divert them, and for what causes ; the one, for that be marriage with Spain or
France, he must also alter his religion, which as he is sure the king will never doe,
so rill he never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as he has any credit with
him; he denys not but the king has been dealt withal be practices to deal against her
majesty, which he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as they have left deal-
ing therein, but whatsoever the king or he knoweth therein there shall be nothing,
hidden from her majesty, as her majefly fall know very hortly; surely it seems by
his speeches, that if the king would have yielded thereunto there had been no finail
company of French in Scotland'ere now to disquiet her m.ijefty. -- This beir
ended, I dealt with him earnefily for the flay of this parliament, which now a-
proacheth; or at the leaftthat there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice
of these noblemen and others now in England, for the forfaulting of their livinlg
and goods, hereupon he made a long discourse to me, first of the earl of Angus
dealing about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwithstanding of fundrie
gracious offers the king had made him, then of the road of Ruthven, how that pre-
fently after they had the king's majesty in their hands, they imprisoned himself, dealt
with the king for putting of the duke out of the realm, the king refuscd so to do,
they told him plainly that if he would not he flould have the elec of Arran's

4 hI ;ad

head in a d:fh; the king asked what offence the earl had made? and they answered
it mufl be so, and should be so; hereupon forthe safeguard of Arran's life, the king
was content to fend away the duke, and yet Airan afterwards fundrie times in dan-
ger of his life; 1 alledged unto him the king's letter to the "queen's majesty, arid"his
acs in council, that they had done nothing but for his fervife, and with his good
liking and contentment, who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not
do any thing but that wh'ch pleated them, with such a number of other their dealings
wiTh the king whileft he was in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad
if they were true; I said the king might have let the queen's majesty's ambassador have
known his mind secretly, and her majesty would have relieved him; he answered,
that the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded
from Mr. Bow's pracice, and thereby durst not impart so much to him, and yet the
king was content, and did give remiflion to as many, as would acknowledge their
fau!ts, and ask remiflion, and such as would not, he thought fit to banish, to try
their further loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's second apprehension,
and the killing of the earle, and others, and seduced the ministers to their faction,
and yet not faiisfied with there conspiracies and treasonable dealings, (as he terms
them) are entered into a third, being in England under her majesty's protection, to
dishonour her majefiy as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king conceive
tome unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring of them; I wrote to yow what the
conspiracy was, the taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and ome
others, the taking of the catle of Edinr, and bringing home the earles, to take the
charge of the king ; ill which (fays he) is by Drummond confessed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, andthe conflable of the catile thereupon
fled; the earl brought D ummond with him as far as Langton, where he lay to
have confessed the conspiracy before me, but having at his lighting, received a blow
on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring him no further, I replied that I thought
verily they would not work any such pra&cices, in refped of the queen's majesty,
abiding within her realme, and if there be any such practices, they have proceeded
from other;, and they not privie unto them.: and that if it be not apparently proved
againit them, that it will be thought to be some pracice to aggravate the fault, and
to make them the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it should be pro-
ved so sufficiently, that they should not be able with truth to deny it, for their
own hands is to be (howed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if her ma-
jelly sho.ld so press the king for them at this time, that would rather hinder this
matter of the amitty, nor further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides he assured me, that if he
would, he dare not, this last matter being fallen out as it is; and fuerly if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the restoring of the earl of Marr very
shortly, if her majesty would have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus,
I perceive the Icing is persuaded that both he, and the reft of the Douglasses, have
conceived fb mortall an hatred against him and the earl of Arran, about the death
of the earl of Morton, as f they were at home, tomorrow next, they would not
leave to practice and conspire the death of them both, and therefore a hard matter
t, do any thing for him : finally, he concluded and required me to aflure her majesty
trom the king, that there flall nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone
that may fatisfic her m.ijefty with reason, and that the king (hall never do any thing,
nor content to have ay thing done in her prejudice, so long as he had any credit

with
76

with him, or authority under him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to show
me his comniiffion, which is under the great eal, to himself only, which is as large
as may be, and yet fundrie of the privie councel there with him, but not one in com-
miflion, nor present, nor near us all this time; having spent almost five hours in
there matters; he presented to me the Master of Gray, who delivered to me a let-
ter from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the king means to fend to
her majefly, and therefore requires a safe conduct for his passage, which I pray yow
procure, and so fend it so soon as you may. I let him understand of the lord Seaton's
negotiation with the French king. He swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave,
and that it was partly against his will, that he hould be sent thither. But his com-
mission and inftrustion being of no great importance, he yielded the sooner; and if
Seaton has gone beyond his inflrucions, which Arran drew himself, he will make
Seaton finart for it. Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he protested
he never heard of any such; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black beard,
come thither a begging, who said he was an enemy to Def-nond, to whom he gave
a croun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into Ireland,
he fays there is no such matter; if there be, there may be some few rafkels that he
knows not of; and touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is
but the slanderous devise of the king's enemys, and such as would have the world
believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who the world shall well fee will
continue as contfant therein, as what prince soever professed it most ; and the earle
himself dos protest to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in his life,
and did aflure me if there was any in Scotland, they fliould not do so much harm
in Scotland, as their ministers would do, if they preach such doctrine as they did
in Scotland ; and touching one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from Mr.
Colvil, the earl avows conflantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any
such man, but he would inquire at the justice clerk, and would inform me what he
could learn of that; thus I have made yow as short a discourse as I can of so many
matters, so long discoursed upon, but theCe are the- principal points of all our talk,
so near as I can remember it, and for this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At
Berwick, the 4th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majesty's pleasure.
Arran's answers to the griefss or articles proponed to the lord Hunfdane,

set down in another form.

S to the itrait and severe persecution of all such, as have been noted to have
been well affeEted to'the queen's majefly, it cannot appear they were either

for that cause punished, or hardly dealt with, since his majesty of late has been o
careful and diligent to choice out good instruments to deal betwixt her majesty and him,
as his majetfy has done in electing of your lordihip and me; besides that in all their
accusations, their good will and affeEtion born to her majesty was, at no time, laid
to their charge, but capital aions of treason many way tried now be the whole three
cflatcs, and more than manifcft to the world.

VOL. I. X x As

APPE N D IX.

As for his majesty inhibiting, be publick proclamation, such as were banished, not

to repair in England; the bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies, and treasons, which since fyn they accomplished, so far as in them lay,
moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majesty's realm,
least they should have atempted these things, which hortly they did atempt, being
farther off, and more dillant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majestys fugitives, and not delivering

them according to his promise, as your lordllip propones, his majesty would be most
glad that so it might fall out by your lordships traviles, that no fugitive of either
realme should be received of either, and when so hall be, it hall not fail on his
majefiy's part, albeit in very deed this time by gone his majesty has been constrained
to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since
her majesty hath receipt, in effect, the whole and greatest rebells and traitors his
majefly in his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with his majesty's mother
anent their association, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of your lordship's
servant, to assure her majesty and your lordfh:p, in his majesty's name, that it is al-
together false, and an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to assure your lordthip, that it is also false

and untrue, that his majefly has, by any means direct or indirect, sent any message
to the pope, or received any from him; or that his majefly has dealt with Spain or
any foreigners, to harm her majesty or her realm, which his majesty could have no
honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's ministers, sent unto his

majesty, his majesty used none of them so; and if his majesty had, sufficient cause
was given by them, as ome of their own writs do yet testify as I more particularly
shewed your lordship at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. I .)

Letter of Q Mary to Q, Elizabeth:

Cott. Lib. Madame ma bonne Seur,
Col. B. VII1. 'Affeurant que vou avez eu communication d' une lettre de Gray que vof-
So . 14 7. i n tre homme Semer me livra hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoifl'ant
Origi. ' quasi de mot a mot les mefmes raisons que le dit Gray m'efcrivit en chifre eftant der-

nierement pres de vous defmontrant la fuffifance & bonne intention du personage je
vous prieray lfulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant inflantement impor-
tune que vous me permettiez deCclaircir librement & ouvertenient ce point de l'aflo-
ciation d' entre moy & mon filz & me dcflier les mains pour procederr avec lui comn;e
je jugeray eflre requis pour con bien & le mien. Et j'entreprendz quoy que 'on
vous die & puifle en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit brouillon qui perfuad par au-
cuns de vos mininircs a cntrepris cette separation entre moy & mon enfant, & pour
y commencer j vous fupplic m'oaroyer que jc puifle parler a cc juflice clerk qui
vous a eflc nouvcllcmcnt envoyC pour mander par luy a mon filz nion intention fur
cela, cc que je me proinis quc ne mc refulercz, quant ce ne feroit quc pour demon-
trer en cftct laL bonnl iltlntioll quc vous m'avez allcurcc avoir a l'accord & entrc-

ticn

tien de natural devoir entre la mere & I'enfant qui dit en bonnes 'termes eftre 'em-
pefche pour vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez mieux def-
mentir & faire paroitre vofire bon defir a notre union que me donnant les moyens d'y
proceder, & non m 'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos. minifires pre-
tendent a fin de laifler toujours lieu a leur mauvais& finifires pratiques entre nous.
La lettre porte que 1'association n'est pas passee, aufli ne luy ai-jejamais dit, bienque mon
filz avoit accepte; & que nous en avions convenu ensemble, comme 'aae sign de
fa main, & ces lettres tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce meme
temoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambaffadeurs & perfonne de credit, s'ex-
cufant de ne 'ofer faire publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces pour
vous resister d'avant de fe declarer si ouvertement eftant journellement persuade au
contraire par vos miniftres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck le
faire declarer votre heretier. Au firplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe malheu-
reux que de s'opiniaflrer en cette extreme impiet6 & ingratitude vers moy, je ne
puis penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la Chretiente le vou-
liffiez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediction,
ains que plutos introviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop juste & evi-
dant devant Dieu & les hommes Helas & encores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays
donner avec droit ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife a vous, &
fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne en foye pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete
des uns ne prevale defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la plus
grande affliction qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous sup-
plie de me mander en cas qu'il perfifte en cette m'efconnoiflance de son devoir, que de
luy ou de moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecofle, & si vous
aves agreable de pourfuivre avec moy a part la trait6 commence entre nous de quoy
je vous requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gouverne enfant vous en re-
querrant avec autant d'affection que je fens mon coeur oppreffe d'ennuy. Pour Dieu,
fouvenez vous de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me prendre en votre protection
me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de
touts vos ennemys & difimulez amys, comme je le desire de me consoler & de me
venger de ceulz qui pourchaffent un tel malheur entre la mere & I'enfant. Je cefleray
de vous troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque consolation de vous
& de Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xii
Mars;

Voflre fidelement vouec feur

& obeiffante coufinc,

A la rcync d'Anglctcrrc MA R I E Q.

nmalalic ma bonnie f;ur
& coufinc.

No. XI.
XX x

A P P E N D I Xi

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. i i.)

A Testament by Q. Mary.

N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Mr. Crawford late regius

Cott. L:b. profeflor of church history in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,
Vefpaf L 1 6, according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's secretary, the reft with the queen's
P' 415 own hand. What is marked " is in the queen's hand.

Onfiderant par ma condition prefente 'ellat de vie humaine, si incertain, que
perfonne ne s'en peuit, ou doibt affeurer, finnon foubs a grande et infinie

misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et ac-
cidens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette captivit6, mefmes a cause
des grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenu6 jufques a present-; j'ay advise tan-
dis que j'ay la commodite, ou raison en jugement, de pourvoir apres, ma la falut de
mon ame, enterrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat, & affaires,
par ce present mon teflament et ordonnance de mon dernier volont6, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit. Premierement, me recong-

noiffant indigne pecherefle avec plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfaaion
par toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa bonte. Et m'appuyant
fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame
a la benoifte et individue Trinite, et aux prieres de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et
de tous les anges fainSs and fainaes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et interceflion
eftre ayde a obtenir de eftre faisle participante avec eulx de felicite eternelle. Et
pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et entier, defpouillant des a present tout ref-
sentiment des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me pourroient
avoir este fades durant ma vie, par mes fubjets rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en re-
triet la vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affedtion, que
je luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et celles queje puis avoiroffenfe
de saids ou de parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphs ctntain diregions concerning
the p 'ace and circujnane cf her burial.]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conservation de 1' Eglife catholique,

apoflolique et Romaine, en la quelleje veulx vivre cr mourir, si le princed'Efcoffe
Imon filz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon tres
grand regret en 'herefie de Calvin entre mes rebeles, je le laine feul et unique heri-
tier de mon royaume d'Efcoie, de droicf que je pretende juflement en a couronne
d'Angleterre et pays que en depcndent, ct generallemnent de tous et chactin mes meu-
bles et immeubles qui refteront apres ma mort, ct execution de ce present testament.

Si non, et que mon (lit filz continue a vivre cn la dite herefic, Je cede, tranf-
' porte, et tailet don " Je touts et clacuns mes droits, queje pretende etpuis pre-
i' tcndre a la couronne d'Anglctcrrc, ct aultres droi6ts, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en
" dependantz, au roy catholique, ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefclues advis,
" colnf ntcirent de fa ilfintetc; tant pour le voyr aujoiurdhuy le feul feurs appui de la
" religion cathloliquc, qlue pour reconoifllnce de gratuites faveurs que Imoy, et les miens
' rccommandcz par moy, ont avons rccu de luy cn ma plus grande neceflitc; et.

" rclguar(l

4

refguard aufll an droit que luy mefme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,

." je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et si
" il ce pleut de celle de Guise, pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
" coffe de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que mon feul enfant, lequel
" eflant Catholique j'ay tousjours voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de

1 I'accepter, ou faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.
" Je layffe mon filz a la protecion du roy, de prince, et ducs de Lorrayne et

" de Guise, et du Mayne, aux quelz je recommende et son eflat en Efcoffe, et mon
" droi en Angleterre, fi'il eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au " compt6 de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu par feu son pere,

et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier et fucceffeur, d' obeyr en ceft en droit
a mon volonte.

Je veulx et'ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe troveront par moy deues,

tien mis cause de doia ellre faits "a Lohliven" etre promptement payes et acquittes,
et tout tort et griefs repares par lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la conscience.
Oultre, &c. [Follow two or three paragraphs concerning particular legacys, and then is
added] Faia au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour de-Mil cinq cens foi-
xant & dix sept.

.fter a blank page follows in the queen's hand:

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamilton lequel fe montrera

' le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus constant en religion, au jugement de Dues
"de Lorraine et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auray donnay la
" charge de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a condition de fe marrier ou
" allier en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Follow near two pages of par.'ictlar legacys.

Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droiL quelle peut pretendre a la conte d'An-

6 gous avant -'acort fait par mon commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et
" e comte de Morton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy,

fur a promefi de fa fidelle affifiance, si luy et moy encourions dangier et be-
soing d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entcndant fecretcment au les nos ennemis rebellc,
" qu' attemtprient contre fa vie, et pour ceft cftet pris les armes, et ont port& Ics ban-

nieres defploiecs, contre nous, j revoque auffi toute autre don que ie luy a) fit

" dc contd.de Morton fur pronefies dce fes bons frvices a avcenri, et enttnj1s quc
"t la dite Conte foit reunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comniic fls tra-
"' hifons tant en la mort de mon feu Mary, que en mon baninlement, ct pourlfiit
" de la miecne l'ont merite. Et delenids a mon filz de fe jamays fervire de luy pour

de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes parents, a quelle je crains ne s'cfledii julqu .
" a luy, le connoitlnt du tout affcCtionne aux cnnemis dc mon droite en cc roy-

auine, du quel il elt pcnconnaire.
' Je recolmmnndc mon ncpveu Francois Stuart a mon flz, ct luy commalnde dctciir
pres de luy ct s'enfervir, ct je luy layffle bien d(I contc e e Boduel lbn onclc, en
c" refi)cc qlui'l eft ice mon fang, mon fillcul, et ma ceit laiflc en lutclle par ftn pcre.

" Jc declare que mol frcre bafiard Robert Abbe de St. Croix iin'en que par cir-
convention Orkenay, et quc e ne fut jamays mnon intention, cormme il apret par
l' l revocation que j'ay fayte depLis, et ctc aufi fitc d'avaiit la ac de xxv. ans,

(' C

" ce quc j'aimois deliberer i il ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe d' tee'fayte 'aurx
'" chats je veulx done que Orkenay Ibit reune a la coionne comme'utiht d plus

neceflaires pour mon filz, et fans la mayton ne pourra etre'bien tenue.
" Les filles de Morra ne parvient acce'fi heriter, ains revient'la conte. i Ia iCou

" ronne, si il luy pleft luy donner fa ou 'fille en marriafge, et il tiofe 'en
' fienne ligne."

No. XI . (Vol. 11. p. 12I.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scott.

April- T LEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the date the i2th of Novr. and
Harl. Lib. 37. in like manner has seen some part of the contents of one other of the fame
B. 9. so. z6, date, direced to Monfr. de Movifir, ambassador for his majesty the most Christian

king, both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your high-
ness desires to know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto me all favour
if I shall be innocent of the heinous faces committed in the person of your husband
of good memory, so by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare unto me,
if your husband's murder could be laid justly against me, that you could not follicit
in my cause, neither yet for any person that was participant of that execrable fad,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you flould have any means to do it;
your majefly's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is most favourable, and your
desire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable; and therefore that I should
with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth answer thereunto is most reasonable, to the
end that your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence hall fuficiently
appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in any matter, except in the
knowledge of the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility againif your
said husband, and not revealing of it, which I am assured was sufficiently known to him-
seif, and to all that had judgment never so little in that realm; which also I was con-
strained to understand, as he, that was specially employed betwixt the earl Morton,
and a good number of your nobility, that they might with all humility intercede at
your majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters as are more specially contained in
the declaration following, which I am constrained for my own justification, by this
letter to call to your majefly's remembrance. Notwithfianding that I am aured to
my grief, the reading thereof will not fmally offend your princely mind. It may
please your majesty to remember, that in the year of God 566, the said earl of
Morton, with divers other nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majesty,
and banished your realm for insolent murder committed in your majefly's own chamber,
which they alledged was done by command of your husband, who notwithstanding
affirmed that he was compelled by them to fubfcrihe the warrant given for that effect,
howsoever the truth of that matter remains amongst them ; it appertains not to me at
this time to be curious; true it is that 1 was one of that number, that heavily of-
fended againf y ur majefy, and passid in France the time of our baniflnient, at the
deCfrc of the rft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Chriffian king, to inter-
ccd that our ofiicnces might be pardoned, and your majclty's clemency extended to-
warcld us, albeit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, was of tlhe opinion,
that the said fact merited neither to be requifit for, nor yet pardoned. Always lfclh

l vas

was the careful mind of his majefiy towards the quietness of that realm, that the
dealing in that cause was committed to Monfr. de Movifir, who was directed at that
time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom Al-
mighty God of his goodness may long preserve in happy estate and perpetual felicity;
the careful travel of the said de Movifir was so effectual, and your majesty's mind so
inclined to mercy, that within hort space thereafter, I was permitted to repair in
Scotland, to deal with earls Murray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and fecrety Leding-
ton, in the name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Linfay, and re-
manent complefis, that they might make offer in the names of the said earl, of any
matter that might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your clemency to be
extended in their favours; at my coming to them, after I had opened the effectE
of my mesSage, they declared that the marriage betwixt you and your hband had
been the occasion already of great evil in that realm, and if your husband hould be
suffered to follow the appetite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effeas ; for helping of such inconvenience
that might fall out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join
themselves in league and band with some other noblemen, resolved to obey your ma-
jelly as their natural sovereign, and have nothing to do with your husband's command
whatsoever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band and confederacy
with them, they could be content to humbly request and travel by all means with
your majesty for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed, they desired
to know the said earl's mind herein ; when I had answered that he nor his friends,
at my departure, could not know that any such like matter would be proponit, and
therefore was not inftruaed what to answer therein, they desired that I flould re-
turn sufficiently initruted in this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of your son,
whom God might preserve; this message was faithfully delivered by me at New-
castle in England, where the said earl then remained, in pretence of his friends and
company, where they all condescended to have no farther dealing with your hus-
band, and to enter into the said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the request of the Most Christian king and the queen's majesty of
England by their ambassadors present, your majefly's gracious pardon was granted
unto them all, under condition always that they should remain banished forth of the
realm, the space of two years, and farther during your majesty's pleasure, which li-
mitation was after mitigated at the humble request of your own nobility, so that im-
mediately after the said earl of Morton repaired into Scotland to Q(Qhittingaime,
where the earl Bodvell and secretary Ledington come to him; what speech ptld
there amongst them, as God fiall be my judge, I knew nothing at that time, but
at their departure I was requefied by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl
Bodvell and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with such answer as they fould
obtain of your majefly, which being given to me by the said perfolis, as God flall
be my judge, was no other than tlere wo ds, " Schaw to the arl Morton that the

queen will hear no fpecch of that matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit

that the answer might be made more sensible, fccrctary Lcdingtoln id, that the earl
would fuffcicntly underfland it, albeit few or none at that time underltand what
pafnid amongtf them. It is known to all men, als vcill be railling, letters pdft he-
twixt the slid cail and Lidington when they become i divers lil'ions, as alko ane
buck ett ftuirht by the minilelc wlherin they anil that the all of Morton has
cuifcficd to them, before lis death, that the carl Ludvcli come to Q.iuittiigaiinle

to

83

to prepon the calling away off the king your hufland, to the which proposition the
said earl of Morton affirms that he could give no answer unto such time he might
know your majesty's mind therein, which he never received. As to the abomina-
ble murder, it is known too by the depositions of many persons that were executed
to the death for the committing thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
;it the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit band for that efire; by this
unpleasant dcclarat'on, the most part thereof known to yourielf, and the remain-
ter m.y be understood by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined in torture,
Aud that are extant in the cufiody of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency
tl far as may concern any fad does appear sufficiently to your majesty. And as for
mnv dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but as what would ac-
c-ufe the vessel that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy of such as
immoderately use the fame. As for the special cause of my banifiment, I think
the fame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the
earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have confessed before
he died, and would not be induced, -for loss of reputation, to perform any part
thereof If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what puniihment
I should deserve I remit me to your majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
carefll ever ilk gentleman should be of his fame, reputation, and honour, and how
far ever ilk man fliould abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin, notwith-
flanding all the injuries I was conifrained to receive at his hand all the time of his
government, and for no other cause, but for shewing of particular friendship to par-
ticular friends in the time of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now
to accuse him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff, be such
kind of dealing obtained that name of Ingrate. Always for my own part, I have
been baniflied my native country those three years and four months, living in anxiety
of mnind, my holl guds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and difponit
upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my last troubles at
the desire of Monfr. de Movifir, attended to know your majesty's pleasure, and to
:iwait upon what service it should please your majesty for to command. Upon the
8th of April inif. your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto me,
that her highnes tho't it expedient that I should retire myself where I pleased, I de-
clared unto him I had no means whereby I might perfornm that desire, until such time
as I should receive it from your majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to direcq me, until such tine as I should have received further information
from you. Upon this occasion, and partly by permission, I have taken the hardrefs
to write this present letter, whereby your majesty may underhtand any part of my
troubles pall, and firait present. As to my intention future, I will never deny that
I am fully resolved to spend the reft of my days in your majefly's service, and the
king your son's, wheresoever I hall be directed by your majesty, and for the better
performing thereof, if so shall be your majefly's pleasure, to recommend the tryal
of my innocency, and examination of the verity of-the preceding narration, to the
king your son, with request that I may be pardoned for such offences as concerned
yvour nmjcfly's service, and var common to all men the time of his les aige and per-
(lolnit to all, except to me, I flould be the bearer thereof myself, and be diretded
in whatCocvcr fcrvice it should please your majesty for to command. Most humble
I beseech your majesty to confider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that

I may

I may have means to serve your majesty according to the sincerity of my meaning,
and so expecting your majesty's answer, after the kissing your hand with all humility,
I take leave from London.

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 4io.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Douglas his ambassador

in England, October, 1586.

Eferve up yourself na langer in the earnest dealing for my mother, for ye have Cott. Lib.

sRs done it too long; and think not that any your travellis can do goode if hir lyse Cal. C. 9.
be takin, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that are the special inftrumentis An Original
thairof: And theirfore, gif ye looke for the contineuance of my favour towartis in the king's
you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but reade my letter wrettin to Wil- hand.
linme Keith, and conform yourself quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in this re-
queift let me reap the fruiclis of youre great credit there, ather now or never. Fair-
well. Otober 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in England, probably from fecre-

tary Maitland. Nov. 27, 1586.
B Y your letters ent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no pleasant fubje&) his A copy in the

majesty conceives well of your earnestness and fidelity in your negotiations, as collect. of fir

also of Mr. Archibald's alivity and diligence, whom you so greatly praise and recom- A. Dick.Vol.
mend. I with the issue correspond to his majefly's opinion, your care and travell, A. fol. 219.
and his great diligence as you write. His majesty takes this rigorous proceeding
against his mother deeply in heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in ho-
nour and otherwise. His highnesses ations and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of
what moment he esteems it. There is an ambaffade hortly to be direEed, wherein
will be employed an earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will depend the
continuance or diflolution of the amity and good intelligence between the princes
of this isle. In the mean season, if farther extremity be used, and his majesty's suit
and requefi disdained, his highness will think himself dishonoured and contemned
far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye may perceive his majesty's difpofitioi
by his letter to you, which you shall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal accord-
ing thereto. I need not to recommend to you care, concerning your mafler's ser-
vice both in weil and in honour. As you and your colleague lhall behave yourself
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your affeicon to your master. I
am glad of that I hear of yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Ar-
chibald, whose friends here make great account of his professed devotion to the
queen, besides the duty he owes to the king's majcfly her son. Faither I am con-
Itrained to remit to next occasion, having carce time to (cribble these few lines
(which of themselves may bear witness of my hate.) Wifling you a prosperous if-
sue of your negotiation, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufc, Nov`. 2.7t', 586.

' 1' -
VOL. II.

Y y

against the queen, that his majesty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations againfi them, and imprecations agaitift the queen of
England.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 143.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

i Oc]. S 6. RLEASE your majefiy, I received your letter of the date the 28th of September,
.-oin tlhe 0- the 5th of OEtober, which was the fame day that I direAed Wmn. Murray to-
mri;nal in the wards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates, your
ileA. it l. majesty may perceive that had omitted nothing o far as my travel might reach
o1. ;. I. ' unto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in the said letter be-

for the receipt thereof, which by there presents I muff repeat for answering of the
faidis. As to the first, so far as may concern the interceeding for the queen your
majefly's mother her life, I have divers times and in every audience travelled with
this queen in that matter, specially to know what her full determination must be in that
point, and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this proceeding against
her by order of justice was no less against her mind, than againit their will that
loved her best: As towards her life she could give no answer thereunto, until such
time as the law hath declared whether {he was innocent or guilty. Herewithall it
was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a number of the affociants that
earnefily pressed her that the law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so
long as she was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never this realm be in
quiet, neither her life, neither this slate in assurance, and in the end they used this
protestation that if she would not in this matter follow their advice, that they hould
remain without all blame whatsoever should fall out; whereupon he had granted
them liberty to proceed, least such as had made the request, might hereafter have
charged herself with inconvenience if any hould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both papist and pro-

teftant has behaved them, as it hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon di-
vers refpefs, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was conceived against
them, the other upon zeal and care that they will be known to have for preservation
of their sovereign's life and fate in this perrelous time, upon consideration whereof,
I have been constrained to enter into ome dealing with both, wherewith I made
her majesty acquainted ; the protestants, and such as in other matters will be known
to bear no finall favour unto your majefly's fetvice, hath prayed that they may be
excused from any dealing in the contrary of that, which by their oath they have
avowed, and by their speech to their sovereign requefied for, and that before my
coming in this country; if they hould now otherwise do, it would produce no bet-
ter cffet1 but to make them subjcd to the accusation of their sovereign, when it
I{ould pleife her to do it, of their inconstancy, in giving councel whereby they
might incur the danger of ill countcellr, and be consequent worthy of punishment.
Such (,. thc papifls, as I did deal with, went immediately, and told her majelly
Ah;hat I hadl Isokcn to them, who albeit she understood the matter of before, sent
for me and declared to nic my own fIpecch that I had uttered to them, willing me

lor
8G

A PP EN D1 X .

for the well of my maifler's service to abstain from dealing with such, as were not
yet sufficiently moved to think of my mailer as she did. I craved leave of her ma-
jelly, that I might inform them of your majefly's late behaviour towards her, and
the htate of this realm, whereunto with some difficulty {he gave her consent. At
my late departure from court, which was upon the 5th of this inflant, and the day
after that the lords of this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majesty to po
northward to Fothringhame, it was her pleasure to promise to have further speech ill
this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to give full answer according to
your majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I had proponit in name
of your majesty. As to the 2d part concerning the association, and desire that the
promise made to the mafler of Gray concerning your majesty's title may be fulfilled;
it appears by the said letter, that the very point, whereupon the question that may
bring your majesty's title in doubt hath not been rightly at the writing of the said
letter confidered, which I take to have proceeded for lack of reading of the a of
parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promie made by the queen to the raid master,
and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise against your said title, except that an
opinion should be conceived by these lords of this parliament that are io vehement at
this time againfi the queen your majesty's mother, that your majefy is, or may be
proved hereafter assenting to her proceedings, and fame that love your majesty's ser-
vice were of that opinion that too earnest request might move a ground, whereupon
suspicions might grow in men so ill affected in that matter, which I tho't might be
helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of your majesty's innocence at
this time, and by reason that good nature and public honesty would constrain you to
intercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with itself, without any fur-
ther, ome suspicion that might move ill affected men to doubt. In my former let-
ters I humbly craved of your majcfty that some learned men in the laws, might be
moved to advise with the words of the afrociation, and the mitigation contained il
the aEt of parliament, and withall to advise what suspicious effects your majesty's re-
quest might work in there cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might
be best moved to receive reason; and upon all these considerations they might have
formed the words of a declarator of your majesty's innocence to be obtained in this
parliament, and failing thereof, the very words of a protellation for the fame effect
that might best serve for your majesty's service, and for my better information. Al-
beit this was my simple opinion, 1 hall be contented to follow any direction it hall
please your majesty to give; I have already opened the substance hereof to the queen
of this realm, who seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to
deal therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of mind. This
being the fum of my proceedings in this matter, besides the remainder, contained in
other letters of several dates, I am confirained to lay the whole open before your
majesty, and to humbly pray that full information may be rent unto me what fur-
ther to do herein, in this middle time, while I hall receive more ample direction I
shall proceed and be doing according to such direction as I have already received.
And so, moit gracious sovereign, wishing unto your majefly all happy success in our
afflairs, I humbly take my leave from London, this 16th of OCtAr .I56. Your ma-
jefty's muol humble subjed and obedt servant.

Yy 2

A mec-

APPENDI X.

A memorial for his majefly by the Mailer of Gray.

iz Jn. 1586. T will please your majesty, I have tho't meeter to set down all things as they oc-
Ai Oigninal J cur, and all advertisements as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre.
in his owtn I came to Vare the 24th of Decr. and sent to W". Keith, and Mr. Archibald
land in tle Douglas to advertize the queen of it, like as they did at their audience. She pro.
collcjt. cf fir
A. Dick. \ 0. mifed the queen your majesty's mother's life hould be spared till we were heard.
A f. 22 . The 27th, they came to Vare to me, the which day Sir Robt. came toVare, where

they shewed us how far they had already gone in their negociation, but for that the
discourse of it is set down in our general letter, 1 remit me to it, only this far I will
tefrify unto your majesty that Wm. Keith hath used himself right honefily and justly
till our coming, refpeaing all circumstances, and chiefly his colleague his dealing,
which indeed is not better than your majesty knows already.

THE 29th day of Decr. we came to London, where we were no ways friendly

received, nor after the honest fort it had pleased your majesty use her ambafadors,
never man ent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we understood of Mr.
de Bellievre his leave taking, and for that the custom permitted not we ent our ex-
cufes by Mr. George Young.

THE ift day of Janry, Wm. Keith and his colleague according to the custom

sent to crave our audience. We received the answer contained in the general letter,
and could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done that day your majesty
has it in the general, yet we was not out of expecation at that time albeit we
received hard answers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where our conferrence was, as

is set down in the general. I remarked this, that he that day said plainly the de-
taining of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that he pretended a fucceflion to
this crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majesty as ye shall hear a
little after.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambassador, whom we find very plain in

making to us a wife discourse of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we
thanked him in your majesty's name and opened such things as we had to treat with
this queen, save the last point, as more largely set down by our general.

IT is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's advised me, that Bellievre Iis

negotiation was not effectual, and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chafieauneuf his
servants taken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he was fending in France,
for that they charge him with a conspiracy of late against the queen here her life.
It is alledged his servant has confefled the matter, but whom I {hall trust I know
not, but till I fee proof I hall account him an honest man, for indeed so he ap-
pears, and one (without doubt) who hath been very instant in this matter. I shew
him that the queen and earl of Leicester had desired to speak with me in private,
and craved his opinion; he gave it freely that he tho't it mceteft, I [hew him the
rcafon why I communicate that to him, for that I had been fufpcEcd by fomeof
her majesty's friends in France to have done evil offices in her service, that he should
be my witness that my earnest dealing in this hould be a sufficient teflimony that
all was lyes, and that this knave Nauc who now had betrayed her, hlad in that done

evil

evil offices; he desired me, feeing ihe saw only with other folks eyes, that I hould
no ways impute it to her, for the like he had done to himself by Nau his persuasion.
I answered he hould be my witness in that.

THE 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which we got the oth day; at

the firrt, he said a thing long looked for should be welcome when it comes, I
would now fee your mafrer's offers, I answered, no man makes offers but for ome
cause; we would, and like your majefly, first know the cause to be extant for which
we offer, and likewise that it be extant till your majefly has heard us. I think it be
extant yet, but I will not promire for an hour, but you think to hist in that fort. I
answered we mind not to shift, but to offer from our sovereign all things that with
reason may be; and in special, we offered as is set down in our general, all was re-
fused and tho't nothing. She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very despitefully repeated all
our offers in presence of them all. I opened the last part and aid, Madam for what
refpedt is it that men deal againfi your person or etate for her cause ? She answered,.
because they think she shall succeed to me, and for that she is a papist, appearingly
said I both the causes may be removed, she aid he would be glad to understand it.
If Madam, said I, all that he has of right of succession were in the king our fove-
reign's person, were not all hope of papists removed. She answered I hope so.
Then Madam I think the queen his mother shall willingly demit all her rights in
his person. She answered file hath no right, for she is declared unable. Then I
said, if he have no right, appearingly the hope cafes already, so that it is not to be
feared that any man attempt for her. The queen answered, but the papists allow
not our declaration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's person by her assignation.
The earl of Leicetler answered, She is a prisoner, how can she demit. I answered
the demifilon is to her on, by the advice of all the friends he has in Europe, and
in cafe, as God forbid, that any attempt conttit the queen here away, who hall
party with her to prove the demission or assignation to be ineffectual her on being
opposite party and having all the princes her friends for him, having bonded for the
efficacy of it with his majesty of before. The queen made as he could not compre-
hend my meaning, and fir Robt opened the matter again, he yet made as tho' he
underltood not. So the earl of Leicester answered that our meaning was, that the
king should be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the queen anfweted, then I put
myelf in a worse cafe than of before ; by God's paflion, that were to cut my own
throat, and for a dutchy, or an earldom to yourself, you or such as you would cause
some of your desperate knaves kill me. No, by God, he hall never be in that place.
I answered he craves nothing of your majefiy but only of his mother. The earl of
Leicester answered that were to make him party to the queen my milfrefs. I said,
he will be far more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She would fay no
longer, but said he would not have a worse in his mother's place. And said, tell
your king what good I have done for him in holding the crown on his head since
he was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now stands between us, and
if he break it {hall be a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us a
farewell; but we cfcheuit. And I speak craving of her that her life may be fpaied
for 15 days; she refufbd. Sir Robt. craved for only eight days, she said not for
an hour; and so gid her away. Your majesty fees we have delivered all we had
for offers, but all is for nothing, for fle and her councel has laid a determination
that they mind to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council than her-

self,.

fc'F, ,'l:i: I like the wolrfC; for with out doubt, fir, it {hall cut off all friendip
yc h- h. l,re. Alllo' it w're that once t'ihe hadA mcaned well to your rajcifty, yet
rcnm.cinuring themselves, that they have medled with your mother's blood, good faith
t!.cjy cannot hopa ograt 'go. of yourself, a thing in trtith I am sorry for; further
lour malefty rnay perceive by this lait di!coul' of that I proponit, if they had
ineaned xwell to your nlajc?)'y, the, iad uid it otherwise than they have done, for
rca:bn has bound thl.'m. .at I da;-e not write all. I miind something to speak in
this nttcr, bccaufi we look Ilharly our letters flall be troucit by the way.

F(. t that I l;e private credit nor no micans can alter their determination, altho'

the juc-en again and the earl of Lei efler has dfired to speak with me in particular;
1 nmind nt to speak, nor mhall not; but auredly shall let all ien fee that in par-
ticular was no ways tycd to England, but for the rcfpel of your majesty's service
So albeit, at this time, I could not efeuate that I desired, yet my upright deal-
ing in it iall be manireflcd to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave au-
dience, where we mind to ue Sharply our inftrulions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, fr we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than
the French ambaffldor has aid for his iafler.

S o I pray your inajety confider my upright dealing in your service, and not the

effect, for had it been double by any I might have here had credit, but being I came
only for that cause 1 will not my credit shill serve here to any further purpose. I
pray God preserve ),our majesty and fend you a true and sincere friendship. From
Lundon this I2th of Jan. 1586.

I underitand the queen is to fend one of her own to your majesty.
To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and secretary to his majesty,

from the matter of Gray.

1 til Jan.

-; 0o, an Ori

ginal in the
collect. of fir
A, Dick. \ol
A. flI. ).

4
M Y lord, I fend you there lines with this inclosed to his majefly, whereby your

lordship shall understand how matters goes here. And before all things I pray

your lordship move his majefRy to refped my diligence, and not the effect in this
negotiation, for I swear if it had been for the crown of England to myself I could
do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the world shall fee
that I loved England for his majefly's service only. I look hortly to find your lord-
sip friend as ye made promise, and by God I shall be to you if I can. W. Keith
and I desired, if matters had gone well, to have run a course that your lordship might
have here been in credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for you as for
myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in conscience they mean not honeit-
ly to the king our sovereign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is gone
or hortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind of scruple I pray you to advise
him the belt is not this way. They fay here, that it has been said by one who
heard it from you, that ye desired not the king and England to agree, because it
would rack the noblemen, and gave an example of it by king James the fourt, I
answered in your name that I was allured you ne er had spoken it. Mr. Archibald is
the speaker of it, who I afllre your lordship has been a poison in this matter, for they
lean very mickle to his opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the king will
be fain to deal this way, either by fair means or necefity, so that when he deals this
course he is aflured to be welcome to ft down all that is palt of the like purposes,
00

it
I

it would consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meeting. There is
a new conspiracy alledged against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambassador resident three of his men taken, but I think in the end it hall prove
nothing. Mr. Stafford, who is ambassador for this queen in France, is touched with
it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our negotiation, that
all this council would not move this queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's
blood, till this invention was found forth. I remit a'l other things to the inclosed.
WVe minded to have ent to his majesty a discourse, which we have set down of all
our proceedings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized that the bearer
is to be truffant by the way for our pacquetc, so that we defer it till our own coming;
this I have put in a privy part beside the pacquet. We shall I think take leave on
Fryday the 3th day, where we mind exactly to follow the rigour of our inftruc-
tions, for it cannot stand with the king's honour that we fay less then the French
ambassador, which was, le roy mon maiRre ne peult moins faire que fe refentir. So
that about the 24th I think we flhall, God willing, be at home, except that some flay
come which we look not for. The queen and the earl of LeicefRer has desired to
speak with me. I refused save in presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter-
mination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave no credit but for that
cause. It will please your lordship retire the inclosed from his majety and keep it.
So after my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I commit you to God.
From London the 12th of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvil.
IT may please your majeRy, since the diredion of our former letters, we had au- zcth Jan.

dience, and her majesty appeared to take our overtures in good part in presence 1586. An

of her council; albeit no offence would take place with them, having taken refolu- Original in
tion to proceed with extremity, not the less it pleased her majeffy to desire us to flay his own hand,
for two days on taking our leave, until she had advised upon our propositions; since in the colled..
which time, her majety is become more hard by some letters (as we are informed) offi"tA Dick.
has come from Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majesty takes not V A.
this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in effect, and had of before removed
the like opinion out of her majefly's mind, which by finifler information was cre-
dited, their reports has hindered our commiflion, and abused this queen, fearing in
like manner we shall be flayed until answer come fronmScotland by such perfnl as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will e well enough known to all men
how heavily your majefly takes these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they
have by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to hinder our negotiation.
As also Allynour Stewart is to be direted in their party, by our knowledge, who
has awantyt more of" his credit, than I believe he may perform, and we willed him
to del;r from this dealing, faying it does harm, and lie is not meet for that purlpoi,
remitting to your majefly's good dirctlion to take order herein as we hall be anfwei-
able to your majesty not to omit any point we have in charge, as the truth is, the
niaftcr of Grhaye has behaved hiimfelf very rightly andd ilciectly in this charge, and
evil tayne with be divers in their parties who were of before his friends. We have
been behalding to the menflrals who has born us bcft company, but has not been
troubled with others. \Vylzemc Kcithe hath left nothillg undone that lie had in

clia Ie.

charge. As for master Archibald ie has promised at all times to do his dewoyr,,
whercin he shall find true report made to your majesty, craving pardon of your ma-
j}fyv that 1 have been o tedious, after I have kisTed your majesty's hand I humbly
take my leave. Praying God to grant your majesty many good days and happy, in
whose protelcion I commit your miajefty at London, the 20th of Jan. 1586.

S I R,
A L B E 1 T NMaJter George has not been in commifllon, he is not inferior in his

service to any of us, as well by his good advice and diligent care he takes for the
advancement of your service, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the king's majelly, from the maser of Gray and fir Robert Melvill.

1 ft Jan. s LEASE it your majesty in the lafi audience we had, since our last advertizement,
i -8Sb. An J by Wm. Murray, we find her majefly at the resuming our offers something miti-
Original in gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, before we got our leave, at
the colict. of our reasoning, certain of the council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir Christopher
fir A. Dick. Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart being present in the chamber, gave
Vol. A. fol. little share of any great contentment to have her from her former resolution,

now caffin in perplexity what he should do, always we left her in that fate, and
since have daily pressed conferrence with the whole council, which to this hour we
have not yet obtained. This day we have sent down to crave our leave. The
greatest hinder which our negotiation has found hitherto is a persuasion they have
here that either your majefiy deals superficially in this matter, or that with time ye
may be moved to digest it, which when with great difficulty we had expugnit, we
find anew that certain letters written to them of late from Scotland has found ome
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a special mefnage, they have made choice of fir Alexander Stewart to
try your highness's meaning in it, and to persuade your majefly to like of their pro-
ceedings, wherefrom no terror we can lay out unto him is able to divert him, he
has given out that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts not to help
this matter at your highness's hand. If he come there that errand, we think your
niajefty will not oversee the great disgrace that his attempts hall give us here, if he
be not tane order with before that he be further heard, and if so be that any other
be directed (as our intelligence gives us there shall) our humble suit is to your ma-
jefty, that it may please your highness to hear of us what we find here, and at what
point we leave this matter with her majesty, before that they find accidence, the
causes whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your majesty for the
present to God's eternal protection. From London this 21ft of Jan. 586.

No. XV.

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL
A P P E N D IX.

I hadno opportunity of feeingfeveral of the following papers, till thoefie /ets of the

history, to which they relate, were printed fs. For this reason no references are
made to them there; but I have supplied that defejt by marking the particular pas-
fages in the history which theyferve to illuJfrate.

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 358. Line io.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the earl of Bothwell and lady

Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.
U POUN the29 of Apryle 567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert Mait-

land dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson dotor in the laws, two of
the enators of the college ofjuftice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alex-

ander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edenr; compeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, pro-
curator for Jean Gourdoune countes of Bothwell, conflitute be her for purfewing of
ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her contra James erie Bothwel her husband
for adultry, committed be him with Beffle Craufurde, the pursuers servant for the
time; and ficklyke, for the said erle, compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who efter he
had pursued and craved thepurfuer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just
caus to purfew the said action, and obtained it, denyd the libell, and the said Mr.
Harrie took the morne, the las day of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The
quhilk day, having produced ome witnesses, he took the next day, being the of
May, to do farther diligence. Upon the quhilk of May, he produced ome moe
witnefles, and renounced farther probatioune. After quilk, he desired a term to be
assigned to pronounce sentence. To whom the said commissars afligned Setterday
next, the 3 of May, to pronounce sentence therein, fecundum alligata et probata,
quilk accordingly was given that day in favour of the perfewar.

AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be the erl of Bothwell contra

his lady, for to have their m rriagedeclared nul, as being contracted againf the ca-
nons, without a dispensation, and he and his lady being within degrees defendand, viz.
ferdis a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a commiffioune
grantit to the archbishop of St. Androis to cognoce and determine it, and Rot. bishop
of Dunkeld, William bifilop of Dunblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glat-

VOL. II. Z z gow,

gow, and parson of Egelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and Mr. George Cook
chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne Manderfionne, chanon in Dunbar and pre-
bendar of Peltoune, or any ane of them. This commiffione is datit 27 Aprile
156-, was presented to two of the aids commissioners, viz. Mr. Andr. Crawfurd
and Mr. John Manderftoune on-Eetterday 3.May, .by Mr. Thomas Hepburne parson
of Auldhamfiocks, procurator for the erle of Bothwell, who accepted the delega-
tioune, and gave out their citation by precept, directed, Decano Chriftianitates de
Hadingtone, nec non vicano feu curato eccle. parochie de Creichtoune, feu ucuuq;
alteri cappellano debite requifitis, ser summoning at the said erles iftance, both of
the lady personally if he could be had, or otherways at the parofche kerk of Creich-
toune the time of service, or at her dwelling place before witnesses, primo, fecundo,
tertio et peremptorie, unico tamen contextu protuplice edicto. And likeways to be
witnesses in the said matter, Alex. bilbopof Galloway, who did marry .the said erle
and his lady, in alyreud-hpufe kirk, in Feb. J56,

F fir John Ban.natyne of Auch-

noulejuftice clerk, M.r. Robert Creichtout pf.Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. Da-
vid Chalmers provost of Creichtoup and c.hancellor of Ross, Michael- abbot
of Melrofs, and to compear before the said judges, or any one ofthem, in St.
Geils kirk in Edinr. on Monday the 5 of May, be thamfelves, or their procurators.
Upon the said 5 day, Mr. John Mandertf1tun, one of thejuges delegat only being
present compeared the fame procurators for both the parties that were in the former

Two words in proces, Mr. Edmond Hay ( atiLculatlie ) and ifoje of the wit-
the parenthe- nefes summoned produced, and received for proving of tlhe ;ame. The said procu-
sis illegible. rator renounced farder probatioune, and the judge afigned the morne, the

6th of May, ad publicandum produta, nempe depositiones ipforum teftium. The
quhilkday, post publicatas depositiones proedi6as, Mr. Hen. Kinroffe, procurator
fur the lady instanter objecit objetiones juris generaliter, contra pro du&ta, in-
super re;:unciavit ulteriori defenfioni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum
hinc ide caufa, judex prsediaus ftatuit craftinum diem pro terming, ad pronunci-
andam fuam fententiam definituram, ex deduEis coram eo, in praefenti caufa et pro-
ceffa. Conform hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said judge gave out
his sentence 'in fa, our of the erie, declaring the marriage to be, and to have been
null from the 'beginning, in refpea of their contingence in blood, which hindered
their lawfull marriage without a dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXXII. [Vcl. I. p. 4oi. line 6.J

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

MADAM,

Cott.] ib.Cal. AL though the necessity of my cause (which maketh me to be importune to you)
C;. . A coly, do make you to judge that I am out of the way; yet such as have not my
and probably pafio l, nor the refpedts whereof you are persuaded, will think that I do as my cause
a trailllation. doth require. Madam, I have not aecufed you, neither in words, nor in thought,

to have uscd your self evil towards me. And I believe, that y(u have no want of
good underfianding, to keep you from perfwafion againfi your natural good incli-
nation. But in the mean time, I can't chufe (having my lenses) but perceive very
evil furtherance in my matters, lince my coming hither. 1 thought that I had sus-
ficicntly discoursed unto you the difcommodities, which this delay bringeth unto

lme.

me. And especially that they think, in this next meanth Of Auuft, o. o.hold a pb
liament ag;intt me and all my servants. And in the meaian time, I am stayed herd,
and yet will you, that I should put myfelfforther into your country, (without fee-
ing you) and remove me further from mine; arid there do me this dilhonour, at the
request of my rebels, as to fend conmiflfionets to hear them against me, as you
wold do to a mere subjet, and not hear me by mouth. Now, madam, I have pro-
mifed you to come, to you, and having there made my moan and oonlplaint of thele
rebels, and they coming thither, not as pofeffors, but as fubjets. to answer I
would have besought you to hear my justification of. thati whihl they have falfly set
furth. against me, and if I could not purge miyfedf thereofi you might then difoharge
your hands of my causes, and let me go for such as I ani But to do as;you fay, if
I were culpable I would be better advis'd; but being not so, I can't accept this dif-
honour at their hands, that being in poffefion they will come' and;acuCe me before
your commifiioners, whereof I can'tdike: And feeing:yori think it to be against
your honour and eonfignage to do otherwise, I, btefeeoh you that you will not be
mine enemy, utill you may fee how I cart difefarge mjelf every way. And to
susser me to go into France, where I have a dowry to maihtairn me; or at the least
to go into Scotland, with assurance that if there come any strangers- thither,. I will
bind' myself for their return without any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you rotcto
do thus, I protest that I will not impute it to fallhood, if I receive strangers in my
country, without making you any other discharge for it. Do with my body as you
will, the honour or blame shall be yours; For I had rather die here, and that my
faithful servants may be succoured (tho' you wou'd not so) by strangers, than to
futer them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in timeto come, particular
commodity. There be many things to move meto fear that I hall have to do, in
this country, with others, than with you. But forasmuch as nothing hath followed
upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may happ. I haveas lees to
aide, } my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further, it pleated you to give
licence to my fubjedts to go and come. This hath been refused by my lord Scroup
and Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by, your commandment, because I would not depart
.hence to your charge, untill L had answer of this letter, tho' I shewed themn that you
required my answer, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

I'HE one is to let you briefly underfand, I am come to you to make my moan

to you, the which being heard, 1 would declare unto you mine innocency, and then
require your aid, and or lack thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to
God, that I am not heard in my just quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to
,have refpe& thereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, madam, first of all, when
you shall have examined your conscience before him, and have him for witness.
-And the other, which is to come further into your country, and not to come to
your presence 1 will esteem that as no favour, but will take it for the contrary,
obeyinglitas-a thing forced. In the mean time, I beseech you, to return to me
my lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having none of mycounfal here, and
also to susser me, if it pltafe you, without further delay, to depart hence whither-
soever it be out;of this country; Lam sure you will. not deny me this simple re-
quest for your honour's' fake, feeing it doth not please you to u your natural good-
ness towards me otherwise, and feeing tlat of mine own accord, 1 am come hither,
let me depart again, with yours. And if God ecrait my causes to succeed well, 1

Z z 2 shall

Perhaps/fr.

A P P E N D I X.

fiall be bound to'you for it; and happening ;otherwise,. yet I can't blame' you. 'A?
for my lord Fleeiing, feeing that upon my credit you have suffered him to go ho'fii
to his house,' I warrant you he shall pass no further, but Ihall return when it flall
please you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. But from
Dumbarton I answer not, when my L. Fleeming hall be in the Tower. For they
which are within it, will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't assure them of
yours; no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to
have more refpeE to my servants and to my etate, than to my life. Good fifterbe
of another mind, win the heart, and all shall be yours, and at your commandment.
I thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas! do not as the
serpent, that ftoppeth his hearing, for I am no inchanter, but your sifter, and natural
cousin. If Caesar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint of an advertiser,
he had not so died; why hould princes ears be flopped, feeing that they are paint-
ed so long ? Meaning, that they mhould hear all and be well advised, before they an-
fwer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and less of the chamelion, to turn
you to my likeness, and tho' I should be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are sufficiently arm'd with constancy and with jufiice, which I require of God, who
give you grace to use it well with long and happy life. From Carlile, the 5th of July,
568.

No. XXXIII. [Vol. Ip. 403. line 12.3
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop and fir F. Knollis,

September 3d, 1568.

Cott. Lib. /Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordfliips, I am informit by James Borth-
cal. C. an o0- Vil wick, lately come from the queen's majesty your foverane, that it. is fchawin
riginal in his to her highness, I (huld have ridden in Crawfurdmure, fen my last cuming into this
own hand. realm, upon the earl of Murray's dependants. And that I fuld have caufitl or been

of counfallto Scottifmen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or fpulzie her majesty's
fuhjeds.

Mv lords, I thought it right needful because your lordships is, be your foverane,

commanded to attend upon the queen's majesty my mistress, so having daily access
in thir matters, to declare upon the truth ; humbly desiring that your lordships will,
for God's cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame. .

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife had knowledge of ony

Scottifman's ryding in England, to do the fubjeds thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene
the siege of Leith; and as I underhand it shall be fund true, that gif ony fie open
hurt be done, it is by the queen my sovereign's disobedients, and that I have not
ridden nor hurt no Scottifiman, nor commanded any hurt to be done to them, fen'
my coming from the queen's majesty of England, it is well kend, for that never ane
will complain of me.

I HAVE done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the earl of Murray has done,

and will be loatheft to do them any harm than he will. Except the queen's ma-
jelly your sovereign, command sic false reports to be tryit, quhereof this is .altogid-
dcr an inventit leafing, her grace fall be trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men

. . here,

here, quhom of sic report fall be made, that baith, would ',f. e hir, and' may, .bt-
ter than they unworthy liars.

MY. lords, I underhand the queen's majesty your sovereign- is not contented of

this bruit, that there hould ony Frenchman come in.this realm, with the duke of Chat-
tlerault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the counfall of their cuming, nor
has no sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's
majesty your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is true 'indeed, her
grace self is all the wyitt, and the counfall that will never let her take order with
my maifrefs cause. For that our sovereign havand her majesty's promise, be writ-
ing, of luff, friendship, and afliflance giff need had so requirit, enterit that realm,
upon the 16 day of May, fen that time the queen's majesty has commanded me di-
verse times to declare she would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in
peaceable poffeflion of this realme, and when I required of her majesty, in my maif-
trefs name, that her highness wold either do for her, (as her special trust was the
wold) according'to her former promises, or otherwise gif her counfal wold not con-
sent, (as I (how her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then that {he would permit .her
to pass in France,' or to ome other prince, to seek support, or failing hereof,
(quhilk was agains all reason) that he would permit her to return in her awin coun-
trie, in sic fempil manner as he' came out of it, and aid to her majesty ane of thir,
of her honour, would not be refufit, fecand that he was corned in her realm upon
her writings and promi.ses 'of friendihip. And ficlike,- I. said to her highness, gif
my maidfrefshad the.like promise of her nobility and estates,' as he had of herself,
I-.hould- havereprovit theti highly,. gif thay had not cobdefendKiti to one- of thir
three, and o I fay, and o I write, that in the warld it hall be maift'reprehendable,
gif this promise taketh not other'good effeA,: nor y et" it' does. Notwithfanding, I
get gud answer of thir promises of friendship made to my sovereign' and to put her
grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary working by
Mr. Mi'ddlemore, direait from her highness to flay the' army that cuift :down our
houses.: And alfua, in the preceding of this late pretendit parliament, promised
twenty days before'the time to myself to have caused. it been difehargit,* And yet
contrary tb'this promise, have they made their pretenditrmanner of forfauluree of 3
men of guld reputation, bishops, abbottis, and barronis obedient fubjets to our so-
vereign, only for:her cause. .'
.

THEY have also difponit, fen' our sovereigns cause ras itaken upon' hand.be the

queen'stmajefty of that realn, 'an hundred.thoufarfd pounds Sets.vworth of:jherawin
true fubje6ds geir, under the color of their law, groundit upon their false, .treason-
able, owin, authority. . " . ': .

TABr murders, theoppeffilons, the burnings,. the ravishing of women, the de-

flrution of policy, both ecclesiastical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my
former writings I said it was lamentable to ony chriflian mnan to hear of, except God
gif grace, the profefflion of the:evangile of Jesus Christ' profeflit be your prince,
counrall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamity that has stand betwixt the
realms, many of my countrymen will doubt in this article, and their proceedings
puttis my self in'fant Thomas belief.' .

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majefly of that realm, upon quhais promire and,

honour my mailtrefs came there, as I have aid, will leave all the French writings,
and. French phrases of writings, quhilks amongis them is over meikle on baith the
fides unfit, 'and plainly, according to the auld true cuflom of Ingland and Scotland,

quherein

qiherein be a word promift truth.was observed, promise, in the name of the. etet.
nal God, and upon the high honour of that nobill and pxiltcely blude of the kings of
Ingland, quhereof he is defeendit and presently wears the diadem, that fhb. will
put my maifirefs in her awin country, and caufo her as queen thereof in her autho-
rity and firength to be obeyit, and: to do the fame will appoint an certain day with.
in two months, at the.farthok, as we; undertand this to be our weill, fua will
we, or the maift part of, u all fllow upon it,. leaving the Frenchmeni and their
evil French phrases togidder. Ad therefoxe and for the true perpetual friendship
of that realm, will condition a for-our part, with, the grace of'Almighty God,
keep sic heads and conditionasof aegteemente as. noble and wife men can condefeend
upon, for the weilof this b.il iflad, As. I have been partlings declaring to the
queen yourfovereign,. qhikll: ew to your lordships fefis, both in religion,. in
the. ptifhment-of the-datl Bothwile,. for the qeeaWs, lafi hutband's flaughiter and
for a mutual bad. of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

Dovutt.mss, my-lords, without that, we.may find fie time and friendful work-

ing, as:may gif us occalion iaith tfogett Middlemore, and this late pretendit pat-
liamenti we will turn the- leai, leaying. ou fevereign agains our will to reft where
she is, under the, pemife of-frienldfip. As I: have baith said, and will ever affirm,
madebe your sovereign, quhilk was:-ofly caufeof her graces coming in that realme,
and seeks the help and- moyen- of French or Spanifbs till epulfe this treasonable
td. false pretendit authority, quhilk means to reignabove us.

MY lords, I desire your lordihips confider, that it is he, that, maif desires the

amity betwixtiInglandand Scotland to continue, and of. a poor man best cause has,
tht writes this.

My brother, the laird of- Skirling, fchaws meb that in your lordships commun-

ing with him, it appearit to him, your. mind was we shold susser the earl of Mur-
raytato work, altho' it were agains reason to. us, and complain thereof to the queen's
majesty,. and her highness wald fee it reformit. My lordsb her majesty will be over
meikle trQublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit already, For I am sure,
gif reason and jufice may have place, our aaiftrefs5 and we her subjes,. have re-
ceived express wrang,. far above two hundred thousand pounds ferling, in the time
of this unhappy government, feeing the reformation of fa great causes, comes, now
a days, so flowlie, and the ungodly law of oblivion in fie matters so. meikle praais'd,
I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordlhips would 'fua
mean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign
sic advertisement hereof, as your good wisdoms hall find in this cause meet. It
will be true and friendful working for us, indeed, and nowthet French phrases, nor
boasting, and finding little other effeit, that will cause us to hold away the French-
men. This is plainly written, and I desire your lordships plain answer, for in
truth and plainness langeft continues gud friendship, quhilk in this matter I pray
God may lang continue, and have your lordships in his keeping. Off Drumfreis,
the 3d day of September 1568,

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

HERR IS.

99

Queen Mary to . Elizabeth.

M A DA M'E ma'bonne foeur. J'ay refceau d vos lettres, d'une nefrme date; 27 Aug. 568.
lune, -ou vous faites meintion He T-excUti'e 'de Moir. de MIurra pour tenir'fon Cott. Lib.

pletendu 'parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obrenir plus de tollerance que je Cal. . an O-
m'eftois peifuadee ri'avoir par voftre promeffe, quant a 'n'otfr donner ommniffon e iginal.
venir fans un parlement pour'leur peu de

h ombrL-e inobleffe alors, je vous refpons,

qu'ils n'ont que'trois ou quatre d'avantage, qui euifent afi bien dit leur opinion
hors de parlement, qui 'a et' tenu tant pour cette ffeWt , mais ptbur faire ce qu'ex-
preffement nous avions requis efre empefch6s, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjeCfs
pour m'avoir eftes fidelles, ceque je m'affurois, jurques a hier, avoir eu en promeise
de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord &Scrup .e Maifre Knoleis vous induire a ire
contre eulx, voire, a les enayre refentir; toutefois je vois queje I'ay mal pris, j'en
fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il me montrerent, et leur parole, je
ay si divulguement affury que pour vengeance que j'en defiraffe, si non mettfe dif-
ference entre lur fauc-deportemens, et les miens sinceres. Dans voftre lettre auffi
duede du oae X 'Aouf, vous metties ces mots. <" I think your adverse party, upon
' myfn dry former advices, will hold no parliament, at all; and if they do, it
" ihall be only in form of an afembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm,
" and in-what fort; for otherwise, if they ihall proceed in manner of a parliament,
" with any a of judgement agaiif any person, I hall not, in any wife, allow

thereof; and if they hall be so overseen, then you may think the fame to be

" of no other moment, than the former procedures; and by such their ra(h man-
"ner of proceeding, they hall mds prejudice themselves; and be assured to find

me ready to condemn hem, in their doings." Sur quoy, j'ay contremand6 mes

feryiteurs, les faitfant retirer, :fouffrant felon vofire commandement d'etre fauffement
nomms traitres, par ceulx, qi le font de vray; et encore d'etre provoques -par
efcarmons dies, et par prinfes de -mes gens et lettres, et a contraire vous etes in-
formee que mes subje&s ont evahis les voftres, Madame qu'i a fait ce rapport n'efi pas
homme de bien, car laird Serford -et on fils font et ont eses mes rebelles depuis le
commencement; enquire s vous, s'ils n'eftoient a Donfris aveques eulx, j'avois offri
refpondrede.fa fontiere, ce qui me fut refuse, ce qui m'endevroit afles defcharger,
neantois, pour oub faire preuve de ma 'fidelit6, et de leur falfite, s'it vous mefayte
donner le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier, je commanderay mes subjes les pour-
fuivre, ou si vous voules que ce foit les voltres, les miens leur ayderont; je vous
prie m'en nander voflre volont6, au refle mes subje&s fidtles feront refponfables a
tout ce que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les voflres, ni les rebelles, defpuis que
me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux Franois, j'efcrivis que 'on m'en fit
nulle pourfuite, car j'efperois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois befoign,-je ne feu
si le dit aura en mes lettres mais, je vous jure devant Dieu que je ne fay chose du
nonde de leur venue, que ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
du monde, et ne le puis croirc pour ceft occasion, et si ils si font, c'eft fans mon fceu
ni confentement, Pourquoy je vous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je
fuis prest dc tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a McRer Knolcis, et vous aflure que vofRre
amit, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera rescue avant toutes Iks cliofcs du monde, quant
France fervit la pour prefier leur retour a cfte condition, quc prenies mes astaires cn
mcin, en foeur, et bonne aini, comme ma France eft en vous ; mais une chore fcule
me rende confure, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre orcille, laquelle ne pouvant avoir
par parolle, toutes mes ations vous font defguifecs, t ailinmeit raportccs, par quoi

il

il m'eft impossible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait, pou
deftruire voftre bonne volonte de moy; par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous
faire entendre ma sincere et bonne affeftion, laquelle je ne puis si bien defcrire, que
mes enemis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne focur, gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir,
n'entrs en jalousie pour faulx raports de celle qui me desire que votre bonne grace;
je me remettray fur Melter Knoleis a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte, et apres
vous avoir bais6e les mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en sant6, longue et heu-
reuse vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere partir, qu'aveques voftre
bonne grace, quoyque les menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d' Aout.

No. XV. [Vol. II. p. 68. line 9.]

Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3, 1580- .

S IR,
H A V E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter of the 25th of
the last direted unto his lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with

the king and his council, in your second audience, wherewith having made her
majesty acquainted, she seemed somewhat to mi/like, that you should so long defer to
dealfor the enlargement of Empedocles. But I made answer in your behalf, that I
thought you were directed by the advice of the said Empedocles friends, in the fol-
liciting of that cause, who knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal there-
in, with molt effeS, and bell success, with which answer, her majesty did in the
end reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

YOUR putting of us in hope that D'aubigny might easily be won at her majesty's

devotion, was at firfi interpreted to have been ironie spoke by you. But since it
feemeth you insist upon it, I could wish you were otherwise persuaded of the man,
or at least kept that opinion to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently proved, was only to advance
the queen's liberty, and reception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you may
use to good purpose there, hall partly give you some light; there is no man here can
be persuaded that he will change his purpose. for so small advantage, as he is likely
to find by it, and therefore you shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that
firing, as I have already written to you. The prince of Orange fending, I fear
will not be in time that it may do any good; for besides that these people are in
themselves flow in their resolutions, their own affairs are, at present, so great, their
state so confused, and the prince's authority so small, that he cannot io soon take or-
der in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or careless in the
matter, having, more than three weeks palt, sent one about it, from whom never-
thelefs I do yet hear nothing. The letters, you desire hould be written thither by
the French ministers, I have given order to Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I
doubt not, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope, I shall have them to fend you by
the next. And so 1 commit you to God. At Whitehall the third of February 1580.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
Tis liter is an original, and in fine par s of it uwrot in cyphers and exp/ainrd by

(ano.her hand. By Emledocles s unde/flood Morton, by l'illenarius the king of Sc&t',
l)'ilubigney is marked thus o -'o.

Cott. Lib.
Calig. C. 6.
100

3 Feb. I5R0.
Sundry Notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time to be

better manifelled, being now thought neet to be in convenient f rt
used, and laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing the king,
the nobility, and that slate.

IRS T, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubigny was privy Cott. ib

F and acquainted with La Nave the king's mother's Secretary, coming into Scot- C.lig. C ;.
land, and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and An Original.
esteem it an evil president for princes, that subje&s might have power to deprive
their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded, by any mean,
to defeat him, either of the present government of that realm, or yet of the posTef-
flon of the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame to him; and
that for the accomplishment of that assurance, the king should have been advised and
drawn to have governed, for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny to rule
as governor of the prince, by commission from the queen his mother, untill the
'king's enemies were fupprefled; after which time, D'Aubigny hould have power
given to eflablifh and resign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's voluntary
consent, whereby all such, as had before been in aion against the queen or her
authority, might be brought to stand in the king's mercy. And for that the king
might live in more surety, D'Aubigny should be declared both second person in fuc-
cession of that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and that D'Aubigny,
before his departure out of France, received commiflion from the king's mother to
the effeRs remembred, or near the fame. That in this behalf he had conference
with the biflops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with Sir James Baford, with which
persons, and with the Duke of Guise, he had and hath frequent intelligence, and
by Sir James Baford he was advised to confer with the Lord John Hamilton be-
fore his repair into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent one
John Hamilton to the said Lord John to excuse him in this part, alledging, that he
did forbear to come to him, left thereby he flould marr or hinder greater effects to
be executed by him in Scotland.

THAT before his coming into that realm, the nobility and country were well

quieted and united in good concord, with great love betwixt the king and nobility,
and amongt the noblefie, but he hath both drawn the king againfi sundry of the
chiefeft of his nobility, that have been most ready and have expended their blood
and poffiffions to prcferve religion, and defend the king's person, his goverment ad
cftate, and also hath given occasions of great suspicions and offence to be engen-
dered betwixt the king and his nobility, and especially with such as have been in
action againit the king's mother, and her authority, who by force and means of
the said commifion and practice, hould have been brought into most dangerous
condition; and who also may. find themselves in no small perril, whiles he p)o-
fesses the king's ear, abufeth his pretence, and holdeth such of the principal keys
and ports of his realme, as he presently enjoyeth.

VOL. II.Aa

THAr r
VOL. II.

A aa

THAT he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great benefits done to

him and his realm, by the queen's majesty of England, but also to requite the fame
with sundry signs of great unthankfulnefs, and wounding therewith the honour of
her majesty, and thereby hath adventured to hake the happy amity long time conti-
.ued betwixt those princes.

AND whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters and good offers, to

have passed, and been done betwixt them: In which refpec, the king and council
having resolved to write to her majesty, for her highness' better satisfaction in the
late negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had given order to the
king's secretary to frame that letter: He minding to break the bond of amity in fun-
der, willed the secretary to be sure that nothing hould be inserted in that letter,
whereby the king should crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to cut offall
loving courtcfies betwixt them, as by the declaration of the said secretary may be
better learned, and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's protection, Alexander

King presumed with that boldness to make his lewd harangue, and by his means
hath hitherto escaped chastisement and correaion, due for his offence.

THAT Sir James Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the king's father, hath

been called into the realm by Lennox, without the privity of the king. And where-
as the said Sir James found in a green velvet desk, late the earl of Bothwel's and saw,
and had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that murder, and
can belt declare and witness who were authors and executors of the fame; he is
drawn by Lennox to suppress the truth, and to accuse such as he himself knoweth
to be innocent ; and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may have due trial,
which, contrary to all juflice, is by Lennox means denied.

This is the charge againfJ D'Aubigny, mentioned in the foregoing letter by tWafingham;
but by Bafordthey mean Sir James Balfur.

No. XVI. [Vol. II.. p. 2, line 8.]
The Scottish queen's offers upon the effet of her liberty propounded by

her secretary Naw, November 1584.
T HE queen my mifirefs being once well assured of your majesty's amity,

i. WILL declare openly that he will (as it is sincerely her meaning) firait-

ly to join unto your Majesty, andi to the fame to yield and bear the chief honour and
respeCt, before all other kings and princes in Chriflendom.

2. SE will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere forgetfullnefs of all wrongs

which fie may pretend to have been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in
any fort or manner whatfoevcr, fhw offence for the fame.

3. SE will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own particular name, as also

for her heirs and others dcfccnding of her for ever, your majesty for jufl, true, and
lawful qucn of Englnd.

4. AND

100

Cott. Lib.
Calig. C. 8.
A co( y.

4. AtD consequently, will renounce, as well for herself, as for her faij heirs, all

rights and pretences which he may claim to the crown of England, during your
majefly's life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all as and hews, by her heretofore made, of pretence to

this said crown, to the prejudice of your majefly, as may be the taking of the arms
and stile of queen of England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord
and husband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may be expounded to turn

in her favour, and for her behoof, touching the deprivation of your majefly, and will
declare that she will never help and serve herself with it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majesty's life, by open force or other-

ways, any publick declaration of her right in the fuccefflon of this realm, so as fe-
cret assurance be given unto her, or at the least publick promise, that no deciding
thereof (hall be made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her fen, during your
majesty's life, nor after your decease, untill such time as they have been heard there-
upon, in publick, free, and general assembly of the parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not praEtice, direclly or indirecQly, with any of your majesty's sub-

jels, neither within nor out of your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or so-
reign, against your majesty and your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for
civil and politick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your subje6s declared rebels, and
convicted of treason against you.

10. SHE will enter into the association, which was hewed her at Wingfield

for the surety of your majesty's life, so as there be mended or right expricated
some clauses, which I will shew to your majesty, when I iball have the copy there-
of, as I have before time required.

II. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any war or trouble

against this state, and will renounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
made in her favour for that refpet.

12. FURTHERMORE, this realm being assailed by any civil or foreign war, he

will take part with your majesty, andaill assist you in your defence with all her
forces and means, depending of herfelfand with all her friends of Christendom.

13. AND to that effect, for the mutual defence and maintenance of your maje-

sty, and the two realms of this ifie, he will enter with your majesty in a league
defensive, as hall be more particularly advised, and will perfwade as much as in
her, the king her son to do the like. The leagues with all parts abroad remaining
firm, and especially the antient league between France and Scotland, in that which
shall not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offensive, having good assurance, or fecrct de-

claration and acknowledgment of her right in the fucceflion of this crown, and
promise, that happening any breach betwixt France and this realm, (which fl:e
prayeth God never to happen) the jufl value of her dowry fliall be placed for her
in lands of the revenue of the crown.

15. FOR aflurance of her promires and covenants, he doth offer to abide her-

self in this realm fora certain time, (better hoflagc can she not give than her own
pcrfon) which, so as she be kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in
cafe to escape secretly out of this country in the sickly slate fle is in, and with
the good order which your majeflty can take therein.

Aaa 2 I6. AND

i6. AND in cafe your majefly do agree to her full and whole deliverance, to

retire herself at. her will out of this realm, the said queen of Scots lhe will give sus-
ficient hofiage for such time as will be advised.

17. IF she, abide in this realm, he will promise not to depart out of it, with-

out your licence, so as it be promised unto her that her fiate,.in.fuch liberty as shall
be accorded unto her, shall not be in any fort altered, untill after tryal to have at-
tempted againA your life, or other trouble of.your estate.

18. IF he go into Scotland, he. will promise to-alter nothing.there in the religion

which is now used there, he being fuffe;ed to have free exercise of hers, for her and
her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France; and further, to.pull out every
root. of new division between the fubjets, that none of the fubjeds of Scotland flall
be sifted for his conscience, nor constrained to go to the service of the: contrary reli-
gion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences done, against her in. Scot-

land, and things hall remain there as they are at this present, for that refpe, sav-
ing that which hath been done against her honour, which he mneareth:to have re-
voked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation between the nbi-

lity of the country, and to cause to be appointed about the king.her,fon, and in his
council, such as hall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the coun-
try, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majesty,. in favour of the Scots lords

banished, anJ refuged hither, upon. their due. fubmiflion to. their, princes, and your
niajety's promise to assist the said queen and king of Scotland against then, if they
happen to fall into their former faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with the advice and
good counsel of your majesty.

23. As she will pass nothing without the king her son, so doth she desire that

he intervene conjointly with her in this treaty, 'for the greater and perfeaer
afhlrance thereof; for otherwise any thing can hardly be etablifhed to be found
and continue.

24. THE said Scotch queen trufteth, that she French king her good brother, ac-:

cording to the good affeAion which he hath always hewed her, and hath been afresh,
tefified unto me by Monfr. de Manniffiere for this said treaty, will very willingly.
intervene, and will assist her for the surety of her promises.

25. AND so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following the will of the-
said king, will bind thenmfelves thereunto.

26. FOR other kings and princes of Christendom, he will aflay to obtain the

like of them, if for greater solemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
necfcairy.

27. SHIE doth desire a speedy answer, and final cciclufion of the premises, to
the end to meet in time with all inconveniencies.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to strengthen the said treaty, as made by.

her of a pure and frank will,. he deftreth that demonstration be. made of ome re-
leafcment of her captivity.

ObjeAions'

A P P E N D I X
Objetions against the Scottiih queen, under secretary Walsinghame's

hand, November 1584.

H E queen of Scots is ambitious, and itandeth ill affected to her majefly, and
therefore it cannot be but that her liberty should bring peril unto her majefly.

HAT her enlargement will give comfortto papifis, and other ill affefted sub-
jeEts, and greatly advance the opinion had of her title as successor.

THAT as-long as he shall be continued in her majesty's pofieffion, ihe may

serve as it were a gage of her majesty's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the
dangerflhe may.be thrown into, in cafe any thing hould be done in her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in the.offence of her majefly.
November} What course were fitto be taken with the queen of Scots,,

1584. * either to be enlarged or not,
PT HE course to be taken with the aid queen may be confidered. of'in-. three Cott. Lib;

degrees; either, ' Cal. 8.

. To continue her.under cultody in that state he now is.
z. Toreftrain her-os the. present liberty. he now.hath.
3. OR to set her at liberty, upon caution.
I. 'OUCHJN.G the first, to continue her under cutody under that tate he now is;

it is to be confidered, that the princes that favour that queen, upon the complaint he
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with-commiferation towards her, and pro-
mise to do their endeavour forher liberty, for which purpose, her. ministers follicit !
them daily.

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, fiteacquainteth them with her of-

sers made to her majesty, which appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable-
for her majesty, o as the refusal and rejeEtinggiveth her friends and favourers caufae.
to think her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better ground and rea-.-
son, attempt somewhat for the setting of. her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, finding her cafe defpefate,

will continue her pratice under hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her.
delivery, but to attain to the present poffeflion of this crown upon her pretended-
title, as she hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is mot. anifefR by letters and,
plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland, which hath pro-.
ceeded altogether by her dire/lion, whereby a gap is laid open for the malice of-
all her majesty's enemies, so as it appeareth that this manner of keeping her, with
luch number of persons as he now hath, and with liberty to write and receive let-
ters, (being duly confidered) is offensive to the princes, the said queen's friends; ra-
ther chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and subjet to all such praEtices as
may peril her majefly's person or slate, without any provision for her majesty's
lafety, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. 'IOUCHI NG the second, to restrain her in a more straighter degree of t li-
berty he hath hitherto ejoyed.

It
4

IT may, at first fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop the course of the

dangerous practices softered heretofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy
might prove very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to
her majelty, as few years past it did; and if the king of that realm were not likely,
as well for the release of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pretended
title, to attempt somewhat against this realm and her majesty, wherein he hould
neither lack foreign assistance, nor a party here within this realm: But the king and
that realm flanding affeaed as they do, this reltraint, instead of remedying, is
likely to breed these inconveniencies following:

FIRST, It will increase the offence both in him, and in the reft of the princes her
friends that mifliked of her refiraint.

SECONDLY, It will give themjuft cause to take some way of redress.
LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke some desperate ill disposed

person, all hope of her liberty removed, to attempt romewhat against her majesty's
own person, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which inconveniency being
duly confidered, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in a straighter degree,
is likely to prove a remedy subjea to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the said queen at liberty, miniftreth

some cause of doubt, touching the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is
to be performed, whether to be continued here within the realm, or to be restored
into her own country.

BUT firfi, this proposition, before the particularities be weighed, is to be confi-
dered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well affected subjec, that tendreth her majesty's surety,

and weigheth either the nature of the Scottish queen, being inclined to ambition
and revenge, or her former actions, what practices he hath set on foot molt dan-
gerous for her majesty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not made ac-
quainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it less perilous than it
hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in some fort, be devised to prevent both
her ambition and malice; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mother, is now grown

to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame title he doth: Such as do affect her, both
at home and abroad, do affect him; (and he is the more dangerous for that he is
unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune; and that he is a man, where-
by he may enter into action in his own person) where he is restrained, he is at
liberty; hs own realm is now altogether at his devotion, and the party affected to
this crown abased; o as the matter du'y confidered, neither her liberty nor restraint
doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her majesty, unless by such promises as
may be made by way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from the king
her onl be provided for.

BUT in this behalf it may be objecled, that so long as the mother remains in
her majesty's hands, the king will attempt nothing for fear of his mother's perik

To this objection it may be answered, firfi, That they hope that her majefly,

being a prince of justice, and inclined to mercy, will not punish the mother for the
son's offence, unless file hall be found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily,
T'lai men will not be over-hafly, confidering in what predicament the king itand-
cth touching his cxpotation of this crown, to advise any thing that in time future
may be dangerous to the giver of such council as may reach to his mother's peril.

AND
I

AND lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being firong in the field through

both foreign assistance, and a party here within the realm, will appear so weak a re-
medy, (which may rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed with
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard measure hould be offered unto
her) as they will suppose fur the reason above specified, that no such extremity will
be used.

IT may also be objeced, that the setting of her at liberty will greatly encourage

the papists both at home and abroad; but herein, if the provision be duly confidered,
that may be made by parliament both here and there, they ihall rather find cause of
discomfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the mother ap-

pearing most manifestly to be seen in the son accompanied with more danger, with
due consideration had also of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing
of the dangers, that her liberty may minifterjuft cause to doubt of; there will be
good cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit than perils.

Now it refleth, in what fort the said liberty shall be performed; if it shall be

thought meet she hall be continued within the realm with ome limitation, efpeci-
ally in that place where she now refideth, the country round about being so infected
in religion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much increase the cor-
ruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides he hould have commodity,
with much more ease, and speed, to entertain practices within this realm, than by
being in her own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France, then hall her

majesty loe the gages of her safety, then hall she be at hand to give advice in fur-
therance of such practices, as have been laid for to stir trouble in this realm, wherein
the hath been a principal party.

FOR the firt, it is answered before, that the refpe& of any perils that may be-

fal unto her, will in no fort restrain her son. For the other, if it be confidered
what harm her advice will work unto herself, in refpeE of the violation of the
treaty, and the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought,
that she will then be well advised, before she attempt any such matter, which now
she may do without perill. Besides such princes, as have interposed their faith and
promise for her, cannot with honour assist her, wherein the French King will not
be found very forward, who, in most friendly fort, hath lately reje&led all such re-
quests, propounded either by her, or her son's ministers, that might any way of-
fend her majesty. And so to conclude, feeing the cause of her grief hall be taken
away; the French king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that,
by any Spanith pracice, the lhould be drawn to violate her faith; that the reft of
the princes shall have no jufl cause of offence, but rather to think honourably of her
mjefly, confidering the Scottish queen's ca rage towards her, which hath dfervtd
no way any such favour; the noblemen of Scotland hall be restored, who \vill be
a good flay of such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm, elpecially
having so good a ground of warrant as the parliament to fland unto; the charges
and prrills which her practices might have red to this re llm shall be avoiied ; and
lastly, the hope of the papifls fiall be taken away, by such good liovifions, as in
both the realms may be made, whereby the perils that might fall into her nmajefy's
own person, (a matter of all others to be weighed) shall be avoidcii, when by the
change that may grow by any such wicked and ungodly pradlice, they hall fe
tlcir cafc no way relieved in point of religion.

Rcafons

0o7

Reasons to induce her majefty'to proceed in the treaty under 'Secre-

cretary Walsingham's hand.

T H A T such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to he raiing of

'

trouble within this realm) have grown from the Scots queen's ministers and fa-
vourers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes to give ear to the
raid plots, is principally grounded upon some commiseration had of her restraint.

THAT the stay, why the said plots have not been put in execution, hath proceed-

ed, for that the said princes have, for the mist part, been entertained with home
and domeflick troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin to be quiet, that
somewhat will be attempted in her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted by some of her
fautors is an extraordinary fort, to the perrill of her majesty.

THAT for the preservation thereof, itfhall be convenient for her majesty to proceed
to the finishing of the treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the said queen.

No. XVII. [Vol. 1I. p. 128. 1. 4.3

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SI F,
IDid forbear according to your direoion' signified in your letters of the 4th of

this present, to proceed to the execution of the contents of Mr. Waades letters

unto you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary servants, and 'for the seasing
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (although
in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th of this inffant, which I
doubt not are with you before this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the
5th, which came not unto my hands until the 8th in the evening, by reason as
did appear by indorfement, that they had been miflaken, and were sent back to
Windsor, after they were entered into the way towakds me, I confidered, that
being accompanied only with my own servants, it might be'thought that they would
be intreated to fay as I would command them, and therefore I thought good, for
my better discharge in there money matters, to crave the assistance of Mr. Richard
Bagott, who repairing unto me the next morning, we had access to this queen,
whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old manner with a defluxion, wieh
was fallen down into the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of
her hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her former pratifes, doubt-
ing left she would persist therein by corrupting underhand some bad members of
this flatc, I was cxprefly commanded to take her money into my hands, and to reft
anfwcrable for it, When it shall be required; advising her to deliver the said money
unto me with quietness. After many denials, many exclamations, and many bitter
words against you, (I fay nothing of her railing against myself) with flat affirmation
that her majesty might have her body, but her heart flie flould never have, refusing

bto

C Ct'. Lib.
Calig. C. 8.

Origin. Cal.
C.9.

to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my servants, and ent for barrs to break
open the door, whereupon he yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waade's remembrance, five rolls of canvass,
containing five thousand French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one had,
in gold, one hundred and four pounds two (hillings, and the other had three pounds
in ilver, which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that he had no more mo-
ney in this house, and that file was indebted to her servants for their wagts. Mr. Curie can tell
Waades note maketh mention of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no you the truth
doubt, he was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and oaths of oflthis inater.
diverse persons, as also by probable conjecurcs; o as in truth we found only two roll,
every of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curie's wife at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamler, in a cabinet, a
chain worth by etimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one bag nine *
hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourfccre and fix pounds eighteen
shillings. All the foresaid arcells of money are beflowed in bags, and ealed by
Mr. Richard Baor, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I reserve
in my hands, for the ue of this houfhold, and may be rcpayed at London, where
her majefly shall appoint out of the money, received lately by one of my ser.
vants, out of the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have dispersed this
money in all this time, or ha e hid.ien the fame in fofie sec;et corners, for doubt
whereof, I had causcd all this queen's family, from the highest to the lowest, to
be guarded in the several places where I found them, so as yff I had not found the
money, with quietness, I had been forced to have searched first all their lodgings,
and then their own per ons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a singular bief-
ting, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a contrary success might have moved
some hard conceits in her majesty.

TOUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I have done o much,

as may suffice to satisfy her majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
solute course, until 1 heard again from you, partly because her majesty, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return such as shall be discharged to
their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to
deliver your opinion; partly, for that as yet, I have received no answer from you, of
your resolution, upon the view of the Scottish family sent unto you, what persons
you will appoint to be difrift ; only this I have done, I have beflowed all such, as
are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame may
fufice to contain them, and that their meat and drink shall be brought unto them
by my servants. It may please you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what
fort, and for what course, I shall make their passports, as also, if they shall fay that
they are unpaid of their wages, what I (hall do therein. Yt is said that they
have been accustomed o be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the whole year. This lady
Her majefiy's charge will be somewhat diminished by the departure of this people, I.at!h g,ood
and my charge, by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the pertons, all save Itcrcofinoney
lBaflian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there was no great cause to fear their t rcfcnt in
practices, and upon this ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all the FlInch
this difinifled train should have followed their millrefs, until the next remove, and .4nlbaflidol's
there to have been discharged upon the sudden, for doubt that the laid remove might hands.
be delayed, yf he did fear, or expe any hard mcafure.

VOL. I.

Bbb

OTHERS fhanl excuse their foolish pity as they may; but for my part, I renunce

my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing that I have said, written, or done,
I have had any other refpe~t than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and so I
shall most earnefily pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not seasing of the
money by Mr. Manners, the other commiflioners and myself. I trust Mr. Waade
hath anflvercd, in all humble duties, for the whole company, that no one of us did
so much as think that our commiflion rea:hing only to the papers, we might be
bold to touch the money, so as there was no speech of that all to my knowledge,
and as you know I was no commiflioner in this search, but had my hands full at
'Tyxhall, discreet servants are not hastily to deal in great matters, without warrant,
and especially where the cause is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

Y o u R advertifemcnt of that happy remove hath been greatly comfortable unto

me. 1 will not fay, in refpel of myself, because my private interest hath no mea-
sure of comparison with her majefy's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God
grant a happy and speedy yflle to these good and godly counsels; and so 1 commit
you to his merciful protescion. From Chartley the ioth of September 1586.

No. XV. [Vol. 1I. p. 149. line 17.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, &c. touching

their proceedings with regard to the death of the Scottish queen, to
her majesty's council.

T may please your honbie good lordships to be advertised, that, on Saturday the
4th of this present, I Robert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in-

the county of- to whom your lordship's letter and meflage was delivered, and her
majefly's commiflion hewn ; whereupon I the earl forthwith sent precepts for the flay-
ing of such hues and cries as had troubled the country, requiring the officers to make
flay of all such persons, as should bring any such warrants without names, as be-
fore had been done, and to bring them to the next justice of peace, to the intent,
that upon their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites might
be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of Kent hould
on the Monday following, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and
readier to confer with my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Beale
came to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the cormiflion, &c. unto us
fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-
covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury, being than at Orton fix
miles of; it was thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go
unto him, which we did on morning; and together with the delivery of her
majefiy's commission, and your lordship's letter, imparted unto him what both the
earl of Kent and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying his lordship hi-
ther the day following, to confer with me the said earl, concerning the fame; which
his lordship promised. And for the better colouring of the matter, I the said earl of;
Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice of peace of the county of Huntingdon next
adjoining, to whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under-
your lor.hip a hands, for the flaying of the hues and cries, requiring him to give
notice thereof to the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the justices of peace

4 of
110

of Huntingdonshire, and to cause the pursuers and bringers of such warrants to be
flayed, and brought to the next juflice of peace; and to bring us word to Fother-
ingay castle on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he should in the
mean time undertand of the authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir
Amias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town, and other places ad-
joining. The fame night, the heriff of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your lordthip's letter came to Aundel, and letters were ent to me
the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's intention and meeting here on
Tuesday by noon; and other letters were also sent with their lordfl:ps assents
to fir Edward Montague, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to
be here on Wednesday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which time
it was thought meet that the execution should be. So upon Tueday, we the
earls came hither, where the heriff met us; and upon co ference between us it
was resolved, that the care for the fending for the surgeons, and other necessary
provision hould be committed unto him againfi the time. And we forthwith re-
paired unto her, and first in the presence of herself and her folks, to the intent that
they might fee and report hereafter that he was not otherwise proceeded with than
according to law, and the form of the fatute made in the 27th year of her majesty's
reign, it was thought convenient that her majesty's commission should be read unto
her, and afterwards he was by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself against the
next morning. She was also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable man-
ner of proceeding with her, and the necefity that was imposed upon her majelty to
proceed to execution, for that otherwise it was found that they could not both stand
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being here new conspiracys
were attempted, and so would be fill; wherefore since he had now a good while
since warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare herself
to die, we doubted not but that he was, before this, fettled, and therefore would
accept this message in good part. And to the effecR that no christian duty might be
said to be omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of
her body and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that if it would please
her to confer with the bishop and dean of Peterborough, he might; which dean,
we had, for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that place. Here-
to he replied, crofing herself in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, faying that she was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her an-
ceflors had professed, from which he would not be removed. And albeit we used
many persuasions to the contrary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
she demanded the admittance of her pries, we utterly denied that unto her. Here-
upon, he demanded to underhtand what answer we had touching her former petition
to her majefly, concerning her papers of accounts, and the bestowing of her body.
To the first we had none other answer to make, but that we thought if they were
not ent before, the fame might be in Mr. Wade's custody, who was now in France,
and feeing her papers could not any wife pleasure her majefly, we doubted nt but
that the fame would be delivered unto such as fle hould appoint. For, for our own
parts, we undoubtedly thought that her majesty would not make any profit of her
things, and therefore (in our opinions) she might set down what he would have
done, and the fame should be imparted unto her majelty, of whom both he and
others might expet all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her majeity's
pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her petition should be deny'd, or grant-

Bbb 2 ed.

ed. For the pratice of Babington, fie utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
that her death was for her religion ; whereunto it was eftsoons by us replied, that for
many years she was not touched for religion, nor should have been now, but that
this proceeding againfi her was for treason, in that she was culpable of that horrible
conspiracy for destroying her majesty's person; which she again denied, adding fur-
ther, that albeit she for herself forgave them that were the procurers of her death,
yet she doubted not but that God would take vengeance thereof. And being charged
with the depositions of Naue and Curl to prove it againit her, she replied, that she
arcused none, but that hereafter when the hall be dead, and they remain alive, it
ihall be seen how indifferently she ad been dealt with, and what measure had been
us d unto her; and asked whether it had been heard before this, that servants had
been pra.tifcd to accuse their miitrels, and hereupon also required what was become
of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the commission, that the charge

of her was in the disposition of us the eatls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S.
Drue Druiie to receive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and to
cause the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and that her folks hould be
put up, and take order that only four of them should be at the execution, remaining
aloof of, and guarded with certain persons, so as they should not come near unto
her, which were Melvil her feward, the ph).-cian, surgeon, and apothecary.

XWEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were repaired unto the catle, and

the sheriss had prepared all things in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place where were present, we
which have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt.
his son and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother, fir Richard Knichtly,
knt. Mr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr.
Forest, ani Raynor, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

AT the flairfold, he pawsed to speak to Melvil in our hearing, which was to this

effek, " Melvil, as thou haft been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue
to my on, and commend me unto him. I have not impugn'd his religion, nor the
religion of otheis, but with him well. And as I forgive all that have offended me
in Scotland, so I would that he lhould also; and beseech God, that he would fend
him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Melvil's answer was, that he would so do,.
and at that infiant, he would beseech God to aflift him with his spirit. Then he
demanded to speak with her priest, which was denied unto her, the rather for that
The came with a fuperflitious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnest requefi, and faying that when other
gentlewomen were executed, she had read in chronicles that they had women al-
lowed unto them, it was permitted that he should have two named by herself, which
were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After she came to the scaffold, first, in presence of
them all, her majestie's commission was openly read; and afterwards Mr. Dean of
Peterborough, according to a direction which he had received, the night before,
from us the earls, wou'd have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But at the first entry, fie utterly
refused it, faying that he was a catholique, and that it were a folly to move her,
being so refolutcly minded, and that our prayers would little avail her. Whereupon,
to the intent it might appear that we, and the whole assembly, had a chriltian desire
to have her die well, a godly prayer, concciv'd by Mr. Dean, was read and pro-

nounced

nounced by us all. " That it would please Almighty God to fend her his holy fpi-
rit and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of his
mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlasting kingdom, and finally to bless
her majefly, and confound all her enemies;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to re-
pair up shortly, can hew your lordships a copy.

T H I s done, he pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this effect, " To be-

feech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that he trusted to receive her salvation in
his blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom, besought God to for-
give her enemies, as he forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this land, to
bless the queen's majeftie, that he might serve him. Likewise to be merciful to her
Ton, to have compassion of his church, and altho' he was not worthy to be heard,
yet she had a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray unto her
Saviour to receive her." After this, (turning towards her servants) he desired them
to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made by
the executioners, he pardon'd them; and said, she was glad that the end of all her
sorrows was so near. Then she miflik'd the whinning and weeping of her women,
faying, that they rather ought to thank God for her resolution, and kissing them,
willed them to depart from the scaffold, and farewell. And o resolutely kneel'd
down, and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon
the executioner proceeded. Her servants were incontinently removed, and order taken
that none hould approach unto her corps, but that it should be embalmed, by the fur-
geon appointed. And further her crofle, apparell, and other things are retained here,
and not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that might follow, but he is
remitted to be rewarded by such as ent him hither.

T H I S hath been the manner of our dealings in this ervice, whereof we have

thought good to advertise your lordships, as particularly as we could, for the time,
and further have thought good to signify unto your lordships betides, that for the avoid-
ing of all sinister and slanderous reports, that may be raised to the contrary, we have
caused a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effet in writing, which we the
saids lords have subscribed, with the hands of such other there the knights and gen-
tlemen above named that were present at the aion. And so beseeching Almighty
God long to bless her majefly with a most prosperous reign, and to confound all his,
and her enemies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the 8th of Febru-
ary I586, in haft.

Your lordihips at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix, is taken from a col-

ledlion made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drumfoy, hifloriographer to Q. Anne, now
in the library of the faculty of Advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has
omitted to mention the book in the Cott. Lib, where it is to be found.

No, XIX,

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. 154. line 2.]
The objecions against Mir. Davison, in the cause of the late Scottish

queen, mut concern things done either, i. Before her trial at So-
theringay. 2. During that session. 3. After the fame.

C ott. Iib. i. EFO RE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had any hand
Cal. C. I. D at all in the cause of the said queen, or done any thing whatsoever, con-

cerning the fame direfly, or indirectly.

2. DURING that feflion, he remained at court, where the only interest he had there-

in, was as her majesty's secretary, to receive the letters from the commifiioners, im-
part them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commissioners, it is well known to all
her council,

x. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatsoever, in parliament,

or council, concerning the cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jefty's warrant unto the commissioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. ITHAT he was no party in signing the sentence, pased against her.
3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation publishing the fame, the war-

rant after her death, nor any other letter, or thing whatsoever, concerning the fame.
And

THAT the only thing, which can be pecially and truly imputed to him, is the

carrying up the said warrant unto her majefly to be signed. She fending a great
counsellor unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great eal
of England, by her own special direEtion and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, was delivered by him

unto Mr. Davison, with her majefly's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when he
ihould be pleaed to call for it.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or fix weeks un-

presented, nor once offering to carry it up, till he ent a great counsellor unto him
for the fame, and was harply reproved therefore by a great peer, in her majesty's
own presence.

3. THAT having signed it, he gave him an express commandment to carry it to

the eal, and being seal'd to fend it immediately away unto the commissioners, ac-
cording to the direction. Herself appointing the hall of Fotheringay for the place
of execution, mifliking the court-yard, in divers refpecs, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her hear any more hereof, till it
was done. She for her part, having (as he said) performed all that, in law or
reason, could be required of her.

4. VWHICH directions notwithflanding, he kept the warrant seal'd all that night,

and the greatest part of the next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majefly withal, and finding her majefly resolved to proceed
therein, according to her former directions, and yet desirous to carry the matter so,

as

as he might throw the burden from herself, he absolutely resolved to quit his hands
thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's chamber, together with

Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and' in his presence restored the fame into the hands
of the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till himself and the reft of the council ent it away.

WHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest the said Davison had
in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the commiflioners, that it was the ge-

neral ad of her majelty's council, (as is before mentioned,) and not any private ad
of his, may appear by

i. THEIR own confession. 2. Their own letters ent down therewith to the corn-

missioners. 3. The testimonies of the lords and others to whom they were direded.
As also 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her majefly's
first commission for their calling to the ilar chamber for the fame, and private ap-
pearance and fubmiflion afterward inflead thereof, before the lord chancellor Broom-
ley. 6. The confeflion of Mr. Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. By
the sentence itself upon record. 8. Betides a common a of council, containing
an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottish ambassador then remaining here,
avowing and justifying the fame.

Now where ome suppose him to have given ome extraordinary furtherance there-
unto, the contrary may evidently appear by

I. His former absolute refusal to ign the band of association, being earneflly.
pressed thereunto by her majesty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commiflioner, in the examination
of Babington and his complices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to stay the commiflioners from pronouncing of the sentence
at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they hould return to her majesty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefented, without once of-
fering to carry it up, till her majesty ent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was scal'd unto the commiflioners, as he

was specially commanded, flaying it all that night, and the greatest part of the next
day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his refloring thereof into the hands of the lord treasurer, of whom
he had before received the fame.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison did notling in this,

cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of the place he then held in her majefly's
service.

Cal. C. 9.

THIs eems to be an original. On the back is this title,
THE innocency of Mr. Davioln in the cause of the late Scottish queen.

Letter

A P P E N D IX.

No. XX. [Vol. II. p. 238. line 29.]

Letter frontm , Sir Robert Cecil, to his Majelfy King James.

Fioil th-O. , 0

/OS T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your affectionates have

rgiinal R'l MJ'v- been such, as hath inforced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your
r'.c. ur. Ferfon, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the main-
Ed:n A, i 1. tenance of the jut regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations,
Ž.o 4. is inverted in your royal person. Fall not then, moit noble and renowned prince,

from him, whose providence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
infirument of his glory, and the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have
been revealed to your prejudice, which must proceed from some ambitious violent
spirited perfcn near your majefly in council and favour; no man in particular will I
accuse, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom, for your service,
I have held correspondence; otherwise, I had, long since, been disabled from r er-
formance of tlofe duties, that tle thoughts of my heart endeavoureth; being only
known to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of Chriftendoni
for his fidelity to your person and slate, and to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal
servant, my first and faithful corrcfpondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom
have found in all things that concern you, mo{t secret and aflured. It may, there-
fore, please your majetty, at the humble motion of 0, which jargon I desire to be
the indorfement of vour commands unto me, tl at by some token of your favour,
he may underhand in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and ervice. My
paflionate affeAion to your person, (not as you are a king, but as you are a good
king, and have just title, after my sovereign, to be a great king) doth transport me
to presumption. Condemn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love,
altho' mixed with defects in judgment.

r. I, therefore, firfl beseech your majety, that for the good of those, whom

God, by divine Providence, hath destined to your charge, that you would be pleased
to have an extraordinary care of all praflicers, or practices, against your person ; for
it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, faction,
or fear, there are many that desire to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the
sovereignty and slate might be swayed by partiality of ffibalternate Ferfons, rather
than by true rule of power and juflice. Preserve your person, and fear not the
practices of man upon the oint of your right, hich will be peferved and main-
tained against all afTults of competition whatevcr. Thus 1 leave the protection of your
person, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who bless and pre-
lerve you and all yours, in all regal happinels to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the conservation and secret keep-

ing of your councells, which, as I have said, are often betrayed and difcoveed,
either out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faction, or base conception, the
which your majesty is to regard with all circumfpeeion, as a matter molt dan-
gerous to your peroln and fate, and the only means to ruin and defiroy all those,
that fland faithfully devoted to your majefly's service. Some particulars, and per-
sons of this nature, I make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this
nlben an, the bearer hereof, of whom your niajcfly may be further informed.

7 3. TE

3. THE 3d point confiGerable is, that your majefly, by all means poflible, ecure

yourself of the good affe6tion of the French king and States, by the negotiation of
some faithful ecret confident; the French naturally diftafting the union of the Bri-
tifh Islands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have many
allies and friends, but by reason of their remote state, they do not so much importe
this affair, which must be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. VWHEN God, by whose Providence, the period of all persons and times is de-

termined, shall call to his kingdom of glory her majesty, altho' I do assuredly hope
that there will not be any question in competition, yet for that I hold it not fitting
to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature) I do humbly beseech
your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and experienced coifident servant of yours,
being of: an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here resident, whoSe
negotiation, it were convenient your majetly should fortifie, with such secret trust
and powers, as there may not need 14 days relpite, to post for authority, in a cause,
that cannot endure Io hours- respite, Without varieties of danger. In the which it is
to be confidered, that all such as pretend least good to your eftablifliment, will not
in publick oppung your title, but out of their cunning ambition, will seek to gain
time, by alledging their pretence of common good to the state, in propounding of
good conditions for difburthening the common weale, of divers hard laws, heavy
impositions, corruptions, oppressions, &c. which is a main point to lead the popu-
lar, who are much disgusted with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
convenient, that these motives, out of your majesty's providence, hould be prevent-
ed, by your free offer in these points following, viz.

I. THAT your majefly would be pleated to abolish purvaiors and purvaiance, be-

ing a matter infinitely offensive to the common people, and the whole kingdom, and
not profitable to the prince.

2. THAT your majesty would be pleated to diltolve the court of wards, being the

ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil
education of their children, by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally repined againfi by

the subject, in regard of their uncertainty, being many times altered from their true
meaning, by variety of interpretation.

4. THAT your majesty will be pleated admit free outport of the native commo-

dities of this kingdom, now often refrained by ubalternate persons for private pro-
fit, being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants, and a plain dcftrudtion
to the true industry and manufacture of all kingdoms, and against the profit of the
crown.

THESE, being by your majefly's confidents in the point of time.propounded, will

assuredly confirm unto your majeflie the hearts and affections of the whole kingdom,
and absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of
pretext of common good, would seek to patronize themselves in popular opinion ;ind
power, and thereby to derogate from your majesty's bounty and free favour, by
princely merit of your moderation, judgment, and justice.

Your majflty's favour, thus granted to the fubjeSR, will no way impcach the

profits of the crown, but advance them. The dilproportionable gain oi sole chequer
oflicers, with the h;bte and mercenary profits of the idle unnecclhry clerks and atteln-
dants, will only ufflr bmoic detriment; but infinite will be the good unto the kiihg-

VoL. II. C c c (IUn,

I17

dom, which will confirm unto your majefy the universal love and affection of the
people, and establish your renown in the highest esteem to all polterity.

THE Lord preserve your majeflie, and make you triumphant over all your ene-
mies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacquet, and will die before he

leave to be yours, flall be no less then of mine own life, and in like esteem will I
hold all your faithful confidents, notwithfianding I will hold myself reserved from
being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted affecions unto your ma-
jelly, only this extraordinary worthy man whose afociate I am in his misfortune,
cloth know my heart, and we both will pray for you, and if we live you shall find
us together.

I BESEECH your majesty burn this letter, and the others; for altho' it be in an
unusual hand yet it may be discovered.

Your majefy's mofl devoted

and humble servant,

0.
A CRITICAL

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

a, r A

. I·;·
- A *

C R I T I C A L
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King H E N R , and the Genuieneefs of

the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.
IT is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which

the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary to
Bothwell, have given rife; far less to appear as an adversary to

any particular author, who hath treated of them. To repeat,
and to expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to these points,
which have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from par-
tiality, from malevolence, and from diflonefty, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to mol of my readers. All
I propose, is to assist others in forming ome judgment concerning
the fads in dispute, by stating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame
attention and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examiniing other controverted points in the Scotch history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two different systems

have been formed. The one supposes Bothwell both to have con-
trived and executed this crime. The other imputes it to the Earls
of Murray, Morton, and their party.

VOL. II. D d d THE

THE decision of many controverted facts in hiflory, is a matter

rather of curiosity than of use. They fland detached; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the fory
remains untouched. But the fat under dispute in thisplace is a
fundamental and essential one, and according to the opinion which
an Historian adopts with regard to it, he must vary and dispose the
whole of his subsequent narration. An historical system may be
tried in two different ways, whether it be confifient with probabi-
lity, and whether it be supported by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue in

the following manner; and though their reasonings have been men-
tioned already in different places of the narrative, it is necefiary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they, was a udden
and youthful pafilon. The beauty of his person was his chief
merit. His capricious temper oon raised in the Queen a disgust,
which broke out on different occasions. His engaging in the con-
fpiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust into an indignation,
which she was at no pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps,
in its own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted that art
and condescension which alone could have repaired it. It widened
every day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all remains of as-
fetion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal
both to the Queen, and to himself. He had served Mary at diffe-
rent times with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself into
her favour, by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her
heart. In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it was ne-
ceflary to get rid of the King. Mary had rejeEed the proposal made
to her for obtaining a divorce. The King was equally hated by the
partizans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the
kingdom; by Murray, one of the most powerful and popular persons
in his country; by Morton and his associates, whom he had deceived;
and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest by a recent favour.
Among the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. He
expeded, for all these reasons, that the murder of the King would
pass without any enquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own

add(rcs(
a

addrers and good fortune, he trulled for the accomplishment of the
reft of his wiihes. What Bothwell expected really came to pass.
Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at an aion
which rid her of a man whom he had such good reason to detest.
A few months after, she married the person who was both us-
peEed and accused of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason in

this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless ambition.
Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, le had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's return into
Scotland, he insinuated himself into her favour, and engrossed the
whole power into his own hands. He set himself against every pro-
pofal of marriage which was made to her, left his own chance of
succeeding to the Crown should be destroyed. He hated Darnley,
and was no less hated by him. In order to be revenged on him, he
entered into a sudden friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and mor-
tal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate the crime, by giving
him hopes of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a de-
sign to throw upon the Qeen herself the imputation of being ac-
ceffory to the murder, and under that pretext, to destroy Bothwell,
to depose and imprison her, and to seize the sceptre which he had
wrested out of her hands.

THE former of these fyffems has an air of probability, is con-

fiftent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, some as-
fertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and effiets
appear, of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray, on the
Queen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and
by his prudent adminifration rendered her so popular, and so power-
ful, as enabled her with cafe to quash a formidable infurrction
raised by himself in the year 1565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without followers,
without influence over the nobles, whom the Queen, by her
neglet, had reduced to the lowest fate of contempt, and who,
after a long disgrace, had regained (according to the mos favoura-
ble filppofition) the precarious poftllioii of her favour only a fev
days before his death ? It is difficult to conceive wlat Murray had to

L) d d 2: fear

fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Queen had no pre-
vious attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical
than a cheme to persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was itill
alive, and who was not onlyv fufpeted, but accused, of murdering
her former husband. But that such a scheme should really succeed
is fRill more extraordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himfelfbeen accessory to the commiflion
ofit, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the persecutions which he suffered, with-
out ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the whole
scene of iniquity ? An antient and deadly feud had fubfiited between
Murray and Bothwell; the Queen with difficulty had brought them.
to some terms of agreement. But is it probable that Murray would
chufe an enemy, to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his
confident in the commission of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination of a wife
man, first to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that after-
wards he should find ome opportunity of depriving him of that
power ? The most adventrous politician never hazarded such a dan-
gerous experiment. The most credulous folly never trusted such
an uncertain chance.

BUT however firong these general reasonings may-be, we must

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we now
proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, i.

From the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary hiflorians.
2. From the confession of those persons who suffered for affiting at
the commission of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail.
of all its circumtfances. Anders. v. 2. 65. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own commissioners, who allow Bothwell
to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good.
. . . 213. 4. From the express testimony of Lefly Bishop of Ross
to the fame effet with the former. Def. of QMary's Hon. And.
2. 76. Id, v. 3. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared that

Both-

Bothwell had follicited him, at different times, to concur in the con-
fpiracy formed againit the life of the King; and that he was in-
formed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The letter
from Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix to vol. II.
No. 12. confirms Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herreis promises,
in his. own name, and in the name of the nobles who adhered to
the Queen, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell as the
murderer of the King. Append. vol. I. No. 23.

THE most diret charge ever brought against Murray is in these

words of Bishop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addrefling himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herreis said to your face openly,
"even at your own table, a few days after the murder was comr
"mitted ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of the

fame murder? Did not he, nulla circuitione ii/us, flatly and

"plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming with one of
"your most assured and trufly servants the fame day whereon you
" departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This
: night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lose his life ?" Def. of Q_
Mary, Anders. v. 2.75. But the assertion of a man so heated with
fadion as Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence, is of
little weight. The servant to whom Murray is said to have spoken
there words, is not named; nor the manner in which this secret con-
verfation was brought to light mentioned. Lord Herreis was
one of the most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable
that in all his negotiation at the court of England, he never once
repeated this accusation of Murray. In answering the challenge
given him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of men-
tioning Murray's knowledge of the murder; but though he openly
accuses of that crime some of those who adhered to him, he in-
dultrioufly avoids any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith
Pref. XII. Mary herself, in a conversation with Sir Francis
Knolles, accused Morton and Maitland of being privy to the murder,.
but does not mention Murray. And. 4. 55. When the Bilhop of
Ross and Lord Herreis themselves appeared before the English coun-
cil, January 1l, 1569, they declared themselves ready, in obedience

to,

to the Quen's cdmmand, to accuse Murray and his atfociates of being
accessory to the murder, but " they being also required, whether

they or any of them, as of themfelve, would accuse the fail
"Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty

thereof;" they a'nswered, " that they took God to witness that
( none of them did ever know any thing of the conspiracy of that
( murder, or were in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither
" who were devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till it
(c was publickly discovered long thereafter by ome of the affafins
(c who suffered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 308. These
words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herreis them-
felv s, and seem to be a direct confutation of the bishop's assertion.
The bishop himself repeats the fame thing in still stronger terms.
And. 3. 31.

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protefation tcuching

the murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given an
account vol. I. 330. add " So after these premisses, the murder
" of the King following, we judge in our consciences, and hold
" for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Le-

thington were authors, inventors, counsellors and causers of the
fame murder, in what manner, or by whatibmever persons the
C fame was executed." Anders. v. 4. 188. But, . This is no-
thing more than the private opinion or personal affirmation of these
two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they make has no con-
nedion with the premifles on which they found it. Because Mur-
ray proposed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her husband
with her own content, it does not follow that therefore he com-
mitted the murder without her knowledge. 3. HIuntly and Argyll
were at that time the leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and
animated with all the rage of faceion. 4. Both of them were Mur-
ray's prional enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment
which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll
was desirous o bcing divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
on no good terms. Knox 32?. and by whom he had no children.
Crawf. Pcer. 19. She was Murray's fifler, and by his interest he

had
6

had obftruted that design. Keith 55 . These circumitances woild
go far towards invalidating a positive tetfimony; they more than coun-
terbalance an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain
whether Huntly and Argyll ever subscribed this protestation. A copy
of such a protestation as the Queen thought would be of advantage
to hercaufe, was transmitted to them by her. Anders. v. 4. 86.
The protestation itself published by Anderson is taken from an unfub-
fcribed copy with blanks for the date and place of subscribing. On
the back of this copy is pasted a paper, which Cecil has marked

Answer of the Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Hunt-
ly and Argyll." Anders. 94, 95. But it can scarce beefteemed

a reply to the above-mentioned protestation. Murray's answer bears
date at London, January 19, 56 . The Qeen's letter, in which
file inclosed the copy of the protestation, bears date at Bowton, Jan.
5, 568. Now it is scarce to be supposed that the copy could be
sent into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and be seen and
answered by Murray within so short a time. Murray's reply seems
intended only to prevent the impression which the vague and uncer-
tain accusations of his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil
had got the original of the Queen's letter into his custody. Anders.
v. 4. 86. This naturally leads us to conje&ure that the letter it-
'elf, together with the inclosed protestation, were intercepted before
they came to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjecure alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. . fol. 280, and is
an original fubfcribedby Mary, though not written with her own
hand, because he seldom chore to write in the English language.
The proteflation is in the fame Volume, fol. 282, and is manifestly
written by the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter. This is
a clear proof that both were intercepted. So that much has been
founded on a paper not fibfcribed by the two Earls, and probably
never seen by them. Besides, this method which the Queen took of
fending a copy, to the two Earls, of what was proper for them to
declare with regard to a conference held in their own pretence, ap-
pears romewhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and
not so liable to any misinterpretation, to have desired them to

write
6

71~

write the most exact account, which they could recollec of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

THE Queen's commissioners at the Conferences in England accused

Murray and his associates of having murdered the King. Good. 2.
28 . But there accusations are nothing more than loose and general
affirmations, without descending to such particular circumiances,
as either ascertain their truth, or discover their falsehood. The
fame accusation is repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton
Sept. 1 568. Good. 2. 359. And the fameobservation may be made
concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to accountfor Mur-

ray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was done on pur-
po.e, that he might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's adminif-
tration, and thereby rendering ineffectual her general Revocation of
Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his associates of
the belt part of their estates. Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a Scotch Monarch, will
fee that such a revocation could not be very formidable to the no-
bles. Every King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles
rendered it ineffectual. The bed vindication of Murray and his
party from this accusation is that which they presented to the Queen
of England, and which hath never hitherto been published.
PdierOfice. An7fver's to tIe objeLTions and alledgance o the EL en, alledging the

Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of Morton, Marr, Glen-
caiirn, Hme, Ruthjven, &c. to have been moved to armour, bfr tat
they abhorred and might not abide her revocation of the alienation
made of her property.

IT i afwered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it appears

God has bereft, the alledgance of all wit and good remcmbrance,
for thir rcafons following.

IM-

7
8

9

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occasion to grudge

thereat, in refped the Queen made him privy to the fame, and took
resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his Lordllip
know he would assuredly in the famine except all things iho had
given to him, and ratefy them in the next parliament, as he did
indeed; and for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind him
Masser John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom he de-
clared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it should be
provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before ever he de-
manded, as it came to pass without any let or impediment, for all
was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the Parliament,
but any difficulty.

ITEM as to my Lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property quilk

alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him, in the said parliament
preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of miscontent of
that revocation, far less to have put their lives and heritage to so open
and manifest ane danger as they did for sic ane frivole cause.

GYF ever any' did make evill countenance, and Mhow any mif-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll in
fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to
the Queen herself, and did complain of the manifest corruption of
ane at of Parliament past upon her Majesty's return, and fa did
lett any revocation at that time; but the armor for revenge of the
King's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there was
no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind thereof.

VOL. I. E e HAv-

k

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been produced

against the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we shall next proceed
to enquire whether the Queen herself was accessory to the murder
of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than. frong

suspicions arose, among ome of her fubjeds, that Mary had given
her consent to the commifion of that crime. And. 2. 156. We
are informed, by her own ambassador in France, the Archbishop of
Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head, were no
less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many of her nobles loudly
accused her of that crime, and a great part of the nation, by support-
ing them, eem to have allowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature that they scarce ad-

mit of a positive or diret proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom be
brought perfeCtly to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Principals, but only of being Accefaries to a crime; not of having
committed it themselves, but only of giving consent to the com-
mission of it by others; the proof becomes still more difficult: and
unless when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof by circum-
flances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attained. Even
in judicial trials, such evidence is ometimes held to be sufficient for
condemning criminals. The degree of conviction which such evi-
dence carries along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises
from positive testimony; and a concurring series of circumstances
satisfies the understanding no less than the express declaration of
witneses.

EVIDENCE of both there kinds has been produced against Mary.

We shall first confider that which is founded upon circumstances
alone.

SoME of there suspicious circumstances preceded the King's death;

others were subsequent to it. With regard to the former, we may
obfcrve that the Queen's violent love of Darnly was oon converted
into an avcrfion to him no lss violent; and that his own ill conduct,

and

O N
IO

and excesses of every kind were such, that if they did not jufiify,
at least they account for this sudden change of her disposition to-
wards him. The rife and progress of this domeRfic rupture, I have
traced with great care in the hiffory, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers published by other authors, I have added
those contained in App. N° XVI. and XVII. The Earls of
Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argyll, and Huntly confidered the
scheme of procuring for the Queen a divorce from her husband,
as one of the most flattering proposals they could make to her, and
employed it as the most powerful inducement to prevail on her to
content to a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 88. Du
Croc the French ambassador, who was an eye witness of what he
describes, not only represents her disgust at Darnly to be extreme,
but declares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do allure Decemb. 12,
you is not at all well; and do believe the principal part of her dif- I566.
ease to consist in deep grief and sorrow; nor does it seem possible
to make her forget the fame. Still she repeats these words, I could
ewif) to be dead. You know very well that the injury she has re-
ceived is exceeding great, and her Majesty will never forget it.-
To speak my mind freely to you, I do not expea, upon several ac-
counts, any good understanding between them [i. e. the King and
Queen] unless God effectually put to his hand.- His bad de- Decemb, 23
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expected
from him for several reasons, which I might tell you was I present
with you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn, but I
will fay, that matters cannot subsist long as they are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad consequences." Keith, Pref. vii.
Had Henry died a natural death, at this juncture, it muf have been
confidered as a very fortunate event to the Qeen, and as a ieaion-
able deliverance fiom a husband who had become altogether odious
to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weeks afterwards,
and as nothing had happened to render the Qu]ccn's aversion to
him lets violent, the opinion of those who confider Mary as the
author of an event, whlich was manlifcftly so agreeable to her,
will appear perhaps to tome of our readers to be ncither unnatural

E c 2 11o

nor over refined. If we add to this, what has been observed in the
history, that in proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of her
husband, Bothwell made progress in her favour; and that he be-
came the objet not only of her confidence but of her attachment,
that opinion acquires new strength. It is easy to observe many ad-
vantages which might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from
the King's death; but excepting them, no person, and no party in
the kingdom could derive the least benefit from that event. Both-
well, accordingly, murdered the King, and it was, in that age,
thought no violent imputation on Mary's chara&er, to suppose that
she had consented to the deed.

THE steps which the Queen took after her husband's death add

strength to that supposition. i. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, afterts that " every body fufpeded
the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to others,
said plainly that it was He." p. 155. 2. Mary having issued a
proclamation, on the 2th of February, offering a reward to any
person, who should discover those who had murdered her husband;
And. . 36. a paper in answer to this was affixed to the gates of
the Tolbooth, February 16, in which Bothwell was named as the
chief person guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was ac-
cufed of having given her content to it. And. 2. I56. 3. Soon
after, February 20, the Earl of Lennox, the King's father, wrote
to Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prosecute the mur-
derers with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his own sus-
picions of Bothwell, and pointed out a method of proceeding againfl
imn, and for discovering the other authors of the crime, no less
obvious than equitable. He advised her to seize, and to commit to
lure custody Bothwell himself, and those who were already named;
as his accomplices; to call an Assembly of the nobles; to ifTue a
proclamation, inviting Bothwelt's accusers to appear; and if, on that
cncouragement, no person appeared to accuse them, to hold them
as Innocent, and to difinifs them without farther trial. And. I. 4o.
4. Archbifbop Beatoun, her ambaflador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March 9th, employs arguments of the utmof weight to,
pcrfuade her to profecutc the murderers with the greatest severity.

" I can,
12

" I can conclude nathing, (fays he) by quhat zour MajefRy writes
to me zourfelf, that fen it has plfit God to conserve zow to take
a rigorous vengeance thereof, that rather than it be not actually taine,
it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I
ask your Majeltie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can heir nathing
to zour prcjudife, but I man conftraindly writ the famin, that all may mr,
come to zour knawlege; for the better remede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth shaw now rather than ever of be-
fore, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and conitance that God has
grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this most
heavie envie and difplefir of the committing therof, and conserve
that reputatioun in all godliness, ze have conquift of lang, quhich
can appear na wayis mair clearlie, than that zow dofick justice that f.ch
the haill world may declare zowr innocence, and give testimony he
forever of thair treason that has committed (but fear of God or withott
man) so cruel and ungodlie a murther, quhairof there is fa meikle nmudc
ill spoken, that I am conftrainit to ask zow mercy, that neither
can I or will I make the rehearsal therof, which is owr odious. too
But alas! Madame, all over Europe this day there is na purpose in
head fa frequent as of zour Majeflie, and of the present slate of
zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit sinisterly." Keith,
Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. N° XIX.
urged the fame thing in itrong terms. 6. The circumstances of the
cafe itself, no less than there solicitations and remonfirances, called
for the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had been
murdered in a cruel manner, almotl in her own pretence. Her
fubjeOs were filled with the utmost horror at that crime. Both-
well, one of her principal favourites, had been publickly accused as
the author of it. Reflections, extremely dishonourable to herfifel
had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of justice, did
not prompt her to pursue the murderers with ardour, decency, at
least, and concern for vindicating her own character, flould have
induced her to avoid any appearance of remifnefs or want of
zeal.

BUT inflead of this, Mary continued to difcovcr, in all her ac-
tions, the utmost partiality towards Bothwell. I. On the 15th of

February,

,3

February, five days after the murder, ihe bestowed on him the re-
version of the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the year

565 file had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This grant
was of much importance, as it gave him not only the command
of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant over
the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of keep-
ing polfflion of it *. 2. Bothwell being extremely desirous to

* Copy from the original in the Charter-house of the city of Edinburgh of an /Jigna.
tion to the reversion of he superiority of Leith by Queen Mary to the Earl of Bothwell.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quos

praefentes literae pervenerint falutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam reducentes mul-
tiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam noftre chariffima
matri Marie Regine regni noftri pro tempore in noftra minoritate fatum et impen-
fum, verurn etiam nobifmet ipfis, tam intra partes Gallia quam intra hoc nostrum
regnum, ad extentionem noftri honoris et aussoritatis in punitione furum, malefac-
torum, et tranfgreflorum infra idem, per nostrum confifum confanguineum et confilia-
rium Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum Halis, Creighton et Liddifdale, mag-
num admirallum regni noftri, commissionem et onerationem ad hunc effeEtum ha-
bentem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus etvitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in
perfoimatione et extentione noftri diAi fervitii, fuam hereditatem, supra fummam
viginti millium mercarum hujus nofiri regni, alienavit ac laefit. Et nos cogitantes
quod, ex nofira principali honore et devoria, diElum nofirum confifum confanguineum
& confiliarium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine recompenfare et gratificare in-
cumbit qua nos commode fibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus
affuturis temporibus efie poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum in omnibus caufis
feu eventibus: In recompenfationem quorum pramiflbrum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftris
rationabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dictum Jaco-
bum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos heredes mafeulos quofcunque nofiros legitti-
mos, &c. affignatos in et ad literas reverfionis faFtas, &c. per Symonem Preston de
eodem militem, prepofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri
burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis ucceflbribus, &c. nobis, noftrifque here-
dibus, ucceflbribus, ct aflignatis pro redcmptione, &c. fuperioritatis totius vill de
Leith, &c. impignorate per nos ditisprmpofito, &c. sub reverfione alicnatae contincntis
fummam decem milliunm mercarum monetx prafcriptae numerandam et calculandam
in parochiali ecclesia de Edinburgh, super premonitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris
ct, veluti in di6tis reverfionis literis, &c. de data 8vo Oftob. 1565, &c. (The reft is
form, and contains a Claufc of absolute warrandicc.) IN cujUS RI 'I'ES''IMONIUM
pra-fcntibus iiiagnlu figillum noftium apponi fccinius. Apud Edinburgh, decimo
quinto (ile n111Cs lc!.ru.rii, ainno Doinii niillcfinmo quingcntefinmo cxagc'imo Icxto,
et rc-ii noli i viccfinio qcuinto.

The great feal entire.

obtainl

obtain the command of the catle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in
order to prevail on the Earl of Mar to fu;render the government
of it, offered to commit the young prince to his custody. Mar
consented; and he instantly appointed Bothwell governor of the
cafile. And. i. Pref.-64. Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Bothwell's trial, teems to have been conduded
with the utmost reminefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly against this.
And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as is evi-
dent from a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when his master
was muidered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbish. Being
examined on the .Monday after the King's death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the Queenis
fervandis the keyis of her halmir. Qhilk the Laird of Tillibar-
din hearing, aid, Hald thair, here is ane ground. 'Efter quhilk
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquifi-
tion." And. 4. P. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to search
into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of so much im-
portarice merited the most careful enquiry. 4. Notwithstanding
Lennox's repeated follicitations, notwithstanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the necessity of complying with them, in
order to encourage any accuser to appear against Bothwell, he not
only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove him
from her presence and councils; And. i. 42, 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circumstances, discovered
an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing
Bothwell to a publick trial; but he permitted him to fit as a mem-
ber in that meeting of the Privy Council, which diredted his own
trial; and the trial itself was carried on with such unnecessary
precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumflances, as
render his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. The!e circumstances have all been mentioned
at length, Vol. I. p. 344, &c. and therefore are not repeated in this
place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of
her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the ceptrc
before her at the meeting of Pailiament. Keith, 378. 7. In that

par-

25

parliament, he granted him a ratification of all the vast poffeflions
and honours, which fle had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services he had performed.
And. . 117. 8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her attach-
ment to Bothwell would at length induce her to marry him, warned
her of the infamy and danger which would attend that ation, ihe
not only disregarded this salutary admonition, but discovered what
had pafied between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. I56. 9. Bothwell seized Mary as he
returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this, without
her knowledge and content, such an infuit could not have failed to
have filled her with the most violent indignation. But according
to the account of an old M. S. " The friendly love was so
highly contracted between this great princess, and her enormous
subjed, that there was no end thereof (for it was constantly esteem-
ed by all men that either of them loved other carnally) so that he
suffered patiently to he led where the lover lift, and all the way
neither made obstacle, impediment, clamour or resistance, as in
such accidents use to be, or that she might have done by her prince-
ly authority, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Huntly,
and ecretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil,
who was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that nothing was
done without the Queen's consent. Melv. 58. io. On the i2th
of May, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that the
was then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended her
by seizing her person, he was so much satisfied with his dutiful
behaviour since that time, and so indebted to him for past services,
that she not only forgave that offence, but resolved to promote him
to higher honours. And. 1. 187. I 1. Even after the confederate
nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's presence, and though
fle saw that he was confidered as the murderer of her former hus-
band by si) great part of her fubjeds, her affection did not in the
lealt abatc, and fle continued to express the most unalterable at-
tachment to him. " I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
that the rigour with which the Q(een is kept, proceedeth by order

6 fronm

from these men, because that the Queen will not, by any means,
be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murder; nor
will not content by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Bothwell for
her husband, but avoweth constantly that he will live and die
with him; and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquith
her crown and kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, he would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a simple damsel with him, and that
(he will never content that he flall fare worse, or have more harm
than herself. App. p. 42. See also p. 44. From this long enu-
meration of circumstances, we may, without violence, draw the
following conclusion. Had Mary really been accessary to the mur-
der of her husband; had Bothwell'perpetrated the crime with her
content, or at her command; and had she intended to stifle the evi-
dence against him, and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, he
could scarce have taken any other fleps than those she took, nor
could her conduc have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary may be classed
under two heads.

i. THE depositions of some persons who were employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was twice examined,
and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of the other,
are still extant. It is pretended, that both thee are notorious for-
geries. But they are remarkable for a implicity and naivete which
it is almost impossible to imitate; they abound with a num-
ber of minute fats and particularities, which the most dextrous
forger could not have easily assembled, and connected together
with any appearance of probability; and they are filled with cir-
cumftances, which can scarce be supposed to have entered the ima-
gination of any man, but one of Paris's profession and character.
But, at the fame time, it muff be acknowledged that his depositions
contain foine improbable circumstances. He seems to have been
a foolifli talkative fcllow ; the fear of death; the violence of tor-

VOL. I. F f f ture;

17

ture,; and the desire of pleasing thofe.in whose power he was, tempt-
ed him, perhaps, to feign ome circumstances, and to exaggerate
others.. To fay that some circumstances in an affidavit are improbable
or false, is very different from faying that the whole is forged. I sus-
pect the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no appearance of the lat-
ter. Be that as it will, some of the most material fads in Paris's
affidavits reft upon his single testimony ; and for that reason, I have
not in the Hillory, nor ihall I in this place, lay any firess upon them;

2. TE letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell.. These

have been frequently published.. The accident, by which the
Queen's enemies got them into their poflefion, is related Vol. I.
371. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may be ascertained either by external or. internal evi-
dence. Both these have been produced in the present cafe.

i. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters. I.

Murray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon their
word and honour, that the letters were written, with the Queen's
own hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. 2.
64, 92. 2. The letters were publickly produced in the parliament
of Scotland, December 1567, Good. 2. 360;- and were so far
confidered as genuine, that they are mentioned, in the a against
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66. 3
They were shewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Susex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's commifioners at York. In
the account which they give of this matter to their Miflrefs, they
seem to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion
of any forgery; they particularly observe, " that the matter con-
tained in them is such, that it could hardly be invented and
devised by any other than herself; for that they discourse of
some things, which were unknown to any other than to herself
and Bothwell; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, so the mat-
ter of them, and the manner how these men came by them is such,
as it feemeth that God,, in whose fight murder and bloodfled of the
innocent is abominable, would not permit the fame to be hid or
concealed." Good. 2. 142. They seem to have made such an
impression on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a fubfcquent letter to

Pem..
x8

O N

Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has there words, If the mat-
ter shall be thought as detestable and manifest to you, as for ought
we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2. 154. 4. After
the conferences at York and Weffminfter were finished, Elizabeth
resolved to call together the Earls who were then at court, and to
lay before them the whole proceedings againfl the Scotch Queen,
particularly that " the letters and writings exhibited by the Regent,
as the Queen of Scots letters and writings, hould also be flew-
ed, and conference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their fight,
with the letters of the said Queen's being extant, and heretofore
written with her own hand, and sent to the Qeen's Majesty;
whereby may be searched and examined whatdifference is betwixt
them." Good. 2. 252. They aflembled, accordingly, at Hampton
Court, December 4and 5, 168; and " The originals of the let-
ters supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand, were
then also prcfently produced and perused; and being read, were
duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and
fashion of orthography, with sundry other letters long since here-
tofore written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the Queen's
Majesty.-- In collation whereof no difference was found." Good,
2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologetical letter for her con-
dut to the Countess of Lennox, July io, 1570*, he transmitted
it to her husband then in Scotland; and he returned to the Countess
the following answer: " Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer
the Queen the King's mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay

but

* Mary's letter has never been published, and ought to have a place here, where

evidence on all fides is fairly produced. " Madam, if the wrang and false reportis
of rebellis, enemeis weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trusted
of me by zoure advice, had not so far flurred you aganis my innocency, (and I
mufl fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have not onelic as it were condempnit me
wrangfullie, bot so hated me, as some wordis and opene deideis hes teffifeit to all the
warlde, a manyfeft miflyking in zow aganis zowr awn blude) I wold not have omit-
tit thuslang my dewtic in wryting to zow excusing me of those untrew reporties
made of me. Bot hoping with Gocis grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin
to zow, as I trust it is already to.the maift pairt of all indifferent perfoniR, I thocht
it bcef not to trouble zow for a tyme till that such a matter is moved that tuichis
us bayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure littil sone, and my onelie child in this

F f f 2 cuntrey.

but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ the best she can for hirfelf,
to feame to purge hir of that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly
perfuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffionis of men gone to the
death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that
is hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa weill knawin.
The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
and my caule, and of the just occafioun of our millykyng. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis interest, were hir trew
confeffioun and unfeyned repentance of that lamentable fad, odious
for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God isjuft,.
and will not in the end be abused; but as he has manifested the
trewth, so will he puneife the iniquity." Lennox's Orig. Regi/.
of Letters. In their publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be
Iufpeded of advancing what would be most subservient to their cause;
not what was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their own
inward convition. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox had
no occasion to dissemble; and it is plain, that he not only thought
the Queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell.

2. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of the

Queen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, . That whenever a

cuntrey. To the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I have born him, and God knawis
with quhat daunger to him and me boith; and of zow he is defcendit. So I meane
not to forzet my dewtie to zow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how
unkyndlie that ever ze have delt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt, and refpea
zow as my moyer in law. And gif ye ples to knaw farther of my mynde in that and
all uther thingis betwixt us, my ambassador the Bishop of Ross fall be ready to con-
ser wth zow. And so after my hairtlie commendationis, remittingme to my faide am-
[ballador, and zour better confideratioun, I commit zow to the protcEtioun of Al-
mi)ygty Gcd, quhom I p ay to prcfervc zow and my brother Charles, and caus zow
to knaw my pairt better nor ze do. From Chatifworlh this x of July 1570.

To my Ladle Lennox Youe natral gude Nice

ny moder in law. and lovynie dochter.

paper

6
20

paper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to elabliih the point in view, his solicitude to cut off all
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncertainty, al-
ways prompt him to use expressions the moif explicit and full o his
purpose. The passages foisted in'o ancient authors by Heretics in
different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romifil faints; the
fuppnfititious deeds in their own favour produced by ronafteries;
the false charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 1 i. are so many
proofs of this assertion. No maxim feetns to be more certain than
this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much, hut seldom falls
into the error of proving too little. The point which the Queen's
enemies had to eflablifi, was " that as the Earl of Bthwell was
chief executor of the horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c,
so was she of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, persuader, and
commander of the faid..murder to be done." Good. 2. 207. But
of this there are only imperfea hints, obscure intimations, and
dark expressions in the letters, which however convincing evidence
they might furnish if found in real letters, bear no refcmblance to
that glare and superfluity of evidence which forgeries commonly
contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocence in her cwn age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof
of her guilt. Lefley, Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with passages
to this purpose; nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet flill it might have been expected (fays her latest
defender) that ome one or other of the points or articles of the
accusation should be made out clearly by the proof. But nothing
of that is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing in the
letters, that could plainly shew the writer to have been in the fore-
knowledge, counsel, or device of any murder, far less to have
persuaded or commanded it; and as little is there about maintaining
orjuftifying any murderers." Good. i. 76. How ill advilcd were
Mary's adversaries to contract so much guilt, and to prafile lo many
artifices in order to forge letters, which are so ill contrived fir efta-
blifiing the conclusion they had in view ? Had they been tf base
as to have recourfc to forgery, is it not natural to think that they
would have produced omething more explicit and decisive ? 2. As
it is almuft imnpoffible to invent a long narration consisting of many

circwul-

21

circumifances, and to conned it in such a manner with real fa&s,
that no mark of fraud flall appear; for this reason kilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially of foreign and
Superfluous ones, well knowing that the more these are multiplied,
the more are the chances of detection increased. Now Mary's
letters, eipecially the firfl, are filled with a multiplicity of circum-
flances, extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogether
foreign to the purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have been perses folly to have inserted if they had been altogether
imaginary, and withoutfoundation. 3. The truth and reality offeveral
circumstances in the letters, and these, too, of no very publick nature,
are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence. Lett. r. Good.
2. p. I. The Queen is said to have met one of Lennox's gentlemen,
and to have some conversation with him. Thomas Crawford, who
-was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's commiflioners, and
confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this circumstance. He likewise
declared, that during the Queen's tfay at Glasgow, the King re-
peated to him, every night, whatever had passed, through the day,
'between her Majesty and him, and that the account given of these
conversations in the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 2. 245. According to the
fame letter there was much discourse between the King and Queen
concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. 2. 8, o1, I.
WWhat this might be, was altogether unknown till a letter of Mary's
preserved in the Scotch College at Paris, and published, Keith,
Pref. vii. discovered it to be an affair of so much importance as me-
rited all the attention (lie paid to it at that time. It appears by a
letter from the French ambassador, that Mary was fubjedc to a vio-
lent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circumstance is mentioned,
Lett. . p. 30. in a manner so natural as can scarce belong to any
-but a genuine production. 4. If we shall still think it probable to
suppose that so many real circumflanccs were artfully introduced into
the letters by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
-their production; it will scarce be possible to hold the fame opinion
concerning the following particular. Before the Queen began her
firit letter to Bothwell, the, as is usual among those who write ong
letters concerning a variety of fubjecds, made otes or nmeiorandmizs

7 of

of the particulars he wished to remember; but as the fate up writ-
ing during a great part of the night, and after her attendants were
asleep, her paper failed her, and he continued her letter upon the
fame heet, on which the had formerly made her memorandums.
This he herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: "It
is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you, yet now after
the kifling of your hands, I will ed my letter. Excuse my evil
writing, and read it twice over. Excuse that thing that is fcriblit, for
I had. na paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial. Good.
2. 28. These memorandums frill appear in the middle of the letter;.
and what we have said seems naturally to account for the manner how
they might find their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be supposed.
however that any forger would think of placing memorandums in the
middle of a letter,. where, at first fight, they make so absurd and-
so unnatural an appearance. But if -any shall flill carry their refine-
ment so far, as to suppose that te forgers were so artful as to throw
in this circumstance, in order to preserve the appearance of genuine-
ness, they muff at leans allow that the Queen's enemies, who em-
ployed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and mean-
ing of these short notes and memorandums; but we find themn
mistaking them so far as to imagine that they were the credit of the
bearer, i. e. points concerning which the Queen had given him
verbal infIrudions. Good. 2. 52. This they cannot poflibly be;
for the Q.een herself writes with so much exadnefs concerning the.
different points in.the. memorandums, that there was- no need of
giving any credit or inftrudions to the bearer concerning them.
The memorandums are indeed the contents of the letter. 5. Mvary,
mentioning her conversations with the King about the affair of
Mynto, Hiegait,. &c. fays, " The morne [i. e. to-morrow] I will
fpeik to him upon that point;" and then adds, " As to the reft of
Willie Hiegait's, he confefit it; but it was the morne, [i. e. the
morning] ofter my cumming or he did it." Good. 2. 9. This ad-
dition, which could not have been made till after the conversation.
happened, seems either to have been inserted by the Queen into-
the body of the letter, or, perhaps, the having written it on the
Inargin, it was taken thence into the text. If we suppose the
lettcr to be a real one, and written at different times, as it plainly

bears,.

hi:

bears, this circumstance appears to be very natural; but no reason
could have induced a forger to have ventured upon fich an ana-
chronifm, for which there was no necessity. An addition, perfectly
similar to this, made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good.
2. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for

her innocence have contended that these letters were forged by her
enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to justify their own
rebellion. It is not necelary to take notice of the arguments,
which were produced, in her own age, in support of this opinion;
the observations which we have already made, contain a full reply
to them. An author, who has inquired into the affairs of that pe-
riod with great industry, and who has acquired much knowledge of
them, has lately published (as-he affirms) a demonstration of the
forgery of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds upon evi-
dence both internal and external. With regard to the former he
observes that the French copy of the Queen's letters is plainly a
translation of Buchanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scotch copy; and by consequence, the assertion of
the Queen's enemies, that she wrote them originally in French, is
altogether groundless, and the whole lettters are gross forgeries. He
accounts for this range succession of translations, by supposing
that when the forgery was projected, no person could be found ca-
pable of writing originally in the French language, letters which
would pass for the Queen's; for that reason they were first composed
in Scotch; but unluckily, the French interpreter, it would Item,
(lid not underfland th.t language; and therefore Buchanan translated
them into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered into
French. Good. . 79, 8o.

Pr is fc.rce neceff.ry to observe that no proof whatever is pro-

duced of ;::y of thefc filppofitions. The manners of the Scots,
in tatage, when almost every man of rank spent a part of his
youth in iilanlc, nndl the itercourfe between the two nations was
,reat, render i. al:etnihcr improbable that so many complicated

opera-
24

operations should be necessary, in order to procure a few letters to
be written in the French language.

BuT without insisting farther on this, we may observe that all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produced by
Murray and his party in the Scottish parliament, and at York and
Westminster. But this he has not attempted; and if we attend to
the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious, must
have been unsuccessful. The letters were first published at the end
of Buchanan's detection. The first edition of this treatire was in
Latin, in which language three of the Queen's letters were subjoined
to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571. Soon after a Scottish
translation of it was published, and at the end of it were printed
likewise in Scotch, the three lette:s which had formerly appeared
in Latin, and five other letters in Scotch, which were not in the
Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of the Detection,
and of seven of the letters; this bears to have been printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem 1572. The name of the place, as
well as of the printer, is allowed by all parties to be a manifest im-
posture. Our author, from observing the day of the month, on
which the printing is said to have been finished, has asserted that
this edition was printed at London; but no stress can be laid upon
a date found in a book, where every other circumstance with regard
to the printing is allowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to
Lefley) was the best informed of all Mary's advocates in that age,
affirms that the French edition of the Detection was publilhed in
France: " 11 [Buchanan] a depuis adjoufle a cefte declamation un
petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la fagon
de son proces, et la tout envoye aux freres a la Rochelle, lefquels
voyants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, l'ont traduit en Francois, et
iceluy fut imprimee a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par
Thomas Waltem, nom apofte et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie.
Jebb. 2. 256." The author of the Innocence de Marie goes farther,
and names the French translator of the Detection. Et iceluy prc-

VOL. I. G gg miercment

mierement compoef (comme il femble) par George Buchanan Efcof.
soys, et depuis traduit en langue Frangoife par un Hugonot, Poi-
tevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant gentilhomme, et un
de plus remarquez fediteux de France. Jebb. I. 425, 443. The
concurring teflimony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence
in France afforded them sufficient means of information,. must
outweigh a flight conjecture. This French translator does not pre-
tend to publish the original French letters as written by the Queen
herself; he exprefly declares that he translated them from the Latin.
Good. . o03. Had our author attended to all these circumiances,
he might have saved hirnielf the labour of so many criticifins to
prove that the prcient French copy of the letteis is a translation
from the Latin. The French editor himself acknowledges it, and
so far as I know no pcrfon ever denied it.

VWE may observe that the French translator was so ignorant, as-

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French, partly
in Scotch. Good. I. 103. Had this translation been publilhed at
London by Cecil, or had it been made by his direction, so gross an
error would not have been admitted into it. This error, however,
was owing to an odd circumfiance. In the Scottish translation of the
Detection, there was prefixed t each letter two or three sentences
of the original French, which breaking offwithan &c. the Scottibh
translation of the whole followed.. This method of printing tranf-
lations was not uncommon in that age. The French editor ob-
serving this, foolishly concluded that the letters had been written
partly in French, partly in Scotch.

IF we carefully confider there few French sentences of each

letter which fill remain, and apply to them that species of criticism,
by which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof will
afie, that there was a French copy not tranllated from the Latin,
but which was itself the original from which both the Latin and
Scotch have been translated. This minute criticifin muff nccclily
be difagrceable to many readers, but luckily a few sentences only
are to be examined, which will render it extremely lliort.

JtM
26

IN the firfl letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, y faifoit bon. It is plain that this expreflion veu ce que
peut un corps fan cur is by no means a translation of cumi plane
perinde efrm atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a spirit
and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor Scottifi
have retained. 'iJjcs a a dinde is not a translation of toto prandii
tempore; the Scottish translation quhile dewier-time exprefles the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently quzlile signified
1ztill as well as during. re n'ay pas tene grand propos is not jufsly
rendered ncque co,:ltiurimermonecm cum quoquam; the phrafc ud in
the French copy, is one peculiar to that language, and gives a more
probable account of her behaviour, than the other. 'tugeant bsic qt'il
ny J;7aift lbn, is not a tranlflation of lt qui juvdicarent id non cfex CXuf i
Tle French Icltcnce prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with anpprenzdr. It is
evident that both the Latin and Scottish translations have omitted
altogether thef words, et toutbisje nepuis apprendre. The French
ientence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with prf'intczr. Yf) e verill pus tard
la h(zif is plainly no tranilation of diutius illic miorata nJi'm; the
sense of the French is better expreflkd by the Scottish 1 have walkit
later there-up. Again, Pour exci /sr voJfre affaire is very different
from ad excifanduim noJftra negotia. The five remaining letters never
appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their being ever
translated into that language. Four of them, however, are pub-
lissed in French. This entirely overturns our author's hypothesis
concerning the necessity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottifl edition of the Detclion the wholefonnet is printed

in French as well as in Scotch. It is not poflible to believe that
this Scottifli copy could be the original from which the French was
translated. The French consists of verses which have both mea-
fire and rhyme, and which, in many places, are far from being
inelegant. The Scottiflh consists of an equal number of lines, but
without measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever think of a
thing so absurd and impradicable, as to require one to translate a
certain given number of lines in prose, into an equal number of
verses, where both measure and rhyme were to be obfcrved. The
Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifcfllyto be a translation of

G g g 2 the

the French; the phrases, the idioms, and many of the words are
French, and not Scottish. Besides, the Scottish translator has in fe-
veral inflances mistaken the sense of the French, and in many more.
expresses the sense imperfectly. Had the sonnet been forged, this
could not have happened. The directors of the fraud would have
underflood their work. I hall satisfy myself with one example,,
in which there is a proof of both my assertions. Stanza viii. ver, 9,

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre.j' ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,.
For him .I desire to ensue courage..

'Atend in the first line is not a Scottish but a French phrase; thei

two last lines do not express the sense of the.French, and are abfc--
lute nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French.. It contains.

much refined myfiicifm about devices, a folly of that age, of which.
Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circumitances,
particularly from a letter concerning iprefas- by Drummond of
Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged her letters, they were.
certainly employed very idly when they produced this.

FROMi there observations it seems to be evident that there was a

French copy of Mary letters, of which the. Latin and Scottish were.
only translations.. Nothing now remains of this copy but thoe.
few sentences. which are prefixed to the Scottish translation. The
French editor laid hold of there sentences, and tacked his own
translation to them, which, so far as it is his work, is a fcrvile and
a very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin; whereas in those.
introductory sentences, we have difcovcrcd frong marks of their
being originals, and certain proofs that they are not translated from.
the Latin.

lI:

TT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottish tranf-

lations with there sentences, that the Scottish translator has more
perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early translated into
Scotch, Good. 2. 76; it is probable that Buchanan made his
translation not from the French but from this Scottish copy. Were
it necessary, several critical proofs of this might be produced. One
that has been already mentioned feeins decisive. Diutius illic mo-
ratafium bears not the least resemblance to jay veill plus tard la
haut ; but if, inifead of I walkit [i. e. watched] later there-up, we
suppose that Buchanan read Iwaitit, &c. this mirfake, into which
he might so easily have fallen, accounts for the error in his tranf-
lation.

THESE criticisms, however minute, appear to be well found-

ed. But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the:
other arguments with regard to the.internal evidence remain in
full force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters, which

our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid:
than that which we have already examined. According to Mur-
ray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow January 2 ,
I567; she arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the 27th;
the, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the 28th, stayed
in that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh before the
end of the month. But according to our author, the Qeen did
not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th; as she flayed a night
atCallendar, she could not reach Glasgow sooner than the even-
ing of Saturday the 25th, and hle returned to Linlithgow on
Tuesday the 28th. - By consequence, the first letter which supposes
the Queen to have been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as,
the second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Saturday morning,
whereas she did not ar ive there till the evening, must be forgeries.
That the Queen did not set out from Edinburgh sooner' than the
2.th of January, is evident (as he contends) from the public re-
cords, which contain a Precept of coinrmaion of a lifr-rentl by

J amc s

James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers granted by the Queen on she
24th of January at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the Queen',
dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing James Inglis
taylor to the Prince her son. That the King and Queen had re-
turned to Linlithgow on the 2Sth, appears fom a deed in which
they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace there, dated at
Linlithgow January 28. Good. i. II8.

THiIS has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgcry of the letters said to be written by Mary ;
but how far it falls hort of this, will appear from the following
coniiderations.

I. IT is evident from a declaration or confefTion made by the

3ifihop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
opened in the beginning of October I5b8, Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters which
her fubjeas accused her of having written to Bothwell. Brown's
trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 3 , 36. It is highly probable that
the Bishop of Ross had fecn the letters before he wrote the defence
of Queen Mary's honour, in the year I570. They were published
to all the world together with Buchanan's Detection, A. D. 1571.
Now if they had contained any error so gross, and so obvious, at
that time, to discovery, as the supposing the Queen to have passed
several days at Glasgow, while file was really at Edinburgh; had
they contained a letter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning, though
she did not arrive there till the evening; is it polible that file her-
self, who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advo-
cates who appeared for her in that age, should not have published
and exposed this contradiction, and, by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of such an impoiltre ? In disquisitions which are
naturally abstruse and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest author
may discover many things, which have escaped the attention, or
baffled the sagacity of those who have formerly confidered the fame
subjec. But when a matter of fad lay so obvious to view, this cir-
cumftance of its being unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any
of her adherents, is almofta demonilration that there is some mif-

take
O -N'

thke or fallacy in our author's arguments. And so far are any either
of our historians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling in question
the common account concerning the time of the Queen's setting out
to Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is not the least
appearance of 'any difference among them with regard to this point.
But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which our author refts

the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's motions, are not
the originals subscribed by the Queen, but copies' only, or tranfla-
tions of copies of those; originals. It is not necrefiary, nor would
it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unacquainted
with the forms of law in Scotland ; but every Scotsman conversant
in business will understand me, when I fay that the precept of con-
firmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a
precept, which was fealed with the Privy Seal, on a warrant from
the signet office, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh the 24th of January; and-that the deed in favour of
James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with the Privy-
leal, proceeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with some degree of reason,
that a proof founded on papers, which are so many removes diflant
from the originals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in the name both

of the King and Qeen; by law, the King's subscription was no les
requisite to any paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original signatures be produced in order to acertain the particular
day when each of them signed, or to prove that it was signed only
by one of them, the legal proof ari(ing from these papers would
be, that both the King and (Qeen signed them at Edinburgh, on
the 24th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrantS or precepts ifitued by the sovereign,

in that age, fcem to have been in a great measure arbitrary, and
afiixcd at the pleafuire of the writer; and of consequence, tleci
dates were fcllonm accurate, arc often falls, and can never b relied

pon.
7

upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found to be so per-
nicious, that an at of parliament, A. D. 1592, declared the
affixing a false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THERE still remain, in the public records, a great number of

papers, which prove the necessity of this law, as well as the weak-
ness and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any particular
dlate to be false, yet furprizing infiances of this kind shall be pro-
duced. Nothing is more certain from hiflory than that the King
was at Glasgow 24th January 567; and yet the record of figna-
tuies from 1565 to 1582, Fol. 6th, contains the copy of a figna-
ture to Archibald Edmonflon said to have been subscribed by ozl
S'oe'reigns, i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January 24th
1567; so that if we were to trust implicitly the dates in therecords
of that age, or to hold our author's argument to be good, it would
prove that not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh
on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Biffiop of Ross that on

the 25th of Oftober i566, Mary lay at the point of death; Keith,
App. I34; and yet a deed is to be found in the publick records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day. Privy feal.
Lib. 35.fol. 89. Ochterlony.

ACCORDING to papers in the fame book, fol. I 13, the Queen must

have been at Edinburgh December 2 1, 566. According to other
papers, fol. 99, oo. the must h'we been at Stirling December 2I;
and if we depend upon other papers, fol. 1 2, flhe mull have re-
turned to Edinburgh on December 22d. These various motions
are altogether repugnant to history. The Queen during all that
time remained at Stirling, on account of the Prince's baptism; and
we particularly know that the was there December 22d, by a lct-
ter of Du Croc the French ambafTador, who mentions an inter-
yiew lie had with her at Stirling on that day. Keith, Pref. VII.

JBOT.-Y

BOTHWELL seized the Queen as he returned from Stirling, April

24th 1567, and (according to her own account) carried her to
Dunbar with all diligence. And. i. 95. But our author, relying on
the dates of some papers which he found in the records, supposes
that Bothwell allowed her to flop at Edinburgh, and to tranfaE
business there. Nothing can be more improbable than this fuppo-
fition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed to Wright
Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned by our au-
thor, Vol. I. I24. among the instances of the false dates of papers
which were issued in the ordinary course of business in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper to Sorbes, ibid.
it is signed April 4th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's hillory, it is, that he

remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her thither,
till he returned to Edinburgh along with him in the beginning
of May. Our author himself allows that she resided twelve days
there, Vol. I. 367. Now though there are deeds in the records
which bear that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar during
that time, yet there are others which bear that they were signed at
Edinburgh; e. g. there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy
feal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at Dun-
bar on that day. Lib. 3 . Chart. No. 524, 526. Ib. lib. 32. No.
154, 157. There are some signed at Dunbar April 28th. Others
at Edinburgh April 3oth, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at
Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No. 158. These different charters sup-
pose the Qeen to have made so many unknown, improbable, and
inconsistent journeys, that they afford the clearest demonstration
that the dates in these records ought not to be depended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the charter said

to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sun-
day, which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scot-
land, as appears from the books of federunt, then kept by the Lords
of session,

VOL. Il

F1ROM
H hh

FROM this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of

the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far from
amounting to demontrration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of these letters is

founded on the stile and composition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real productions. It
is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in most of
Mary's letters, and even from her solicitude to write them in a fair
hand, that file valued herself on those accomplishments, and was
desirous of being efleemed an elegant writer. But when the wrote
at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy appear.
A remarkable inflance of this may be found in a paper publified,
Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
molt hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of a translation,
they are not deflitute either of spirit or of energy. The manner
in which she exprefles her love to Bothwell hath been pronounced
indecent and even hocking. But Mary's temper led her to warm
expressions of her regard; thole refinements of delicacy, which
now appearin all the commerce between the sexes, were, in that
age, but little known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a series of letters, from Mary
to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares her love to that nobleman in
language, which would now be reckoned extremely indelicate.

THE sonnets and orne of Mary's letters to Bothwell were written

before the murder of her huiband; ome of them after that event,
and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior to
the death of her husband abound with the fondest expressions of
her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that their familiarity
had been extremely criminal. We find in them, too, some dark
expressions, which her enemies employed to prove that he was no
firanger to the schemes which were forming against her hufland's
life. Of this kind are the following passages, " Alace ! I ncvir dif-
favit ony body ; hot I remit me altogidder to zour will. Send me
advertifcmcnt quhat I fall do, and quhatfaever thing come therof,

I fall
34

I fall obey zow. Advise too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medecine, for he iuld tak medecine and
the bath at Cragmillar." Good. 2. 22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit
teiris fuld not be fa meikle praifit and eflemit, as the trew and faith-
full travellis quhilk I fuftene for to merite hir place. For obtain-
ing of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that may
impefche me. God forgive me," &c. ibid. 27. " I have walkit
laiter thair-up, then I wjld have done, gif it had not been to draw
Something out of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk
is the fairefl commodity that can be offerit to excuse zour affairis."
Ibid. 32. From the letters posterior to the death of her husband,
it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's seizing Mary by force,
and carrying her along with him, was contrived in concert with
herself, and with her approbation*.

H h h 2 HAy-

* THAT letters of so much importance as those of Mary's to Bothwell should have

been entirely loft, appears to many altogether unaccountable. After being produced
in England before Elizabeth's commilfioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good. 2. 235. He fcems to have kept them in his posses-
sion during his life. After his death, they fell into the hands of Lennox his fuc-
ceffor, who restored them to the Earl of Morton. Good. 2. 91. Though it be
not necessarily conneced with any of the questions which gave occasion to this Dif-
fertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of some of my readers to inform them,
that after a very, diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's let-
ters to Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries in Great Britain. The
only certain intelligence concerning them, since the time of their being delivered to
Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador from Queen Eli-

zabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary of
slate, from the original rcgifier book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from 5th of August
I582, to 28th September 1583, in thepoffeffion of Christopher Hunter, M. D. of
Durham.

1582, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein were the originals

of letters between the Scottish Qieen and the Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered
to f idry hands, and thereby was at prcfent wanting, and unknown where it
relted, yet I have learned certainly by the Plior of Plucardyne's means, that both
the coflcr and alIb the writings arc come, and now remain with the Earl of Gow-

rie,
.

35

HAVING thus fated the proof on both fides; having examined

at so great length the different systems ith regard to the fads
in controversy; it may be expected that I should now pronounce

fen-

rie, who, I perceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her Majesty accord-
ing to her Majesty's desire.

TIIS time past I have expended in searching where the coffer and writings were,

wherein without the help of the prior I hould have found great difficulty; now I will
essay Gowrie, and of my success you shall be shortly advertised.

I2th of November .582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the casket and letters mentioned in my lass,

before these were come to the possession of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found
that no mean might prevail to win the fame out of his hands without his own con-
sent and privity; in which behalf I had employed fitt instruments, that neverthe-
less profited nothing, therefore I attempted to essay himself, letting him know that
the said casket and letters hould have been brought to her Majefly by the offer
and good means of good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majesty
before they came into his hands and custody, and knowing that he did bear the like
affection, and was ready to pleasure her Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this
that had been thus far tendered to her Majefly, and which thereby should be well
accepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his comfort and
contentment ; I moved him that they might be a present to be sent to her Majefly
from him, and that I might cause the fame be conveyed to her Majefly, adding
hereunto such words and arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality, and
also best effet the purpose; at the first he was loth to agree that they were in his
possession, but I let him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that they were
delivered to him by Sanders Jurdin, whereupon he prefled to know who did so in-
form me, enquiring whether the sons of the Earl of Morton had done it or no;
I did not otherways in plain terms deny or answer thereunto, but that he might
think that he had told me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleased that
I shall give him to be the author thereof; after he had said [though] all these let-
ters were in his keeping (which he would neither grant nor deny) yet he might not
deliver them to any perfbn without the contents and privities, as well of the King,
that had intcreft therein, as also of the rcft of the noblemen entcrprifers of the
afion against the King's mother, and that would h:ive them kept as an evidence
to warrant and make good that aion. And albeit I replied, that their atioll in
that part touching the alignation of the crown to the King by his mother, had re-
ceivcd uch cfiablifhinent, confirmation, and freigth, by als of Parliament ad
other ub!ick authority and ilruments, as neither lhould that cl be ucflrcd to
come in debateor qucltioni, nor fulch scrolls and papers ought to be ihewed for the
Itrcgthening thereof, lo as these might well be left and be rendered to the hiat;ds
of hr Majclty, to whoim they were ldltincd before they fell in his kccpingl yet he

Would

sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which
can be drawn from the fads which have been enumerated.

ONE,

would not be removed or satisfied, concluding, after much reasonings, that the
Earl of Morton, nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durr at
any time make delivery; and because it was the first time that I had moved him
therein, and that he would gladly both answer her Majesty's good expectation in
him, and also perform his duty due to his sovereign and associates in the ation afore-
said, therefore he would seek out the said casket and letters, at his return to his
house, which he thought should be within a short time; and upon finding of the
fame and better advice, and consideration had of the cause, he would give further
answer. This resolution I have received as to the thing; and for the present I
could not better, leaving him to give her Majeffy such testimony of his good will
towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as she may have cause to confirm her
highnesses good opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to greater
goodness towards him. I shall itill labour him both by myself and also by all other
means, but greatly diitruft the desired success herein.

24th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

FOR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the hands of the Earl of

Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnefily therein, letting him know the purpose of
the Scottifl Queen, both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels, and
also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or defaced, and that the means which
she will make in this behalf hall be so great and effectual, as there writings cannot be
safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that hath the custody
thereof, neither hall he that is once known to have them be suffered. to hold theni
in his hands. Herewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that ation,
and the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now openly known to have
the possession of these writings, and have lettin him fee what surety it hall bring
to the said cause and all the parties therein, and to himself, that there writings may
be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping of her Majesty, that will
have them ready whcnfoever any ufie shall be for them, and by her Hi-hneffes coun-
tenance defend tllhe and the parties from such wrongfull objctions as shall be laid
against them, offering at length to him, that if he be not fully satisficd herein, or
doubt that the reft of the aflociates flall not like of the delivery of them to her
majesty in this good manner, and for the interest rehearsed, that I ihall readi!y, upon
meeting and conference with them, procure their afllnt in this part; (a matter more
cafy to offer than to perform) and, laiy, moving him that (for the secrecy and
henefit of the cause, and that her Majefly's good opinion towards himl'flf may be
firmly set ledl ;and confirmed by h s acceptable forv'ardnCr i

hereinl) Ie would, with-

out ncedlCss Tfruple, frankly commnit these writing:; to her Mljefly's oodl cufluyv
for the good utlcs received. iAftcr long debate lie rcolvcd, and laid(, that he wom!il
unlfcignetll (y few and do to !:.r M:i jcil}y all te plc:aflre that he might without oiLnellc
to the ling his Svcrcei;,nu, and prcjudice to the alciates in the aion, arnd there-
tlic lic would lirll make ficarcl and victv the ;lid letters, and hierein take iadvie

1 \\ hit

ONE, that Bohweli, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the Qteen's known aversion to her husband, and pre-
iuminlg on her attachmeint to limfelf, struck the blow without
having concerted with her the manner or circumfrances of perpe-
trating that crime. That Mary, instead of testifying much indig-
na.ionl at the deed, or discovering any resentment againif Both-
well, who was accused of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her rega:d, conduced his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it imponlible to diicover his guilt, and soon after,

what he might d,, and how far he might satisfy and content her Majesty ; promif-
ing thereon to give more resolute answer ; and he concluded flatly, that after he had
found and seen the writings, that he might not make delivery of them without the
privity of the King. Albeit I flood long with him against his resolution in this
point, to acquaint the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands
of her \Majesty, letting him fee that his doings there should admit great danger to
the cauie; ) et I could not remove him from it. It may be that lie meaneth to put
over the matter from hinfelf to the King, upon fight whereof I shall travel effec-
tually to obtain the Iing's consent, that the letters may be committed to her Ma-
jefty's keeping, thinking it more ealy to prevail herein witl the King, in the pre-
fcnt love and affection that he bearcth to her Highness, than to win any thing at the
hands of the associates in the ac'iot, whereof bome principal of them now come and
remain at the devotion of the King's mother; in this I fall still call on Gowrie
to farch out the coffer, according to his promise; and as I shall find him minded
to do therein, fib) f11 I do my belt and whole endeavour to effec& the success to her
,ajeiS),''s belt conteitment.

2d December 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I sa\v good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the Earlof Gow-

rie for recovery of the letters in the costser in his hands, therefore I put him in
minid thereof; whereupn he told me, that the iDuke of Lennox had fought earn-
cllly to hive liad thofc letters, and that the King did know where they were, so as
they could not be deliCvred to her MI\ajcfiy without the King's plivity and consent,
and he pictended to be flill willing to pleasure her Majefy in the fame, so far as he
may with his duty to the Kirng and to the rct of the aflbciatcs in that action; but
I greartly d(ifrult to cffeit this to her Maljcl)'s p)lcafure, wherein, ncvcrthelcfs, I
shall do iy, uttcrme f ndeavours.

VWI-i.i'rllER James Vl. who urt the Earl of Gowrie to dca'h, A. 1). 58., and

fcizcd a i 1 is efCe's, to k caic to dcflioy his mother's letters, for wholf honour
lie was at tliat ime extrcmel)' z.c;loi:; ; whelther they iavc pcnfihcd by some un-

lknown accident; or whether they n1l;y ot flill remailn illOi)lci'vcd among the ar-
chives of lOrm of our gicat failiLs, i ib iipollible to dctr-nllnlc.

in

39

in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, vo-
luntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every confidera-
tion hould have induced her to detest. By this verdict, Mary
is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her
husband, or even of having previously given her consent to his
death; but he is not acquitted of having discovered her appro-
bation of the deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the
author of it.

TIE other conclusion is that which Murray and his adherents

laboured to establish, " That as James, fumtyme Erle of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy
murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry of gude
memory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Qeenis lauchfull
husband; fa was he of the foreknowledge, counfall, devise,
perfwadar and commandar of the said murder to be done." Good.
2. 207.

WHICH of these conclusions is most agreeable to the evidence,
that has been produced, I leave my readers to determine.

INDEX

# INDEX.

I N
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer

P

A.
A DAMSON, archbishop of St. An-

drews, is excommunicated by the fy-
nod of Fife, II. 19. He excommu-

nicated his opponents, ibid. is restored by
the general aflembly upon conditions, 120.
His mean fubmifiion to the general assem-
bly - - - 174
Albany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his

nobles against his brother I. James III. I.
48. is made prisoner but escapes to France,
ibid, concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of
England, 49. procures assistance to invade
Scotland on mean conditions, ibid. returns
to Scotland, and is restored to favour, 50.
cabals again but is forced to fly to France,

ibid. 5
.--- Duke of, made Regent during the

minority of K. James V. I. 31, 53. after
several unsuccessful itruggles with the nobi-
lity, he is forced to retire to France, ib. 54
Alencon, Duke of, Q Elizabeth long amules

the court of France, by carrying on a treaty
of marriage with him, - I . 59
Alen, cardinal, publilhed a book proving the

lawfulness of killing excommunicated
Princes - - II. 107
Ala, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q.

Mary, II. 23, 6, 37. is recalled from his
government of the Netherlands 43

AmNhajfadors, their office I. 73, 74
AnIdrews St. the archbiflop of, remarkably

cured of a dangerous distemper, I. 116.
the motives of his opposition to the Q. Re-
gent, 136. his great influence on the bench
of Biffops and weight in Parliament, 140.
governed the church with great moderation,
141. perfecutesthe reformers, 14z. per-
forms great service to the congregation
against the French, 190. is imprilbned for
celebrating Mass, z;8. ruins Q. Mary's

to the Vol. and the Figures to the
ages.

affairs by his imprudent conduet, 388. is
taken prisoner in Dunbarton castle, and
hanged - - II.
----- the castle of, demolished by the

French - I. 99
=--* the prior of, promotes a treaty be-

tween the Q, Regent and the Reformers,
I. 153. is provoked to leave the court,
I 5. is one of the chief promoters of the
reformation, 168. ome account and a cha-
raAer of him, ibid. 169. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, 169. pre-
fumption of his innocence of the designs
charged on him, ibid. is ent by the con-
vention to invite the Queen to Scotland,
216. is received by her with confidence and
affeAion, 217. restrains the turbulent spirit
of the people against popery, 228. is sent
to restrain the licentious pracices of the
borderers, 233. executes his commiTion
with vigour and prudence, 234. a confpl-
racy against him discovered, 242. is crea-
ted Earl of Mar, 244. becomes obnoxious
to the Earl of Huntly, ibid. fee Mar and
Murray.
Angus, Earl of, was the only man who asserted

the independency of his country, I. 19, 20.
assumes the Regency during the minority
of K. James V. 31. 54. is unable to gain
his affections, 54, is attainted and flies into
England 5
---- Obtains leave to return into Scotland,

II. 7. surrenders himself to K. James VI.
88. he with several others seize the caflle
of Stirling to oppose Arran, 92. they are
forced to fly into England on the approach
of the King with an army, 92. he is at-
tainted and his eltate forfeited, 99. is con-
ccrned in a plot in favour of Spain, 178.
is seized and committed prisoner to the castle
ofl dinburgh, 179. cfcapes and lis to the

1 i i 1ounI
D

E

X.
_ __ _ __ __

mountains, ibid. 18o. offers to submit to a
trial, 83. sentence is prouounced against
him, 184. he refuses to submit 185
Anijou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between

him and Q Elizabeth - II. 21
Anne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K.

James VT. II. 170, 171. her arrival in
Scotland and coronation, 173. heads a
party that opposes the chancellor 181
.rchbijhops, Bihops, Deans, and Chapters revi-
ved in Scotland during the King's minority,
II. 33, 34. this gives great offence to many
of the clergy, ibid. an at of assembly
against thele offices, 74. Bishops made
subjet to prelbytries and assemblies, 119.
a great firoke given to their authority, 159.
None of them pre'ent at the Queen's coro-
nation - - 173
.rgylEarl of, is appointed to carry the crown

matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I.
140. uses his interest with the reformers to
make a treaty with the Queen, Regent, 153.
leaves her court in resentment of her trea-
chery, 55. refuses to accede to a treaty
with Murray the Regent, 422. is soon as-
ter forced to submit, 423. ats as lieute-
nant to the Queen after the Regent's mur-
der, II. 5. is prevailed on to join the
King's party, 8. quarrels with Athole, 47.
confederates with him against Morton, the
Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid. they
remonstrate against him to the King, 50.
they raise forces against him, 55. negoci-
ates a treaty with him by the mediation of
Q Elizabeth, 56. is promoted to the of-
fice of chancellor, 57. the King's autho-
rity delegated to him and Lord Sorbes
against the popish Lords, 187. his forces
are defeated in an engagement with them

_ _- 188

./Srijocracy, predominant in Scotland I. 201
Armado Spanish, preparations for it, II. 16r.

it is defeated -- 166
Arran Earl, is appointed Regent during the

minority of Q. Mary, I. 83. his characer,
ibid. 84. contents to the schemes of Eng-
land which difgurts the public, 86. be-
comes suspicious of the Earl of Lenox, 87
is forced to renounce the friendship with
England and declare for France, 88. and
to persecute the reformers, 89. publickly

abjures the doctrine of the reformers, 9o,
is contemned by one half and little trusted
by the other part of the nation, 91. heads
the partizans of France and defenders of
popery, ibid. attempts in vain to seize the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 97. is forced
to make a truce with the conspirators, 98.
his eldest son is conditionally excluded all
right of succession, oo. his mean concession
to the court of France, 107. gets the title
of Chatelherault, ibid. is undermined by
the Q Dowager 1, 13, 4. proposals and
arguments for his resignation, I15. he con-
sents to it, ir6. retracts by the influence of
the archbishop of St. Andrews, 117. is at
last prevailed on and gets advantageous
terms, ibid. fee Chatelherault.
Arran Eldest son of the Duke of Chatelhe-

rault, joins in an association with the refor-
mers, I. 166. narrowly escapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 167. is full of
resentment against the French on that ac-
count, ibid. 168. the congregation follicit
Q Elizabeth to marry him, 209. his great
imprudence with regard to Q.Mary, 235
discovers a conspiracy against the Queen's
favourites, 24z. Iofes his reason, 1I. 57,
58. is imprisoned by Morton 58
'--- late capt. Stewart, gets that title and

estate, II. 69. is appointed to condu&
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, ib.
tortures several of his servants cruelly, ibid.
his infamous marriage with the countess of
March, 71, 72. his variance with Lenox,
72. is frustrated in an attempt to rescue the
King at Ruthren, 78. is confined prisoner
to the castle of Stirling, ibid. 79. regains
his liberty and the King's regard, 85, 86,
resumes his power and arrogance, 86. gets
the Ruthren conspirators declared guilty of
high treason, 88. is detested as author of a
persecution against the clergy, 94. is gain-
ed over to Q. Elizabeth's interest, 97, 98..
gets several forfeited estates, 99. his cor-
ruption and insolence, io5. is made chan-
cellor and has unlimited power, ibid. his
venalty is imitated by his wife, ibid. his
monitrous tyranny and oppression, o6, 107
his power undermined by Wotton the Eng-
lifh envoy, 115. is confined in the cattle of
St. Andrews but soon recovers favour, 1x6

his

his interelt rinks miuh, 117. is stripped of
his honours and spoils, and reduced to his
original flation - - 118
Alrticles Lords of, their origin and business, I.

69. by whom chosen, 70. the subsequent
variations and political use made of this in-
ftitution - - 71, 72
Arundel Earl of, is appointed a commissioner

to the conference at Weftminfier I. 414
4l/by, ambassador from Q Elizabeth to Scot-

land, II. 163. his great promises to King
James, ibid. his promises are soon forgot,
166. he is ashamed and withdraws pri-
vately from Scotland ibid.
A.Jafination, the frequency of it in Scotland,

how accounted for, I. 311-313. several
inltances of it France, 313, 314. a flop
put to it there and in Scotland, 314. feve-
ral great men approved of it, 315. pre-
vailed greatly afterwards - II. 174
4geffmbly of the church of Scotland, the first

but feeble and irregular, I. 215. another
aflembly, their demands from the conven-
tion, 235. two other assemblies in vain fol-
licit an augmentation of their revenues, 252
they address Q. Mary in high irains of
complaints, 294. an assembly proceeds at
Glalgow notwithfianding the King's inter-
didion, II. 74. two assemblies yield many
of the privileges of the church to the King,
204. declare it lawful for Ministers to fit in
Parliament, 207, 208. fee Clergy.
4ffociation, formed in defence of QElizabeth

againfi Q Mary II. Ilo
Athole Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel

with the Earl of Argyl, II. 47. joins with
him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib. dies
soon after an entertainment at Mortons, 57
suspicions of his being poisoned ibid.
.ulbigne Lord de, second son of the Earl of Le-

nox, arrives in Scotland from France, II. 60
becomes soon a great favourite of K. James,
ibid. high titles and polls bellowed on him,
ibid. notes against him, appendix iol. fee
Lenox.
Austrian family, their origin and power, I. 74

B.

abingon, Anthony, some account of him,
B II. 122. the rife of his conspiracy againll

Q Elizabcth, ibid. the names and scheme

of operations of his aflroates, ibid.
they are betrayed, seized and executed,

- - - 124, IZ$
Bacon, Sir, Nicholas, appointed one of the

commissioners to the conference at Weft-
minster - I. 414
Baliol John, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. is preferred by Ed. I. o. soon
forced by him to resign ibid.
Ballard, a trafficking pries, follicits an inva-

sion of England from-Spain, II. 122. joins
in a conspiracy to murder Q. Elizabeth, 123
is discovered and taken into cuitody, 124
and executed - 125
Barons, their jurisdiction very extensive, I. 18.

the differenee between the greater and lesser
whence, 66. three hundred of them remon-
frate againfl the conduct of the Q. Dowa-
ger, 130. the lesser admitted by their
representatives into Parliament, II. 160.
petition of the lesser Barons to Parliament,
app. io. fee Nobles.
Baflicon Doron, a book published by King

James VI. strengthens his interest in Eng-
land - 1I. 209
Beatoun cardinal, made use of by K. Jaines V.

to mortify the nobles, I. 58. his preten-
sions to the Regency on the death of that
Prince, 82. forges a testament of the late
King, ibid. his views how disappointed,
ibid. his character, 83. opposes the Earl
.of Arran Regent, 86. excites mofl of the
nation againit the Englih, 87. seizes the
young Queen and her mother, ibid. cajols
the Earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the Re-
gent to renounce England and declare for
France, 88. and to persecute the refor-
mers, 89. engrosses the chief direflion of
affairs, 91. his double dealing with the
Earl of Lcnox refcnted, ibid. is murdered,
95, 96. his death fatal to the Catholics,
97. a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid.
scandalous reports concerning him 126
Bedford Earl of, comes as Ambaflndor from

Q. Elizabeth to witness the baptism of
James VI. 1. 332. his inltrultions, ibid.
333. his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appendix

_ -^^ 1~27, 30, 34
Bdlindon Sir Lewis, juflice clerk K. Janies't

relident at London, II. 114. joins in pro-
moting Q. Elizabeth's interefl in Scotland,
I i 2 ibid.

ibid. is sent with her Envoy into that coun-
try - - ibid.
llack Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews,

his ridiculous and seditious expreflions in the
pulpit, II. 195, iq6. being upported by
the clergy, he declines the civil jurif-
diaion, 196. is condemned by the privy
council, 197. is sentenced by the King
to reside beyond Spey - 198
Blckader captain, and three others executed

for the murder of Darnly - I. 370
Boethius HeCtor, his history of Scotland, some

account of - I. 4
Bolton CGa/le, Q. MIary confined a prisoner

there - - I. 401
Bonat, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney,

_~-. - ~- I. 129
Borderers, an attempt to refirain their licen-

tious practices, I. 233, 234. QMary vi-
fits them, 323. a fcufle there in which the
English warden, &c. are made prisoners,

1. 46
Berthwick Lord, assists the Queen Regent in

defending Leith - 1. 83
Bothwell Earl of, intercepts a fum of mo-

ney from England to the congregation,
I. 18i. favours the Queen Regent, but re-
fides at his own house, 83. his resent-
ment against the prior of St. Andrews,
245. is by him when Earl of Murray and
Regent summoned to a public trial, 28o.
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid.
a sentence of Outlawly againt him pre-
vented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted
to return, 289. escapes with her after the
murder of Rizio, 310. Tome account of
his former behaviour, 317. commences a
favourite of the Queen, ibid. 3 1 8. Ile re-
conciles him to fcvcral Lords, with whom
he was at variance, ibid. he incrcafes in
favour with her, 320. circumstances con-
curring in this, 321. he is wounded in at-
tempting to seize one of the borderers, 323.
the Queen's extraordinary regard for him
on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton and his as-
fociates, 334, 35. proposes the reftora-
tion of the popish ecclefialtical juridiiition,
336. his views in this, bid. 337, is sis-
pedted the author of Darnly's murder, 343.
is charged with it by Lnox, 345. but flill
l.Avoured by the Quccn, ibid. appointed

governor of Edinburgh Caflle, ibid. his
trial is hurried on, 346. remarkable par-
tiality in his favour, 347. Lenox accuses
him openly, 348. comes to his trial with
a great retinue, 348, 349. is acquitted by
a jury, 349. the trial univerfallycenfured,
ibid. 350. challenges any that would ac-
cufe him, 350. several ats of Parliament
passed in his favour, 351. he procures an
act in favour of the refornmtion, ibid. 352,
prevails on several of the nobles to recom-
mend him as a husband to the Queen, 352,
353, 354. seizes the Queen on a journey
from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar,
356. hisview inthis, 357. obtains a par-
don under the great feal, ibid. procures a
divorce from his wife, 358. carries the
Queen to the castle of Edinburgh, ibid. is
created Duke of Orkney, 359. and mar-
ried to the Queen, ibid. is not allowed the
title of King, 360. he watches the Queen
very closely, ibid. endeavours to get the
Prince into his custody, ibid. 361. is al-
larmed with an association of the nobles
against the Queen and him, 362. carries
the Queen to the castle of Borthwick, ibid.
raises forces against the confederate Lords,
364. he marches againftthem, 365. pro-
poses a ingle combat, 366 this how pre-
vented, ibid. takes his last farewell of the
Queen, and i forced to fly, ibid. fends for
a casket of letters from Q. Mary to him,
371. they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 380, 381
reflections on his conduct, 381. copy of
his divorce from Lady JeanGordon, appen-
dix - - 93
---- late Francis Stewart, created Earl of

Bothwell, II. 167. is imprisoned for con-
fulting witches, 17F. escapes and attempts
to break into the King's presence, ibid. re-
tires to the north, 176. he and his adhe-
rents are attainted, 178. fails in an at-
tempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken un-
der protection of Q Elizabeth, who follicits
for him, 180. seizes the King's person,
181, 182. forces him to dilnmils the chan-
cellor and his other favourites, 182. and
to grant him a remission, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, ibid. 83
is encouraged by the English. anibanfldor,
185. mJc:sb another attempt to come at

thl

the King, 86. is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the north f England, ibid. is aban-
doned by Q. Elizabeth, and forced to fly
into Spain and Italy, 19o. remains in in-
digent obscurity, and is never after recon-
ciled to the King - ibid.
---- Adam, bishop of Orkney, performs
the ceremony of marriage of Q. Mary to
the Earl of Bothwell - I. 359

Botbwellhazugh. fee Hamilton.
Boulogne, wrested by the French out of the

hands of the Engliih, I. o16. they content
to restore it and its dependencies to the
French - - o8
Bo.-ves, Envoy from Qz Elizabeth, accuses Le-

nox of disturbing the peace, II. 63. is re-
fused an audience, ibid. is sent to encou-
rage the conspirators at Ruthren, 79. to
cnquire about K. James's correspondence
with the pope - 210
Boyd Lord, his ambitious views in the time of

K. James III. frustrated - I. 30
- is prevailed on to join the King's party

againit Q. Mary, II. 18. joins the Ru-
thren conspirators - 77
Brienne Count de, comes as ambassador from

France to witness the baptism of K. Ja. VI.

_~- ~~

- -~1. 332
Bruce Robert, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. his grandson asserts his right
and vindicates the honour of his country,
l o. he attempts to reduce the power of
the nobles - - 39
- a priill, employed by the King of Spain

to seduce the Scot's nobles - II. 167
--- Mr. Robert, a presbyterian minister,

performs the ceremony of the coronation of
K. James's Queen I. 173
-- Edward, abbot of Kinlefs, acquits him-

self with address and reputation as ambanfi-
dor at the court of England I. 208, 209
--* Mr. Robert, a miniiter, his resolution

in refusing to publish the King's account of
Gowries conspiracy, IL 229. is deprived
and baniflhd on that account ibid.
Buchanan George, his hiltory of Scotland,

some account of, . 4. remarks on his dia-
logue de jure Regiis, 1.57. alone accuses
Q Mary of a criminal correfpondcnce with
Riizio, 305. approved of aflaflination, 31 .
his partiality in overlooking an at of lar-

liament in favour of the reformation, 352.
attends the Regent into England when cal-
led on to accuse Q Mary, 404. was one of
the preceptors of K. James VI. II. 48.
commended for his great genius 256, 257

Burleigh, fee Cecil.
Burroughs, when firit represented in Parlia-

ment. - II. 179

C.

C AIS John, a declaration of his in name of
C Q.Elizabeth to the Lords of Grainge and:

Lethington, app. - 68
Caithneis Earl of, his proteftat the trial of Both-

well for the murder of Darnly I. 35o
Calvin, the patron and restorer of prefbyte-

rian church government - I. 213

Canbden, some mistakes of his I. 333, 354
Canongate near Edinburgh, a Parliament held

there - - II. 16
Cardan, some account of him, L 16. his

remarkable cure of the bishop of St. An-
drews - - ibid.
Carey Sir George,. ent ambassador from Q

Elizabeth to encourage the conspirators at
Ruthren - - I. 9
- Robert, sent by Q Elizabeth to footi

K..James after the death of his mother, IT.
154. is not permitted to enter Scotland,
ibid. was the first that brought K. James
intelligence of the death of Q Elizabeth

- - 246, 24+
Ca/ket of letters from Q. Mary to Bothwell

seized the Earl of Morton, . 371. her
enemies avail themselves much of them

..- - ibid.

Cajils Earl of, joins the King's party, If. 8
Caj/elnan, the French ambassador is employed

to procure the content of his court to her
marriage with Darnly, 1. 273. he endea-
vours to make up the differences between
the Queen and him, 320. his interceflion
in behalf of Q. Mary - II. 0o
Catherine of Medicis, afltmes the government

after the death of Francis II. her ion, I. 211.
her h;ar(h treatment of Q. Mary, ibid. her
views in behaving more friendly to her, 261.
bends her whole endeavours to destroy the
Protellants, II. 21. her artful conduct
with that view, - ibid. 22

G i 3,

Ccril, his great capacity as a miniPter, I. 198.

219. is employed to negotiate a peace with
France, ibid. over-reaches the French
ambaflador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 219.
is appointed a commillioner to the confe-
rence at Weftminller, 414. is ent by Q.
Elizabeth with proposals to Q Mary, II.
9. has an interview with her which ex-
cites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, 43. is treat-
ed harlhly by Q.Elizabeth for consenting to
Q. I'ary's death - 153
--- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads

the party againlt Effex, II. 232. his cha-
rater, 233. his great assiduity, ibid. en-
ters into a private correspondence with K.
James, 238. a letter from him to his Ma-
jefty, app. 116
Celebacy of the popish clergy, a chief engine of

their policy - . 123, 148
Charles V. Emperor, his great power, 1. 74.

and unlimited ambition, 75. is checked by
Francis I. ibid.
---- K. of France makes a league with Q.

Elizabeth, - II. 27
Chatelherarlt Duke of, that title conferred on

the Earl of Arran, Regent of Scotland, I.
107. his right of fucceflion to the crown of
Scotland maintained, 136. enters a pro-
teitation to save his right, 138. joins the
reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 163, 64. joins in affocia-
tion with them, 166. is looked on as the
head of the congregation, 168. his pus-
lanimity, 180. becomes obnoxious to Q.
Mary, 235. his jealousy of the prior of
St. Andrews, 242. deprived of his French
pension, 261. is alarmed at the Earl of
Lenox's return to Scotland, 268. an ac-
commodation brought about by the Queen's
influence, 269. adheres to Murray in op-
poling the Queen's marriage, 290. is par-
doned on his humble application, but forced
to reside in France, 293. his partiznns
grumble at Murray's being advanced to the
Regency, 384. returns from France and
heads the Queen's adherents, 422. is
made her lieutenant-general, ibid. his re-
solution wavering, the Regent commits him
priloncr to the castle of Edinburgh, 423.
is set at liberty by K irka;ldy and Joins the

CcQuen' plary, , . 4. is proclaimcd trai-

tor by Lenox the new Reget, 8. is recon-
ciled to Morton the Regent, 39. articles
of a treaty between them, ibid. his death

- - 45
Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the

union of the crowns, II. 254, 255. fee as-
Jembly, clergy.
Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parlia-

ment - I11. 158

Clans the institution and nature of, I. 25
Clergy popilh,their great riches and power, 1.57

121. were made ule of by K. Jam.V. to sup-
press the nobles, 57, 58. made a confider-
able body in Parliament, 2zz. their great
influence over the laity, ibid. they engrof-
fed learning, 123. and held many of the
chief employments, ibid. their power en-
creafedby Celebacy, ibid. they seized the
estates of the intestate, 124. and tried all
matrimonial and testamentary causes, ibid.
become obnoxious to the laity, 125. their
great corruptor, whence, ibid. these of
Scotland particularly dissolute, 126. their
weak defence of their tenets, 127. try in
vain to impose false miracles, ibid. their
impolitic conduct to the reformers 143
-- reformed, try in vain to recover the

revenues of the church, I. 215, 216, z28.
procure a debolition of all relicts of po-
pery, ibid. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 236---240. they are no
gainers by it, 240. their stipends what in
those days, ibid. are offended at the mo-
deration of their leaders, 259. occasions
a tumult among the people, ibid. 260.
more complaints of their poverty, 269, 335.
are jealous of Q Mary, ibid. the small al-
lowance appointed to upport them all, 336.
their application for payment of their ti-
pends of little effect, 383. fresh complaints
of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, 433, 434. are put off with
fair words and promises, 434. archbishops
&c. introduced among them by Morton,
1I. 33, 34. their grievances under his ad-
miniliration, 45. they approve of the Ru-
thren conspirators, 80. by favouring them
they provoke the King, 89. severe laws
made against them, 92, 93. they of Edin-
burgh Ily into England, 93. as do several
others that were molt eminent, 94. more

vigorous
.1

vigorous measures against them, 99. they
obtain no redress on- the restoration of the
exiled Lords, i 8. represent their grie-
vances to Parliament, 157. a maintenance
provided for them by Parliament, 159. they
prevail to get Presbyterian government efta-
blifhed by law, 77. their zeal agains the
Popilh Lords, 183, 184, 192. their rash
proceedings, 192, 194. they ere& a stand-
ing Council of the Church, 194. vindicate
one of their number who declined the civil
jurifdition, 196, 197. their anding Coun-
cil ordered to leave Edinburgh, ibid. this
occasions a violent tumult there, 198, zoo.
they use their utmost efforts to spirit the
people, 20 . are deserted and fly to Eng-
land, 202. their power greatly reduced,
ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of
their privileges, 203, 204. are restored to
a feat in Parliament, 206. this violently
opposed by many of them, 207. but car-
ried in their general Afembly, 208. these
entitled to this privilege are laid under
many regulations and reftriftions, 213.
they are brought under great fubjeaion,
214. the revolutions among them since the
Union of the Crowns - 254, 255
Clinton Lord, appointed a commissioner at the

conference at Westminster I. 414
Cockburn of Ormifton, receives a supply of

money from the English to the congregation,
I. 181. is intercepted and robbed of it, ibid.

Coin in Scotland, fomeaccount of, I.177. 11.44
Commifaries appointed to try causes in place of

the Spiritual Court, . 258. they are de-
prived of all authority - 336
Confefion of faith by the Reformers, consented

to by Parliament - I. 205
Congregation, the Protestants difftinguilhed by

that name, 1. 149. their leaders enter into
an association, 153. are involved in diffi-
culties, 179. apply to Q Elizabeth for as-
liflance, 18o. money sent them by her in-
tercepted, 181. make a rash and desperate
attempt on Leith and are repulsed, ibid. 182.
are no less unfortunate in a second flirmifh,
182. are quite dispirited and retreat to Stir-
ling, ibid. 183. are joined by the body of
the nobles, 183. their army dwindles away,
184. are animated by Knox, ibid. they

apply again to Q. Eizabeth, 185. their
parties harrafs the French, 190. are affilted
by a fleet from England, ibid. conclude a
treaty at Berwick with the D. of Norfolk,
191. the design and substance of this treaty,
192. negociate a peace with France, 198.
articles of the treaty, 199. they reap many
advantages from it, 200, 201. fee Refor-
mation.
Covenant, National, framed in defence of the

King and Government, II. 164. the na-
ture and reasonableness of it, ibid. 65.
the progress of it since - 65

Courtey of Scotland, what - I. 136
Craig, a minister, boldly teltifies againf Q.

Mary's marriage with Bothwell I. 359
Crawford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes

Dumbarton Castle, II. 13, 14. the diffi-
culties of that enterprize - 14

Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nilh facion, II. 163, 167. offers his er-
vice to the K. of Spain, 167. joins in re-
bellion against the King, 169. is forced
to submit to him, ibid. and imprisoned a
short time - - 170
Crichton, Regent during the minority of K.

James II. his barbarous policy I. 44, 45
---- a jesuit, a plot against Q Elizabeth

discovered by his means - II. 1oo
Criminals, a remarkable inflance of the diffi-

culty of bringing them to justice I. 17
Croe du, the French Ambassador, refuses to

countenance Q. Mary's marriage with Both-
well, 1. 359. attempts in vain a reconci-
liation between the Queen and the confe-
derate Lords, 36g. mediates a truce be-
tween the King's and Queen's party in Scot-
land - - If. 28
Cro'wn matrimonial of Scotland granted by.Par-

liament to the Dauphin of France, 1. 138.
deputies appointed to carry it, but are pre-
vented - - 140
Cuningham Robert, appears at the trial of

Bothwell in name of the Earl of Lenox,
I. 349. demands a delay, which is refused,

ibid.
Curie, one of Q Mary's secretaries, is seized

and crried prisoner to London, II. 127,
128. is produced an evidence against her

........._a 135

Da, ily,

D.
D Arnly, Henry Lord, proposed as a hus-

band to Q Mary I. 265. his right of

succession confidered, ibid. 266. is per-
mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 271.
arrives there and quickly gains the Queen's
heart, 272. his character, 274. disgusts
several of the nobles, particularly Murray,
ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David
Rizio, 275. is despised on that account,
276. grows intollerably insolent and haugh-
ty, z82. schemes to affaflinate Murray,
284. a plot to seize and fend him to Eng-
land prevented by the Queen, ibid. evi-
dences of this, 285, 286. his marriage
with the Queen celebrated, 287. is ho-
noured with the title of King of Scotland,
288. is implacable with refpet to the ex-
iled nobles, 297. loses the Queen's assec-
tion by his untoward behaviour, 302. de-
mands the Crown matrimonial, ibid. 303.
becomes suspicious ofRizio's ill offices with
the Queen, 303. his resolution to be aven-
ged of him encouraged by the nobles, 305.
articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 3'o6. Heads the conspirators who
perpetrate the murder, 307. confines the
Queen after it is committed, 308. prohi-
bits the meeting of the Parliament, ibid.
makes his escape with the Queen, 309, 310.
her hatred to him increases, 315. is neg-
leEted by her and treated with little refped
by the nobles, 319. resolves to leave Scot-
land, 321. his wayward and capricious
behaviour, 322. he writes the reasons of
his conduct to the Queen, ibid. his strange
behaviour at the baptism of the Prince, 332.
a false reason alledged for this confuted,
3 3. retires to his father at Glasgow, 335.
falls sick there, 337. conjetures concern-
ing his distemper, ibid. is negleted by
the Queen, 338. she afterwards visits and
cxpreffes affection for him, 339. he is pre-
vailed on by her to come to Edinburgh,
341. is lodged in a separate house, ibid.
he is murdered there, 342. his charater,
ibid. a proclamation issued for discovering
the murderers, 343. a remiss enquiry made
into it, 344--350. Capt. Blackadder and
three others executed on that account, 384.
the confeflion of Morton the Regent at his

death concerning the murder, II. 7o, pa-
per of objections of the Court of England
againit his marriage with Q Mary, App.
a dissertation concerning his murder, at the
end of vol. II.
David I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the

church, - - I. 121

- II. troubles during his minority, I. 28
Davi/on, sent into Scotland by Q Elizabeth,

as a spy on the French Ambassador, II. 83.
is sent to gain Arran's interest to Q. Eliza-
beth, 98. this he loon accomplilhes, ibid.
brings the warrant for Q Mary's death at
Q. Elizabeth's desire, 44, 145. is char-
ged by her with disobeying her orders, 153.
is imprisoned, tried and fined, and loses all
favour, ibid. objections against him in the
cause of the late Scottish Queen, App.. 114
Defe, Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces

to aflift the French against the English in
Scotland, I. 1o6, his success there, ibid.
DiJfipline, in the Church, the sirs book of

composed, I. 21 5. why objected against ir
a convention of the States, ibid. another
attempt in favour of Church discipline fruf-
trated, - II. 73
Douglas, the power and property of that fa-

mily, I. 29. they afpirc to independency,
44. Will. Earl of, murdered by K. James
II. 45. his son endeavours to resent it,
ibid. is forced to fly into England, 46
·. William, Qz Mary committed a pri-

soner to his castle of Lochleiven 370
---- George, brother to the above, assists

the Queen in making her escape 385
--- Archibald, one of Darnly's murder-

ers, II. 121. undergoes a mock trial for
that crime and is acquitted, ibid. is ent
Ambaflador to England, ibid. letter from
him to the Qof Scots, a pp. to the King.
Drury, Sir Wm. enters Scotand with an army

to support the Queen's party, 11. 5. they
join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
he procures a truce between the King's and
Queen's parties, zS. comes with forces to
affiit Morton in besieging the castle of Edin-
burgh, 40. whch is forced to surrender 41
- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q. Mary's

keepers - -- I. lo3
Dud/cy Lord Robert, recommended y Q.

Elizabeth as a hufland-taQMary, I. 262.
why a favourite of Q Elizabeth's, ibid. is
highly promoted by her, ibid. 263. his

filuatiMl

fitation extremely delicate, 264. becomes
suspicious of Cecil -- ibid.
Dumbarton Catle, furprized and taken in the

King's name by the Regent II. 13, 4
Dury, a minister of Edinburgh, banished from

his charge by K. James, for his firee invec-
tives against the courtiers, I. 75. after
being restored he is driven from it a second
time for approving the Raid of Ruthven 89

E.

Dinbiugh, is taken and burnt by the Eng.
liss, 1. 93. a great fray there between

the French and Scots, Ilo. is seized by
the Reformers, I58. its inhabitants are
terribly alarmed by the French, 182. a
treaty there with the French and Englilh,
199. a loan demanded of it by Q. Mary,
293. which is granted for the superiority
of Leith, 294. the treaty of insisted on by
Q. Elizabeth, 333, 334. is pofleffed by
the Queen's party, I1.. 3. and fortified by
them, 1.6. the City and Caffle hold out
against the King's forces, 26. is reduced
to great straits by famine, ibid. 27. is re-
lieved by a truce, 28. the citizens take up
arms to promote the King's marriage, 171.
they rife again and insult the King and his
ministers on the murder of the Earl of Mur-
ray, 176. assist the King againfi Huntly,
86. a violent tumult there on accountof the
Clergy, 198,-200. they are severely pu-
nifiled for it by the King, 201,-203. their
ministers return to their charges, 205. di-
vided into parishes and number of ministers
increased, ibid. they decline publishing
the account of Gowries conspiracy, 228.
all, except one who is banished, areper-
fuaded by the King to do it 229
Ed'ward I. of England, destroyed the public

archives of Scotland, I. 4. is made um-
pire between Bruce and Baliol, 7. his art
to acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid.
his wars with the Scots under R. Bruce

-- o10, 39
Eglinton, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the

King's party - 11. 18
Elizabeth, her peaceable acceflion to the Crown

of England, 1. 140. supports the congre-
gation in Scotland, 180. is sparing in her

,pplies, 181. resolves to support them on
a second application, 185. her good con-

dut in matters of ilporta nce, 186. mo-
tives that determined her toraiift them, ibid.
i 8. her deliberate and efolute conduct,
191. fends aftrong flccet to their afifance,
ibid. concludes a treaty with them, ibid.
19z. her right to the Crown of England
aiierted by Francis and Mary in France,
200. obtains advantageous terms for the
Scots, 201. is follicited by the Parliament
of Scotland to marry the Earl of Arran,
209. this ne declines, 210. the feeds of her
difcontcnt with Q. Mary, 219, 220. her
jealousy of the fcceflion, ibid. 223. her
exceflive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beau-
ty, 223. her difimulation to her, 224.
refuses her a safe conduct, ibid. fends to
congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 230.
refules a conceflion made by QMary, 23 r.
her jeaioufy of her right betrayed her into
mean actions, 232. her resemblance to
Hen. VII. ibid. a personal interview with
Q. Mary proposed, 21. she artfully de-
clines it, 252. her views in regard to Q_
Mary's marriage, 255, 256. assumes a dif-
agreeable authority, 256. names one for a
husband to Q Mary, 262. the different
qualifications of her miniflers and favorites,
ibid. dissembles with Q. Mary about her
marriage, ibid. 265. and likewise with re-
gard to L. Darnly, 266. affronts Q Mary
by her insinuation concerning Lenox, 267.
is perplexed about the marriage of the Scot-
tilh Queen, 271. permits Darnly to visit
the Court of Scotland, ibid. affeEts to de-
clare againit Q. Mary's marriage to him,
277. her reasons for this cndut, 278.
her great dissimulation in that affair, 283.
her harth and deceitful behaviour to Mur-
ray and his aflbciates who had fled to her,
292. is flruck at hearing of the birth of
James VI. 319. consents to stand godmo-
ther to him, ibid. the Parliament addrcfs
her to fettle the fucceflion, 325. this greatly
embarraiffes her, ibid. 326. ihe footlhs and
gains her Parliament, 327. endeavours to
accommodate her differences with Mary,
333. writes to her to delay the trial of
Darnly's murderers, 348. intcrpofes in her
behalf when a prifoncr, 372. her ambaf-
fador is refused access to Q. Mary, 373.
she offers assistance to the other nobles, ibid.
her deliberations concerning the disposal of
Q. Mary on her arrival in England, 392,

Kkk 391,
I N

393. resolves to detain her there, 394.
her motives to this conduct, ibid. 395.
fends her letters of condolance and gives
orders to watch her condu&t, 395. ihe
gladly accepts the office of umpire between
her and her fubjeas, 396, 397. receives a
very pressing letter from Q. Mary, 399.
her precautions against her, 400. appoints
commiflioners to hear Q Mary and her ac-
cufers, 405. her important situation on
that occasion, ibid. her views in this as-
fair, 4.o6, 407. receives the Regent's de-
mands, 4o. removes the Conference to
Westminster, 411. her mean artifices to
get the evidences of Q. Mary's guilt from
the Regent, 417. treats her with greater
rigour, 418. writes a harlh letter to Q.
Mary, ibid. he difiniffes the Regent without
approving or condemning him, 419. but
secretly supports his party, 420. makes
ropoials to the Regent in her favour, 423.
orfolk's projeEt concealed from her, 425,

427. discovers and defeats a rebellion in
Q Mary's favour, 431, 432. resolves to
deliver her up to the Regent, 434. her
great concern at his death, It. . conti-
nues to encourage fations in Scotland, z.
her political conduct with regard to Lenox,
6, 7. is excommunicated and deprived of
her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 7. sup-
ports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lenox to be Regent, 7. proposes a
treaty of accommodation between Q. Mary
and her fubjeas, 8. procures a cessation of
holtilities, 9. fends proposals to Q. Mary,
ibid. her artifices in the conduEt of this
affair, o1, 1i. appoints commissioners to
frame a treaty, 1 . finds a pretence to
rendertheir meeting fruitless, 12. a marriage
proposed between her and the D. of Anjou,
21. declares openly against the Queen's
party, 25. concludes a treaty with France,
27. her motives for negociating a peace
between the two parties in Scotland, 3, 37.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q. Mary,
43. ncgociates a treaty between Morton
and his adversaries, 56. her answer to K.
James's demand of a poffcffion of an eflate
in England, 56, 57. a marriage between
her and the D. of Alencon proposed, 59. in-
terpofes in behalf of Morton, 63. her
nicafures in order to save him, 66. coun-
telances the conspirators at Ruthvcn, 79.

is.alarmed at a conspiracy against her, 95,
95. the designs of Q. Mary's adherents
against her, 97. endeavours to recover her
interest in Scotland and gains Arran to her
interest, 98. amuses Q. Mary with a fruit-
less negociation, 1oo. a new conspiracy
against her, ibid. an association formed
for her defence, iot, oz. her suspicions
of Q. Mary, o10. her life endangered by
a conspiracy, 107. this how discovered
and prevented, ibid. occasions an extraor-
dinary statute for her preservation, o8.
is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, 112. endeavours to
form a confederacy of the Proteflant Princes,
ibid. and to proceed with rigour against
Q. Mary, ibid. 114. advances her interest
in Scotland, and proposes a league with it,
14. fettles a pension upon K. James, 15.
concludes a treaty with Scotland, 120. ac-
count of Babington's conspiracy against her,
122,-125. her difimulation after QMary's
conviction, 137, 138. her answer to K.
James's intercefion for her, 141.' her far-
ther difiimulation and anxiety, 143. signs
the warrant for her execution, 44. her
speech to Davison on that occasion, ibid.
affecs to lament Q Mary's death, 152.
several marks of her artifice in that affair,
ibid. 153. she endeavours to sooth K.
James, 154. provocations given by her to
Spain, 62. prepares to meet its resent-
ment, ibid. 163. endeavours to secure
Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. James's
marriage, 170. follicits him to treat con-
fpirators against him with rigour, 180.
evades the decision of K. James's right of
succession to the Crown of England, 208.
is disgusted at several of his proceedings,
210. discovers his correspondence with the
Pope, ibid. fresh grounds of her suspicion,
232. her conduEt with regard to the Earl
of Esex, 233,-237. her irresolution con-
cerning his death, 237. and great concern
after it, ibid. receives ambassadors fiom
K. James with regard and increases his ub-
fidy, 238. her last illness, 241. conjec-
tures concerning the causes of her melan.
choly, 242, 243. her death, 244. and cha-
racter, ibid. 245. declared the K. of Scots
her successor, 246. tome of her lettcrb,
app. 13, 28, 35, 36, 39, 47, 48, 52, 65.

Elthin.

Elphinfion, secretary to K. James VI. deceives

him into a correspondence with the Pope,
II. zl i. is tried and found guilty of high
treason, 212. and pardoned on the Queen's
interceflion -- ibid.
England, the Engliih seize and detain K.

James I. of Scotland long a prisoner, I. 29.
the nobles there humbled, 32. had early
two houses of Parliament, 68. they in-
vade Scotland, 92. their depredations there,
94, 95. a peace between England, France
and Scotland, 95. invade Scotland again,
Iol. gain a great victory, 102, 103. it
proves of little advantage to them, 104.
they force the Scots into a closer union with
France, o15. conclude a peace, io8. an
Englifih fleet arrives in Scotland to aflift the
congregation, 190. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 191. they enter Scotland and
besiege the French in Leith, 192. are fe-
veral times repulsed, 194. causes of their
bad success, ibid. r95. articles of a treaty
of peace, 199. -they quit Scotland, 202.
reflections on the right offucceflion to their
Crown, 220,-223. the Parliament favours
Q Mary's right of succession, 225. a league
between England and France, 11. 27, be-
tween England and Scotland, 120. the
national covenant adopted in England, 65

Entails with what view introduced I. 19
Epifiopal government in the Church, ome ac-

count of, I. 213. an attempt to revive it,
11. 33, 34. it is abolished by the Aflein-
bly, 74. Jurifdition abolished, 1,74. ice
Archbihops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nilh faftion, II. 163. his offers of service to
the K.. of Spain, 367. appears in rebellion,.
x69. is forced to submit to the King, ibid.
imprisoned for a short time, 7o. joins in
another conspiracy, 179. is summoned by
the King to surrender, ibid. offers to sub-
mit to a trial, 183. sentence pronounced
against him - - 184
Erjkine of Dun, is employed by the Queen-

Regent to deceive the Protestants, I. 15o.
his resentment of this usage ibid.
.- -i Lord, governor of Edinburgh Cafile,,
acts a neutral part between the Queen-Re-
gent and the congregation, I. 183. receives
the Queen-Regent into the Calklc, 193. is
created Earl of Mar, 248. fee Mar.

. Alexander, has the chief directions of

the education of K. James VI. II. 48. ad-
mits some of the nobles to make complaints
to him against Morton the Regent, 50. is
turned out of Stirling Cale by his Nephew
the Earl of Mar - - 53
EJfewval, the French Envoy, endeavours to

obftrua a treaty between England and Scot-
land - - II. 120
Efix, Earl of, set up by the Englilh Papilts

as a candidate for the Crown, II. 89.
heads a party in England, 232. his cha-
racter, ibid. is greatly distinguished by the
Queen, 233. favours the K. of Scots, ibid.
obtains the offices of Lord Lieutenant and.
Commander in Chief in Ireland, 234. is
unsuccessful in that expedition, ibid. re-
ceives a harsh letter from the-Queen, ibid.
returns to England and is confined, ibid..
is tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to
spirit up King James, 235. his rath and
frantic conduct, 236. is again taken into
custody, ibid. his death, 237. his son and
associates are relfored to their honours after
the acceflion of King James - ibid.
Europe, the state of, at the beginning of the

Sixteenth Century I. 71
Excommunication, a terrible engine of the Po-

pish Clergy - - I. L2+

F.

EL TON, an Englishman, fixes the Pope's
excommunication of Q Elizabeth, on the
gates of the bishop of London's palace,

11. 7
Fenelon, M. de la Motte, ent by the French

King to interpose for K. James when con-
fined by the Ruthven conspirators, II. 82.
is forced to return without success, ibid.
Feudalgo'vernment, its origin and aritlocratical

genius, I. 12, 13. causes which limited
the power of feudal monarchs, 14. feudal.
vassals liable to few taxes, 15, a remark-
able instance of the feebleness of feudal go-
vernment, 17. the most perfect idea of
the feudal system, how attained, 37. fate
of it in England, 65--67. and in Scotland,

- - 67, 68
Fife, a populous and powerful county much

devoted to the congregation, I. 189. is
destroyed and plundered bythe French, ibid.
the fynod of, excommunicates the archbi-
fiop of St. Andrcws for contumacy, II. 119.

K k k they.

they excommunicate the popish Lords

183
Fribes Lord, with the Earl of Argyl, is feat

against the popilh Lords, II. 187. are de-
feated by them, - 188
Fordun, John de, his hillory of Scotland when

wrote - - 1. 4
Foyier Sir John, warden of the Englilh bor-

der, a scuffle between him and the Scots

- II. 115
Fotherinay Castle, Q. Mary's imprisonment,

trial and death there, II. 128--149
France, the consequences of the subversion of

the feudal government there, I. 72. a body
of French arrive in Scotland to support the
Catholics, 99. they reduce the cattle of
St. Andrews, ibid. another party of them
arrive there. o6. their tranifations there,
ibid. c19. conclude a peace with England,
o18. their politic condu&, o09. they
leave Scotland, ibid. their artifices in a
treaty of marriage between the Dauphin
and the Q ofScots, 135, 136. endeavours
to expell the French army out of Scotland,
163. another party of them arrive there
and fortify Leith, 170. they exasperate
the people by their insolence, ibid. they
are sent againt the congregation, 189. they
destroy and plunder Fife, and are much har-
rafled by parties of the congregation, 190.
are greatly allarmed by the arrival of the
English fleet, 190. they return to Leith
greatly harraffed and exhausted, 191. are
belicged there by the Englilh and the con-
gregation, 194. they gain several advan-
tages, ibid. 195. their motives for con-
cluding a peace, 197. negotiations for that
purpose, 198. articles ot the treaty, 199,
200. they leave Scotland, 202. the French
advise Q. Mary to moderate mcafures, 217.
their proposals by an ambassador rejected,
ibid. they agree to Q. Marry's marriage
with Lord Darnly, 274. the licentiousness
of their morals, 340
France, King of, a copy of his directions ieilt

to Scotland, pp. - 73
Frandis 1. gives a check to the ambitious pro-

jects of Lhal ilcs V. 1. -5. his fidelity
to the Scots, 9q. his death 99
- II. comes to the crown of France,

1. lou. his character, ibid. 210. is guid-

ed by the Duke of Guise and
Lorrain, ibid. 166. he treats
ftants with great rigour, 197.

cardinal of
the Prote-
his death,

210

G.

IF F R D S, DoAor and Gilbert, their
notion concerning the lawfulness of kil-

ling heretical excommunicated Princes, If.
z22. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q.
Elizabeth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by
Walsingham betrays his aflociates, z14. is
employed to carry on a foreign correfpon-
dence with Q. Mary - 125
Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for

witchcraft I. 58
-- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's

order to Morton to surrender the Regency,
11. 50. is killed in a rencounter of Stirling,

53
- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of

Ruthven, II. 77. his bold speech toKing
James, 78. he with the other conspirators
seize the castle of Stirling and eret their
standard, 91. he is attainted and his estate
forfeited 99
Glasgo-w, bifhopof, a note of his concerning

the Queen of Scotland's dowry, app. - 71
Glencairn Earl of, joins the Ruthven confpira-

tors - 1. 77

Glenli-vat the battle of - II. 188
Gordon Sir John, a scuffle in the fireets of

Edinburgh between him and Lord gslvy,
1. 295. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, ibid. when ordered by the
Queen to surrender himself he takes up arms
against her, 245, 246, 247. is defeated
and together with his brother made prifo-
ners, 249. he is beheaded and his brother
pardoned - - ibid.

Gordon, Lord, fct at liberty 289
----. Sir Adam, exerts himself for the

Queen's interest in the north, II. 26. his
character and good conduct as a soldier, 28
Go'wrie Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize

the King at Ruthven, II. 77. is visitcd and
pardoned by the King after his escape, 85.
becomes fufpecled and is ordered for France,
91. delays his voyage, and is taken into
cullody, ibid. ho is tried and executed,

CowrI o0Luerie,

Go.wrie,John andAlexander, sons of the above,

their charaiter and conspiracy, II. 214.
the surprising circumfiances of that remark-
able tranfa&ion, 2 5-21 8. several diffe-
rent conje&ures concerning it, 219-z28.
their dead bodies brought into Parliament
and condemned, 229. their estates and
honours forfeited, and name abolished for
ever, ibid. different accounts of this affair
published but not fatisfadory, 230--232. fee
Ruithven.
Graham Sir David of Fintry, accused of a

conspiracy with the popish Lords in favour
of Spain, II. 79. is conviced and be-
headed ibid.
Gray matter of, some account of him, I1. 103.

he becomes a favourite of King James VI.
ibid. is gained to Q. Elizabeth's interest,
104. betrays Q. Mary, ibid. persuades
K. James to write a harsh and undutiful let-
ter to her, lio. joins with others in pro-
moting Q(Elizabeth's interest in Scotland,
114. his treachery when ent to intercede
for Q. Mary, 143. his baseness discovered
he is disgraced, 15o. his vain attempt
against secretary Maitland, ibid. ads in
Italy as a spy from the court of England,
210. a memorial of his for his Majesty,
app. 88, 92. to the secretary of fate, 90
Gui/e duke of, his violent counsels with regard

to the Scots, I. 66. is murdered at the
siege of Orleans, -25S

his intrigues against Q.Elizabeth, 11.

96, 9. is a principal promoter of the
holy league, 112, 6i. drives the French
King out of his capital, - 161

FH.

H / DDINGTOU N, sized and forti-
H.r sied by the English, I. o15. is relieved

by the French - 6
Hamilton, the rife of that family, . 30. ar-

bitrary proceedings of Morton the Regent
against it, II. 57. fee Chatrlherault.
_ - of Bothrclhaugh, taken prisoner at

the battle of Langfide, . 400. is tried
and condemned for rebellion, ibid. obtains
a pardon from Murray the Regent by the
intercelion of Knox, ibid. an account of
his murdering Murray, 43;, 436, makes
his efcapc, 436. is received in triumph at
hilamilton 11. i

Hamilton Mr. Patrick, the firlt who suffered it

Scotland for the Protefiant religion I. 14x
Hartford Earl of, invades Scotland with an

English army, I. 93. burns Edinburgh
and'Leith, ibid. is made.Duke of Somer-
set, and protedor of England, lot. fee
Somerset.
Hafton, vice-chamberlain of England, the ar.

gument by which he prevailed on Q Mary
to plead at her trial lI. 131
Henry II. of France, fends forces to assist the

Scots, I. 99. a marriage proposed between
his son the Dauphin and the youngQueen of
Scots, os, o6. excites the Scots to in-
vade England, 131. his infamous impofi-
tion on QL Mary in the treaty of marriage,
135. persuades his son and Q. Mary to
afllume the titles of King and Queen of Eng-
land, 145. his death - 164
--- .- III. degenerates greatly on his accef-

sion to the crown of France, Ii. i . en-
ters into a private negociation with Q Eli-
zabeth, 113. interposes feebly in behalf of
Q Mary . 38
-- VIIf. of England. by his system of
reformation becomes formidable both to
Papists and Proteflants, I. 59. proposes
an interview with K. James V. ibid. is
disappointed by him and declares war
against Scotland, 6. invades it but is
forced to retreat. ibid. 62. his impor-
tance as to the balance of power in Europe,
76. his influence in Scotland how ob-
tained, 78, his schemes with regard to it
on the death of James V. 84. were ill-
conduced by himself and odious to the
Scots. 8. attempts to gain the Regency
by great promises, 88, invades Scotland,
92. this being ill-conduced turns to no
account, 93. receives and rewards the
Earl of Lenox, ibid. encourages the mur-
derers of cardinal Beatoun, 98. his death
and charaeter, ibid. 99. his inconsistent
condud, 45. excluded the Scots line by
his ttamcnt, --- 334
Hrris Lord, joins Chatelherault.in opposing

the Regent, 1. 421. comes to a treaty
with him, 422. he and the duke are coln-
initted prisoners to the caffle of Edinburgh,
423. intimates the King's order to Mor-
ton to resign the Regency, 11. o5, account

of

of his behaviour in Parliament, app. 50.
a letter from him to Lord Scroop and Sir F.
Knollis -96
Hickford, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk,

betrays him by discovering his intrigues
with Q. Mary - I1.23,24
Highlands and Iles, an attempt to civilize them

byK. James VI. II. 239. regulations for
that purpose, 240. three towns endued
with the privileges of royal boroughs or-
dered to be built there - ibid.
Hodgson, a priest of Reims, maintained the

lawfulness of killing heretical excommuni-
cated Princes - II. 122
Home, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a fe-

cret embassy to the pope - II. 212

Hotward, fee Norfolk.
Hunsdame Lord, governor of Berwick, his in-

terview with Arran - II. 98
Huntly Earl, tho' a catholic, joins the refor-

mers in opposing the French army, 1. 163,
164. afits them only with fair promises,
183. his further concurrence with them,
195. some account of that family,
243. his enmity against the young Queen's
ministers, ibid. his resentment inflamed by
an accident, 24C. appears in open rebel-
lion against the Queen, 247. his plot against
her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks
out into open rebellion, 248. is trodden to
death in a battle, 249. his family prose-
cuted with the utmost rigour, 250. everal
anecdotes and conjectures concerning his
plot,ibid. 251. is attainted by Parliament,
.258. the attainder repealed and the family
restored to estate and honours, 351
c-- his attachment to Bothwell, 347,

353. refuses to submit to the Regent 3z2.
is forced to do it, 423. a&is as lieutenant
to the Queen after the Regents murder, J r.
5. is proclaimed a traitor by Lenox the
new Regent, 8. receives some money and
promises of assistance from Spain, ibid.
agrees to a treaty with Morton the Regent,
139. is one of the heads of the Spanish sac-
tion, 163. engages to the Prince of Parma
to serve the King of Spain, 167. is impri-
soned for a short time, 199. ereEts a tlan-
dard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to sub.
mit to the King, ibid. is again imprisoned,
170. is soon set at liberty, ibid. receives

a commiflon fromthe King, 176, his bar-
barous murder of the Earl of Murray, ibid.
is summoned to surrender to julfice, 179.
flies to the mountains, 180. offers to sub-
mit to a trial, 183. feenene pronounced
against him, 184. refuses to submit, 185.
makes another desperate attempt but is
forced to fly - 186

I.
JAMES I. was detained long aprifoner

in England, I. 29. troubles in Scotland
during that time, ibid. was much' im-
proved by an English education, 40. his
policy on his return to Scotland, 41. his
chara&er, 42. fupprefles the power of the
nobles, ibid. they being exasperated con-
spire against and murder him 43, 44
--- 11. troubles in Scotland during his
minority, I. 30. his attempts against the
nobles, 44, 45. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 45. procures several good laws
to be pased, 46. reduces the power of the
nobles, ibid. 47. his death 47
--- III. the itate of Scotland during his

minority, T. 30. his impolitic conduct,
47, 48. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 48, 49. is greatly in-
fulted by his nobles, 50. his despicable
minions, ibid. was the firit that appointed
a itanding guard to his person, 51. the
nobles are provoked to take arms against
him, ibid. is killed in a battle against
them, ibid. 52. his character ibid.
-- - IV. his character, I. 52, 53. is-

killed in a battle against the Englih at
Flowden 53
- V. his minority long and turbulent, 1. 31.

tranfaaions during that time, 53, 54. as-
fumes the government while very young,
54, 55. his character, 55. his ichcnme
for humbling the nobles, 56--59 is di-
verted from it by the clergy. 60, 61. takes
arms for the defence of his kingdom, 61.
his nobles refuting to follow him, throws
him into a deep melancholy, 62, 63.
which is increased by a urprifing defeat of
his forces, 63: his death, 64. rcfleftions
on his conduct, ibid. he refused an alli-
ance with Charles V. Emperor 77

J7aarcs

James VI. his birth, I. 318. his baptism,

232. the care of him committed to the
Earl of Mar, 345. is by,him preserved
from falling into the hands of Bothwell,
36X. is crowned, 376. the nobles op-
pressed by Morton the Regent. turn their
eyes to him for redress, II 48. his edu-
cation and dispositions, ibid. 49. he be-
comes suspicious of the Regent's power,
49. discovers early a great attachment to
favourites, 60. adopts two of different
difpolitions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with
great iolemnity, 6. is by his favourites
engaged in unpopular measures, 75, 76.
is sized by a party of nobles at Ruthven,
77. and forced to receive complaints
against his'favourites, ibid. 78. dissembles
with them and banishes Lenox, 79. is
brought to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 8..
his concern at Lenox's death, and regard for
his memory, ibid. receives the French
ambassador with great respect, 83. makes
his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 84.
resolves to treat them with moderation, 85.
visits Gowrie and grants him a pardont, ibid.
renews his fondness for Arran, ibid. 86.
is by him persuaded to violent measures
against the conspirators, 86. his answer to
a haughty letter from Q Elizabeth on their
behalf, 87. is by her interposition rendered
more violent against them, 88. is pro-
voked by the clergy, 89. his steps to
humble them, 92. his profusion to Arran,
99. fends a newfavourite toEngland againlt
the banished Lords, 103. devolves the
whole regal authority on Arran, Xlo.
writes an undutiful letter to his mother,

i lo. is threatened to be disinherited by
her, i1. receives a pension from Q Eli-
zabeth, 115. is reconciled to the exiled
Lords, 17, becomes popular by conclud-
ing a treaty with England, 120, 121. his
scandalous behaviour with regard to archd.
Douglas, ibid. his endeavours to save his
mother's life after her condemnation, 139,
140. is greatly inccnfed atherdeath, 154.
arguments ued by the English minilfers to
pacify him, ibid. 55. is forced to flifle
his rcfentment, 155. attempts to unite the
nobles, 157 158. is courted both by
Spain and England, 62, 163. refolvgs

vigorously to adhere to the latter, 163.
takes several eps with that view, ibid.
164. his flill in the popilh controversy,
168. wrote a commentary on the revela-
tions, ibid. his maxims with regard to po-
pery, ibid. 169. his excessive lenity to
conspirators against him, 69. resolves to
marry the Princess of Denmark, 170. arts
used to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is
consummated in Norway, 171. passes fe-
veral months in Denmark, ibid. reflec-
tions on his conduft there, ibid. 172. his
arrival in Scotland with his Queen, 173.
indulges the Presbyterians, 174. the ill
consequences of his lenity, ibid. 175. his
zeal against witchcraft, 175. is follicited
by Q. Elizabeth to treat the conspirators
againit him with rigour, i80. is fufpe&ed
of conniving with them, 18I. is furprized
and seized by Bothwell, ibid. and forced
to comply with his terms, 18z. his lenityto
Bothwell abused, ibid. 183. is fufpeted
of favouring the popish Lords, 183. is in
new danger from them, 86. delegates
his authority to Argyl and Sorbes against
them, 187. goes in person against them,
ibid. waftes their lands and garifons their
caliles, ibid. his right of the succession to
the crown of England opposed by the pa-
piits, 189. his lenity to them incenses the
clergy and people, 193, 194. is much
provoked by the obstinacy of the clergy,
195. gives orders against them, 197, 198.
is much insulted and in great danger at
Edinburgh, 198--zoo. leaves Edinburgh
and proceeds with severity against the citi-
zens, 200--z03. acquires abolute domi-
nion in ecclefialtical affairs, 204, 205.
strengthens his in parliament by restoring
the feats of the ecclefiaffics, 206, 207. en-
deavours with success to gain a party in
England, 208. increases his reputation by
publifling his Baflicon Doron, 209. is
accused by Q. Elizabeth of corresponding
with .the Pope, 210. this he denies and
how accounted for, zl . other reports
concerning this, 12., is at great pains to
gain the roman catholics, ibid. his regu-
lations with regard to the church, ar3. the
myltcrious affair of Gowry's conspiracy,
214--233. his cautiaus behaviour in regard

to
I N

to the Earl of Eex, 235. fends ambafla-
dors to save him, 236. they arrive too
late, 237, he restores his son and aflociates
to their honours after his acceflion, ibid.
continues his intrigues in England, 238,
239. his interest greatly strengthened there,
ibid. 239. endeavours to civilize the high-
lands and isles, 239, 240. , is proclaimed
King in England. after the death of Q.Eli-
zabeth,, 24, 246. is proclaimed likewise
in Scotland and prepares for his journey to
England, 247. enters London and takes
polleflion of the throne, 28. his charac-
ter how different from that of Q. Elizabeth,
ibid. a letter from him to Mr. Archd.
Douglas, app. 85
lnvernejs Castle, refues to urrender to Q.

Mary, I. 247.' it is forced, and the gover-
nor punished ibid. 248
Italy the liberty of, how preserved, I. 73

K.
K EITH Sir William, ent to intercede

for Q Mary when under sentence, II.

140. letter to him from secretary Mait-
land, app. - 85
Kent Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence

against Q. Mary executed II. 145
Ker of Ferniherit, ravages England on the

murder of Murray the Regent, I. 1, 2.
his design, 4. has a scuffle with the Eng-

lifh - -
- Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is dif-

covered when ready to fail to promote a
plot in Spain, 11. 178. his fchemeopened.
ibid. escapes out of prison 181
Killigrett Henry, his declaration on the peace,

157. app. 70
Kings feudal, the most limited of all Princes,

i. 12. general causes of this, 14. their
revenues were but small, ibid. 15. had
no tfanding armies, 5. and jurisdiction
limited, 6. means used to extend the
royal authority, 33. their jurisdiction en.
larged, 35. the extraordinary influence of
the Scottiih Kings in Parliament, 65. the
reason of this - ibid. 69
Kirkaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of

Beatoun is recalled by the Q. Dowager, I.
13z. his attainder reversed in Parliament,
258. offers to fight Bothwell in tingle

E X,

combat, 366. his interview with Q.Mary,
in name of the confederate Lords, ibid.
rescues Maitland from confinement, 431.
labours to support the King's authority and
restore harmony after the murder of the Re-
gent, II. 3. accedes to the Queen's party,
.ibid. :4. provides for a siege by increasing
his garifon and fortifying dinburgh, 15.
proclaims Lenox's authority unlawful and
usurped, 16. attempts in vain to prevent a
meeting of the Parliament, ibid. forms a
scheme for;furprifing the King's party, 19.
is at first successful but afterwards defeated,
20. comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regent, 31. a treaty with Morton,
breaks it off, 37, 38. fires upon Edin-
burgh from the catle, 38. is besieged
by the Regent assisted by English forces,
40.' is forced by a mutiny of the garifon
to capitulate, 41. surrenders to Drury the
Englith general, ibid. is by order of Q.
Elizabeth delivered up to the Regent, 42.
he and his brother are executed 43
Knollys Sir Francis, ent by Q. Elizabeth with

letters of condolence to Q Mary on her ar-
rival in England, I. 395. some of his let-
ters, app. - 1, 52, 56
Knox John, a famous reformer, his charater,

I. i . after being some time abroad he is
recalled by the persecuted Protestants, s 1.
inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
against the papists, ibid. his notion con-
cerning the government of women whence,
I56, 57. his residence fixed in Edin-
burgh, 161. complains of the lukewarm-
ness of the reformers, 174. his opinion to
the convention of reformers that it is lawful
to resist and deprive tyrannical Princes, 176.
animates and revives the desponding con-
gregation, 184, 185. complains of the ne-
gled of the reformers in providing maintai-
nancc for their preachers, 207, recom-
mends the Geneva model of church go-
vernment, 213. proposes superintendents
in the church, 214. compotes the first
book of discipline, 21 . renounces friend-
flip with the Earl of Murray for his mode-
ration, 239. is tried for encouraging a mu-
tiny among the people and acquitted, 260.
popish judges concur in this decision, ibid.
26 1. is publickly accused by Maitland of

pFeaching

preaching seditious dotlrine concerning re-
fitance, 270, charaSers of the two difpu-
tants, ibid. approvcd of several inflarces
of affaflination, 315.. agrees to some regu-
lations concerning the ele. ion of Bilhops,
II. 34. his death and clharater, 35. 36.
his eulogium by Morton the Regent, 36.
articles sent by him to the general afiembly,
app. - - 68

L.

NG SIDE, the battle of, 1. 389
Laiieaeu cardinal, is sent as Nuncio

from the Pope with a present to Q. Mary
of Scotland, . 328. is flopped at Paris,

-. - 329
League holy, a confederacy of roman catho-

lics so called, II. 112. was univcrfally
agreed to-by them all over Europe ibid,
Learning, the revival of promotes the refor-

mation - * . 119
Leicefjer Earl of, appointed a commiflioner to

the conference at We'fminfter, I. 414
LePi', burnt by theEnglifh, 1.93. fortified by the

French, 170. besieged by the Englilh, 193.
Q Mary lands there fiom France, 2z5. the
superiority of it granted by her to Edin-
burgh, 294. is ieizcd and rortiied by Mor-
ton and the Regent, -- II. 16
Lenox Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France,

I. 87. is much courted by cardinal Beatoun,
ibid. his prctenfions to the fucceflion how
founded, 9o. resents Beatoun's deceitful-
ncls to him,- 9. heads the reformers and
the advocates for the Englih' alliance, ibid.
furprizes the Regent and cardinal, 92. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. continues
alone in the intcrel of England, 93. is
forced to fly to that court, where he is re-
warded, ibid. is married to a niece of K.
Henry's, by which he becanel fiathcr to a
race of Kings, ibid. 9..1. his claim to the
succession, 2u5. is inmprifoned for a b(crct
correspondence with (Q)Mary, ?66. is in-
vited Iccretly by her to return to Scotland,
ibid. arrives in Scotland, : and is received
with great familiarity by her, 268. his for-
fLituie is repualed, and lie is rellored to his
cffite and honours by the Parliament, 269.
his lady sent prilner to the tower of Lon-
don, 279. and treated witli rigour, 2'3. he
inJlils on the prolccution of his ion Dlarly's

murderers, 344, charges Bothwell with it,
345. the prosecution is hurried, 346. he
craves a delay which is refuted, 347. he is
left alone in it, ibid. follicits Q. Elizabeth's
interest to obtain a delay, 348. infiis on it
by proxy at the trial but is over-ruled, 349.
being apprehensive of danger he flies to-
wards England, 350. his counters accuses
Q. Mary of the murder to Q Elizabeth,
397. he apl'ea s at the conference at Welt-
minRier and accucs Q.Mary of the murder
upon oath, 415. returns to Scotland pro-
te&ed by an Englilh army, II. 6. i eleced
Regent, 7, S. his progress againfl thcQueen's
party, 8. appoints commifiioners to fiame
a treaty with those of the Queen, rr. fur-
prizes Dumbarton caltle, 13, 14. joins the
Earl of Morton at Leith, i6. holds a Par-
liament in the Canongate, ibid. another at
Stirling, 19. he is furprLed and killed there

~~- - ~ ibid. 20
Leuox, late Aubigne, his charaer, II. 6,

joins with the King's other new favourite to
undermine Morton, ibid. ienounces pope-
ry, 62. Q. Elizabeth demandls him to be
removed fiom the privy council, 63. is ac-
cufed by her amlbafl or, 67. Arran tries
in vain to supplant him, 72. is commanded
by K. James at the requelt of the nobles to
leave the kingdom, 79. puts o his depar-
ture on various precences, So, S. re:urns
unwillingly to rance where lie soon dies,
81. his menmory vindicated and rmuch rc-
garded by the l2ing. ibid. died a Protc-
Rant, - - ibid.
- E. of, left as te King's lieutenant in the

north afterdilpirfing tle pop h Lords I.i S
Lf/,'e Nlorman, murders cardinal Cattoun, 1.

96. he and his afibciates keep pofc9.ion of
tie castle of St. Andrews, 9. makes ci truce
witlh the Regent, 9. are ecourag d by
l tenry VIII. ib'.
---- - billlop of Rlof;, is lent by thl catho-

lics in Scotland to engag:e l.Maruy in their
iterell, 1. z216. his propoal, LO ther l-jec-
ted, iid. 2 17. his negoiatitons in ]'lnlaid
in fvour, of Q( Mary, 1 . .z, 23. is con-
lined long in11 he tower l.and :l cr wards is 1a-
IliLed 1';9!.ld -
L/,//bay .orld, carries the proio(d fioil tlhe

coi(ldc;ratcs to (Q Mary, tha: (;x l do;.l rc-
1i:;? the govcriimncit, 1. 3>. join:, tile Rto ii-
vcn colilliratos - !. 7

L 1 1 L/..

Locblkvin cafile, Q Mary comrnlitted a prisoner

there, I. 370. her escape from thence. 385
*- Lord, letters to and from him, ap-

pendix - - 72
Logan of Reftalrig, an alledged accomplice in

Gowries conspiracy, II. 220, 221. is tried,
and his estate forfeited long after his death,

~- - ~ 222, 223
Lords confederate, associate against Bothwell

and Q. Mary, I. 362. raise forces against
them, 363. publilh the motives of their
conduct, 364. prevail on the Queen to fur-
render to them, 367. assume the title of
Lords of the secret council and the royal au-
thority 370

~---. popish, conspire against K.James, II.

167. are treated by him with great lenity,
159. form anew conspiracy, 178. the King
proceeds against them, 179. more of his le-
nity to them, 183. fefh dangers from
them, 186. they receive money from Spain,
ibid. zeal of the clergy against them, 187.
are declared guilty of treason and th.ir
eflates forfeited, ibid. defeat the King's ar-
my, 188. are dispersed on the King's ap-
proach, ibid. go abroad and give fccu-
rity to keep the peace, 189. return to Scot-
land, and petition for leave to reside in their
own houses, 193. this granted by a con-
vention of estates, ibid. recant their errors
and are absolved from excommunication,
205. relapse, and are again reconciled to
the church of Rome, ibid. are restored to
their estates and honours - 206
Lorrain cardinal, gets tome of the best bene-

sices in Scotland, - I. 14

Princes of, their ambitious views, I.

144. inltigate the Dauphin and Q. Mary
to take the titles of King and Queen of
England, 14i. resolve so invade Eng-
land, I46. and to check the reforma-
tion in Scotland, ilid. the cardinals great
in'uence over the young King, I65, 166.
drives the (QICen RIccnt of Scotland to vio-
lhnt meaures, 1 , 172. theirviolences oc-
cation a conipiracy ;againiit theni, 198. are
fOrccd to withdraw their troops fron Scot-
land, ibid. they insult the Scottifi anibaf-
fador, zr). lhave great power over the
young Killngll Queen, 210. are frced to
cnlltracl'lc their views on the death of the

.n--- - _ 211

Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the re-

formation, I. 119. the rapid progress of his
doctrine, , - 120

M.
M A J 0 R John, his hiltory of Scotland,

ome account of, - I. 4
Alaitland of Lethington, secretary to Mary

Queen Regent, leaves her service and joins
the congregation, I. 183. his charater,
184. is ent by them ambafldor to Q. Eli-
zabeth, 185. fends them assurances of her
protection, 188. is ent by QMaryto the
court of England, 23 I. makes a conceflon
to Q Elizabeth, ibid. accompanies Q. Mary
in a progress to the north, 246. hi: is em-
ployed by Q. Mary to desire a personal in-
terview with Q Elizabeth, 251. publickly
accuses Knox of preaching seditious doc-
trine concerning refifance. 270. intimates
to Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q. Viary to
marry Darnly, 277. prudently conceals her
resentment from Q. Elizabeth, 279. pro-
poses moderate measures with regard to Q.
Mary when imprisoned, 373. attends the
Regent when called on to accuse her in Eng-
land, 404. he disapproves of this measure
ibid. his intrigue with the Duke of Nor-
folk, 408, 409, 424. is imprisoned by the
Regent, 430. is relieved by Kirkaldry and
secured in the castle, ibid. 43'. proposes
a coalition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, II. 2, 3. accedes to the
Queen's party, 4. is deprived of his office
of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 8. is
attainted in a Parliament of the King's par-
ty, 16. agrees with. Mar, 31. his views
in refuting a reconciliation with Morton the
Regent, 37, 38. rejects overtures of atreaty
with him, 37. is besieged by him in the
catle of Edinburgh, 38. is forced to capi-
tulate and surrenders to the English general,
41. to avoid the Regent's relentment he
dilpatches himself, 43. fevcral of his let-
ters, app. - II. 63, 85
-- Sir John, is made secretary for Scot-

land, II. 114. concurs with others in pro-
moting QL Elizabeth's interests there, ibid.
attempts against him by capt. James Stew-
art, late Arran, 156. they prove abortive,
and he is advanced to be chancellor, i57.
an attempt to remove him fiom that office,

frultratcd,

frutrated, 69. his death, 9go. a copyof
verses in honour of him wrote by the King,

--

_ bia.
Mar Earl of, that title conferred on the prior

of St. Andrews, I. 244. accompanies the
Queen in a progress to the north, 246. he
and his afrociates narrowly escapes aflafli-
nation, 247. he is created Earl of Murray,
z48. fee Murray.
-- the title is conferred on L. Erftine, 248.

the person of the young Prince put into his
hands, 345. his resolution in preserving
him from Bothwell, 361. is chosen Regent,
I. 21. labours to bring about a general
peace, 31. is thwarted by Morton and his
affoeiates, ibid. 32. dies, of melancholy,
ibid. his characer, ibid. his merit and in-
tegrity was acknowledged by both parties,

- - ibid.
- the young Earl, being imposed on by

Morton, turns out his uncle from the catle
of Stirling, 11. 53. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 77. he with the others seize
Sterling castle, and ereCt their itandard, 91.
is attainted and his eflatc forfeited, 99. is
pardoned and restored to eate and ho-
nours - - 117, 118
JMarch countess of, her infamous marriage

with the Earl of Arran, II. 71, 72
Mary of Guise, Q. Dowager of Scotland, takes

a considerable hare in the government, I.
o15. is much addiced to the French inter-
eft, ibid. proje&ts a marriage of her daugh-
ter to the Dauphin of France, ibid. 1o6.
becomes instrumental in promoting the re-
formation, 113. aspires to the office of
Regent, ibid. promotes diffaffetion to the
present one and favours the reformers, 114.
visits the court of France, 1i5. returns to
Scotland to take possession of the Regency,
rl6. after ome opposition he obtains it,
117. confers several offices of trull upon
firangers, 129. proposes to lay a tax upon
land, 130. is forced to drop it, 131. tries
in vain to excite a war with England, ibid.
the nobles vigorously oppose her necafurcs,
132. treats the reformers with great re-
fpe&, 133. obtains a conceflion from the
Parliament in favour of the Dauphin, 138.
her artful management of the reformers,
ibid. 139. bellows the vacant benefices on
foreigners, 40o. he alters her condut to
the reformers, 143. rcmonftratcs againll

the violent measures of the Princes of Lor-
rain, 147. is persuaded by them to perse-
cute the reformers, 148. her rash answer
to their remonstrance, 149. summons their
preachers to appear before her, ibid. breaks
a promifehe had made them, 1io. marches
with an army against them, 152. concludes
a treaty with them, x3. this he again
breaks, ibid. her severity at Perth, ibid.
her schemes discovered, 54. she goes to
attack them, 155. has again recourse to
negotiation, 156. he is flartled at their
demands and gets time to answer them, 157.
violates another treaty, 158. loses Perth
and forced to abandon Stirling and Edin-
burgh, he retires with precipitation to Dun-
bar, ibid. marches to attack the reformers
at Edinburgh, 6r. gains time by her ar-
tifice, ibid. makes another treaty with
them, 162, her artifices to undermine the
prior of St. Andrews, 169. the absurdity
of her scheme, ibid. 170. gets a rein-
forcementoffrench troops who fortify Leith,
ibid. ihe difiegards a remonstrance of the
reformers, 171. is influenced by french
counsellors and perfwaded to violent mea-
fures, ibid. 172. retires to Leith on the
approach of the reformers army, 173. her
prudent and artful conduct there, ibid. her
haughty and imperious answer to a fresh re-
monfirance from them, 174. is by a con-
vention of them deprived of her office of
Regent, 176. the foundation of this fen-
tense, ibid. 178. foments differences among
them, 179. is deserted by her principal fe-
cretary, 183. fends french troops against
the reformers, 189. retires inro the cafile
of Edinburgh on the approach of the Eng-
lil, 193. her death and character, 196.
repented of her violent measures, 197. li-
flencd to the instructions of a reformed
preacher - - ibid.
Mary Queen of England, her persecuting reign,

I. 8 . her death, - I1o
- Queen of Scots born, I. 8r. a propo-

fal to marry her to Ed. VI. 84. fle is dc-
manded by Henry VIII. 85. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, lo;.
a treaty for that purpofc con(ludCd, lo7.
The is sent to be educated in France, ibid.
the fttal consequence of this, ibid. is im-
pofild on by the artilices of the Irench in
the treaty of niarriage, 13 5. her i;r iai.,;e

L I 1 2 cc-

celebrated with great pomp, 136. they
take the 'title of King and Queen of Eng-
land; I4. the makes concessions to the
congreg:tion, 199, 200. declares Q. Eli-
zabeth's right to the crown of England,
ibid. she acquires an entire ascendant over
her hufiand, a0o. she i overwhelmed
w.ith great affliction on his death and retires
to Rheims, 211. Ihe is invited by the con-
vention to return to Scotland, 216. an
ciniilary from the catholics in Scotland pro-
poses violent measures to her, ibid. she is
determined to moderation by the French
and the prior of St. Andrews, 217. is pre-
va,'ed on to pre;are for her return to Scot-
land, 218. the origin of the dii"ord be-
tween her and Q Elizabeth, 29, 220.
her pretensions to the crown of England,
220. is envved on account of her beauty,
223, demands a safe condt-c from Q. Eli-
zabeth which is refused, 224.- leaves France
with great relufance, 225. lands at Lcith,
ibid. is much ailtieed by the change of her
fitnation, 22z'. several difad':antages at-
ten'ing her accession, ibid. 227. some cir-
cumiiances to her advantage, 227, 228.
her accominlilhments of body and mind, ib.
the fcrvants of her ch;.pcl infultd, ibid.
prouries thefrcc cxercit olhcr religion,229.
ifli:es a prncl.inarion in favour of the Pro-
teCfants, ibid. 23o. employs them only in
the adminiftraniopi, 230. attempts to gain
Q Elizabeth's favour, ibid. makes a con-
ceii n to her, 2 31. wVhich is rjI'ed, 232.
the m.ikes her p>'nlic entry into Edil),nlrgh,
ibid. an inful oercd to her rliion on
that occasion, 233. difco'ragc; till at-
tempts of the papiit:; t,, g:in her favor,
234. her averion to tile t:nily of Ha;nil-
ton, 23;. In;ia;cs a progrcfs into the norih,
246. ILhr ninilcrs n.rrowly ccape ali':ii-
nation, 27. is refiel:' access to t:lic:rl:l
of Invernef;, id. 1when in th'e utmo!t
conllernation is relieved i)', tic iioo!1i andil(
ot'.her Clil, ibid. hi ' ,)Ine. d fe:it fluit-
l]y':; i>an)lion, " 19. f!' (l,'ir:s an int^r-

i'cw v. i hl ,Q . l',ii.'.,', ,

i : *1i . I ic;., cia-

lion. c',:<::, ' '). ' i

',' ii. l:;;iai.y , 252. i' ">1

)

licit:c.l i v. ; '.- : i'i'c .', :'.;',, ?.; .. i'her
(h:!i).:ral i.); ., C.l.c,':'iiui' it, i',ii. ; t>,,'d(
t) 1 :-ar the I':ILI/ ,>it:Q'. iv.: [I. ', o",' o' ().

I'. iz l;, thli, 2 '). 7I

pL; :; l:- i

i' li; ' .'

( ,: -
to.tL inues ag.inllt a 'ore'; , ;.i!;, n .m , .;7.

E X.

determines not to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, '258. further negociations for her
marriage, 261. discovers the views of
Catharine of Medicis, ibid: 262. Lord Ro-
bert Dudley recommended to her as a hus-
band by Q. Elizabeth, 262. fle is
highly oended at this, 263. difembles
with Q. Elizabeth, ibid. 265. entertains
thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly, 265.
she recalls Lenox, 2)6. is affronted at a
letter of Q. Elizabetl, 267. her indiffe-
rence as to the rcfoirincd, and zeal for the
catholic religion, 269. is taken with Darnlv
at firl{ fight, 272. is greatly moved at Q_
Elizabeth's iniilting craftine!s, ibid. 273.
ncgotiates with the court of Rome for a dif-
pen fation to marry Darnly, 273. and the
consent of the court of France, 274. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to Q.
Elizabeth for consent to her marriage, 276,
277. which ihe afreEts to refuse; 277. in
resentment fie proposes to fend an angry
mefl'ge to Elizabeth, which iMaitland pre-
ve ts, 279. jaftiCes her condua to the
Engli(h ambaflador, ibid. cndeavours to get
Murray's consent, 23l. courts the pope's
prote'ion, and receives a fublidy from him,
ibid. her great addres in gaining the con-
sent of her ubljccs, 283. prevents a plot
againftlDarnly, 284. iummons her valhals
to take arms against Murray, 286. and
him to appear before her, 287. her mar-
riage with Darnly celebrated, ibid. file
confers the title'of King of Scots upon him,
28S8. this fep censured, ibid. her reent-
ment againt the malecantents, ibid. flle
miarches againll them, 28S. rejecLs the
interccffion of Q Elizabeth in their behalf,
290. continuec! her march againlt the re-
bels, ibid. her conduct and courage on
that occniion, ibid. 291. drive.c them out
of Scotland, 291. her further refcntmcnt
igainft them, 293. has rccourfe to f:veral
devicesi to iraie money, ibid. 294. her
profp.cr'ity promotes her rcli ion, 29;. her
delberations conccning tle exiled Lords,
29.) dt:til'ninc:'; lo treat them with lIenity,
.'SI. is .i verted frlom tllli: by her religion
and l're;c!> inadhlenc, ibid. 300. this the
lu)tllc of ler aftelr il: fortulns, 300 her
inltenition to rcftore i'(,pcry, 31. is dif-

''V.i witllh D.1) l': iil,>ciit bechaviour,
y'/. e. l'r flllliliaritL witl Ri.o oli.lls the

King,

King, 303. vindicated fiom any criminal
correspondence with Rizo, 305-307. uses
her utmost endeavours to prevent his mur-
der, 308. he is confined by the confpi-
rators,.ibid. file gains the King, and c-
capes from them, 309. is reconciled to
the exiled nobles, 310. her hatred to
Darnly increases, 315, 316. and favour
for Bothwell commences, 317. extinguishes
some dometlic feuds among the nobles,
318. is delivered of her son James VI. in
the Caflle of Edinburgh, ibid. invites fe-
veral foreign princesto his baptism, 319.
continues to treat Darnly with neglect,
ibid. her attachment to Bothwell increases,
320. prevents Darnly's intended flight,
322, 323. visits the borders, 323. an in-
stance of her regard for Bothwell on that
occasion, ibid. how herival'd QElizabeth,
324. her right of Succcflion favoured by
the English parliament, 325. she endea-
vours to avail herself of that opportunity,
326, 327. he takes an extraordinary ltep
in favour of popery, 328 receives a pre-
sent from the pope, but flops his nuncio at
Paris, 329. endeavours to procure a bet-
ter fubfiltence for the reformed clergy, ibid.
330. her aversion to the King excessive,
becomes melancholy, 330. Ihe declines a
divorce from him, ibid. 331. goes to
Stirling to celebrate her sons baptiim, 332.
is greatly offended at the king's behaviour
on that occasion, ibid. restores the popilh
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, 336. her negle't
of the King during his sickness, 338. the
breach between them becomes irreparable,
ibid, 339. lhe visits him at Glasgow,
339. the motives of her diflimulation
on that occasion, ibid. 30. prcv.ils on
him to come to Edinburgh, 341.. her l'uf.
picious behaviour to him there, ibid.
342. ifliies a proclamation for diStco-
vering his muderers, 343. is fulppol'd
to.have been acccilbry to it, ibid. is char-
ged with it abroad as well as at honm, 31- 1
goes to visit her ion at Stc ling, 350. is
lmet on her rcturn by ]Iothwell, \wlo fiiz.
and carries liher to )unbar, ibid. thli; ilp-
pol'cd with her coiiclent, 3 7. is co(litltd
to l'tlinlburgh, 35S. ;an married cto oti-
.wcll, 3 q. fcll; ;an tapoloy to the Ckourtl':;
of f'rance and 1',glald, llbd. lier COilti llc
calufs a gnelal indiga;tion agaiinllt hcr
abtload, 3,(). i.' larnild at a colminailtion
of' the nobles aainit her, 362. llie ilub.

lilhes a manifegfo to vindicate her condu<t,
363. is conduced to the caflle of Borth-
wick, ibid. marches with Bothwell's forces
againfl the confederate Lords, 355. an at-
tempt of an accommodation proves vain,
ibid. is forced to surrender to the confe-
derates, 367. is insulted by the soldiers and
mob, ibid. is carried to Edinburgh, whcre
many abuses are offered her, ibid. 368. is
sent a prisoner to Lochlevin Castle, 370. Q_
Elizabeth interposes in herbehalf, 372. the
English anbaflador is refused access to her,
ibid, various proposals among the confe-
derates concerning her, 373. they oblige
her to resign the Government, 374, 375.
difl'erent reaionings on this measure, 376,--
379. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 379, 380. her party
among the nobles become dispirited, 381.
her resignation of the Crown accepted by
the Parliament, and her imprisonment de-
cla:ed lawful, 383. her letters to Bothwell
read, and he declared accefibly to the
King's murder, ibid. escapes fiom Loch-
levin, 385. arrives at Hamilton, ibid. is
attended by many nobles and a numerous
army, 386. an afibciation signed in her
defence, ibid. her imprudence in hazard-
ing a battle, 388. her army defeated 'by
the confederates, 389. her precipitate flight
into Galloway, 390. rashly determines to
retire to England, ibid. goes thi:her against
the advice of her attendants, 391. arrives
at Carlifc, 392. writes to Q Elizabeth,
imploring her good offices, ibid. receives
letters of condolance from hcr, and demands
admittance into her presence, 395. this re-
fuled and why, ibid. 36. osi'ers to fbmit
her caule to Q. Eliz.abcth, 396. is much
deceived in her expe&iation tfom this, 398.
and offended on diicovcringc the artifices of
QL E lizabeth, 399. earneliey follicits to be
admlitted into her prefienc, ibid. file is
carried to Bolto C(';lll, ol. challin'd
at finding hertelf a priioner, ibid. agre's
to an enquiry into Ier condtul, 402. her
difliniultion wiih ) rc;id to religion, ibid.
collliillioners appoined to) appcl in her
n;lne, o5. lher cikf view in thlii :.;1.ir,
40(). colntients to inc'in l the conlic.ic to

'eihiidtri , .l !. flie is car 'l to 'lo l'T h-

buIry' in Staflord(ilhire, I 12. is indIlC oftiln-
ded at tt tle regard lcwn tlhe lc' t, land
rce]all, her conlil' it to tle CO Cr'C'i Cc., .1,3.
the accusation againit hert proiductd by the

R%, :t,

Regent, 414. is accused likewise by the
Earl of Lenox, 415. her commissioners re-
fuse to answer, and demand a personal in-
terview, 416. they protest against future
proceedings, ibid. a suspicious circumstance
againit her, ibid. 417. her commissioners
withdraw from the meeting, 417. her re-
solute answer to a harsh proposal of Q Eli-
zabeth, 418. avoids any farther progress
in the enquiry, 419. is enraged at the pro-
ceedings, and proposes desperate measures,
420. spreads chimerical conjectures with
that view, ibid. 421. proposes a divorce
from Bothwell, 424. is influenced by the
D. of Norfolk's schemes, ibid. exchanges
many letters and love tokens with him, 425.
consents to proposals from the English no-
bles, 427. their views in this tranfadtion,
426,-428 a rebellion by her adherents
against Q Elizabeth, 431. is removed to
Coventry, 433. Q. Elizabeth thinks of
delivering her up to the Regent, 434. this
projec how disappointed, ibid. 435. ac-
cession of several to her party after the mur-
der of the Regent, II 4. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ibid. her
authority proclaimed at Linlithgow, 5. her
parties defeated by the new Regent, 8, 9.
ihe answers proposals by Q. Elizabeth, o.
attempts in vain to get foreign assistance,
ibid. appoints commissioners to frame a
treaty for her liberation, 11. this proving
fruitless, he is more ftritly confined, 12.
the invalidity of her resignation declared in
a Parliament held by her adherents, 17. at
of Parliament in England to curb her and
her party, 21. (he looks for protetion
from the King of Spain, 22. is denied the
privilege of an ambassador at the Court of
England, 25. is more close confined and
watched, ibid. proceedings against her in
England, 28. her interest neglected by the
French, 29. is hurt by the massacre at
Paris, 30, 31. her adherents divided into
two factions, 37. one of them joins with
Morton the Regent, 39. review of the
characters of her adherents and opponents,
41, 42. her forlorn situation, 42. is car-
ried to Buxton Wells, 43. loses several of
her friends by death, 45. fends a letter and
presents to her son, 59. her meflenger why
dismisscd without secing him, ibid. her un-
easiness at his confinement by the Ruthven
conspirators, 82. complains to Q. Eliza-
beth of her hard usage, ibid. and begs her

intercellion for the King her son, ibid.
Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour,
95-97. a fruiders negociation with QO Eli-
zabeth, oo. is alarmed at an association
in defence of Q Elizabeth, 102. is com-
mitted to more severe keepers, 103. betrayed
by Lord Gray the Scots ambassador, 104. a
statute for the preservation of Q. Elizabeth
proves fatal to her, io8. is more rigor-
ouly treated, 1og. her complaints to Q
Elizabeth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
French ambassador's interest, removed to
Tuthbury, o. is undutifully treated by
the King her son, ibid. her paifionate
complaint to the French ambassador on that
occasion, ibid. l . threatens to disinherit
him, i i . several discoveries alledged a-
gainft her, I25, 126. he is guarded with
unusual vigilance, 127. her domestics, pa-
pers, &c. are seized, ibid. 128. she is con-
veyed to Fotheringay Castle, 128. delibe-
rations concerning the method of proceeding
against her, ibid. 129. is suspicious of poi
son or private murder, 129, 130. vindicates
herself to the D. of Guise, 130. the com-
miflioners for trying her arrive at Fotherin-
gay Castle, ibid. her spirited speech when
refusing to plead, ibid. 131. is at length
prevailed on, ibid. he protests against the
authority of the court, 132. the accusation
against her, ibid. her defence, ibid.-134.
her sentence, 135. irregularities in her trial,
136. the sentence is confirmed by Par-
liament, ibid. who demand the execution
of it, ibid. 137. France interposes feebly
in her behalf, 138, 139. the sentence a-
gainft her publilhed, 141. flie is treated
with the utmost rigour, ibid. her last re-
quefl to Q. Elizabeth, 142. refuses the
alfillance of a Protellant Bithop or Dean,
ibid. artifices used to inflame the people
against her, 144. her behaviour at her
death, 146-149. sentiments of hiforians
concerning her, 149. her character, 150,
151. her person described, 151. is bu-
ried, first at Petcrborough and afterwards
at Weffminlter-Abbcy, 152. letters from
her, app. 78, 94, 99. her will, app. 80.
objections againlt her by Wallingham, app.
Xo1. what course to be taken with her,
ibid. a difirtation on the genuincneef; of
her letters to Bothwell. End of Vol. II.
Maxwell Lord, arrives from Spain and pre-

ares forces to join them, II. 163. his fol-
lowers difpcrfcd, he is taken pritoner, ibid.

Mclvil
I N

Melhil is sent by the French King to observe

the motions of the Qeen-Regent and her
adversaries, I. 65. sent to make up a dif-
ference between Elizabeth and Mary, 268.
brings about an appearance of fiiendflip
between them, ibid. is sent to inform Q.
Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 319.
puts a letter into the Queen's hand againt
her marriage with Bothwell, 355. is orced
to fly from court, 356. advises K. ames
to moderate measures upon his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators - II. 85
--- , Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his cha-

rater, I1. 46. zealously opposes Epifco-
pacy, ibid. declines the civil jurifdiaion
in ecclesiastical matters, go. is forced to
fly into England to avoid persecution ibid.
-- Sir Robert, sent by K. James to inter-

ceJe with Q Elizabeth for Q.Mary wlen
under sentence, I1. 142. executes his com-
milion with fidelity and zeal, 43. a me-
morial of his to the King, app 9.
*-- Malter of the houlhold to Q Mary,

takes his last farewel of her, II. 147. her
parting speech to him - 148
Mildmay, Sir Wm. sent by Q.Elizabeth with

proposals to Q: Mary - . 9
Monluc, Bilhop of Valence, employed by the

French to conclude a peace with England
and Scotland, I. 198. terms agreed to by
him -- 199-202
jointgomery appointed Archbishop of Glasgow,

11. 74. is refused and excommunicated by
the general Afembly for his immoral life

ibid.
Montmorency, Conflable of France, endeavours

to prevent the Dauphin's marriage with Q.
Mary, I. 133, 134. his prudent advice to
Henry II. 105. makes a slender appear-
ance in favour of Q. Mary - 11. 29
aMorton, Earl of, his irresolute condut as to

the Reformation, I. 183. accompanies Q.
Mary in a progress to the North, 246. in-
lligates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, 305.
takes the direclion of that enterprize, 307.
is admitted into the Queen's preience, who
promifis him a pardon, 309. is forced to
fly into England, 310. obtains his pardon
on Botlhwcll's interccfiion, 334, 335. feics
a caiket with letters from Q. Mary to Both-
well, 371. he is, by Q. Elizabethl's iiicer-
position, in favour with the King's party as-
ter tlhe murder of the Regent, 11. 3. ap-
pointed one of the conmifiioners to treat
with te (QIeen's party, . li i deii:,nlls
fiuftrates the meetilg, z. is entirely i-
fnuccd by the Court of Englanll, 8. colm-
mand'. the King's lbrces t .Leitli, Ol. hias
several ikiriilies with the Q cu!cn's forces,

ibid. closely besieges Edinburgh, and com-
mits great cruelties, ibid. a suspension pro-
cured by the Engli(h and French ambaffa-
dors, 27. a coalition of parties prevented
by him, 31, 32 he is chosen Regent, ibid.
his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of
Northumberland, 33. obtains the tempo-
ralities of Archbilhoprick of St. Andrew's,
ibid. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 36. attempts in vain to
gain Maitland and Kirkaldy, 37, 38. makes
a treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, 39.
gets poffeflion of the Caille of Edinburgh,
41. his severity to Kirkaldy and his bro-
ther, 43. his adminifiration becomes odi-
ous, 44. his various methods of gratifying
his avarice, ibid. 45. connives at the dif-
putes of the Clergy, 47. he irritates the
nobles, ibid. Argyll and Athol refuse to
answer his summons, ibid. - makes a vain
attempt againil Lord Claud Hamilton, 48.
discovers the designs of the nobles againti
himr and proposes to resign his office, 5o.
his resignation accepted by the King gives
universal joy, g5. obtains an approbation
of his conduEt and a pardon in ample form,
52. continues to watch the motions of his
adversaries, ibid. is forced to surrender the
Caflle of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes his au-
thority, 53. gains the Caitle of Stirling
and a feat in the Privy Council, 54. po-
cures a meeting of the Parliamfent at Stir-
ling, ibid. 55. his security ratified in it,
5,. forces are raised for and against him,
ibid. he is reconciled to his adversaries by
the interceflion of Q. Elizabeth, 56. is
fufpeaed of foul play at an entertainment
in his own house, 57. his illegal proceed-
ings againtl the family of Hamilton, ibid.
58. the King's new favourites undermine
him, 61. he endeavours to prevent them,
62. Q Elizabeth interposes in his favour,
63. is charged with being acceTary to the
late King's death, 6,. he is confined in
diffcrent prisons, 65. discourages an at-
tempt to relfcue hini, ibid. all his f iend.;
arc turned out of olfice, 6. he is tcd
and condemned, 69. hie resolute calin be-
haviour and confellion before a;id ;at his
death, 70, 71. his body is trec.tcd with ig-
nominy, 71.
nur,,ny, Earl of, late prior of St. Andrew's,

goes \ith a handlil of mnll againll:t untly,
1. 248. by ]ii' g rl.'tt il.ill ;lld courage he
galins a conIl ltce vilol'y , 2.;9. his gr.,t
is conlirnl d by l'a ) lia;lllit, 2,j-. . :ta
aigainll Iiin l>y l enIIO and l)ar& ', 2-4.
hl ;LVl'I;oll to) l) l'l ' .id h(ilctr -:odt '1-
vourites, 80. c.il outihw\\ll to 11landi ;a

tr :a],
I

trial, ibid. his reroln. so; olr-ofing Darn-
!y's marriage wit'l ti Qucen, 2Si. he
and his afirciees are e;ade the dopes of Q.
Elizabeth's policy, 283. co.certs to seize
Darnly and carry him to England, 284.
this prevented by the Q(een, ibid. avoids
aflafiination intended him bv Darnly, ibid.
evidences of these lots, zSj, 286. the
Queen's vafails are called to arms against
him, 286. he is fuimoned to appear be-
fore her. 287. is again summoned and
culawed on his non appearance, 288. is
forced to fly with his aobciates into Argyl-
flire, 289. they are interceded for by Q'
Elizabeth, 2qo. are pursued by the Queen,
and obliged to fly into England, 291. they
meet with unexpec&ed ill'treatment from Q,
Elizabeth, ibid. 292. courts Rizio to in-
tercede with the Qeen for him, 297.
many of his old friends follicit for him,
ibid. the Queen's favour how intercept-
ed, 98, 99. a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 301. this how prevented,
3o2. he and his associates arrive at Edin-
burgh, 309. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ibid. are alarmed at
the Queen's escape, but soon reconciled to
her, 310. he is appointed Regent during
the minority of King James VI. 379. his
harsh behaviour in a visit to the Queen,
ibid. the success of his wife adminiftra-
tion, 3I. procures many of the Queen's
party to join him, ibid. gets the places of
ilrength into his hands, 382. his office of
Regent confirmed by Parliament, 383. his
ievere and haughty behaviour difgults fc-
veral, 384. his adherents in great conftcr-
nation at the Queen's escape from Lochlc-
ven, 386. his prudent conduc on that
occasion, 387, Defeats the Queecn's army
at Langfide, 389. lie improves this vic-
tory, 400. his lenity to the prisoners, ibid.
he calls a parlialniclt, 402. is called upon
by Eliizabcthl to vindicate his conduAd,
o03. lie arrives at Yollk, 4o. his views
in this a:lTir, .0(,. complaints (.f the
Queen's comniillion crs aga;inll liim, 407.
he bllvcs with great rl'Ierve on this oc-
cafion, ibid. 4.c. ' this part of his:; condu(
accolunteC for, .oi. .1O9. intriguel; wit
the DuI)!: of Norlolk, i(,id. liis temands
frioni thc lnglifli comlnillionr, , o1°.
ainfivers the compla)i nt.s of the (Qfcn'; co;in-
iai(lion;r, witholt totuchin on lte inrl dr,
.310, 311. at1cc( to i:ive tile con:' reln(e
movi(led to\vcl linil tler, 1t. is ;fl'cnioiimltcly
rii''cv(ld by (. i.!i.;b l.'i. which o;'inds ( )
l'iiv', ,i 3 i, prc'/ailed on I)y lli/:dtllh
1 Ic(lt; I' M ary of the mu111lrd r, i 1'. pro-
duces hli, evidlicci,, 417. is. diiiulled by

Q. Eliwabeth without approving or con-
dcmning his conduct, 419. his party is
fccretly supportcd by her, 420. returns to
Scotland and by his vigorous conduct breaks
the Queen's party, 421. he receives pro-
pofals both from Q. Elizabeth and Q. MIary,
423. he disappoints Norfolk, 429. an ac-
count of his murder, 435, 436. his cha-
rai'cr, 436, 437. his death mutch lamented
by Q Elizabeth and the King's party, II. i,
much anrchy the ccnfcquence of it, . part
of a letter of his, app. 58. his heir mur-
dered by tlh Earl of-Iuntly, II.. 176

N.
N A:e secretary to Q. Mary, is sent by her

with a letter, and preients to her son.

II. h59. wy difiilCed without feeing him,
ibid. is sent with offers of humble refigna-
tion to Q Elizabeth, oz. is seized and
sent prisoner to London, 127, 128. is pro-
duced an evidence againll her 135
AN'vi/difcovcrs and prevents Parry's dcfign to

murder Q. Elizabeth, II. 107, 103
Aoil'es, theirextenfive power, I. 18, 19. be-

come turbulent and formidable, zo. their
power greater in Scotland than in any other
kingdom. zi. the caules of this, 22--27.
their power of long duration, 32. it be-
comes intolerable to the Princes, ibid. they
are humbled in France and England, ibid.
but continue rigorous in Scotland, 33. dif-
cords among them encouraged, ibid. their
jurisdiction circumfcibed, 35. are greatly
mortified by IK. James V. 5i--59. are dif-
appointed in a cheme to hew their resent-
ment, 61. refteif to attend the King into
England, 6z. they seize the revenues of
the church, 206. resile to part with them
to the leforncd clcrlgy, 207, 215, z16.
di:flcnlfions amllOlng them , z .i a conven-
tion of them apiprove the QO;een's marriaged
to )Darnl, 22'. fcveral of theml recom-
mend jo;iw;vcll as a hulbll)d to her, 353,
a llr ange com;iination of theni on this occa-
sion, 3 51.. a iody of tllhem aflociate a;ailll her
andBlolhwll, 3( their diflirent views in this,
ibid. a parly of thelm ifvours the Queen
371. they are Inuch dlilfiri td by the good
conldu of' Murray, -31S, 38 . they arc
much provoked lby lMortln the c

jl lt, 11.

47. thinlk ofrc drcfs froi te ing, 4..
iiif'ufc fiufplicion of ithe KRegclt', power into
hibi, 49(. a mlcctitig o ,iilli c:ll.d by
liiin, r). a 1 uty

lt oft l tiel conljir aaili

thec Ni;,/i,' i.vomit., , 77. they lcizc his
pcrloii :111(i d tiiv C tlti oil, 7;). thleir ne-
gle.t (of, ii

and to t11; cllery, .

S.

thle Kingi ai ltcillis to rcconlilc their lC:tud
11and tnic tlhnei, 57. 1iu Lordls

nrcfolk, Duke of, appointed a commifioner

to hear the cause between Queen Mary and
her accusers, I. 405. forms -a scheme of
mounting the throne of Scotland, 408. in-
trigues with the Regent and Maitland with
that view, ibid, 409. he represents the'de.
mands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 410.
his farther negociations with refpe&t to
Mary, 424, 425. endeavours to conceal
his designs from Q. Elizabeth, 425. is im-
poi:ed on by the artifice of the Regent,
425, 426. gets the consent of many of
the English nobles, 426. his projet ap-
proved at foreign courts, 428. is disco-
vered and defeated by Q Elizabeth, 429.
flies to Norfolk, 430. he surrenders on a
fccond summons, and is sent prisoner to the
Tower, ibid. is set at liberty, and con-
tinues hisintrigues with QMary,II. 22. is
betrayed by his fecrctary, 23. is seized
with his dependants, and accused by them,
24. is executed, ibid.
Northurmberland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q.Mary, I. 431. his scheme
defeated, 432. he is seized by the Regent,
433. is delivered up to the governor of
Berwick, and put to death at York, II. 33.
Noltinghanm, Countess of, some account of the

tranfaion concerning the Earl of Eflex's
ring, II. 242.

0.
O C 'TAJIA NS, their itlitution and ex-

tensive powers, II. 191. they under-

mine the King's miniiters, ibid. become
odious, and a combination is formed againfl
them, ibid, 192. being split into fations,
and envied by the courtiers, they resign
their commission, 205.
Ogi/ie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John

Gordon in the fireets of Edinburgh, I. 245.
Olithann, Mailer of, joins the Ruthvcn con-

fpilrators, I. 77.
Oran'ge, Prince of; fends an agent into Scot-

land, Il. 67. his infirutions, ibid. is
afliflinated, 112.
I'Oci'/, commander of the French troops in

Scotland, endc;tvours to promote a war
wvithll ngl;anl, 1. 132. his dcfign firul.irted,
ibid. the numlber of troo)ps under his coni-

mand, 154. initigates the Queen Regent
to violent measures against the Reformers,
155. is sent by Q.Marv to demand a safe
conduA from Q Elizabeth, during her
voyage to Scotland, 224.

P.

A4 ISLE 1; Abbot of, arrives inScotland,
I. 87. creates a suspicion of the Earl of

Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent, ibid,
88. is made Archbilhop of St. Andrews,
99.
Paris, the maflacre of, II. 29, 30. rejoicings

of the pop;fh party on account of it, 30.
the coniternation and horror of the Pro-
telfants, ibid.
Parliament, the nature of their original con-

flitution, I. 65-67. particularly that of
Scotland, 67-S, 202. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 202. a dif-
ficulty flarted and anfvered, 203, 204.
their proceedings with regard to religion,
204. condemn thePopilh and approve the
Reformed Dorines, 2o05 several other
regulations of the iame endency, 206.
their validity called in queltion, 207. ex-
cced their.powers, 208. their proceedings
laid before the King and Queen, ibid.. a
parliament in favour of Bothwell, 351.
pass an at- in favour of the Reformation,
ib. 32. confirm the proceedings of the
confederates, 383. parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's parties, II. 16,
17. another of the Queen's adherents, S.
attaint upwards of 200 of their opponents,
ibid. a parliament at Stirling by the King's
party, 19. furprized by the Queen's ad-
herents, ibid. another at Stirling, 5.4, 5
one at Edinburgh, 61. and on the King's
being of age, 158. several new laws made
there, ib. 161. the fleirBarons admitted
into parliament, 16o.
Parry, Dotor, undc(rt;kcs to murder Q . l!i-

z;abcth. 11. 107. is encouragsedl by and
gets absolution fiom the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. o8. is c\e-
cuted, ibid.
Parl/ius, a lJclit, llliil('s .n book in ;vour

of the lntlanlt of Sp:ii's 'ielit of ftlcctilion
to the Crown of I'nglandl, 11. 18y.

M In nl

Pafqqinades and PiElures, accusing Bothwell of

Darnly's murder, 1. 343, 351. a law
made against them, 35'.
Patten, William, his account of the Scottish

antient military discipline, I. 103.
Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q.

Mary's keepers, 1I. 103. his rigid severity
to her, 109. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence; 125. his rude treatment of
her, 141. refuses to be concerned in pri-
vately afiaffinating her, 145. a letter from
him, App. o8.
Prce-v: , Bi:;op of Amiens, is appointed to

support the popish interet in Scotland, I.
172. drives the Queen Regent to violent
measures againfi the Protelants, ibid.
Perth, an infurre'tion of the Reformers there

against the Papilts, I. 1 x. its inhabitants
are f:vercly treated by the Queen Regent,
153. a French garrison placed there, ibid.
154. is besieged and taken by the Pro-
tefiants, 158. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's confpir.icy, II. 318.
'hi/lp II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen
of England, I. 118. reinforces his army
v ith her troops, 131. his great power, II.
i -z. joins in the holy league, ibid. re-
solves to invade and conquer England, 162.
his preparations for it dilatory, I66. his
design frufirated, ibid. meditates an inva-
sion of England through Scotland, 167.
intrigues with some Scots Lords with that
view, ibid. remits money to them, 186.

Pinuky, the battle of, I. 1oz.
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q Elizabeth,

deprives her of her kingdom, and absolves
her fubjets, 1I. 7.
Polly, one of Babington's conspirators against

Q.Elizabeth, 11. 123, discovers the plot,
124.
Poltror, a frantic zealot, affalinates the Duke

of Guise at the siege of Orleans, I. 25;.
Pcnt, Mr. Robert, a miniRer, and one of the

Lords of Seflion, protests againit laws op-
priclive to the Church, II. 93.
Popcry, where moll flourishing, 1. 120. what

kind prevailed in Scotland, ibid, 121. was
partly grastd on Hcathcnifm, 59. is
much hurt by the congregation, 205.
their doctrines condemned by parliament,
ibid. tli jurifdidion of their courts abo-

3

liihed, 206. their worship prohibited, ibid.
attempt in vain to gain Queen Mary's.fa-
vour, 234. the great influence of Popery,
299, 300.
Po.zer, the ballance of, the great consequence

of preserving it, II. 73.
Prejbyterian church government eftablilhed in

Scotland, I. 12. is confirmed by King
JamesVI. 177.
Proteyiants, in France, violently persecuted,

I. 167. are moderate on Q Mary's arrival
from France, 229. are employed by her'
in the adminifration, 230. a scheme for
fupprefing them all over Europe, 299. a
league formed for that. purpose, I. 112.
See Rformation.

R.

AMS AT, a favourite of K. James II.
narrowly escapes the fate of his aso-

ciates, I. 50. is appointed Captain of the
King's guard, and created Earl of Both-
well, 5 1. See Both-well.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French

to negociate a peace with England and
Scotland, I. 98. terms agreed on by
him, 200, 201.
Randolph, sent to encourage the congregation,

I. 180. (See App. i.) congratulates Q_
Mary's arrival in Scotland, 230. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh,
231. is imposed on by Q Mary in the
affair of her marriage with Darnly, 276.
sent into Scotland on the murder of Mur-
ray, II. 2. interposes for Morton, 66, 67.
flies from Scotland in the night, 68. is sent
again there, and concludes a treaty with
England, 123. fevera of his letters, App.
7, 14, 15, 24, 29, 30, 33.

Ratcli.; See Suijex.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland I, o.

account of its firit preachers, 11 . is much
influenced by England, 1 I z. two remark-
able instruments of promoting it, 113.
it makes great progress, 118. caufcs con-
tributing to promote it, 119. its advan-
tages over popery, 128. is favoured by
the Q( Regent, 133. an inflance of rc-
gard for it in Scotand, 134. the whole
party not chargeable with Cardinal Bea-

tOutl's

toun's murder, 41. a priess burnt for em-
bracing it, 142. the reformers violently per-
fecuted by the Archbilhop of St. Andrews,
ibid. are proteted by the Q Regent, ibid.
apply in vain to the popish clergy, 143. a
persecution againfi them pushed on by the
French interelt, 148. the preachers fum-
moned before the Regent, I49. they are
deceived and declared out-laws by her, i 5o.
a riotous infurreion of them at Perth
againi. the papists, i i. prepare to defend
themelves against the Queen, z52. con-
clude a treaty with her which she presently
breaks, 153. they take arms again againtL
the Qtieen, 155. infit on redreifing civil
as well as religious grievances, 156. the
influence of the reformation on liberty, ibid.
they besiege and take Perth, 5 8. they seize
Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
great violence on churches and monaiteries,
159. their conduft how accounted for,
ibid. an instance of their moderation, 160.
fix their residence at Edinburgh, 161. the
Queen prepares to attack hem, ibid.
make another treaty with her, 162. are
forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but al-
lowed the exercise of their religion, ibid.
demand the expulsion of the French army,
163. are aware of their danger from
France, 166. their party strengthened,
ibid. remonstrate against the French for-
tifying Leith, 171. take arms in their
own defence, 172, 173. remonltrateagain
to the Regent, 174. are highly incensed
at her imperious answer, ibid, 175. by
advice of a convention deprive the Queen
Dowager of the office of Regent, 176.
the foundations of this condut, ibid, 177.
the growth of it encouraged by parliament,
383. See Congregation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdition of I. 18
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belong-

ing, - - I. 18
Revenge, encouraged both by cutfom and

law, .- I. 34
Revenues of the church, proceedings of par-

liament concerning them, - I. 206
Ridolphi, an agent for the Pope at London ne-

gociates for Q Mary, II. 22. his argu-
ments with the D. of Norfolk. 23, 24

Rizio David, some account of him and his

rife, I. 275, 276. D)arnly's coniineSion
with him, 276. his good offices courted
by Murray, 297. his great intercft and
familiarity with the Queen, 303. incurs
the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lord, ibid. several
concurring causes of this, ibid, 304. a
combination formed to murderhim, 305.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace,

- - 307, 308
Romans invade Britain, I, 2. give the car-

lieft accounts of the Scots, - ibid.
Ross bishop of, zealously promotes Queen

Mary's interefi at London, II. 23, 24.
is confined to the Tower and threatened
with capital punishment, 25. is et at li-
berty and banished the kingdom, ibid.
some letters of his, App. - 53. 6
Rubay, a foreigner, made keeper of the

great feal of Scotland, - I. 129
Ruthbven Lord, the murder of Rizio propoled

to him by Darnly, I., 305. heads the con-
fpirators against him, 308. his part in
that tranfa&ion, ibid. is admitted into
the Queen's presence who promises him a
pardon, 309. did not repent of it at his
death, 315
--- created E. of Gowrie, he and his
associates seize the King, and remonflrate
against his favourites, 11. 77, 78. drive
them from him, ibid. their condu& ap-
proved in an assembly of the states, 8c.
the King escapes from them, 84. by Ar-
ran's influence violent measures are de-
termined against them, 86. Q. Eliza-
beth intercedes in their behalf, ibid, 87.
are declared guilty of high treason, 88.
take refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
are harshly treated by Q Elizabeth, 104.
a reconciliation with her brought about,
115, 116. return to Scotland and are re-
conciled to the King, 117. their mode-
ration on being reflored to their cltates and
honours, 1 8. their negleA of their
friends the clergy, ibid
___---- that name abolifled by parliament,

II. 229. fee Gocwrie.
.Ruihven raid, what, II. 72

M m 2 8.

S.

ADLER, Sir Ralph appointed com-
millioner to hear the cufe between Q:
Mary and her accusers, - I. 405
Sandilinds of Calder, lord St. John, sent to

lay the proceedings of the congregational
parliamecnt before the King and Queen in
France, 1. 208. is coldly received and dif-
millid without a ratification by them, 209
,Sa; '7,, a Spanish officer, his desperate refo-

liition to kill Q. Elizabeth, - ii. 122
s,,/ia/n, its antient hiitorv fabulous, I. 1.

the origin of the Scots, 2. their hifory
wh.1 rlemarkably obscure, 3. some account
of the riters of it, 4. is divided into
four peiiods, 5. a review of the third
;.-a, 6. some account of the controversy
concerning its independency, ibid.-lo.
this the cause of great animofities and much
bloodlhed, 11. the state of Scotland
when Bruce began his reign, 12. It be-
gins to have an influence on the fate of
ditlant nations, 76, 77. influence as to
the balance of power, 77. itate of Scot-
land at the birth of QMarv, 8. is in-
vaded by the Englifll, and ieveral places
burnt and plundered, 93. much alienated
from the English, ibid. 94. a peace con-
cluded between England, France and Scot-
land, 95. computation of damages done
by the English in Scotland, 94, 95 a new
breach with England, oo. is invaded by
a great English army, lo0. the Scots are
defeated with great slaughter, 102, 103.
their manner of fighting at that time, 103,
o14. a marriage agreed of their -young
Queen and the Dauphin of France, 107.
they soon repent this Itep, og. a fray at
Edinburgh occaions their utter aerfion to
the French, lo. this inflamed by another
incident, 129. they decline a war with Eng-
land, 131. fend rcprefentatives to witnels
Q.Mary's marriage, 134. their care as to
lihe marriage articles, ibid. 135. they rc-
fulf con;lcnt to the demnands of the French,
136. fionr of their deputies ill fpcced to be
ploifoned, 137. which much encreafes the
a'crfion, 138. grant the crown matrimo-

nial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to
the English for afiflance against the French,
180. 185. an Englilh fleet arrives for
that purpose, 9go. conclude a peace with
England and receive an English army, 191,
192. all parties agree in relenting the
French, 195. a treaty between England,
France and Scotland. 198, 199. both
English and French armies leave Scotland,
202. they rejoice much at the death of
the young King of France, 212. fend to
invite the Queen to Scotland, z26. rejec
proposals of an ambaflador from France,
217. slate of Scotland on Q Mary's re-
turn from France, 226. the great zeal of
the nation against popery, 229. the Scots
brought into contempt by QO Mary's con-
duta, 361. in a miserable condition after
the murder of Murray the regent, II. 17.
state of factions at that time in it, ibid. 8. a
league concluded between Scotland and
England, 120. a view of the revolutions
of Scotland since the accession of James
VI. 249-260. of the policy of the htate,
249-254. and of the church, 254, 255.
of the genius and talie as to learning, 256.

260
Scott of Buccleugh, enters and ravages Eng-

land after the murder of Murray the re-
gent, II. . z. the design of this 4
Scroop Lord, sent to condole with, and watch

Q. Mary on her arrivalin England I. 395
Sefion Lords and Court of, by whom firit ap-

pointed, 1. 36. the President and one half
of their number of the Clergy, 1 3
Seton Lord, affills the Queen Regent in de-

fending Leifh, I. 183
Sre.sjinbuy Earl of, the charge of Q. Mary's

person committed to him, 1. 412. why
removed from that office, II. o12. is ap-
pointed to fee the sentence against her exe-
cuted, 145. letter from him and theEarl
of Kent concerning her death, Appendix,

I Io
Sinclair, Bishop of Ross, a zealous Papill,

concurs as pefident of the feflion in ac-
quitting Knox of a charge of treason, I.

260
Somefe t Duke of, enters Scotland with a pow-

erful army, I. oi. is reduced to a very

critical

crit'cal situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, 102. this viEtory
'why of little advantage, 104. cabals
against him at the Court of England, force
him to return, ibid. is ruined by his ene.
mies o10
Spain, great warlike preparations there, II.

16z. See Armado. the Infanta of, let up
as candidate for the Crown of England, 89
spani/h ambassador is ordered to leave Eng-

land, for intriguing in favour of Q. Mary,

II. 25
Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's con-

fpiracy, If. 220- 2z2. is executed, 222
S/cwart, James, prior of St. Andrews, is ap-

pointed to carry the Crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin of Fiance, . 140. See
S/. Adrecws.
---- Efme, Lord Aubigne,. his arrival in

Scotland, I. 60. See Aubigny.
- - Capt. James, his character, II. 6.

becomes a favourite of King James, ibid.
accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 64. is created Earl of Arran. See
Arran.
_- Col. William, commander of the

King's guard, contributes to his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators, 11. 84. seize3
the Eal of Gowrie 91
--- -Francis, created Earl of Bothwell,

II. 167. joins in a treasonable correfpon-
dence with the Popish lords, G68. See
Both.c-/l
-, ail of that name combine in opposing

the Chancellor, II. 181
SIti/'ng seized by the Reformers, . 158. a

parliament there by the Kiing's party, II.
19. is furprized by the Queen's adherents,
and a great fray ensues, ibid, 20
Strozzi Leon, commands a body of French

sent into Scotland, I. 99. reduces and de-
miolithe3 the Callle of St. Andrews, ibid.
See F ,ra'ice.
Siti'c,,J , a remarkable statute concerning it,

I. ICO
S,/pric/riI.rs proposed in the Church of Scot-

land, 1. 214. ltheit bufines, ibid
Si,,l? Earl of, one of the commiflioncrs to

hear the caufc between Q. Mary and her
accufts, . o05 . afflmbles a powerful

4

army on the borders, II. 3. he and Scroop
enter, and ravage Scotland 5

T.

AX upon land, firl proposed in Scot-

T land 1. 130
7cThogizorton Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador ex-

traordinary from Q Elizabeth, to oppo!e
Q. Mary's marriage with Darnly, I. 279.
his interceflion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 297, 298. his enmity to Cecil,
ibid. is ent to negociate Q: Mary's libe-
ration, 372. is refused access to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his,
Appen. 37, 39, 43, 46, 48, 49
--- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy

against Q. Elizabeth 11. 95. at firfl lie
denies, but afterwards confesses it, ib, 96.
reflestions on his confeffioa, ib. 97. is
executed, 97
Tichbourne designs to aaflinate Q Elizabeth,

II. 123
T'rea,/o, persons guilty of it, tried after the:r

death by the law of Scotland, II. 221

U.
V ILMOT, a foreigner, made comptroller

of Scotland, I 129
Unic. of Scotland and England, the advan-

tages of, II. 253, 254

W,.
WJi7 -LL4CE Sir William, bravely aftrted

theliberty of his country, 1. o
1'a/fiugnamz, secretary to Q Elizabeth, sent

amballadorto K. James VI. 11.87. returns
without success, ibid. mn.kes a favourable
report to her concerning Jmcs 88. inter-
poses in favour of Ql Mary, 2oz. dilco-
vcrs Babington's conlpiracy, 124. why a
determiincd and invetcrarte enelmy to
Mary, 127. a letter froni him, Appen.

oo
l/'rci 'k EFrl of, uceds Some t inthe go-

vernment of England, I. 1oS.
11/'i/mi/,', the coiIcrencc concerning .

A ;ar)', tere, I. 411

1!; .',,:, ,.',
,, ,,'.

ffi'morland Eirl of, actempts a rebellion in

favour of QMary, I. 431. his cheroes
discovered and dcfeated, 432, 433. he
escapes to the Netherlands, ibid,
If'iihs.:, the prior of, impiifoned for cele-

brating Mass I. 2;8
Willox, a minister, declares for refiflance and

deprivation oftyrannical rulers, I. 176. is
called to attend the Q. Dowagcr on her
death-bed, 197
ijlar, George, his illegal execution, reveng-
ed, 1. 46.
Witchcraft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland,

JI. 175
Wotton, dean of Canterbury, employed to

negociate a peace with France, I. 198
---- - Sir Edward, sent by Queen Elizabeth

into Scotland, II. 114. his charaater, ib.

soon gets into high favour with King Jamer,
it. procures a league between the two
kingdoms, ibid, ii5. undernmines Arran's
power, 15. torms a plot on King James,
and forced to withdraw without taking
leave, ii6, 117

Y.

OR K, the conferences there concerning
y Qeen Mary, I. 45

Z.

0 UCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q.
Elizabeth, to remonstrate againtfKing

James's lenity te the Popiih lords, 11. 85.
his treachery on that occasion, ib.
F N I S.

X.
