THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

B OO K S IX. AND X.

CONTAINING
'THE HISTOR OF VIRGINIA,

TO THE YEAR i688; AND
THE HISTORT OF NEW ENGLAND,

TO THE YEAR X652.

/

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS

MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN ; T. CADELL Jun. and W. DAIEss (Succcfors to Mr. CAD E LI.)

in the Strand; and E. BALFvOUR, Edinburgh.

MDCCXCVI.

( /,

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEME NT.
THE original plan of my Father, the late Dr. Robertson,

with refpea to the Hiftory.of America, compre-

hended not only an account of the discovery of that
country,. and of the conquefis and colonies of the Spa-
niards, but embraced also the history of the Britifll and
Portuguese Establishments in the New World, and of
the Settlements made by the several nations of Europe
in the Weft India Islands. It was his intention not to
have published any part-df the Work until the whole
was completed. In the Preface to his Hiflory of Ame-
rica, he has fRated the reasons which induced him to
depart from that resolution, and to publifi the Two Vo-
lumes which contain an account of the discovery of the
New World, and of the progress of the Spanish arms and
colonies in that quarter of the globe. He fays,.' he had
" made some progress in the Hiflory of British America ;"
and he announces his intention to return to that part of
his Work, as loon as the ferment which at that time pre-
vailed in the Britifli Colonies in America,, fiould subside,,

and,

[ vi ]

and regular government be re-eftabliihed. Various
causes concurred in preventing him from fulfilling his
intention.

DURING the course of a tedious illness, which ie early

foresaw would have a fatal termination, Dr. Robertson
at different times destroyed many of his- papers. But
after his death, I found that part of the History of
British America which he had wrote many years be-
fore, and which is now offered.to the Public. It is
written with his own hand, as all his Works were;
it is as carefully corrected as any part of his Manu-
scripts which I have ever seen; and he had thought
it worthy of being preserved, as it escaped the flames
to which so many other papers had been commit-
ted. I read it with the utmost attention; but, be-
fore I came to any resolution about the publication,
I put the MS. into the hands of some of those friends
whom my Father used to consult on such occasions, as
it would have been rashness and presumption in me to
have trusted to my own partial decision. It was per-
used by some other persons also, in whose taste and
judgment I have the greatest confidence: by all of them
I was encouraged to offer it to the Public, as a frag-
ment curious and interefling in itself, and hot inferior
to any of my Father's Works.

WHI-EN

[ vii ]

WHEN I determined to follow that advice, it was a cir-

cumftance of great weight with me, that as I never could
think myself at liberty to destroy those papers which
my Father had thought worthy of being preserved, and
as I could not know into whose hands they might here-
after fall, I confidered it as certain that they would be
published at some future period, when they might
meet with an Editor, who, not being atuated by the
fame sacred regard for the reputation of the Author
which I feel, might make alterations and additions, and
obtrude the whole on the Public as a genuine and au-
thentic work. The MS. is now published, such as it was
left by the Author; nor have I presumed to make any
addition, alteration, or corretion whatever.

WM ROBERTSON..

QUE EN-STREET,.
EDINBURGH,.
April 1796.

yuft publiJhed

Written by the fame AUTHOR,
i. The HISTORY of AMERICA, Vol.I. and II. Illufrated with Maps.

21. 2s.

+** ANOTHER EDITION, in 3,Vols. 8vo. 18 s.
2. The HISTORY of SCOTLAND, during the Reigns of Queen MARY and

of King JAMES VI. till his Accession to the Crown of England; with a Re-
view of the Scottish History previous to that Period; and an APPENDIX,
containing Original Papers. The Sixth Edition, 2 Vols. 4to. 2.1. 2s.

*,* ANOTHER EDITION, in 2 Vols. 8vo. 14 s.

t;+t ANOTHER EDITION, ill one Vol. 7 s. 6d.
3. The HISTORY of the REIGN of the EMPEROR CHARLES V. with

a View of the Progress of Society in EUROPE, from the Subversion of the
Roman Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century. Embellished
with four Plates, elegantly engraved. 3 Vols. 4to. 31. 3 s.

*,* ANOTHER EDITION, in 4 Vols. 8vo. 1 1. 4 s.
4. An HISTORICAL DISQUISITION concerning the Knowledge which the

Ancients had of INDIA, and ,the Progress of Trade with that Country
prior to the Discovery of the Cape of Good Hope. 4to. 18 s.

*,* ANOTHER EDITION, in one Vol. 8vo. 8s.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IX.

THE
.H I S T 0 R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

BOOK IX.
-T H.E dominions of Great Britain in America are next in B o o K

extent to those of Spain. Its acquisitions there are a re- Ix.

compence due to those enterprising talents which prompted the Spirit of ad-
English to enter early on the career of discovery, and to pursue venture
it with persevering ardour. England was the second nation England by
that ventured to visit the New.World. The account of Co- dicovbries
lumbus's fiiccefsful voyage filled all Europe with astonishment
and admiration. But in England it did something more; it
excited a vehement desire of emulating the glory of Spain, and
of aiming to obtain some share in those advantages which were
expeAed in this new field opened to national activity. The
attention of the English court had been turned towards the
discovery of unknown countries, by its negociation with Bar-
tholemew Columbus. Henry VII. having listened to his pro-
positions with a more favourable ear than could have been ex-

B peaed

B o o K peced from a cautious, distrustful prince, averse by habit as
i ..- _r well as by temper to new and hazardous projeas, he was more

easily induced to approve of a voyage for discovery, proposed
by some of his own fubjeeds, soon after the return of Christopher
Columbus.

unkilfunefs BUT though the English had spirit to form this scheme, they
in nvigation. had not, at that period, attained to such skill in navigation as

qualified them for carrying it into execution. From the incon-
fiderate ambition of its monarchs, the nation had long wafted
its genius and activity in pernicious and ineffectual efforts to
conquer France. When this ill-direaed ardour began to abate,
the fatal contest between the houses of York and Lancaster
turned the arms of one half of the kingdom against the other,
and exhausted the vigour of both. During the course of two
centuries, while industry and commerce were making gradual
progress, both in the south and north of Europe, the Eng-
lifh continued so blind to the advantages of their own situation,
that they hardly began to bend their thoughts towards those
objecs and pursuits, to which they are indebted for their present
opulence and power. While the trading vessels of Italy, Spain,
and Portugal, as well as those of the Hans Towns, visited the
moit remote ports in Europe, and carried on an active intercourse
with its various nations, the English did little more than creep
along their own coasts, in small barks, which conveyed the pro-
ductions of one county to another. Their commerce was al-
most wholly passive. Their wants were supplied by firangers ;
and whatever necessary or luxury of life their own country did
not yield, was imported in foreign bottoms. Tlhe cross of St.

George

George was seldom displayed beyond the precinas of the narrow B o o K
seas. Hardly any Engliih flip traded with Spain'or Portugal, Ix.
before the beginning of the fifteenth century; and half a cen-
tury more elapsed before the English mariners became so adven-
turous as to enter the Mediterranean.

IN this infancy of navigation, Henry could not commit the Expedition

from Bristol,
condu& of an armament, destined to explore unknown regions, under the

'to ~~~~~~~~~his r

wn i~~~ubcommand of

to his own fubjets. He inverfed Giovanni Gaboto, a Venetian Cabot.
adventurer, who had fettled in Bristol, with the chief command;
and issued a commission to him and his three sons, empowering
them to fail, under the banner of England, towards the east,
north, or weft, in order to discover countries unoccupied by any
Chriflian state; to take possession of them in his name, and to
carry on an exclusive trade with the inhabitants, under con-
dition of payirg a fifth part of the free profit on every voyage
to the crown. This commission was granted on March 5th,
1495, in less than two years after the return of Columbus from
America *. 'But Cabot (for that is the name he assumed in
England, and by which he is belt known) did not set out on
his voyage for two years. He, together with his second bon
Sebastian, embarked at Bristol, on board a flip furnished by the 1497.
king, and was accompanied by four finall barks, fitted out by May.
the merchants of that city.

As in that age the most eminent navigators, formed by the Cabot disco.
inftrutions of Columbus, or animated by his example, were fousdland

* Hakluyt, iii. 4.

B a guided

B O O K guided by ideas derived from his superior knowledge and expe-

Ix.
v _s rience, Cabot had adopted the system of that great man, con-

and fails cerning the probability of opening a new and shorter passage to
coattofVir- the East Indies, by holding a western course. The opinion
ginia. which Columbus had formed, with refpe&. to the islands which

he had discovered, was universally received. They were sup-
posed to lie contiguous to the great continent of India, and to
constitute a'part of the vast countries comprehended under that
general name. Cabot, accordingly, deemed it probable, that
by steering to the north-west, he might reach India by a ihorter
course than that which Columbus had taken, and hoped to fall
in with the coast of Cathay, or China, of whose fertility and
opulence the descriptions of Marco Polo had excited high ideas.
After failing for some weeks due weft, and nearly on the paral-
lel of the port from which he took his departure, he discovered
a large island, which he called Prima Vifla, and his sailors New-
foundland; and in a few days he descried a smaller isle, to
June 24. which he gave the name of St. John. He landed on both

there, made some observations on their foil and producions,
and brought off three of the natives. Continuing his course
westward, he soon reached the continent of North America,
and failed along it from, the fifty-fixth to the thirty-eighth de-
gree of latitude, from the coast of Labrador to that of Vir-
ginia. As his chief objec was to discover some inlet that
might open a passage to the weft, it does not appear that he
landed any where during this extensive run; and he returned
to England, without attempting either settlement or conquest
in any part of that continent *.

* Monfon's Naval TraCts, in Churchill's Collet. iii. 211.

IF it had been Henry's purpose to prosecute the objea B o o K

of the commission given by him to Cabot, and to take pof- . I
session of the countries which he had discovered, the success of Henry does

not profit by

this voyage must have answered his most sanguine expecations. Cabot's dif-
His fubjets were, undoubtedly, the first Europeans who had covery
visited that part of the American continent, and were entitled
to whatever right of property prior discovery is supposed to
confer. Countries which stretched in an uninterrupted course
through such a large portion of the temperate zone, opened a
profped of fettling to advantage under mild climates, and in a
fertile foil. But by the time that Cabot returned to England, he
found both the state of affairs and the king's inclination un-
favourable to any scheme the execution of which would have
required tranquillity and leisure. Henry was involved in a war
with Scotland, and his kingdom was not yet fully composed
after the commotion excited by a formidable infurrecion of his
own fubjets in the weft. An ambassador from Ferdinand of
Arragon was then in London; and as Henry set a high value
upon the friendship of that monarch, for whose charater he
profefied much admiration, perhaps from its similarity to his
own, and was endeavouring to strengthen their union by ne-
gociating the marriage which afterwards took place between his
eldest son and the princess Catharine, he was cautious of giving
any offence to a prince, jealous to excess of all his rights.
From the position of the islands and continent which Cabot
had discovered, it was evident that they lay within the limits
of the ample donative which the bounty of Alexander VI.
had conferred upon Ferdinand and Isabella. No person, in that
age, queltioned the validity of a papal grant; and Ferdinand

13 was

B O O K was not of a temper to relinquish any claim to which: he had a

Ix.
_ x shadow of title. Submission to the authority of the Pope, and

deference for an ally whom he courted, seem to have concurred
with Henry's own situation, in determining. him to abandon a
scheme, in which he had engaged with some degree of ardour
and expectation. No attempt towards discovery was made in
England during the remainder of his reign; and Sebastian
Cabot, finding no encouragement for his active talents there,
entered into the service of Spain M.

enor his im TTHIS is the most probable account of the sudden cessation of
mediate fuc* .
ceflors. Henry's activity, after such success in his first essay as might

have encouraged him to persevere. The advantages of com-
merce, as well as its nature, were so little underifood in
England about this period, that by an ad of parliament
in the year I488, the taking of interest for the use of money
was prohibited under severe penalties t. And by another
law, the profit arising fromr dealing in bills of exchange was
condemned as favouring of ufuryt . It is not surprising,
then, that no great'effort should be made to extend trade, by a

Some schemes of discovery seem to have been formed in England towards the

beginning of the sixteenth century. But as there is no other memorial of them,
than what remains in a patent granted by the king to the adventurers, it is pro-
bable that they were feeble or abortive proje&s. If any attempt had been made
in consequence of this patent, it would not have escaped the knowledge of
a compiler so industrious and inquisitive as Hakluyt. In his patent, Henry
reftrias the adventurers from encroaching on the countries discovercd by the
kings of Portugal, or any other prince in confederacy with England. Rymer's
Fccdcra, vol. xiii, p. 37.

t 3 Hen. VII. ce,. $ 3 Hen. VII. c. 6.

nation

nation whose commercial ideas were still so crude and illiberal. B o o K

IX.

But it is more difficult to discover what prevented this scheme
of Henry VII. from being resumed during the reigns of his son
and grandson; and to give any reason why no attempt was
made, either to explore the northern continent of America
more fully, or to fettle in it. Henry VIII. was frequently at
open enmity with Spain: the value of the Spaniih acquisitions
in America had become so well known, as might have excited
his desire to obtain some footing in those opulent regions; and
during a considerable part of his reign, the prohibitions in a
papal bull would not have refirained him from making en-
croachment upon the Spanish dominions. But the reign of
Henry was not favourable to the progress of discovery. Du-
ring one period of it, the active part which he took in the as-
fairs of the continent, and the vigour with which he engaged
in the contest between the two mighty rivals, Charles V. and
Francis I, gave full occupation to the enterprising spirit both of
the king and of his nobility. During another period of his ad-
ministration, his famous controversy with the court of Rome
kept the nation in perpetual agitation and suspense. Engrossed
by those objeds, neither the king nor the nobles had inclination
or leisure to turn their attention to new pursuits; and without
their patronage and aid, the commercial part of the nation
was too inconsiderable to make any effort of consequence.
Though England, by its total reparation from the church of
Rome, soon after the accession of Edward VI., disclaimed that
authority, which, by its presumptuous partition of the globe
between two favourite nations, circumscribed the aaivity of
every other state within very narrow limits, yet a feeble mi-

nority,
-n ",'**'

B O O K nority, diftraated with faaion, was not a junture for forming

Ix,
lx schemes of doubtful success and remote utility. The bigotry of

Mary, and her marriage with Philip, disposed her to pay a sacred
regard to that grant of the Holy See, which veiled in a husband,
on whom she doated, an exclusive right to every part of the New
World. Thus, through a singular succession of various causes,
fixty-one years elapsed from the time that the English dif-
covered North America, during which their monarchs gave
little attention to that country which was destined to be an-
nexed to their crown, and to be a chief source of its opulence
and power.

Expedition BUT though the public contributed little towards the pro-
to South
America, un- grefs of discovery, naval ikill, knowledge of commerce, and
der the com- a spirit of enterprize, began to spread among the English. Du-
mand of Se-
baftian Ca- ring the reign of Henry VIII. several new channels of trade

were opened, and private adventurers visited remote countries
with which England had formerly no intercourse. Some mer-
chants of Bristol having fitted out two ships for the southern re-
gions of America, committed the conduct of them to Sebastian
1516. Cabot, who had quitted the service of Spain. He visited the

coasts of Brasil, and touched at the islands of Hispaniola and
Puerto Rico; and though this voyage seems not to have been
beneficial to the adventurers, it extended the sphere of English
navigation, and added to the national stock of nautical science *.
Though disappointed in their expectations of profit in this first
essay, the merchants were not discouraged. They sent, fuc-

* Hakluyt, iii. 498.

ceflively,

ceffively several vessels from different ports towards the fame B o o K

Ix.

quarter, and seem to have carried on an interloping trade in - _
the Portuguese settlements with success *. Nor was it only
towards the weft, that the activity of the Englifll was direced.
Other merchants began to extend their commercial views to
the east; and by eftablifling an intercourse with several islands
in the Archipelago, and with some of the towns on the coast
of Syria, they found a new market for woollen cloths, (the
only manufature which the nation had begun to cultivate,) and
supplied their countrymen with various productions of the east,
formerly unknown, or received from the Venetians at an exor-
bitant price t.

BUT the discovery of a ihorter passage to the East Indies, Unruccersful

by the north-west, was still the favourite projet of the nation, difcove pa
which beheld, with envy, the vast wealth that flowed into north -weft
Portugal, from its commerce with those regions. The scheme indies.
was accordingly twice resumed under the long administration of 1527 and
Henry VIII.; first, with some slender aid from the king, and 1536.
then by private merchants. Both voyages were disastrous and
unsuccessful. In the former, one of the ships was loft. In the
latter, the stock of provisions was so ill-proportioned to the
number of the crew, that although they were but fix months at
sea, many perished with hunger, and the survivors were con-
strained to support life by feeding on the bodies of their dead
companions..

H*akluyt, iii. 700. + Ibid. ii. 96, &c.
X Ibid. i. 213, &c. iii. 129, 130.

c Is'Fr l

B o o K THE vigour of the commercial spirit did not relax in the

lX.
, -v _* reign of Edward VI. The great fishery on the banks of New-

Wiloughby foundland became an objec of attention; and from some re-
fails in search gulations for the encouragement of that branch of trade, it
of a north-
ealt passage. seems to have been prosecuted with ativity and success*.

But the profpeE of opening a communication with China and
the Spice Islands, by some other route than round the Cape of
Good Hope, fiill continued to allure the English, more than
any scheme of adventure. Cabot,. whose opinion was deferu-
edly of high authority in whatever related to naval enterprise,
warmly urged the English to make another attempt to discover
this pafRage. As it had been thrice searched for in vain, by fleer-
ing towards the north-west, he proposed that a trial lhould now
be made by the north-east ; and supported this advice by such.
plausible reasons and, conjeatures, as excited sanguine expeat-
ations. of success. Several noblemen and persons of rank, to-
gether with some principal merchants, having associated for this
purpose, were incorporated, by a charter from the king, under
the title of The Company of Merchant Adventurers for the
Discovery of Regions, Dominions, Islands, and Places. un-
known. Cabot, who was appointed governor of this. com-
1553. pany, soon fitted out two flips and a bark,. furnished with in-

ftrutions in his. own hand, which discover the great extent
both of his naval skill and mercantile sagacity.

SIR Hugh Willoughby, who was entrufled with the comn-
May 1o. mand, flood direlly northwards along the coast of Norway,,

* I-akluyt, iii. 131.

and

and doubled the North Cape. But in that tempestuous ocean, B o o K
his finall squadron was separated in a violent fiorm. Wil-
loughby's ship and the bark took refuge in an obscure harbour in
a desert part of Ruffian Lapland, where he and all his com-
panions were frozen to death. Richard Chancelour, the cap- Willoughby
tain of the other vessel, was more fortunate; he entered the oi of his
White Sea, and wintered in safety at Archangel. Though no ships sliters

at Arch.

veflel of any foreign nation had ever visited that quarter of the angel.
globe before, the inhabitants received their new visitors with an
hospitality which would have done honour to a more polilhed
people. The English learned there, that this was a province of
a vast empire, subjet to the Great Duke or Czar of Muscovy,
who resided in a great city twelve hundred miles from Arch-
angel. Chancelour, with a spirit becoming an officer em- The captain

vifitsMofcow.

ployed in an expedition for discovery, did not hesitate a mo-
ment about the part which he ought to take, and set out for
that distant capital. On his arrival in Moscow, he was ad-
mitted to audience, and delivered a letter which the captain of
each ihip had received from Edward V1. for the sovereign of
whatever country they flould discover, to John Vafilowitz,
who at that time filled the Ruffian throne. John, though he
ruled over his fubjeEts with the cruelty and caprice of a barba-
rous despot, was not destitute of political sagacity. He in-
ftantly perceived the happy confequenecs that might flow from
opening an intercourse between his dominions and the weflern
nations of Europe; and, delighted with the fortunate event to
which he was indebted for this unexpected benefit, he treated
Chancelour with great rcfpec ; and, by a letter to.the king of Fl,. I55.

c 2 England,

B O X0 K England, invited his fubjets to trade in the Ruffian dominions,.
i..--- with ample promises of protection and favour .

Trade open- CHANCELOUR, on his return, found Mary feated on the
ed with
Russia. Englilh throne. The success of this voyage, the discovery of a

new course of navigation, the eflablifhment of commerce with a
vast empire, the name of which was then hardly known in the
weft, and the hope of arriving, in this diretion, at those re-
gions which had been so long the object of desire, excited a
wonderful ardour to prosecute the design with greater vigour.
Mary, implicitly guided by her hulband in every at of admi-
niftration, was not unwilling to turn the commercial activity of
her subje&s towards a quarter, where it could not excite the
jealousy of Spain, by encroaching on its pofleffions in the New
World. She wrote to John Vafilowitz in the most refpedful
terms, courting his friendihip. She confirmed the charter of
Edward VI., empowered Chancelour, and two agents appointed
-by the Company, to negociate with the Czar in her name; and
according to the spirit of that age, Ihe granted an exclusive
right of trade with Russia to the Corporation of Merchant Ad-
venturers t. In virtue of this, they not only eflablifhed an
aative and gainful commerce with Russia, but, in hopes of
reaching China, they pushed their discoveries eastwards to the
coast of Nova Zembla, the Straits of Waigatz, and towards the
mouth of the great river Oby. But in those frozen seas, which
Nature seems not to have destined for navigation, they were ex-
posed to innumerable disasters, and met with successive di'fap-
pointments.

Hlakluyt, i. 226, &c. t Ibid. i. 258, &c.

NoR

NOR were their attempts to open a communication with B o o K

Ix.

India made only in this channel. They appointed some of _
their factors to accompany the Ruffian caravans, which tra- C mmlunica-

tion with In-

velled into Persia by the way of AlLracan and the Caspian Sea, dia by land.
inftruting them to penctrate as far as pollible towards the east,
and to endeavour, not only to cftablifl a trade with those coun-
tries, but to acquire every information that might afford any
light towards the discovery of a passage to China by tlhe north-
east . Notwithstanding a variety of dangers to which they
were exposed in travelling through so many provinces, inha-
bited by fierce and licentious nations, some of these' facors
reached Bokara, in the province of Chorafan; and though
prevented from advancing farther by the civil wars which defo-
lated the country, they returned to Europe with some hopes of
extending the commerce of the Company into Persia, and with
much intelligence concerning the state of those remote.regions
of the east -t.

THE successful progress of the Merchant Adventurers in dif- Expedition to

ll: coast of

covery, rouzed the emulation of their countrymen, and turned Africa.
their aclivity into new channels. A commercial intercourse,
hitherto unattempted by the English, having been opened with
the coaft.of Barbary, the.fpccimens which that afforded of the
valuable producions of Africa, invited folne enlterprifing na-
vigators to visit the more remote provinces of that quarter of the
globe. They failed along its western shore, traded in different
ports on both fides of the Line, and after acquiring considerable
knowledge of those countries, returned with a cargo of gold-

Hakluyt. i. 3o-1. 1 Ibld. i. 310, &c.

dufft,

s 00 K 'dust, ivory, and other rich commodities, little known at that

Ix. X_ ,, time in England. This commerce with Africa seems to have

been pursued with vigour, and was at that time no less inno-
cent than lucrative; for as the English had then no demand for
slaves, they carried it on for many years, without violating the
rights of humanity. Thus far did the English advance during
a period which may be confidered as the infant state of their
navigation and commerce; and feeble as its Reps at that time
may appear to us, we trace them with an 'interefling curiosity,
and look back with fatisfadion to the early essays of that spirit
which we now behold in the full maturity of its strength.
Even in those first efforts of the Englith, an intelligent observer
will discern presages of their future improvement. As loon as
the activity of the nation was put in motion, it.took various di-
rections, and exerted itself in each with that Rteady, persevering
industry, which is the foul and guide of commerce. Neither
discouragcd by the hardships and dangers to which they were
exposed in those northern seas which they first attempted to
explore, nor afraid of venturing into the sultry climates of the
torrid zone, the English, during the reigns of Henry VIIi.,
*Edward VI., and Mary, opened some of tthe most considerable
sources of their commercial opulence, and gave a beginning to
their trade with Turkey, with Africa, with Russia, and with
Newfoundland.

Re;gn ofR El- BY the progress lhich England had already made in navi-
zabeth aufpi-p gation and commerce, it was now prepared for advancing far,
cious to dif.
covcry. ther; and on the acceflion of Elizabeth to the throne, a period

commenced, extremely aufpieious to this spirit which was riling

8 in

in the nation.. The domestic tranquillity of the kingdom, main- B ' o K
tained; almost without. interruption, during the course. of a long _ .
and prosperous reign; the peace with foreign nations, that sub-
fited more than twenty years after Elizabeth was feated on
the throne; the Queen's attentive economy, which exempted
her fubjeds from the burden of taxes oppressive to trade.; the
popularity of her administration; were all favourable to com-
mercial enterplife, and called it forth into vigorous exertion.
The discerning eye of Elizabeth having early perceived that the
security of a kingdom, environed by the sea, depended on its
naval force, the began her government with adding to the num-
ber and strength of the royal navy; which, during a factious.
minority, and a reign intent on no object but that of fuppreifT.
ing heresy, had been neglected, and suffered to- decay. She
filled her arsenals with naval flores; she built several flips of
great force, according to the ideas of that age, and encouraged
her fubjets to imitate her example, that they might no longer
depend on foreigners, from whom the English had hitherto
purchased all vefiels of any considerable burden *. By those
efforts, the tfill of the Englilh artificers was improved, the
numbcr of sailors increased, and the attention of the public
turned to the navy, as the most important national objec. In,
flead of abandoning any of the new channels of commerce
which had been opened in the three preceding reigns, the
English frequented them with greater assiduity, and the pa,
tronage of their fovcreign addlcd vigour to all their efforts. In
order to fccure to them the continuance of their cxclufive trade

* Camu. Annalcs. p. 70. edit. .61 ;.fol.

with

B O O K with Rutifa, Elizabeth ciiltv;iated the connection with John Va-

IX- , filowitz, which had been formned by her predecessor, and, by

successive embassies, gained his confidence so thoroughly, that
the English enjoyed that lucrative privilege during his long
reign. She encouraged the Company of Merchant Adven-
turers, whose monopoly of the Ruffian trade was confirmed by
a& of parliament *, to resume their design of penetrating into
i56z. Persia by land. Their second attempt, conducted with greater

prudence, or undertaken at a more favourable juncure than
the first, was more successful. Their agents arrived in the
Persian court, and obtained such protection and immunities
from the Shah, that for a course of years they carried on a
gainful commerce in his kingdom t; and by frequenting the
various provinces of Persia, became so well acquainted with the
vast rrches of the east, as strengthened their design of opening
a more dire& intercourse with those fertile regions by sea.

Frobiflier BUT as every effort to accomplish this by the riorth-eaft had
Makes three
ttcmpts to proved abortive, a scheme was formed, under the patronage of
difcotver te the Earl of Warwick, the head of the enterprising family of
north-we[t
pallage. Dudley, to make a new attempt, by holding an opposite course

by the north-west. The condut of this enterprise was com-
mitted to Martin Frobisher, an officer of experience and re-

;576, ,577, putation. In three successive voyages he explored the inhofpi-
and 1578. table coast of Labrador, and that of Greenland, (to which Eli-

zabeth gave the name of Mcta Incognita,) without discovering
any probable appearance of that passage to India for which he

* Hakluyt, i. 369. 1 Ibid, i. 344, &c.

fought.

fought. This new disappointment was sensibly felt, and might B o o K

Ix.

have damped the spirit of naval enterprize among the English,
if it had not resumed fresh vigour, amidst the general exult- Sir Francis

Drake fails

ation of the nation, upon the successful expedition of Francis round the
Drake. That bold navigator, emulous of the glory which Ma- world
gellan had acquired by failing round the globe, formed a scheme
of attempting a voyage, which all Europe had admired for sixty
years, without venturing to follow the Portuguese discoverer in
his adventurous course. Drake undertook this with a feeble
squadron, in which the largest vessel did not exceed a hundred
tons, and he accomplished it, with no less credit to himself,
than honour to his country. Even in this voyage, conducted
with other views, Drake seems not to have been inattentive to
the favourite objec of his countrymen, the discovery of a new
route to India. Before he quitted the Pacific Ocean, in order
to firetch towards the Phillippine islands, he ranged along the
coast of California, as high as the latitude of forty-two degrees
north, in hopes of discovering, on that fide, the communica-
tion between the two seas, which had so often been searched for
in vain on the other. But this was the only unsuccessful at-
tempt of Drake. The excessive cold of the climate, intolerable
to men who had long been accustomed to tropical heat, obliged
him to stop flort in his progress towards the north; and whe-
ther or not there be any paflage from the Pacific to the Atlantic
Ocean in that quarter, is a point still unafcertaincd *.

FROM this period, the Engliflh seem to have confided in their Entlufiarfn
own abilities and courage, as equal to any naval enterprize. of dircuvery

* Hakluyt, iii. 440. Camld. Annal. .or, &c.

D Thcy

B O O K They had now visited every region to which navigation ex-

X., tended in that age, and had rivalled the nation of highest re-

pute for naval skill in its most splendid exploit. But notwith-
standing the knowledge which they had acquired of the different
quarters of the globe, they had not hitherto attempted any set-
tlement out of their own country. Their merchants had not
yet acquired such a degree, either of wealth or of political in-
fluence, as were requisite towards carrying a scheme of colo-
nization into execution. Persons of noble birth were destitute
of the ideas and information which might have disposed them
to patronize such a design. The growing power of Spain, how-
ever, and the ascendant over the other nations of Europe to
which it had attained under Charles V. and his son, naturally
turned the attention of mankind towards the importance of those
settlements in the New World, to which they were so much
indebted for 'that pre-eminence. The intercourse between
Spain and England, during the reign of Philip and Mary; the
retort of the Spanish nobility to the English court, while Philip
resided there; the study of the Spanish language, which be-
came fashionable; and the translation of several histories of
America into English, diffused gradually through the nation a
more diftina: knowledge of the policy of Spain in planting its
colonies, and of the advantages which it derived from them.
When hostilities commenced between Elizabeth and Philip, the
profped of annoying Spain by sea opened a new career to the
enterprising spirit of the English nobility. Almost every emi-
nent leader of the age aimed at diftinguiihing himself by naval
exploits. That service, and the ideas connected with it, the
discovery of unknown countries, the eftablihiment of distant

colonies,

colonies, and the enriching of commerce by new commodities, B o o K
became familiar to persons of rank. x-

IN consequence of all those concurring causes, the English Sirs projea

of a colonyia

began seriously to form.plans of fettling colonies in those parts North Are-
of America, which hitherto they had only visited. The pro- ica.
jectors and patrons of these plans were mostly persons of rank
and influence. Among them, Sir Humphry Gilbert, of Comp-
ton in Devonshire, ought to be mentioned with the diftintion
due to the conductor of the first English colony to America.
He had early rendered himself conspicuous by his military
services both in France and Ireland; and having afterwards
turned his attention to naval affairs, he published a discourse
concerning the probability of a north-west passage, which dif-
covered no inconsiderable portion both of learning and inge-
nuity, mingled with the enthusiasm, the credulity, and fan-
guine expectations which incite men to new and hazardous
undertakings *. With those talents, he was deemed a proper
person to be employed in establishing a new colony, and easily
obtained from the Queen letters patent, vesting in him sufficient June 1,
powers for this purpose. 1578.

As this is the first charter to a colony, granted by the Crown Charter

granted by

of England, the articles in it merit particular attention, as they gQcen Eliza.
unfold the ideas of that age, with refped to the nature of such beth.
settlements. Elizabeth authorizes him to discover and take pof-
session of all remote and barbarous lands, unoccupied by any

* Hakluyt, iii. ii.

D 2 Chriftlan

B 0 0 1 Christian prince or people. She vests in him, his heirs and

IX.
I -,_j assigns for ever, the full right of property in the foil of those

countries whereof he shall take poffeflion. She permits such of
her fubjeds, as were willing to accompany Gilbert in his
voyage, to go and fettle in the countries which he shall plant.
She empowers him, his heirs and assigns, to dispose of whatever
portion of those lands he shall judge meet to persons fettled there,
in fee-fimple, according to the laws of England. She ordains,
that all the lands granted to Gilbert shall hold of the Crown
of England by homage, on payment of the fifth part of the gold
or silver ore found there. She confers upon him, his heirs and
assigns, the complete jurifdiaions and royalties, as well marine
as other, within the said lands and seas thereunto adjoining;
and as their common safety and interest would render good
government necessary in their new settlements, she gave Gil-
bert, his heirs and assigns, full power to convidc, punish,
pardon, govern, and rule, by their good discretion and policy,
as well in causes capital or criminal as civil, both marine and
other, all persons who shall from time to time fettle within the
said countries, according to such statutes, laws, and ordinances
as shall be by him, his heirs and assigns, devised and established
for their better government. She declared, that all who fettled
there ihould have and enjoy all the privileges of free denizens
and natives of England, any law, custom, or usage to the con-
trary notwithstanding. And finally, ihe prohibited all persons
from attempting to fettle within two hundred leagues of any
place which Sir Humphry Gilbert, or his aflbciates, shall have
occupied, during the space of fix years*.

* Hakluyt, iii. 135.

's ....

WITH those extraordinary powers, suited to the high notions B 0 o K

lx.

of authority and prerogative prevalent in England during the
sixteenth century, but very repugnant to more recent ideas Ftin faedi1
with refpea to the rights of free men, who voluntarily unite to
form a colony, Gilbert began to colleC associates, and to pre-
pare for embarkation. His own character, and the zealous es-
forts of his half-brother, Walter Ralegh, who, even in his early
youth, displayed those splendid talents, and that undaunted
spirit, which create admiration and confidence, soon procured
him a sufficient number of followers. But his success was not
suited either to the sanguine hopes of his countrymen, or to
the expence of his preparations. Two expeditions, both of
which he conduCted in person, ended disastrously. In the last, 158o.
he himself perished, without having effeCted his intended fettle-
ment on the continent' of America, or performing any thing
more worthy of notice, than the empty formality of taking
possession of the island of Newfoundland, in the name of his
sovereign. The dissensions among his officers; the licentious
and ungovernable spirit of some of his crew; his total ignorance
of the countries which he purposed to occupy; his misfortune
in approaching the continent too far towards the north, where
the inhospitable coast of Cape Breton did not invite them to
fettle; the shipwreck of his largest vessel; and above all, the
scanty provision which the funds of a private man could make
of what was requisite for eftablifluing a new colony, were the
true causes to which the failure of the enterprise mufft be im-
puted,not to any deficiency of abilities or resolution in its leader*.

* Hakluyt, iii. 143, &c.

BUT

B o o K BUT the miscarriage of a scheme, in which Gilbert had

Ix. lx_, wafted his fortune, did not discourage Ralcgh. He adopted all

The plbn re- his brother's ideas; and applying to the Qu!ecn, in whose fa-
fumed by Ra-
legh. vour he stood high at that time, he procured a patent, with
March4z6. jurifdition and prerogatives as ample as had been granted unto

Gilbert *. Ralegh, no less eager to execute than to undertake
April 27. the scheme, instantly dispatched two frnall vet'els, under the

command of Amadas and Barlow, two officers of trust, to visit
the countries which he intended to fettle, and to acquire some
previous knowledge of their coasts, their foil, and produtions.

Discovery of In order to avoid Gilbert's error, in holding too far north, they
Virglnia. took their course by the Canaries and the Weft India islands,

and approached the North American continent by the Gulph of
Florida. Unfortunately their chief researches were made in
that part of the country now known by the name of North Ca-
rolina, the province in America most destitute of commodious
harbours. They touched first at an island, which they call Wo-
kocon (probably Ocakoke), situated on the inlet into Pamplicoe
Sound, and then at Raonoke, near the mouth of Albemarle
Sound. In both, they had some intercourse with the natives,
whom they found to be savages, with all the charaderiftic
qualities of uncivilized life, bravery, aversion to labour, hofpi-
tality, a propensity to admire, and a willingness to exchange
their rude productions for Englifli commodities, especially for
iron, or any of the useful metals of which they were destitute.
After spending a few weeks in this traffic, and in viiiting tome
parts of the adjacent continent, Amadas and Barlow returned

* Hakluyt, iii. 243.

4 to

to England with two of the natives, and gave such rplendid de- B o IK
scriptions of the beauty of the country, the fertility of the foil, .
and the mildness of the climate, that Elizabeth, delighted with Sept. '.
the idea of occupying a territory, superior, so far, to the barren;
regions towards the north hitherto visited by her fubjeas, be-
fiowed on it the name of Virginia; as a memorial that this
happy discovery had been made under a virgin Queen M-

THEIR report encouraged Ralegh to haften his preparations Colony ella.

for taking pofleffion of such an inviting property. He fitted out Virginia by
a squadron of seven small ships, under the command of Sir Ri- Sir Richard

Greenville.

chard Greenville, a man of honourable birth, and of courage
so undaunted as to be conspicuous even in that gallant age.
But the spirit of that predatory war which the English carried
on against Spain, mingled with. this scheme of settlement; and-
on this account, as well as from unacquaintance with a more
direct and shorter course to North America, Greenville failed
by the Weft India islands. He spent some time in cruising
among these, and in taking prizes; so that it was towards the
elofe of June before he arrived on the coast of North America.
He touched at both the islands where Amadas and Barlow had
landed, and made some excursions into different parts of the
continent round Pamplicoe and Albemarle Sounds. But as,
unfortunately, he did not advance far enough towards the
north, to discover the noble Bay of Chefapeak, he eftablifled
the colony which he left on the island of Raonoke, an incom- AugUaf 25.
modious flation, without any safe harbour, and almost unin-
habited --.

* Hakluyt, iii. 24(. i Ibid. iii. 251.

Tins

B 0 0 K THIS colony confited only of one hundred and eighty per-

Ix.
_ ' _* Ifons, under the command of Captain Lane, assisted by some

Inridaing byf men of note, the most distinguished of whom was Harlot, an
aamine; re- eminent mathematician. Their chief employment, during a
turns to Eng-
land. residence of nine months, was to obtain a more extensive know-

ledge of the country; and their researches were carried on with
greater spirit, and reached farther than could have been expet-
ed from a colony so feeble, and in a station so disadvantageous.
But from the fame impatience of indigent adventurers to ac-
quire sudden wealth, which gave a wrong direcion to the in-
duftry of the Spaniards in their settlements, the greater part of
the English seem to have confidered nothing as worthy of at-
tention but mines of gold and silver. These they fought for,'
wherever they came; these they enquired after with unwearied
eagerness. The savages soon discovered the favourite objeas
which allured them, and artfully amused them with so many
tales concerning pearl fisheries, and rich mines of various me-
tals, that Lane and his companions wafted their time and
acivity in the chimerical pursuit of these, instead of labouring
to raise provisions for their own subsistence. On discovering
the deceit of the Indians, they were so much exasperated, that
from expoltulations and reproaches, they proceeded to open
186, hostility. The supplies of provisions which they had been ac-

customed to receive from the natives were of course withdrawn.
Through their own negligence, no other precaution had been
taken for their support. Ralegh, having engaged in a scheme
too expensive for his narrow funds, had not been able to fend
them that recruit of fiores with which Greenville had promised
to furnish them early in the spring. The colony, reduced to the

utmost

utmost distress, and on the point of perishing with famine, was B o o K

Ix.

preparing to disperse into different diftrits of. the country in A .
quest of food, when Sir Francis Drake appeared with his fleet, June r.
returning from a successful expedition against the Spaniards in
the Weft Indies. A scheme which he formed, of furnishing
Lane and his aflfciates with such supplies as might enable them
to remain with comfort in their station, was disappointed by
a sudden storm, in which a finall vefel that he destined for
their service was dashed to pieces; and as he could not supply
them with another, at their joint request, as they were worn out
with fatigue and famine, he carried them home to England *. J ne 19.

SUCH was the inauspicious beginning of the Englifhl fettle- Knowl.dge

ments in the New World; and after exciting high expecations, acquored in
this first attempt produced no effec but that of affording a more tiox.dl.
complete knowledge of the country; as it enabled Harlot, a
man of science and observation, to describe its foil, climate,
productions, and the manners of its inhabitants, with a degree
of accuracy which merits no inconsiderable praise, when com-
pared with the childish and marvellous tales publiihed by several
of the early visitants of the New World. There is another con-
sequence of this abortive colony important enough to entitle
it to a place in history. Lane and his aflbciates, by their con-
ftant intercourse with the Indians, had acquired a relilh for their
favourite enjoyment .of finoking tobacco; to the use of which, re or to-

bacco intro.

the credulity of that people not only ascribed a thousand imagi- daed in
nary virtues, but their superstition confidered the plant itself as Eugland.

* Hakluyt, iii. 255. Camd. Annal, 387.

I a gracious

B o o K a gracious gift of the gods, for the solace of human kind, and-

I'. the most acceptable offering which man can present to heaven *.

They brought with them a specimen of this new commo-
dity to England, and taught their countrymen the method of
using it; which Ralegh, and some young men of fashion,.
fondly adopted. From imitation of them, from love of novelty,
and from the favourable opinion of its salutary qualities enter-
tained by several physicians, the pracice spread among the Eng-
liIh. The Spaniards and Portuguese had, previous to this, intro-
duced it in other parts of Europe. This habit of taking tobacco
gradually extended from the extremities of the north to those of
the south, and in one form or other seems to be equally grateful
to the inhabitants of every climate; and by a singular caprice of
the human species, no less inexplicable than unexampled, (so be-
witching is the acquired taste for a weed of no manifest utility,
and at first not only unpleasant, but nauseous,) that it has be-
come almost as universal as the demands of those appetites ori-
ginally implanted in our nature. Smoking was the first mode of
taking tobacco in England; andwe learn from the comic writers
towards the close of the sixteenth century and the beginning of
the seventeenth, that this was deemed one of the accomplish-
ments of a man of fashion and spirit.

A FEW days after Drake departed from Roanoke, a small bark,

dispatched by Ralegh with a supply of tores for the colony,,
landed at the place where the English had fettled; but on find-
ing it deserted by their countrymen, they returned to England..

* Harlot ap. Hakluyt, iii. r. De Bry. America, Pars i.

9 The

The bark was hardly gone, when Sir Richard Greenville ap- B o o K

Ix.

peared with three ships. After searching in vain for the co- , x
lony which he had planted, without being able to learn what
had befallen it, he left fifteen of his crew to keep possession of
the island. This handful of men was soon overpowered and
cut in pieces by the savages *.

THOUGH all Ralegh's efforts to eftablifhl a colony in Virginia Ralegli's fe-

had hitherto proved abortive, and had been defeated by a fuc- to fettle a -
cession of difalfers and disappointments, neither his hopes nor lny in Vir-
resources were exhausted. Early in the following year, he 1587.
fitted out three ships, under the command of Captain John
White, who carried thither a colony more numerous than that
which had been fettled under Lane. On their arrival in Vir-
ginia, after viewing the face of the country covered with one con-
tinued forest, which to them appeared an uninhabited wild, as it
was occupied only by a few scattered tribes of savages, they dif-
covered that they were destitute of manythings which they deem-
ed essentially necessary towards their subsistence in such an un-
comfortable situation; and, with one voice, requested White, their
commander, to return to England, as the person among them
most likely to solicit, with efficacy, the supply on which de-
pended the existence of the colony. White landed in his na-
tive country at a most unfavourable season for the negociation
which he had undertaken. He found the nation in universal
alarm at the formidable preparations of Philip II. to invade Eng-
land, and colleaing all its force to oppofc the fleet to which lie
had arrogantly given the name of the Invincible Armada.

 Hakluyt, iii. 265. 283.

E 2 Ralegh,

B o o K Ralegh, Greenville, and all the most zealous patrons of the-

Ix.
_ , new settlement, were called to aCt a diftinguiihed part in the.
sss. operations of a year equally interesting and glorious to Eng-

land. Amidit danger so imminent, and during a contest for the
honour of their sovereign and the independence of their coun-
try, it was impossible to attend to a less important and remote

Colony pe- object. The unfortunate colony in Roanoke received no sup-
ine by fa- ply, and perished miserably by famine, or by the unrelenting

cruelty of those barbarians by whom they were surrounded.

Raleghaban- DURING the remainder of Elizabeth's reign, the scheme of
dons the de- establishing a colony in Virginia was not resumed. Ralegh,
sign of set-
ttinga colony with a mofl aspiring mind and extraordinary talents,, enlight-

ened by knowledge no less uncommon, had the spirit and the.
defects of a projector. Allured by new objects, and always
giving the preference to. such as were most splendid and ardu-
ous, he was apt to engage in undertakings so vast and so vari-
ous, as to be far beyond his power of accomplishing. He.
was now intent on peopling and improving a large diftria of
country in Ireland, of which he had obtained a. grant from the.
Queen. He was a deep adventurer in the scheme of fitting out
a powerful armament against Spain, in order to eftablilh Don.
Antonio on the throne of Portugal. He had begun to form his!
favourite, but visionary plan, of penetrating into the province'
of Guiana, where he fondly dreamed of taking possession of in-
exhaustible wealth, flowing from the richest mines in the New
World. Amidst this multiplicity of projets, of such promising'
appearance, and recommended by novelty, he naturally became
cold towards his ancient and hitherto unprofitable scheme of

fettling

fettling a colony in Virginia, and was easily induced to afflgn B 0 0 K
his right of property in that country, which he had never visited,. -
together with all the privileges contained in his patent, to Sir
Thomas Smith, and a company of merchants in London. This March,
company, satisfied with a paltry traffic carried on by a few
small barks,. made no attempt to take poffeflior of the country.
Thus, after a period of a hundred and fix years from the time
that Cabot discovered North America, in. the name of
Henry VII., and of twenty years from the time that Ralegh
planted the first colony, there was not a single Englilhman set-
tled there at the demise of Queen Elizabeth, in the year one
thousand fix hundred and three.

I HAVE already explained the causes of this, during the pe- circum-

fiances in

riod previous to the accession of Elizabeth. Other causes pro- Elizabeth's.
duced the fame effed under her administration. Though for reign unfa.

vourable to

one half of her reign England was engaged in no foreign war, colonization.
and commerce enjoyed that perfect security which is friendly
to its progress; though the glory of her latter years gave the
highest tone of elevation and vigour to the national spirit; the
Queen herself, from her extreme parsimony, and her aversion
to demand extraordinary supplies of her fubjeas, was more apt
to restrain than to second the ardent genius of her people. Se-
veral of the most splendid enterprizes in her reign were con-
certed and executed by private adventurers. All the schemes
for colonization were carried on by the funds of individuals,
without any public aid. Even the felicity of her government
was adverse to the eftablilhment of remote colonies. So power-

ful

B O O K ful is the attradion of -our native foil, and such our fortunate

ix. .IX _, partiality to the laws and manners of our own country, that

men seldom choose to abandon it, unless they be driven away
by oppreflion, or allured by vast profpeds of sudden wealth.
But the provinces of America in which the English attempted
to fettle did not, like those occupied by Spain, invite them
thither by any appearance of silver or golden mines. All their
hopes of gain were distant; and they saw that nothing could be
earned but by persevering exertions of industry. The maxims
of Elizabeth's adminifiration were, in their general tenor, so po-
pular, as did not force her fubjeds to emigrate, in order to
escape from the heavy or vexatious hand of power. It seems to
have been with difficulty that these slender bands of planters
were colleced, on which the writers of that age bellow the
name of the first and second Virginian colonies. The fulness
of time for English colonization was not yet arrived.

60o3. BuT the succession of the Scottish line to the crown of England

Reign of hastened its approach. James was hardly feated on the throne
James fa-
vourable to before he discovered his pacific intentions, and he soon termi-
the eflablifh-
ment ofcolo- nated the long war which had been carried on between Spain
nies. and England, by an amicable treaty. From that period, unin-

terrupted tranquillity continued during his reign. Many per-
sons of high rank, and of ardent ambition, to whom the war
with Spain had afforded constant employment, and presented
alluring profpets, not only of fame but of wealth, soon became
so impatient of languishing at home without occupation or oh-
jea, that their invention was oa the firetch to find fame exer-

cife

cife for their activity and talents. To both these, North Ame- B o o K
rica seemed to open a new field, and schemes of carrying _
colonies thither became more general and more popular.

A VOYAGE, undertaken by Bartholemew Gofnold in the Dire& course

last year of the Queen, facilitated, as well as encouraged, the land to orth
execution of these schemes. He failed from Falmouth in a America firsl

attempted by

small bark, with thirty-two men. Instead of following former Gofnold.
navigators in their unnecessary circuit by the Weft India isles
and the Gulf of Florida, Gofnold steered due weft, as nearly
as the winds would permit, and was the first Engliih commander
who reached America by this ihorter and more direct course.
That part of the continent which he first descried was a pro-
montory in the province now called Mafiachufets Bay, to which
he gave the name of Cape Cod. Holding along the coast, as it
fretched towards the south-west7 he touched at two islands, one
of which he called Martha's Vineyard, the other Elizabeth's
fland; and visited the adjoining continent,and traded with its
inhabitants. He and his companions were so much delighted
every where with the inviting aspea of the country, that not-
withstanding the smallness of their number, a part of them con-
sented to remain there. But when they had leisure to reflec
upon the fate of former settlers in America, they retraded a re-
solution formed in the firfi warmth of their admiration; and
Gofnold returned to England in less than four months from the
time of his departure *.

* Purchas, iv. p. 1647.

TIls

B Ox0 K THIS voyage, however inconsiderable it may appear, had
L-._---. important effets. The Engliih now discovered the asped of
Consequences
of Golnold's the American continent to be extremely inviting far to the
voyage. north of the place where they had formerly attempted to

fettle. The coast of a vafi country, stretching through the
most desirable climates, lay before them. The richness of its
virgin foil promised a certain recompence to their industry.
In its interior provinces unexpe&ed sources of wealth might
open, and unknown objects of commerce might be found. Its
diltance from England was diminiihed almost a third part, by
the new course which Gofnold had pointed out. Plans for
eftaliifhing colonies began to be formed in different parts of the
kingdom; and before there were ripe for execution, one small
vessel was sent out by the merchants of Bristol, another by
the Earl of Southampton and Lord Arundel of Wardour, in or-
, der to learn whether Gofnold's account of the country was to

be confidered as a just representation of its slate, or as the ex-
aggerated description of a fond discoverer. Both returned with
a full confirmation of his veracity, and with the addition of so
many new circumstances in favour of the country, acquired by
a more extensive view of it, as greatly increased the desire of
planting it.

Hakluyt im- 'THE most aCive and efficacious promoter of this was Ri-
roves thel chard Hakluyt, prebendary of Weitminfter, to whom England
and naval c
Cni navtha is more indebted for its American poffiefions than to any man
WIIl of that
age. of that age. Formed under a kinfinan of the fame name,

eminent for naval and cdmmercial knowledge, he imbibed a

similar

finilar taste' and'applied earl.y-.to the ltudy of geography :and B 0 K
navigation. .These favourite, sciences engrossed his attention,
and to 'diffuse: a:relifh-for them was the'great .objeetaof his life.
In order.to excite his countrymen to'naval enterprize, by flat-
tering their nltion- '.vanity, he published, in the year .one thou-
iand, five hundred and eighty-nine, his valuable collection of
vpyages and discov-eries .made by Englishmen., In :order to
i'upply th. en with what informationl might. be derived from the
egperience of the most successful foreign navigators, he'tranf-
lated some of the belt accounts of the progress of the Spaniards
and, Por,tuguese ,in :their voyages both to the ,Eaft.and Weft
Indies, into the Engliih tongue. He was.confiilted with refped
to :nany of the: :attempts towards discovery. or colonization
during the la.tter part of Elizabeth's, reign. He.correfponded.
with the officers who conducted them, direced their researches
to proper objects, and published the hifory of their exploits.
By.the zealous: endeavo.urs of a perion, equally refpet-ed by
men:of rank and. men of business, many of both, orders fornied .
an a.otiation to establish colonies in,America, and petitioned
the king for the sanction of his authority to warrant the execu-
tion of their plans.,

JATES, who prided hinfelf on his, profound fkcill'in the anles di-

hfcience of governmelnt, and who had turned his attention to cafl of:
confider'the advantages which might be derived from colonies, Northl Ame-

.

. , ,  t rica into two

at a time:*whcn he patroniicd a fcheine tor planting them in parts;
iome of the ruder provinces of his, ancicnt'kingdom, with a
view of introducing induRry and civilization there ,
c was now

*
', * I*Ilil. of Scotland, ii. 239.

1 '1 110

. ,P

'
t

B 0 K no lets fond of direaing the afive genius of his Englilh sub-

Ix.
. .j.-. , jets towards occupations not repugnant to his own pacific max..

ims, and listened with a favourable ear to their application.
But as the extent as' well as value of the American continent
began now to be better known, a grant of the whole of such a
vast region to any one body of men, however refpedable, ap-
peared to him an a& of impolitic and profuse liberality. For
this reason, he divided that portion of North America, which
firetches from the thirty-fourth to the forty-fifth degree of la-
titude, into two diftrids, nearly equal; the one called the first
or south colony of Virginia; the other, the second or north

1606. colony. He authorized Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Stm-
April o1. mers, Richard Hakluyt, and their associates, mostly resident in

London, to fettle any part of the former which they ihould
choose, and vested in them a right of property to the land ex-
tending along the coast fifty miles on each fide of the place of
their first habitation, and reaching into the interior country a

and grants hundred miles.' The latter diftrit he allotted, as the place of
charters to ~
to compa- settlement, to sundry knights, gentlemen, and merchants of
nies. Bristol, Plymouth, and other parts in the weft of England,

with a similar grant of territory. Neither the ^monarch who
issued this charter, nor his fubjeas who received it, had any
conception that they were proceeding to lay the foundation of
mighty and opulent states. What James granted was nothing
more than a simple charter of corporation to a trading company,
e nempowering the members of it to have a common feal, and to
aft as a body politic. But as the objed for which they affoci,.:
ated was new, the plan eftabliffied for the adminifiration of their
affairs was uncommon. Infead-.of ,the power usually granted

8 .. to,

^ ; , v '**
~

to corporations, of electing officers and framing by-laws for the B o K
conduct of their own operations, the supreme government
of the colonies to be fettled was veited in a council resident in Te"rC of

these char.

England, to be named by the king, according to such laws and ters.
ordinances as should be given under his figtn manual; and the
subordinate jurlfdiaion was committed to a council resident in
America, which was likewise to be nominated by the king, and
to at conformably to his inftrutions. To this important
clause, which regulated the form of their confitution, was added,
the concession of several, immunities, to encourage persons to
fettle in the intended colonies. Some of there were the fame
which had been granted to Gilbert and Ralegh; such as the fe-
curing to the emigrants and their descendants all the rights of
denizens, in the fame manner as if they had remained or had
been born in England; and granting them the privilege of
holding their lands in America by the freest and leafl burden-
some tenure. Others were more favourable than those granted
by Elizabeth. He permitted whatever was neceflary for the
sustenance or commerce of the new colonies to be exported
from England, during the space of seven years, without paying
any duty; and as a farther incitement to indufiry, lie granted
them liberty of trade with other nations, and appropriated the
duty to be levied on foreign commodities, for twcnty-one years,
as a fund for the benefit of thic colony *.

I N this singular charter, the contentspf which have been little neti. o(

tilcl'e char '
attended to by the hitforians of Alfierica, Ibme articles arc as tcrs.

Sith. HIift. of Virginia, p. 35. Append. p. i, Purchas, v, 1T63.

l' 2 llt l

B o o K unfavourable to the rights of the colonists, as others are to the

interest of. the parent tate.. By placing the legislative and exe-
cutive powers in a council nominated by the crown, and.guided
by its inftruaions, every person fettling in America seems to
be bereaved of the noblest privilege of a free mnan; by the un-
limited permiflion of trade with foreigners, the.parent state ,is
deprived of that, exclusive commerce which has been deemed
the chief advantage resulting from the eflablifhment of colonies..
But in the infancy of colonization, and without the guidance
of observation or experience, the ideas of men with refped to
the mode of forming new settlements, were not fully unfolded,.
or properly arranged. At a period when they could not soresea
the future grandeur and importance of the communities which
they were about to call into existence, they were ill .qualified to.
concert the belt plan for governing trhem. Besides, the English
of that age,: accuftomerd to the high, prerogative and arbitrary,
rule of their monarchs, w ere not animated withfuch liberal fen-
timents, either concerning,their own personal, or political rights,,
as have become familiar in the more mature and improved state
of their conflitution.

Colonies of WITHOUT hesitation or relucance the proprietors of both
Virginia and
New E'3ng- colonies prepared to execute their refpedive plans; and under
land. the authority of a charter, which would now be rejected with

disdain, as a violent invasion of the sacred and inalienable
rights of liberty, the'firft permanent settlements of the English
in America were established. From this period, the progress of
the two provinces of Virginia and New England form a regular
and conneCted story. The former in the south, and the latter

in

in the north, may be confidered as the original and parent co- o o 0 K

Ix.

lonies; in imitation of which, and under whose ihelter, all the
others have been successively planted: and reared.

THE first attempts to occupy Virginia and New England' Advantages

of tracing the

were made by very feeble bodies of emigrants. As there set- hiflory of
tied, under great disadvantages, among tribes of savages, and in these colonies

in their'in-

an uncultivated desert; as they attained gradually, after long. sant fate.
struggles and many disasters, to that maturity of strength, and
order of policy, which entitles them to be confidered as re--
fpeaable ftatesb the history of their persevering eftfrts merits-
particular attention. It will exhibit a fpeaacle no less itriking
than inftruative, and presents an opportunity, which rarely oc- .
curs, of contemplating a society in. the first moment of its poli-
tical existence, and of observing how its spirit forms in its in-
sant state, how its principles begin' to unfold as it advances, and
how those charaeeriflic qualities, which distinguish its maturer
age, are fucceflrvely acquired. The account of the eflablifhment
of the other Eriglifh colonies, undertaken at periods when the
importance of fich pofleffions was better understood, and effect-
ed by more direct and vigorous exertions of the parent Rfate, is
'ess intereftirg. I shall therefore relate the history of the two.
original' colonies in detail. With refpea to the subsequent set-
tlements, some more general observations concerning the time,.
the motives, and. circumstances of their establishment, will be
sufficient. I begin with the history of Virginia, the most ancient'
and most valuable of the British colonies in North America.

TIrouGc

B O'0 K THOUGH many persons of diftinaion became proprietors in

Ix.

K - _ _ the company which undertook to plant a colony in Virginia, its
iiNewport, funds seem not to have been considerable, and its first effort was
fails for Vir-
ginia. certainly extremely feeble. A minall vessel of a hundred tons,

c ' and two barks, under the. command of Captain Newport, failed

with a hundred and five men, deflined to remain in the coun-
try. Some of these were of refpeaable families, particularly a
brother of the Earl of Northumberland, and several officers who.
had served with reputation in the reign of Elizabeth. New-
port, I know not for what reason, followed the ancient course

j607. by the Weft Indies, and did not reach the coast of North Ame.
April 26.

-rica for four months. But he approached it with better fortune
than any former navigator; for having, been driven, by the
violence of a storm, to the northward of Roanoke, the place
of his destination,. the first land he discovered was a promon-
Dircovers the tory which he called' Cape Henry, the southern boundary of

eapea. the Bay of Chefapeak. The English flood directly into that

spacious inlet, which seemed to invite them to enter; and as they
advanced, contemplated, with a mixture of delight and admi-
ration, that grand reservoir, into which are poured the wiaters
of all the vast rivers, which not only diffuse fertility through
that diftri& of America, but open the interior parts of the coun-
try to navigation, and render a commercial intercourse more
extensive and commodious than in any other region of the
globe. Newport, keeping along the southern. ihore, failed up
a river, which the natives called Powhalan, and to which he

,Sails up gave the name of James-River. After viewing its banks, during
Jamcs.River.

a run of above forty miles from its mouth, they all concluded

that

0*

that a country, where safe and convenient harbours seemed to B O O K
be numerous, would be a more suitable station for a trading co- ~ ..
lony, than the ihoally and dangerous coast to the south, on:
which their countrymen had formerly fettled. Here then they
determined to abide; and having chosen a proper spot for their
residence, they gave this infant settlement the name of James- Foundc.
'Town, which it frill retains; and though it has never become 'rowv
either populous or opulent, it can boast of being the most an-
cient habitation of the Englifli in the New World. But how-
ever well-chofen the situation might be, the members of the co-
lony were far from availing themselves of its advantages. Vio-
lent animofities had broke out among some of their leaders, du-
ring their voyage to Virginia. There did not ifbfide on their
arrival there. The first deed of the council, which affumned the
government in virtue of a commission brought from England Bad'adnmni-
under the real of the company, and opened on the day after they io.
landed, was an at of injustice. Captain Smith, who had been
appointed a member of the council, was excluded from his feat
at the board, by the mean jealousy of his colleagues, and not
only reduced to the condition of a private man, but of one sus-
peded. and watched by his superiors. This diminution of his
Influence, and refiraint on his activity, was an essential injury
to the colony, which at that juncture flood in need of the aid
of both. For foot after they began to fettle, the English were
involved in a war with the natives, partly by their own indifl
cretion, and partly by the suspicion and ferocity of those barba-
rians. And although the Indians, scattered over the countries Colony an.
adjacent to James-River, were divided into independent triecs,, loyed Iy the

I ndians.
to extremely feeble that hardly one of them could muller

above
A *

Bo o iO above two hundred warriors*, theyteazed and annoyed an in-

IX_ . sant colony by'their incessant hostilities. To this was added a

,calamity still more dreadful; the stock of provisions left for their
June s1. 'subsistence, on the departure of their ihips for England, was so

'scanty, and of such bad quality, that a scarcity, approaching

Suffers from almost to absolute famine, soon followed. Such poor unwhole-
,scarcity, and
Ithe unealth- iome fare brought on diseases, the violence of which was so
inefsof the .much increased by the sultry heat of the climate, and the moist-
'climate.

ure of a country covered with wood, that before the beginning
of September, one half of their number died, and most of the
survivors were sickly and dejeced. In fuchtrying extremities,
the comparative powers of every individual are discovered and
called forth, and each naturally takes that . ation, and assumes
that ascendant, to which he is entitled by his talents and force

Sciith called of mind. Every eye was now turned towards Smith,. and alj
to the corn-
mand, re- willingly devolved on him that authority, of which they had
proserity of formerly deprived him. His undaunted temper, deeply tinc-
,the colony. tured with the wild romantic spirit charaderiftic of military ad-

ventures in that age, was peculiarly suited to such a situation.
The vigour of his conflitution continued, fortunately, ftl un-
impaired by disease, and his mind was never appalled by danger.
He inflantly adopted the only plan that could five them from
deftrution. He began by surrounding Janms-Town with fuclh
rude fortifications as were a sufficient defence against the as-
faults of savages. He then marched, at the head of a finall
detachment, in quest of their enemies. Some tribes he gained
by caresses and presents, and procured from them a supply of

Purchas, vol. iv. 1692. Smith's Travels, p. 23.

provi-
M~~~~~~~~~~

provisions. Others he attacked with open force; and defeating B o o K

lx.

them on every occasion, whatever their superiority in numbers L _
might be, compelled them to impart to him some portion of
their winter stores. As the recompence of all his toils and dan-
-gers, he saw abundance and contentment re-eflablifled in the
colony, and hoped that he should be able to maintain them in
that happy state, until the arrival of ships from England in the
spring: but in one of his excursions he was surprised by a
numerous body of Indians, and in making his escape from
them, after a gallant defence, he funk to the neck in a swamp,
and was obliged to surrender. Though he knew well what a He is taken
dreadful fate awaits the prisoners of gavages, his pretence of he Indians.
mind did not forsake him. He shewed those who had taken
him captive a mariner's compass, and amused them with so many
wonderful accounts of its virtues, as filled them with astonish-
ment and veneration, which began to operate very powerfully
in his favour. They led him, however, in triumph through
various parts of the country, and conducted him at lass to
Powhatan, the most considerable Sachim in that part of Vir-
ginia. There the doom of death being pronounced, he was
led to the place of execution, and his head already bowed
down to receive the fatal blow, when that fond attachment of
the American women to their European invaders, the bene-
ficial effets of which the Spaniards often experienced, inter-
posed in his behalf. The favourite daughter of Powhataa
Tushed in between him and the executioner, and, by her in-
treaties and tears, prevailed on her father to fparc his life. The
beneficence of his deliverer, whom the early English writers
dignify with the title of the Princcfs Pocahultas, d(id not tcr-

C nlinate

B O O K minate here; she soon after procured his liberty, and sent him

Ix.

, -,,-.._ X from time to time seasonable presents of provisions *

On his re- SMITH, on his return to James-Town, found the colony re-
turn, he
finds the co- duced to thirty-eight persons, who, in despair, were preparing
SunYedmol to abandon a country which did not seem destined to be the

habitation of Englishmen. He employed caresses, threats, and
even violence, in order to prevent them from executing this fa-
tal resolution. With difficulty he prevailed on them to defer it
so long, that the succour anxiously expeced from England ar-

Seasonable rived. Plenty was instantly reflored; a hundred new planters
succours
from Eng- were added to their number, and an ample flock of whatever
land. was requisite for clearing and sowing the ground was delivered

to them. But an unlucky incident turned their attention from
that species of indufiry which alone could render their situation

ColoniRs de- comfortable. In a small stream of water that issued from a
ceived by the
appearances bank of sand near James-Town, a sediment of some shining
of gold. mineral substance, which had some resemblance of gold, was

discovered. At a time when the precious metals were con-
ceived to be the peculiar and only valuable productions of the
New World, when every mountain was supposed to contain a
treasure, and every rivulet was searched for its golden sands,
this appearance was fondly confidered as an infallible indication
of a mine. Every hand was eager to dig; large quantities of
this glittering dust were amassed. From some aflay of its na-
ture, made by an artist as unskilful as his companions were
credulous, it was pronounced to be extremely rich. " There

* Smith's Travels, p. A4, &c. Purchas, iv. 1704. Stith. p. 45, &c.

8 "was

was now" (fays Smith) " no talk, no hope, no work, but dig B o o K

Ix.

"gold, waih gold, refine gold *." With this imaginary wealth
the first vessel returning to England was loaded, while the cul-
ture of the land, and every useful occupation, were totally ne-
gleaed.

THE effecs of this fatal delusion were soon felt. Notwith- Smith un-

dertakes a

standing all the provident activity of Smith, in procuring corn survey of te
from the natives by traffic or by force, the colony began to sus- country.
ser as much as formerly from scarcity of food, and was wafted
by the fame distempers. In hopes of obtaining some relief,
Smith proposed, as they had not hitherto extended their re-
searches beyond the countries contiguous to James-River, to
open an intercourse with the more remote tribes, and to examine
into the state of culture and population among them. The ex-
ecution of this arduous design he undertook himself, in a finall
open boat, with a feeble crew, and a very scanty flock of pro-
visions. He began his survey at Cape Charles, and in two dif-
ferent excursions, which continued above four months, he ad-
vanced as far as the river Sufquehannah, which flows into the
bottom of the Bay. He visited all the countries both on the
east and weftllhores; he entered -most of the confidcrable creeks;
he failed up many of the great rivers as far as their falls. He
traded with some tribes; he fought with others; lie obfcrvcd
the nature,of the territory which they occupied, their mode of
subsistence, the peculiarities in their manners ; and left among all
a wonderful admiration either of the beneficence or valour of the

* Smith's Travels, p. 53.

c: 2 Englii(i.

B 0 0 K English. After failing above three thoufandmiles in a paltry veflel,

X^ _, ill fitted forfuch an extensive navigation, during which the hard-

ihips to which he was exposed, as well as the patience with
which he endured, and the fortitude with which he surmount-
ed them, equal whatever is related of the celebrated Spanish
discoverers in their most daring enterprizes, he returned to
James-Town; he brought with him an account of that large
portion of the American continent now comprehended in the
two provinces of Virginia and Maryland *, so full and exa&,
that after the progress of information and research for a century
and a half, his map exhibits no inaccurate view of both
countries, and is the original upon which all subsequent deli-
neations and descriptions have been formed t.

BUT whatever pleating profpea of future benefit might open

upon this complete discovery of a country formed by nature
to be the feat of an exclusive commerce, it afforded but little
relief for their present wants. The colony still depended for'
subsistence chiefly on supplies from the natives; as, after all the
efforts of their own industry, hardly thirty acres of ground
were yet cleared fb as to be capable of culture T:. By Smith's
attention, however, the stores of the English were so regularly
filled, that for some time they felt no considerable distress; and
at this junture a change was made in the constitution of the
company, which seemed to promise an increase of their security
and happiness. That supreme direction of all the company's
operations, which the king by his charter had reserved to himn-

* Smith's Travels, p. 65 &c. t Stith. p. 83. 1 Ibid. p.97.

felt,

self, discouraged persons of rank or property from becoming B o o K
members of a society so dependant on the arbitrary will of the I
crown. Upon a representation bs this to James, he granted 1609.
them a new charter, with more ample privileges. He enlarged Mayz1.

A new char-

the boundaries of the colony; he rendered the powers of the ter granted.
company, as a corporation, more explicit and complete; he
abolished the jurifdicAion of the council resident in Virginia;
he vested the government entirely in a council residing in
London; he granted to the proprietors of the company the
right of elecing the persons who were to compose this coun-
cil, by a majority of voices ; he authorized this council to efta-
blifh such laws, orders, and forms of government and magi-
ftracy, for the colony and plantation, as they in their discretion
Should think to be fittet for the good of the adventurers and
inhabitants there; he empowered them to nominate a governor
to have the administration of affairs in the colony, and to
carry their orders into execution *. In consequence of these
concefions, the company having acquired the power of regu-
lating all its own tranfadions, the number of proprietors in-
creased, and among them we find the most refpecable names
in the nation.

THE rfirt deed of the new council was to appoint Lord Lord Dela-

wareappoint-

Delaware governor and captain-general of their colony in cd governor
Virginia. To a person of his rank, those high-founding titles
could be no allurement; and by his thorough acquaintance
with the progrcfs and tate of the settlement, he knew enough

* Stith. Append. 8.

of

B O O K of the labour and difficulty with which an infant colony is

, x , reared, to expea any thing but anxiety and care in discharging

the duties of that delicate office. But from zeal to promote
an establishment which he expeded to prove so highly bene-
ficial to his country, he was willing to relinquish all the com-
forts of an honourable station, to undertake a long voyage
to fettle in an uncultivated region destitute of every accom-
modation to which he had been accustomed, and where he
foresaw that toil and trouble and danger awaited him. But as

Gates and he could not immediately leave England, the council dif-
Summcrs ap.
pointed to patched Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Summers, the
command till
the arrival of former of whom had been appointed lieutenant-general and
Lord Dela- the latter admiral, with nine ships and five hundred planters.

They carried with them commiflions, by which they were
empowered to supersede the jurifdidcion of the former council,
to proclaim Lord Delaware governor, and, until he should
arrive, to take the adminifiration of affairs into their own

Their ship hands. A violent hurricane separated the vessel in which
lranded on
the coast of Gates and Summers had embarked from the reft of the fleet,
Bermudas. and stranded it on the coast of Bermudas. The otherfhips arrived
Auguf 1. safely at James-Town. But the fate of their commanders was

unknown. Their commiflion for new-modelling the govern-
ment, and all other public papers, were supposed to be loft, toge-
ther with them. The present form of government, however,
was held to be abolished. No legal warrant could be produced
for establishing any other. Smith was not in a condition at
this juncture to aflert his own rights, or to at with his
wonted vigour. By an accidental explosion of gunpowder,
he had been so mifcrably scorchcd and mangled, that he was

incapable

incapable of moving, and under the necessity of committing B 0 0 K

Ix.

himself to the guidance of his friends, who carried him l_
aboard one of the ihips returning to England, in hopes that he
might recover by more flilful treatment than he could meet
with in Virginia '.

AFTER his departure, every thing tended fast to the wildest Anarchy in

anarchy. Fadion and discontent had often risen so high the colly.
among the old settlers, that they could hardly be kept within
bounds. The spirit of the new-comers was too ungovernable
to bear any restraint. Several among them of better rank
were such diflipated hopeless young men, as their friends were
glad to fend out in quest of whatever fortune might betide
them in a foreign land. Of the lower order, many were so
profligate or desperate, that their country was happy to throw
them out as nuisances in society. Such persons were little
capable of the regular subordination, the ftrid ceconomy,
and persevering industry, which their situation required.
The Indians observing their mifcondud, and that every pre-
caution for fuifenance or fafcty was neglected, not only with-
held the supplies of provisions which they were accustomed
to furnish, but harassed them with continual hostilities. All The colony
their subsistence was derived from the stores which they had fauined b
brought from England: these were soon consumed; then the
domestic animals sent out to breed in the country were devour-
ed; and by this inconsiderate waste, they were reduced to fiuch
extremity of famine, as not only to eat the most nauseous and
unwholesome roots and berries, but to feed on the bodies of

Purchas, iv. 1734, &c. Smith's Travels, p. 89. Stith. p. 102, &c.

the

B 0 O K the Indians whom they flew, and even on those of their com-

Ix.
L -- panions who funk under the oppression of such complicated

diltrefs. In less than fix months, of five hundred persons whom
Smith left in Virginia, only sixty remained; and these so feeble
and dejected, that they could not have survived for ten days, if
succour had not arrived-from a quarter whence they did not
expet it '

Gates and WVIEEN Gates and Summers were thrown ashore on Bermu-
Sumrnmers ar-
rive from das, fortunately not a single person on board their ship perished.

A considerable part of their provisions and stores too was saved,
and in that delightful spot,. Nature, with spontaneous bounty,
.presented to them such a variety of her productions, that a
hundred and fifty people subsisted in affluence for ten months
on an uninhabited island. Impatient, however, to escape from a
place where they were cut off from all intercourse with man-
kind, they set about building two barks with such tools and ma-
terials as they had, and by amazing efforts of perseverance and
ingenuity they finished them. In there they embarked, and
fleered diretly towards Virginia, in hopes of finding an ample
consolation for all their toils and dangers in the embraces of their
companions, and amidst the comforts of a flourilhing colony.
After a more prosperous navigation than they could have ex-
May z3. peed in their ill-conltruded vessels, they landed at James-

Town. But initcad of that joyful interview for which they
fondly looked, a fpcccacle prelentcd itself which firuck them

Find the co- with horror. They beheld the miserable remainder of their
lony in the
utmolt dif- countrymen emaciated with famine and fickncfs, funk in
trPls.

* Stitl p. 116. I'urchlas, iv. a74i.

deti)air,

despair, and in their figure and looks rather resembling fpecres B 0 0 K:

IX.

than human beings. As Gates and Summers, in full confidence -
of finding plenty of provisions in Virginia, had brought with
them no larger flock than was deemed necessary for their own
support during the voyage, their inability to afford relief to
their countrymen, added to the anguish with which they viewed
this unexpeAed scene of diflrefs. Nothing now remained but
instantly to abandon a country, where it'was impofiible to sub-
sift any longer; and though all that could be found in the
stores ofthe colony, when added to what remained of the flock
'brought from Bermudas, did not amount to more than was
sufficient to ftipport them for sixteen days, at the nioft scanty.
allowance, they set fail, in hopes of being able to reach New-
foundland, where they expected'to be relieved by their country-
men employed at that season in the fishery there

BuT it was nor the will of Heaven tlhatall the labour of the Are about to

return to

Englilh, in planting this colony, as well as all their hopes of England.
benefit from its future posterity, should be for ever loft. Be- Delaware ar-
fore Gates, and the melancholy companions 'of his voyage, had ives.
reached the mouth of James-River, they were met by Lord De-
laware, with three ships, that brought a large recruit of provi-
sions, a considerable number of new settlers, and every thing
requisite for defence or cultivation. By persuasion and au-
thority he prevailed on them to return to James-Town, where

* A minute and curious account of the fliipwreck of Gates and Summers,

and of their adventures in Bermudas, was composed by Strachy, a gentleman
who accompanied them, and was publifnid by Purchas, iv. 1734.

1'Gr^~ ~they

B OM K they found their fort, their magazines, and'houfes entire, which
. -w ' _ Sir Thomas Gates, by some happy chance, had preserved from

being set on fire at the time of their departure.. A society so
feeble and disordered in its frame required: a tender and fkil-

Wife admi- ful hand to cherish it, and restore its vigour. This it found in.
nifration of
Lord Dela. Lord Delaware: he searched into the causes of their misfor-

ware tunes, as far as he could discover them, amidst the. violence

of their mutual accusations.; but instead of exerting his power
in punishing crimes that were past, he employed his prudence
in healing their dissensions, and in guarding against a repetition
of the fame fatal errors. By unwearied assiduity, by the re-
fpet due to an amiable and beneficent character, by knowing
how to mingle severity with indulgence, and when to assume
the dignity of his office, as well as when to display the gen-
tlenefs natural to his own temper,. he gradually reconciled men.
corrupted by anarchy to subordination and discipline, he turn-
ed the attention of the idle and profligate to industry, and
taught the Indians again to reverence and dread the Englifhl

161 . name. Under such an administration, the colony began once

March 28.
His health more to assume a promising appearance; when unhappily for it,
obligeshim a complication of diseases brought on by the climate obliged
to return to
England. Lord Delaware to quit the country *; the government of which

he committed to Mr. Percy.

May o. I-IE was soon superseded by the arrival of Sir Thomas Dale;

Sir Thomas
Daleappoint- in whom the company had vested more absolute authority than
ed governor. in any of his predeceflors, impowering him to rule by martial
Martial law law; a 1hort code of which, founded on the pracice of the
eflablilhcd.

* Stitlh. p. 117. PurchsaB, iv. 1764.

armies

armies in the Low Countries, the most rigid militarytEhool at B O O K
that time in Europe, they sent out with him. This system of ._ "X
government is so violent and arbitrary, that even the Spaniards
themselves had not ventured to introduce it into their fettle-
ments; for among them, as soon as a plantation began, and the
arts of peace succeeded to the operations of war, the jurifdic-
tion of the civil..magiRfrate was uniformly established. But
however unconstitutional or oppressive this may appear, it was
adopted by the.advice of Sir Francis Baeon, the most enlight-
*ened philosopher, and 'one of the most eminent lawyers of the
age *. The company, well acquainted with the inefficacy of
every method which they had hitherto employed for restrain-
ing the unruly mutinous spirits which they had to govern,
eagerly adopted a plan that had the fan&ion of such high au-
thority to recommend it. .Happily for the colony, Sir Thomas
Dale, who was entrusted with this dangerous power, exercised
;it with prudence and moderation. By the vigour which the
summary mode of military punishment gave. to his adminiftra-
tion, he introduced into the colony more perfea order than
'had ever been established there; and at the fame time.he tem-
*pered its vigour with so much .discretion, that no alarm seems
to have been given by this formidable innovation I.

tlE regular form which the colony now began to aflilme, 1,32.

March iz.

'induced the King to issue a new charter for the encouragement Ncw charter
of the adventurers, by which he not onrly confirmed all their iffled to the

colony: new
-former privileges, and prolonged the term of exemption fiom privileges

contel rcd.
payment of duties on the commodities exported by them, but

* Bacon, Effayon 'Plaltations, r. 3, t Stith. p. 122.

.1, .2 granted

B O O K grantecathem more extensive .property, as well as more ample

Ix.
. _.-.- jurisdiction. All the islands lying within three hundred leagues

of the coast were annexed to the Province ,of Virginia. In
consequence of this, the company took poffefiion of Bermudas,.
and the other small isles discovered by Gates and Summers;
and at the fame time prepared to fend out a considerable rein-
forcement to the colony at James-Town. The expence of those
extraordinary efforts was defrayed by the profits of a lottery,
which amounted nearly to thirty thousand pounds. This 7ex-
pedient, they were authorized to employ by their new char-
ter *; and it is remarkable, as the firfl instance, in the English
history, of any public countenance given to this pernicious fe-
ducing mode of levying money. .But the House of Commons,
which towards the elboe of''iis reign began to observe every
measure of government with jealdds attention, having remorif-
trated against the institution as uncoiiftitutional and impolitic,
James recalled the licence under the fanaion of which it had
been established -

Cultivation BY the severe discipline of martial law, the activity of the
promoted. colonists was forced into a proper direaion, and exerted itself

in useful industry. This, aided by a fertile foil and favourable
climate, soon enabled them to raise such a large flock of pro-
visions, that they were no longer obliged to trust for fubfifance
to the precarious upplies which they obtained or extorted
from the Indians. In proportion as the Engliih became more
independent, the natives courted their friendflhip upon more
equal terms. The happy effecs of this were quickly felt. Sir

* Stith. p. 19t. Appendix, 23, &c. Ct Chalmers' Annals, i. 32.

Thomas

Thomas Dale concluded a treaty with one of their most power- B o o K
ful and warlike tribes, situated on the River Chickahominy, in I
which they consented to acknowledge themselves fubjeas of Treaty with

the natives.

the King of Great Britain, to assume henceforth the name of
Englishmen, to fend a body of their warriors to the afliftance
of the Englilh, as often as they took the field against any
enemy, and to deposit annually a stipulated quantity of Indian
corn in the store-houses of the colony *. An event, which the
early historians of Virginia relate with peculiar fatisfadion,
prepared the way for this union. Pocahuntas, the favourite
daughter of the great Chief Powhatan, to whose intercession
Captain Smith was indebted for his life, persevered in her partial
attachment to the English; and as she frequently visited their
settlements, where she was always received with refpedful hof-
pitality, her admiration of their arts and manners continued to
increase. During this intercourse, her beauty, which is repre-
sented as far superior to that of her countrywomen, made such
impression on the heart of Mr. Rolfe, a young man of ranik in Rolfemarriec

lie daughter

the colony, that he warmly solicited her to accept of him as a tofan lndian
hulband. Where manners are fimpje, courtship is not tedious. Chief.
Neither artifice prevents, nor ceremony forbids the heart from
declaring its sentiments. Pocahuntas readily gave her content;
Dale encouraged the alliance, and Powhatan did not disapprove
it. The marriage was celebrated with extraordinary pomp;
and from that period a friendly correspondcnce sublisted be-
tween the colony and all the tribes subjed to Powhatan, or
that flood in awe of his power. Rolfe and his Princess, (for

* llamer SolidaNarratio, ap, DeBry. Pars x. p. 33. Stith. p. 130.

by

-B O K by that name the writers of the last age always distinguish her,)

Ix.

. _ et out for England, where ihe was received by James and his

Queen with the refpea suited to her birth. Being carefully
inftruated in the principles of the Ghriftian faith, she was pub-
licly baptized, but died a few years after, on :her return to
'America, leaving one son; from whom are sprung some of the
rnoft refpeaable families in Virginia, who boast of their de-
scent from the race of the ancient rulers of their country *.
But notwithstanding the visible good effecs; of that alliance,
none of Rolfe's countrymen seem to have imitated the example
*which he set them, of intermarrying with the natives. Of all
the Europeans who have fettled in America, the Engliih have
availed themselves least of this obvious method of conciliating
the affetion of its original inhabitants; and, either from the
Ihynefs confpleuous 'in their national character, or from the
want of that pliant facility of manners which accommodates
itself to every situation, they have .been more aveffe than the
French and Portuguese, -or -eveni the Spaniards, from incorpo-
rating with-the native Americans. The Indians, courting such
an union, offered their daughters in marriage to their new
guests: and when they did not accept of the proffered alliance,
'they naturally imputed it to pride and to their contempt of
,them as an inferior order of beings t.

Land it)ir - DURING the:interval of tranquillity procured by the alli-
ginia firfl be-
comes pro- ance with Powhatan, an important change was made in the

pety. state of-the colony. Hitherto no right of private property in

* Hamer.Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry, Pars x. p. 23. Stith. p. 129. 146.
. Smith's Travels, p. 113. za . tI Beverley's Hilt. of Virg. p. 25.

land

land had been efiablifhed. The fields that were cleared had B o o K
been cultivated by the joint labour of the colonists; their pro-. -
dud was carried. to the common store-houses, and distributed.
weekly to every family, according to its number and exigen--
cies.. A society, destitute of the first advantage resulting from.
social union, was not formed to prosper. Industry, when not
excited by the idea of property in what was acquired by its
own efforts, made no vigorous exertion. The head had no
inducement to contrive, nor the hand to labour. The idle and:
improvident trusted entirely to what was issued from the com-
mon store ; the afliduity even of the fober and attentive relaxed,.
when. they perceived that others were to reap the fruit of their
toil; and it was computed, that the united industry of the co-
lony did not accomplish as much work in a week as might;
have been performed in a day, if each individual had laboured..
on his own account. In order to remedy this, Sir Thomas. Advantages.
Dale divided a considerable portion of the land into small lots,;
and granted one of these to each individual in: full property.
From the moment that industry had the certain profped of a.
recompence, it advanced with rapid progress; The articles of.
primary necessity were cultivated with so much attention as
secured the means of subsistence; and such schemes of improve-
ment were formed as prepared the way for the introducion of-
opulence into the colony *..

THE industrious 'sprit, which began to rife among the Cultureof

' tobacco intro.
planters, was soon directed towards a new objea; and they duccd.

* Smith's Travels, p. x14. Stith. p. 131.

applied

ao o0 0: atppliedi to it for .some time with such inconsiderate atd:ou, as

IX.'
L , _._ -was producaive of fatal, cenfequences. The culture -of tobacco,

which his :firice become the flaple of Virginia anid'the source of
.166. its prosperity, was introduced about this time into the colony.

As the taste for that weed continued to increase in England,
-notwithflanding-the zealous declamations of James againf it,. the
tobacco imported from Virginia came to a ready market;. and
though it was so much inferior in quality or in estimation
to that raised by the Spaniards in the Weft Indian islands, that
a pound of the latter fold for eighteen ihillings,: and of the for-.
mer for no more than three -shillings, it yielded a coniiderable

Bad confe-r profit. Allured- by the profped of such 'a certain and quick
quences arif-
ing from it. return, every other species- of industry was. neglected. The

land which ought: to have been reserved for raising provisions,
.and even the ffreets of James-Town,. were planted with to-
.bacco. Various regulations were framed to restrain this ill-di-
:redted aftivity. But from eagerness for present gain, the
planters disregarded every admonition. The means of sub-
fiftence became so scanty as forced them to renew their demands
upon the Indians, who, feeing no end of thdfe exations, their
antipathy to the English name revived with additional rancour,
and they began to form schemes of vengeance, with the secrecy
and silence peculiar to Americans ?.

MEANWHILE the colony, notwithstanding this error in its

operations, and the cloud that was gathering over its head, con-
tinued to wear an aspec of prosperity. Its numbers increased

* Stith.p Ip49. 147. 164. 168. Smith, p. 140. Purchas,iv. 1787.

x by

by fuccerlve migrations; the quantity of tobacco exported be- i oo o
came every year more considerable, and several of the planters
were not only in .an easy situation, but advancing fast to opu-
lence*; and by two events, which happened nearly at the
fame time, both population and induffry were greatly pro-
moted. As few women had hitherto ventured to encounter
the hardships which were unavoidable in an unknown and un-
cultivated country, mofti of the colonists, constrained to live
single, confidered theinfelves as no more than sojourners in a
land to which they were not attached by the tender ties of a
family and children. In order to induce them to fettle there,
the company took advantage of the apparent. tranquillity in the
country, to fend out a considerable number of young women, Young
of humble birth, indeed, but of unexceptionable character, and grate front
encouraged the planters; by premiums and immunities, to Enrglandi
marry them -.. These new companions were received with
such fondness, and jmany of them so .comfortably . established, as
invited.others to follov. their example, and by degrees thought-
less adventurers, assuming the sentiments of virtuous citizens
and of provident fathers of families, became solicitous about the
prosperity of a country, which they now confidered as their
own. As the colonists began to form more extensive plans of
industry, they were unexpe'tedly furnished with means of exe-
cuting them with greate. facility. A Dutch ship from the Coast
of Guinea, having failed ..up :ames-River, fold a part of her
cargo of negroes to the planters i; and as that hardy race was Negroes firti
found more capable of enduring fatigue under a sultry climate introduccd.

* Smith, p. x39. . j Stith. p. '66. 197. : Beverlcy, p. 37.

I than

B O0 K than Europeans, their number has been increased by conti:nual

Ix.
_ IX_, importation; their aid seems now to be essential to the existence-

of the colony, and the greater part of field labour in Virginia
is performed by servile hands. -

BUT as the condition of tie colony improved,' the- spirit of

its members became more independent. To Englishmen the'
fummaryandfevere decisions of martial law,however tempered by
the mildness of their governors, appeared intolerably oppressive;.
and. they longed to recover the privileges to which they had'
been accustomed under the liberal form of government in their-

1619. native country. In compliance with this spirit, Sir George
June.

Sirs general Yeardley, in the year I619, called: the first general assembly.
aprefem-ta. that was ever held in. Virginia; and the numbers of the people'
xives.. were now so increased, and: their settlements so dispersed- that

eleven, corporations appeared by their representatives, in this-
convention, where they were permitted to assume legislative
power, and to exercise the noblest fundion of freemen. The
laws enaaced in- it feen.neither. to have been many, nor of great
importance; but the meeting was 'highly acceptable to the
people, as they now beheld among themselves an image of the
English constitution, which they reverenced as the most perfect
model of free government. In order to render this, refemnblance
more complete, and the.rights of.the:.planters more certain, the

July 24. company issued a. charter or ordinance,.which gave' a legal and
giwongitven permanent form to the government, of the colony. The
to the co- supreme legislative authority in Virginia, in imitation of that in

Great Britain, was divided and lodged partly in the governor,
who held the place of the fdvereign; partly in a council of state

named

named by the company, which pofleffed some of the diftinsions, B o o K

Ix.

and exercised some of the fundions belonging to the peerage; ,,
partly in a general council or assembly composed of the repre-
fentatives of the people, in which'were vefied powers and
privileges similar to those of the Ioufe of Commons. In both
there councils all questions were to be:determined by the majority
.of voices, and a negative was reserved to the governor; but
no law or ordinance, though approved of by all the three mem-
bers of the legislature, was to be of force, until it was ratified in
England by a general court of the company, and returned under
its feal '. Thus the constitution of the colony was fixed, and
the members of it are henceforth to be confidered, not merely
as servants of a commercial company, dependant on the will
and orders of-their superior, but as free men and citizens.

TIIE natural effeCt of that happy change in their condition Induftryin;

was an increase of their industry.' The product of tobacco in creaed.
Virginia was now equal, not only to the consumption of it in
Great Britain t, but could furnish some quantity for a foreign

* Stith. Appendix, p. 32, &c.
k It is a matter of some curiosity to trace the progress of the consumption of

this unnccefiary commodity. The use of tobacco seems to have been first in-
troduced into England about the year i586. Poflibly a few sea-faring persons
may have acquired a relifli for it by their intcrcourfe with the Spaniards previ-
ous to that period; but the use of it cannot be denominated a national habit
sooner than tice time I havc-mentioncd. Upon an average of the fcven Scars
immediately preceding the year.1622, the whole import of tobacco into England
amounted to a hundred and forty-two thourand and eighty-five pounds weight.
Stith. p. 246. From this it appears, that the taste had spread with a rapidity
which is remarkable. But how inconfrdcerall e is that quantity to wllat is now
consumed in Great Britain !

I 2 market.

B OO 1 market. The company opened a trade for it with Hbllarnd

Ix. IX._, and established warehoifes inMiddleburgh and Flufiing. James,

Dirca trade and his privy council, alarmed Sat feeing the commerce of a corn
of the colony
with Hol-. modity, for which the demand was daily increasing, turned

into a channel that tended,,to the "diminution of the -revenue;

Gives offence
to Janies. by depriving it of a considerable duty imposed on the importa-

tion of tobacco, interposed with vigour to check this innova-
tion. Some expedient was found, by which the matter was
adjusted for the present; but it is remarkable as the first in-
'stance of a difference in sentiment between the parent state and
the colony, concerning their refpeaive rights. The former
concluded, that the trade of the colony fiould be confined to
England, and all its producions be landed there. The latter
claimed, not only the general privilege of Englishmen to carry
their commodities to the best market, but pleaded the particu-
lar concessions in their charter, by which an unlimited freedom
of commerce seemed to be granted to them *. The time for a
more full discussion of this important question was not yet
arrived.

The colony BUT while the colony continued to increase so fast, that set-
negleas the tlements were scattered, not only along the banks of James and
precautions
necessary for York Rivers, but began to extend to the Rapahannock, and
its defence
againRthe even to the Potowmack, the English, relying on their own
Indians, numbers and deceived by this appearance of prosperity, lived

in full security. They neither attended to the movements of
the Indians, nor fufpeded their machinations, and though fur-

* Stith. p. 200, &c.

rounded

rounded by a people whom they might have known from ex- B o o x

Ix.

perience to be both artful and vindicive, they neglected every .-
precaution for their own safety that was requisite in such a fitua-
tion. Like the peaceful inhabitants of a society completely efla-
blifhed, they were no longer soldiers but citizens, and were so
intent on what was subservient to the comfort or embellishment
of civil life, that every martial exercise began to be laid aside
as unnecessary. The Indians, whom they commonly employed
as hunters, were furnifhedwith fire-arms; and' taught to use them
with dexterity. They were permitted to' frequent the habitations
of the English at all hours, and received as innocent visitants
whom there was no reason to dread. This inconsiderate fecu-
rity enabled the Indians to prepare for the execution of that plan
of vengeance, which they meditated with all the deliberate fore-
thought which is agreeable to their temper. Nor did they
want a leader capable of conducing their schemes with address.
On the death of Powhatan, in the year 61 8; Opechancanough G'eneral maf-

facr of the

succeeded him, not only as wirowanee or chief of his own tribe, Englilh plan.
but in that extensive influence over all the Indian nations of ed by t'le
Virginia, which induced the English writers to distinguish them
by the name of Emperor. According to the Indian tradition,
he was not a native of Virginia, but. came from a distant
country to the fouth-welt, poiffbly from Tome province of the
Mexican Empire *. But as he. was confpicuqus for all the qua-
lities of highest eftlmation among. savages, a fearless courage,
great strength and agility of body, and crafty policy, he quickly
rose. to eminence and power. Soon after his elevation to the

'* Bcvcrley, p. 5;i

supreme

B 0 0 K supreme command,-a general maifacre of the English seems to
.- . . have been resolved upon; and during four years, the means of

perpetrating it with the greatest facility and success were con-
certed with amazing secrecy. All the tribes contiguous to the
Engliih settlements were fucceflively gained, except those on
the Eaflern ihore, from whom, on account of their peculiar
attachment to their new neighbours, every circumstance that
might discover what they intended was carefully concealed.
To each tribe its flation was allotted, and the.part it was to aA
March 22. prescribed. On the morning of the day consecrated to ven-

geance, each was at the place of rendezvous appointed, while the
English were so little aware of the impending deftruaion, that
they received with unfufpicious hospitality, several persons sent
by Opechancanough, under pretext of delivering presents of
venison and fruits, but in reality to observe their motions.

Executed on Finding them perfetly secure, at mid-day, the moment that
molt of the
settlements. was previously fixed for this deed of horror, the Indians rulhed

at once upon them in all their different settlements, and mur-
dered men, women, and children, with undiftinguifling rage,
.and that rancorous cruelty with which savages treat their ene-
mies. In one hour, nearly a fourth part of the whole colony
was cut off, almost without knowing by whose hands they fell.
The slaughter would have been universal, if compafion, or a
sense of duty, had not moved a converted Indian, to whom the
secret was communicated the night before the massacre, to re-
veal it to his mafler in such time as to save James-Town, and
some adjacent settlements; and if the English, in other diftri&s,
had not run to their arms with resolution prompted by dcfpair,
and defended themselves so bravely as to repulse their aflailants,

who,

who, in the execution of their plan, did not discover courage B 0 O K
equal to the sagacity and art with which had concerted it . .

BUT though the blow was thus prevented from descending

with its full effet, it proved very grievous to an infant colony.
In some Settlements not a single Engliihman escaped. Many
persons of prime note in the colony, and among there several
members of the council, were slain. The survivors, overwhelmn-
ed with grief, astonishment, and terror, abandoned all their re-
mote Settlements, and, crowding together for safety to James-
Town, did not occupy a territory of greater extent than had been
planted soon after the arrival of their countrymen in Virginia.
Confined within those narrow boundaries, they were less intent
on schemes of industry than on thoughts of revenge. Every
man took arms. A bloody war against the Indians commenced; Bloody war

with the In-

and, bent on exterminating the whole race, neither old nor young dians,
were spared. The conduct of the Spaniards in the Southern
regions of America was openly proposed as the most proper
model to imitate t; and, regardless like them of those principles
of faith, honour, and humanity, which regulate hostility among
oivilized nations and set bounds to its rage, the English deemed
every thing allowable that tended to accomplifhl their design.
They hunted the Indians like wild beafis, rather than enemies;
and as the pursuit of them to their places of retreat in the
woods, which covered their country, was both difficult and
dangerous, they endeavoured to allure them from their inac-
eeffable fastnesses, by offers of peace and promifcs of oblivion,

* Stith. p. 2o8, &c. Purchas, iv. 7788, &c. + Stith. p. 233.

3 made

B O O K made with such an artful appearance of sincerity as deceived

IX.
Le.... _*. their crafty leader, and induced them to return to their former

1623. settlements, and resume their usual peaceful occupations. The

behaviour of the two people seemed now to be perfectly re-
versed. The Indians, like men acquainted with the principles
of integrity and good faith, on which the intercourse between
nations is founded, confided in the reconciliation, and lived in
absolute security without suspicion of danger; while the Eng-
lifli, with perfidious craft, were preparing to imitate savages in
their revenge and cruelty. On the approach of harvest, when
they knew an hostile attack would be most formidable and fatal,
they fell suddenly upon all the Indian plantations, murdered
every person on whom they could lay hold, and drove the reft
to the woods, where so many perished with hunger, that tome
of the tribes nearest to the English were totally extirpated.
This atrocious deed, which the perpetrators laboured to repre-
sent as a necessary act of retaliation, was followed by tome
happy effets. It delivered the colony so entirely from any
dread of the Indians, that its settlements began again to extend,
and 'its industry to revive.

.Company at BUT unfortunately at this juncure the state of the company
hoime divided
by taions. in England, in which the property of Virginia and the go-

vernment of the colony fettled there were vested, prevented it
from seconding the efforts of the planters, by such a reinforce-
ment of men, and such a supply of necessaries, as were requisite
to replace what they had loft. The company was originally
composed of many adventurers, and increased so fast by the
juntion of new members, allured by the profpea of gain, or

he

the desire of promoting a scheme of public utility, that its ge. B o O K

Ix.

neral courts formed, a. numerous assembly . The operation of .
every political principle and passion, that spread through the
kingdom, was felt in those popular meetings, and influenced
their decisions. As towards the close of James's reign more
just and enlarged sentiments with refpea to constitutional li-
berty were diffused among the people, they came to under-
stand their rights better, and to assert them with greater bold-
ness; a diftintion formerly little known, but now familiar in
English policy, began to be established between the court
and country parties, and the leaders of each endeavoured to de-
rive power and consequence from every quarter. Both exerted
themselves with emulation, in order to obtain the diretlion of a
body so numerous and refpeaable as the company of Virginian
adventurers. In consequence of this, business had been con-
duted in every general court for some years, not with the tem-
perate spirit of merchants deliberating concerning their mutual
interest, but with the animosity and violence natural to nume-
rous assemblies, by which rival fations contend for superiority tf

As the king did not often assemble the great council of the James initi-

nation in parliament, the general courts of the company be- tteryint'
came a theatre, on which popular orators displayed their theircondut-
talents; the proclamations of the crown, and aas of the privy,
council, with refpe& to the commerce and police of the colony,
were canvafled there with freedom, and censured with severity,
ill-fuited to the lofty ideas which James entertained of his own

* Stith, p. 272. 276. t Ibid. p. 229, &c. Chalmers, p 59.

K wisdom,

B o o K wisdom, and the extent of his prerogative. In order to check
C. - ,a.. this growing spirit of difcuflon, the ministers employed all

their address and influence to gain as many members of the
company as might give them the direction of their deliberations.
But so unsuccessful were they in this attempt, that every mea-
sure proposed by them was reprobated by a vast majority, and
sometimes without any reason, but because they were the pro-
posers of it. James, little favourable to the power of any
popular aflembly, and weary of contending with one over
which he had laboured in vain to obtain an ascendant, began
to entertain thoughts of dissolving the company, and of new-
modelling its constitution. Pretexts, neither unplaufible, nor
destitute of some foundation, seemed to justify this measure.
The flow progress of the colony, the large fums of money ex-
pended, and great number of men who had perished in attempt-
ing to plant it, the late massacre by the. Indians, and every dif-
after that had befallen the Englifi from their first migration to
America, were imputed solely to the inability of a numerous
company to conduct an enterprise so complex and arduous.
The nation felt sensibly its disappointment in a scheme in
which it had engaged with sanguine expectations of advantage,
and wilhed impatiently for such an impartial scrutiny into for-
mer proceedings as might suggest more salutary measures in
the future administration of the colony. The present state of
its affairs, as well as the wishes of the people, seemed to call for
the interposition of the crown; and James, eager to display the
superiority of his royal wisdom, in correcing those errors into
which the company had been betrayed by inexperience ia the
arts ofgovernment, boldly undertook the work of reformation.

Without

Without regarding the rights conveyed to the company by s o o K
their charter, and without the formality of any judicial proceed-
ing for annulling it, he, by virtue of his prerogative, issued a ,623.
commission, empowering some of the judges, and other persons
of note, to examine into all the tranfaaions of the company
from its first eflablifliment, and to lay the result of their in-
quiries, together with their opinion concerning the most effec-
tual means of rendering the colony more prosperous*, before
the privy council. At the fame time, by a frain of authority
till higher, he ordered all the records and papers.of the com-
pany to be seized, and two of its principal officers to be arrested.
Violent and arbitrary as there acs of authority may now ap-
pear, the commilfioners carried on their inquiry without any
obstruction but what arose from some feeble and ineffetual
remonfirances of the company. The commissioners, though
they conducted their scrutiny with much acivity and vigour -,
did not communicate any of their proceedings to the company;
but their report, with refpet to its operations, items to have
been very unfavourable, as the king, in consequence of it, rigni-
fled to the company his intention of veiling the supreme go-. o. 8.
vernment of the company in a governor and twelve afliftants, CopePary
to be resident in England, and the executive power in a coun- surrender its

charter.

cll of twelve, which fliould reside in Virginia. The governor
and assistants were to be originally appointed by the king.
Future vacancies were to be supplied by the governor and his
afiftants, but their nomination was not to take effe&t until it
lh.oukl le ratified by the privy council. The twelve counsellors

* Stitl, p. 288. t Smitl's Travels, p 6, S, &c.

K 2 in

B o o K in Virginia were to be chosen by the governor and assistants;

J)x.

c i-_
_ and this choice was likewise fubjeaed to the review of the

privy council. With an intention to quiet the minds of the co-
loniafs, it was declared, that private property should be deemed
sacred; and for the more effectual security of it, all grants of
lands from the former company were to be confirmed by the
new one. In order to facilitate the execution of this plan, the
king required the company instantly to surrender its charter
into his hands *
Company re. BUT here James and his ministers encountered a spirit, of

which they seem not to have been aware. They found the
members of the company unwilling tamely to ielinquifh rights
of franchises conveyed to them with such legal formality, that
upon faith in their validity they had expended considerable
fums t; and still more averse to the abolition of a popular form
ofgovernment, in which every proprietor had a voice, in or-
der to subjea a colony, in which they were deeply interested,
to the dominion of a fnall junto absolutely dependent on the
crown. Neither promises nor threats could induce them to
depart from these sentiments; and in a general court the king's
o0. 20. proposal was almost unanimously rejeced, and a resolution

taken to defend to the tmoift their chartered rights, if these
should be called in question in any court of justice. James;
highly offended at their presumption in daring to oppose his
Nov. 1o. will, direted a writ of quo 'warranto to be iflued' against the

company, that the validity of its charter might be tried in the

* Stiti, p. 293, &c; . Chalmero, p. 61.

Court

Court of King's Bench; and in order to aggravate the charge BIo o BI
by colleting additional proofs of mal-administration, he ap- .
pointed some persons, in whom he could confide, to repair to
Virginia to infped the state of the: colony, and inquire into
the condu&c of the company, and of its officers there.

THE law-suit in the King's Bench did not hang long in Trial in the

suspense. It terminated, as was usual irn that reign, in a deci- King'sBench,.
si.on perfectly consonant to the wishes of the monarch. The tion of the

company.

charter was forfeited, the- company was dissolved, and all the June p164.
rights and privileges conferred upon it returned to the king;
from. whom they flowed. %

SOME writers, particularly Stith, the most intelligent and Defeflsinlthe

best informed historian. of Virginia, mention the dissolution of tironofthe
the company as a most disastrous event to the colony. Ani- colonies.
mated with liberal sentiments, imbibed.iha!ah age when the prin-
ciples, of liberty were more fully unfoided, than. under the reign
of James, they viewed ,his..violent! and arbitrary proceedings
on this occasion. with such indignation, that their abhorrence of
the means which. he employed to accomplish, his design seems
to have rendered' them ' incapable of contemplating its-effets
with discernment and. andour. , Th.ere is not perha.ps any mod'
of governing an infant colony less friendly to. itsdliberty,:than the
dominion of an exclusive corporations poffefled of all the powers
which James had conferred;lupon. the company of adventurers
in Virgihia. During several years, the colonists can ;hardly be

* Rymer, vol. xvii. p.6i8, &c. Chalmers, p. 62.

coifidered:

B o K confidered in any other light than as servants to the company,
W _ nourished out of its stores, bound, implicitly to obey its orders,

and fubjeded to the most rigorous of -all forms of government,
that of martial law. Even after the native spirit of Englihfimen
began to rouse under. oppreflion, and had extorted from their
superiors the right of enacting laws for the government of that
community of which,they were members, as no aa, though
approved of. by all the braches of,the proyincial legilfature,
was held to be of ,legal force; until it was ratified. by a general
court. in England, the company fill retained the paramount
authority in its own hands.. Nor was the power of the com-
pany more favourable to the prosperity of the colony, than to
its freedom. A numerous body of merchants, as long as its.
operations are. purely. commercial may. carry them on with
discernment. and faccefs. But the mercantile spirit feemsill-
addapted to condut an enlarged and liberal plan of civil policy,
and colonies have feldbi grcwan, up to maturity and vigour
under its narrow and. inereftedi' .ngtations. To the iinavid-
able. defet s in admirifiration which this occalionedi were
added errors atifing from. itexperience. The Englilh mer-
chants othat ge.had. not those extensive views which a ge-
neral commerce opens to such as have the direftion of it. When
tley fiaif began to vemtre- out f.!theI beaten track, they
groped their way with timidity and hesitation. Unacquainted
with the climate and foil of Ameriea, and ignorant of the pro-
dutiions best suited to tbem, they seem to have had no fettled
plan of impr.o.emnt,. and.their shemes were continually vary-
ing. Their system of government was equally flucuating. In
the course of eighteen years ten different persons presided over

5 the

the province as chief governors. No wonder that under such B o o '

Ix.

adminifiration all the efforts to give vigour and flability to the ,.
colony should prove abortive, or produce only slender effecs.
These efforts, however, when estimated according to the ideas
of that age, either with respect to commerce or to policy, were
very considerable, and conducted with astonishing perfeve-
rance.

ABOVE an hundred and fifty thousand pounds were expend- Weaknef of

the colony.

ed in this first attempt to plant an English colony in America te

;

and more than nine thousand persons were Lent out from the
mother country to people this new settlement. At the diffolu-
tion of the company, the nation, in return for this waste of trea-
sure and of people, did not receive from Virginia an annual
importation of commodities exceeding twenty thousand pounds
in value; and the colony was so far from having added:
frength to the late by an increase of population, that, in the
year one thousand fix hundred and twenty-four, scarcely two
thousand persons furvivedt, a wretched remnant of the nume-
rous emigrants who had flocked thither, with sanguine expeca-
tions of a very different fate.

THE company, like all unprofperous societies, fell unpitiedL Temporary

The violent hand with which prerogative had invaded its rights pointed for
was forgotten, and new profpedts of success opened, under a ent of

Vie.

form of government exempt from all the defecs to. wllich past ginia..
disasters were imputed The king and the nation concurred

Smith's Travels, p. 42. 167- f- Chalmera' Annat, p. 69.

with

o0 0 K with equal ardour .ii;refolving to; encourage the colony; Soon
L ,_X_ t after the .final judgment in the Cburtd f Khmgs Bench against

the company, James appointed a council of twelve persons to
Aug. 26. take. the temporary diredion of affairs in; Virginia,- that he

might have leisure to frame with deliberate consideration pro-
per regulations for the. permanent government of the colony *.
Pleased with such an opportunity of exercising his talents as a
legislator, he began to turn his attention towards the subjed;
but death prevented him from completing his plan.

1625, CIIARLES I. on his accefiri'n to the thione, adopted all his

March 27.
Accession of father's maxims with refpeat to the colony in Virginia. He de-
is alrbitrary dared it to be a part of the empire annexed to the crown, and
government immediately subordinate to its jurifdition : he conferred the
,of the colony.

title of Governor on Sir George Yardely, and appointed him,
in conjunction with a council of twelve, and a fecietary, to
exereife, supreme authority there, and enjoined them to con-
form in every point to such inifruactons as from time to time
they might receive from him t. From the tenor of the king's
commiflion, as well as from the known spirit of his policy, it
is apparent, that he intended to vest every power of govern.
ment, both legislative and executive, in the governor and coun-
cil, without recourse to the representatives of the people, as.
possessing a right to enac laws for the community, or to im-
pose taxes upon it. Yardely and his council, who seem to have
been fit instruments for carrying this system of arbitrary rule
into execution, did not fail to put such a conftrudion on the

* Rymcr, xvIi. 618, &c. + Ibid. xviii. 72 311.

words

words of their commission as was most favourable to their own B o o K

IX.

jurifdicaion. During a great part of Charles's reign, Virginia _-
knew no other law than the will of the sovereign. Statutes
were published, and taxes imposed, without once calling the
representatives of the people to authorize them by their fandtion.
At the fame time that the colonists were bereaved of political
rights, which they deemed essential. to freemen and citizens,
their private property was violently invaded. A proclamation Grants and

monopoly of

was issued, by which, under pretexts equally absurd and fri- tobacco.
volous, they were prohibited from felling tobacco to any per-
son but certain commiflloners appointed by the king to pur-
chafe it on his account *; and they had the cruel mortification
to behold the sovereign, who should have afforded them pro-
tection, engross all the profits of their industry, by seizing
the only valuable commodity which they had to vend, and re-
taining the monopoly of it in his own hands. While the staple
of the colony in Virginia funk in value under the oppreflion
and restraints of a monopoly, property in land was rendered
insecure by various grants of it, which Charles inconsiderately
bestowed upon his favourites. These were not only of such
exorbitant extent as to be unfavourable to the progress of culti-
vation; but from inattention, or imperfect acquaintance with
the geography of the country, their boundaries were so inaccu-
rately defined, that large traas already occupied and planted
were often included in them.

THE murmurs and complaints which such a fyltcm of admi-
niftration excited, were augmented by the rigour with whicl

.Rymer, xviii. 19.

L Sir

B 0 O K Sir John Harvey, who ftcceeded Yardely in the government

Ix.

A_ , of the colony *, enforced every act of power. Rapacious, un-
1627. feeling, and haughty, he added insolence to oppression, and

neither regarded the sentiments, nor listened to the remon-
ftrances of the people under his command. The colonists, far
from the feat of government, and overawed by authority de-
rived from a royal commission, submitted long to his tyranny

Colonils and exactions. Their patience was at lait exhausted, and in a
seize on ar- transport of popular rage and indignation, they'feized their go-
vernor, and vernor, and sent him a prisoner to England, accompanied by
fend him
prisoner to two of their number, whom they deputed to prefer their accu-
England. fations againit him to the king. But this attempt to redress

their own wrongs, by a proceeding so summary and violent as
is hardly confitent with any idea of regular government, and
can be justified only in cafes of such urgent necessity as rarely
occur in civil society, was altogether repugnant to every notion,
which Charles entertained with refpe& to the obedience due by
fubjedts to their sovereign. To him the cond'ut of the colob
nifts appeared to be not only an usurpation of his right to judge
and to punish one of his. own officers, but an open and auda-
cious a: of rebellion against his authority. Without deigning
to admit their deputies into his presence, or to hear one article

le is re- of their charge against Harvey, the king instantly sent him
leafed by the
king, and rc- back to his former flation, with an ample renewal of all the
itistted in
his govern- powers belonging to it. But though Charles deemed this vi-
zneni. gorous ftep neceflary in order to assert his own authority, and

to tcftify his displeasure with those who had prcfumed to offer

Rymer, xviii, 980.

fulch

such an insult to it, he seems to have been so sensible of the B 0 o K

IX.

grievances under which the colonists groaned, and of the chief
source from which they flowed, that soon after he not only re- 1679.
moved a governor so justly odious to them, but named as a
successor Sir William Berkeley, a person far superior to Harvey
in rank and abilities, and still more distinguished by possesing
all the popular virtues to which the other was a firanger *.

UNDER his government the colony in Virginia remained, SirW.Bcrke-

Icy appointed

with some short intervals of interruption, almost forty years, governor.
and to his mild and prudent administration its increase and His mild and

wife adinii-

prosperity is in a great measure to be ascribed. It was indebted, firation.
however, to the king liimfelf for such a reform of its conftitu'-
tion and policy, as gave a different aspeCt to the colony, and
animated all its operations with new spirit. Though the tenor
of Sir William Berkeley's commission was the fame with that
of his predecessor, he received inftrudions under the great feal,
by which he was empowered to declare, that in all its concerns,
civil as well as ecclesiastical, the colony was to be governed ac- New privi-

leges granted

cording to the laws of England: he was directed to issue writs by Charles.
for electing representatives of the people, who, in conjunction
with the governor and council, were to form a general assembly,
and to possess supreme legislative authority in the community;
he was ordered to cftal)lifh courts of jultice, in which all quef-
tions, whether civil or criminal, were to be decided agreeably
to the forms of judicial procedure in the mother country. It
is not easy to discover what were the motives which induced

* Bcvcrley'sI-if. of Virg. p, s. Chialmer's Annals, i. ;8, &c.

1. 2 a monarch

B 0 0 K. a monarch tenacious in adhering to any opinion or system

Ix.
L _ which he had once adopted, jealous to excess of his own rights,

and adverse on every occasion 'to any extension of the privi-
leges claimed by his people, to relinquish his original plan of
administration in the colony, and to grant such immunities to
his fubjeets fettled there. From the historians of Virginia, no
less superficial than ill-informed, no light can be derived with

Motives that refpe: to this point. It is most probable, that dread of the
have tn- spirit then rising in Great Britain extorted from Charles con-
fluenced the cessions so favourable to Virginia. After an intermission of al-
king.

most twelve years, the state of his affairs compelled him to have
recourse to the great council of the nation. There his fubjets
would find ajurifdidion independant of the crown, and able to
control its authority. There they hoped for legal redress of all
their grievances. As the colonists in Virginia had applied for
relief to a former parliament, it might be expected with cer-
tainty, that they would lay their cafe before the first meeting of
an assembly, in which they were secure of a favourable audi-
ence. Charles knew, that if the spirit of his administration in
Virginia were to be tried by the maxims of the Englifl confli-
tution, it must be severely reprehended. He was aware that
many measures of greater moment in his government would be
brought under a striCt review in parliament; and unwillingto
give mal-contents the advantage of adding a charge of op-
preflion in the remote parts of his dominions to a catalogue of
domestic grievances, he artfully endeavoured to take the merit
of having granted voluntarily to his people in Virginia such
privileges as he foresaw would be extorted from him.

BUT

BUT though Charles eftablifihed the internaL igovernment' of B. o o K.

Ix.

Virginia on a model similar to that of the English conifitution,.
and conferred on his fubjets there all.the rights of freemen and Virginia

flourishes un-

citizens, he was extremely solicitous to maintain its connection der the new
with the parent ltate. With.this view he ipftruded Sir William government..
Berkeley ftridly to prohibit any commerce of the colony with,
foreign nations; and in order more certainly to secure exclu-
five possession of all the advantages -arising from the sale, of its.
producions, he was required to take a bond from the master of,
each vessel that failed from Virginia, to land his cargo in some
part of the king's dominions in Europe *. Even under this. re-
ftraint, such is the kindly influence of free government on so-'
ciety, the colony advanced so rapidly in industry and popula-.
tion, that at the beginning of the civil war, the English fettled&
in it exceeded twenty thousand t.

GRATITUDE towards a monarch, from- whofe'-hands they Remains at-

tached to the-

had received immunities which they had long wished, but royal caure..
hardly expeced to enjoy, the influence, and example of a po-
pular governor, passionately devoted to, the interests of his
master, concurred in. preserving inviolated loyalty among the
coloniftsi Even after' monarchy was abolifled, after one king
had been beheaded, and another driven into exile, the authority
of the crown continued' to be acknowledged and revered in
Virginia. Irritated -at this open defiance of its power, the par- 165so
liament issued an ordinance, declaring, that as the settlement in
Virginia had been made at the cost and by the people of Eng-

* Chllncrs'.Anuals, p.2. 23. id. .
235.

land,.

o o Y, land, it ought to be Subordinate to and dependant upon the
lx.
,. _ _ _jEnglifh commonwealth, and subjea to such laws and regula-

tions as are or Ihall be made in parliament: that, instead of this
dutiful fubmiflion, the colonists had disclaimed the authority of
the slate, and audaciously rebelled against it; that on this ac-
count they were denounced notorious traitors, and not only all
veTels belonging to natives of England, but those of foreign na-
tions., were prohibited to enter their ports, or to carry on any
commerce with them.

Parliament IT was not the mode of that age to wage a war of words
onks Vireia alone. The efforts of an high-fpirited government in aferting

its own dignity were prompt and vigorous. A powerful fqua-
dron, with a considerable body of land forces, was dispatched
to reduce the Virginians to obedience. After compelling the
colonies in Barbadoes and the other islands to submit to the
1651. commonwealth, the squadron entered the Bay of Chefapeak.

Berkeley, with more courage than prudence, took arms to
oppose this formidable armament; but he could not long main-
tain such an unequal contest. His gallant refiltance, however,
procured favourable terms to the people under his government.

Virgln'a is A general indemnity for all past offences was granted ; they ac-
torced to ac-
knowledge knowledged the authority of the commonwealth, and were ad-
te cot""On- mitted to a participation of all the rights enjoyed by citizens .

Berkeley, firm to his principles of loyalty, disdaincd to make
any stipulation for himeilf; and choosing to pass his days far
removed from the feat of a government which he detested, con-

* Thurlow's State Papers, i. x97. Chalmecrs' Alinals, p. x22. Beverlcy's
ifti. p.53.

,I tinted

tinued to reside in Virginia as a private man, beloved and re- B o o K

Ix.
fpeaed by all over whom he had formerly presided.

NOT satisfied with taking measures to fub1je& the colonies, ReRfraints on

the trade of

the commonwealth turned its attention towards the most cffec- thecolony.
tual mode of retaining them in dependance on the parent state,
and of securing to it the benefit of their increasing commerce.
With this view the parliament framed two laws, one of which
expressly prohibited all mercantile intercourse between the co- 165X
lonies and foreign states, and the other ordained, that no pro-
duction of Asia, Africa, or America, should be imported into
the dominions of the commonwealth, but in vessels belong-
ing to English owners, or to the people of the colonies fettled-
there, and navigated by an. English. commander *, and by crews
of which the greater part must be Engliflmen. But while the
wisdom of the commonwealth prescribed the channel: in which
the trade of the colonies was to be carried on, it was solicitous
to encourage the cultivation. of the staple' commodity of Vir-
ginia. by an aa of parliament, which gave legal force to all the 165z.
injunaions of James and Charles against planting tobacco in.
England t.

UCTDE.lt governors appointed by the commonwealth, or

by Cromwell, when he usurped the supreme power, Virginia
remained almost nine years in perfect tranquillity. During that
period, many adherents to the royal party, and among theef
some gentlemen of good. families, in order to avoid danger and.

Scobcl's A<ts, p.. 132. 176. t Ibid. p. 187.

oppreflion,

B o o K oppression, to which they were exposed .in England, or in;

Ix.

_-, hopes of repairing their ruined fortunes, ,resorted thither.

Thecolonits Warmly attached to the cause for which they had fought and
difatisfied suffere'd, and animated withall the paoions natural to men re-
with these re- all.
ftraints. . cently engaged in a fierce and long protraced civil war, they,

by their intercourse with -the colonists, confirmed them in prin-
ciples of loyalty, and added to their impatience and indignation
under the: eftraints imposed on their commerce by their new
masters. -On the death of Mathews, the last governor named
by Cromwell, the sentiments and inclination of the people, no
longer under the control of authority, burst out with violence,
They forced Sir :William Berkeley to quit his retirement; .they
unanimously eleted him governor of the colony: and as he
refused toaCtt under an usurped authority, they boldly ereded

Are the firt the royal standard, and, acknowledging Charles II. to be their
to acknow- lawful sovereign, proclaimed him with all his titles; and the.
ledge Charles
LI. Virginians long boasted, that as they were the last of the king's

fubjeas who renounced their allegiance, they were the first who
returned to their duty*.
Their loyalty HAPPILY for the people of Virginia, a revolution in Eng-

ll-rearded and, rio less sudden and unexpected, feated Charles on the

-throne of his ancestors, and saved them from the severe chaf-
tifement, to which their premature declaration in his. favour
-must have ex.posed them. On receiving the .first account of
*this event, the joy and exultation of the colony were universal
and unbounded. These, however, were not of long con-

Beverlcy, p. 55. Chalmers, p. 124.

tinuance.

tinuance. Gracious, but unproducive profeflions of esteem and B o K
good-will were the only return made by Charles to loyalty and I.
services, which in their own effimation were so distinguished
that no recompence was beyond what they'might claim. If the
king's neglec and ingratitude disappointed all the sanguine
hopes which their vanity had founded on 'the merit of their
past condua, the spirit which influenced parliament in its com-
mercial deliberations opened a profpe&t that alarmed them with
refpea to their future situation. In framing regulations for
the encouragement of trade, which, during the convulsions of
civil war, and amidst continual fluctuations in government, had
met with such obftruaion that it declined in every quarter;
the House of Commons, instead of granting the colonies that
relief which they expected from the restraints in their com-
merce imposed by the commonwealth and Cromwell, not only
adopted all their ideas concerning this branch of legislation, but
extended them farther. This produced the al. of navigation, Navigation
the most important and memorable of any in the statute book
with refp.e to the history of Englifl commerce. By it, be-
fides several momentous articles foreign to the subjet of this
work, it was enaaed, that no commodities flhould be imported
into any settlement in Asia, Africa, or America, or exported
from them, but in vessels of English or plantation built, where-
of the master and three fourths of the mariners {hall be Eng-
lifh fubjets, under pain of forfeiting ship and goods; that none
but natural-born fubjeds, or such as have been naturalized,
shall exercise the occupation of merchant or factor in any Englifl
settlement, under pain of forfeiting their goods and chattels;
that no sugar, tobacco, cotton, wool, indigo, ginger, or woods

M utfed

o o0 K used in dying, of the growth or manufadure of the colonies,
Ix.
i ..- fliall be shipped from them to any other country but England;

and in order to secure the performance of this, a sufficient
bond, with one surety, shall be given, before failing, by the
owners, for a specific fum proportional to the rate of the vessel
employed by them *. The producions fubjeaed to this re-
ftriaion are distinguished, in the language of commerce and
finance, by the name of enumerated commodities; and as industry
in its progress furnished new articles of value, these have been
successively added to the roll, and fubjeaed to the fame re-
1663. firaint. Soon after, the aa of navigation was extended, and ad-

ditional restraints were imposed, by a new law, which pro-
hibited the importation of any European commodity into the
colonies, but what was laden in England in vessels navigated
and manned as the at of navigation required. More effecual
provision was made by this law for exacing the penalties to
which the transgressors of the at of navigation were fubjeded;
and the principles of policy, on which the-various regulations
contained in both statutes are founded, were openly avowed in
a declaration, that as the plantations beyond seas are inhabited
and peopled by fubjeds of England, they may be kept in a
firmer dependance upon it, and rendered yet more beneficial
and advantageous unto it, in the further employment and in-
crease of Englill shipping and seamen, as well as in the vent
of English woollen and other manufatures and commodities;
and in making England a staple, not only of the commodities
of those plantations, but also of the commodities of other

*i Car. II. c. 18.

countries

countries and places, for the supplying of themn; and it being B o o lK

Ix.

the usage of other nations to keep the trade of their plantations i
to themselves *. In prosecution of those favourite maxims, the
Englili legislature proceeded a Prep farther. As the aCt of navi-
gation had left the people of the colonies at liberty to export
the enumerated commodities from one plantation to another
without paying any duty, it fubjeaed them to a tax equivalent 1672.
to what was paid by the consumers of there commodities in
England t.

BY these successive regulations, the plan of securing to Eng- Effeas ofthr

land a monopoly of the commerce with its colonies, and of fltut- a&.
ting up every other channel into which it might be diverted,
was perfeced and reduced into complete system. On one fide
of the Atlantic, thefe-regulations have been extolled as an extra-
ordinary effort of political sagacity, and have been confidered
as the great charter of national commerce, to which the present
ltate is indebted for all its opulence and power. On the other,
they have been execrated as a code of oppression, more suited
to the illiberality of mercantile ideas, than to extensive views
of legislative wisdom. Which of there opinions is best found-
ed, I shall examine at large in another part of this work. But
in writing the history of the English settlements in America, it
was necessary to trace the progress of those restraining laws
with accuracy, as in every subsequent tranfadion we may ob-
serve a perpetual exertion, on the part of the mother-country,
to enforce and extend them ; and on the part of the colonies,

*15 Car. II. c. 7. t 25 Car. II. c. 7.

Mh 2 endleavours

B o O K endeavours no less unremitting, to elude or to obftrud their

Ix.

. ,

-_! .operation.

Coloniis re- HARDLY was the aa of navigation known in Virginia, and
rnonfirate t
against the its effets begun to be felt, when the colony remonstrated
ad. against it as a grievance, and petitioned earnestly for relief.

But the commercial ideas of Charles and his ministers coin-
cided so perfecly with those of parliament, that, instead of
listening with a favourable ear to their applications, they la-
boured assiduously to carry the at into stria execution. For
this purpose, inftrudions were issued to the governor, forts were
built on the banks of the principal rivers, and finall veftels ap-
pointed to cruize on the coast. The Virginians, feeing no pro-
fpeat of obtaining exemption from the act, set themselves to
evade it, and found means, notwithstanding the vigilance witl
which they were watched, of carrying on a considerable clan-
destine trade with foreigners, particularly with the Dutch set-
tied on Hudson's River. Emboldened by observing disaffection
spread through the colony, some veteran soldiers who had served
under Cromwell, and had been banished toVirginia, formed a de-
663. sign of rendering themselves masters of the country, and of assert-

ing its independence on England. This rash project was disco-
vered by one of their afrociates, and disconcerted by the vigorous
exertions of Sir William Berkeley. But the spirit of discontent,
though repressed, was not extinguiihed. Every day something
occurred to revive and to nourish it. As it is with extreme dif-
ficulty that commerce can be turned into a new channel, to-
bacco, the staple of the colony, funk prodigiously in value,
when they were compelled to fend it all to one market. It was

fomo

some time before England could furnish them regularly full as- B o o K

Ix.

fortments of those necessary articles, without which the industry __
of the colony could not be carried on, or its prosperity secured.
Encouraged by the symptoms of general languor and despond- Colonyat-
ency, which this declining itate of the colony occasioned, the Indias the
Indians feated towards the.heads of the rivers ventured first to
attack the remote settlements, and then to make incursions into
the interior parts of the country. Unexpeted as these hoftili-
ties were, from a people who during a long period had lived
in friendship with the English, a measure taken by the king
seems to have excited frill greater terror among the most opu-
lent people in the colony. Charles had imprudently imitated Difcontcnts

produced by

the example of his father, by granting such large traCds of land tpe gralits of
in Virginia to several of his courtiers, as tended to unsettle the Olandbythe
distribution of property in the country, and to render the title
of the most ancient planters to their estates precarious and quef- 1676.
tionable. From those various causes, which in a greater or
lesser degree affeced every individual in the colony, the indig-
nation of the people became general, and was worked up to
such a pitch, that nothing was wanting to precipitate them into
the most desperate afts, but some leader, qualified to unite and to
direc their operations*.

SncH a leader they found in Nathaniel Bacon, a colonel of An infurrcc-

tion in Vir-

militia, who, though he had been fettled in Virginia only three ginia, headed
years, had acquired, by popular manners, an insinuating address, by N. Bacon.
and the consideration derived from having been regularly train-
ed in England to the profeflion of law, such general esteem,

* Chalmers' Annals, ch, o1. 13, 14. pafini, Beverlcy, p. 58, &c.

that

86 HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B o O K that he had been admitted into the council, and was regarded as

IlX'. one of the most refpedable persons in the colony. Bacon was

ambitious, eloquent, daring, and prompted either by honest
zeal to redress the public wrongs, or allured by hopes of
raising himself to distinction and power, he mingled with the
mal-contents, and by his bold harangues and confident pro-
mises of removing all their grievances, he inflamed them al-
most to madness. As the devastations committed by the In-
dians was the calamity most sensibly felt by the people, he accused
the governor of having neglected the proper measures for re-
pelling the invasions of the savages, and exhorted them to take
arms in their own defence, and to exterminate that odious
race. Great numbers assembled, and chose Bacon to be their
general. He applied to the governor for a commission, con-
firming this elecion of the people, and offered to march in.
ftantly against the common enemy Berkeley, accustomed by
long poffefllon of supreme command to high ideas of the re-
sped due to his station, confidered this tumultuary armament
as an open insult to his authority, and fufpe&ed that, under
specious appearances, Bacon concealed molt dangerous designs.
Unwilling, however, to give farther provocation to an incensed
multitude, by a direct refusal of what they demanded, he
thought it prudent to negociate, in order to gain time; and it
was not until he found all endeavours to sooth them ineffecual,
that he iflued a proclamation, requiring them, in the king's name,
under the pain of being denounced rebels, to disperse.

BUT Bacon, sensible that he had now advanced so far as
rendered it impoflible to recede with honour or safety, instantly

took

took the only resolution that remained in his situation. At the B OO K
head of a chosen body of his followers he marched rapidly to
James-Town, and surrounding the house where the governor
and council were assembled, demanded the commission for
which he had formerly applied. Berkeley, with the proud in-
dignant spirit of a cavalier, disdaining the requisitions of a rebel,
peremptorily refused to comply, and calmly presented his naked
breast to the weapons which were pointed against it. The
council, however, foreseeing the fatal consequences of driving
an enraged multitude, in whose power they were, to the last
extremities of violence, prepared a commission, constituting
Bacon general of all the forces in Virginia, and by their entrea-
ties prevailed on the governor to sign it. Bacon with his
troops retired in triumph. Hardly was the council delivered
by his departure from the dread of present danger, when, by a
traifition not unusual in feeble minds, presumptuous boldness
succeeded to excessive fear. The commission granted to Bacon
was declared to be null, having been extorted by force; he
was proclaimed a rebel, his followers were required to abandon
his standard, and the militia ordered to arm, and to join the go-
vernor.

EN RAGED at conduc which he branded with the name of base B:col formr

SirW. Ber:e-

and treacherous, Bacon, instead of continuing his march towards ley and the
the Indian country, instantly wheeled about, and advanced with cnl
all his forces to James-Town. The governor, unable to resist
such a numerous body, made his escape, and fled across the bay to
Acomack on the Eastern shore. Some of the counsellors ac-
companied him thither, others retired to their own plantations.

6 Upon

B 0 O K Upon the flight of.Sir William Berkeley,; and' dispersion of the

IX.
_- _council, the frame of civil government in the colony seemed to

be dissolved, and Bacon became possessed of supreme and un-
controlled power. But as he was sensible that his countrymen
would not long submit with pafience to authority acquired and
held merely by force of arms, he endeavoured to found it on a
more constitutional basis, by obtaining the fanaion of the
people's approbation. With this view he called together the
most considerable gentlemen in the colony, and having pre-
va/iled on them to bind themselves by oath to maintain his
authority, and to resist every enemy that should oppose it, he
from that time confidered his jurifdition as legally eftablithed.

SirW.Berke- BERKELEY, meanwhile, having collected some forces, made
ley applies
for succours inroads into different parts of the colony, where Bacon's
toEngland. authority was recognized. Several sharp conflics happened

with various success. James-Town was reduced to ashes, and
the best cultivated diftridts in the province were laid waste,'
Ibmetimes by one party, and sometimes by the other. But it
was not by his own exertions that the governor hoped to ter-
minate the contest. He had early transmitted an account of the
tranfadions in Virginia to the king, and demanded such a
body of soldiers as would enable him to quell the insurgents,
whom he represented as so exasperated by the restraints im-
posed on their trade, that they were impatient to ihake off all
dependance on the parent state. Charles, alarmed at a commo-
tion no less dangerous than unexpected, and solicitous to
maintain his authority over a colony, the value of which was
.daily increasing, and more fully underflood, speedily dispatched

a finall

a small squadron, with such a number of regular troops as B o o K

ix.

Berkley had required. Bacon and his followers received in- _-
formation of this armament, but were not intimidated at its ap-
proach. They boldly determined to oppose it with open force,
and declared it to be consistent with their duty and allegiance,
to treat all who Ihould aid Sir William Berkley as enemies, un-
til they ihould have an opportunity of laying their grievances
before their sovereign *.

BUT while both parties prepared, with equal animosity, to 1677.

involve their country in the horrors of civil war, an event hap- con termi-
pened, which quieted the commotion almost as suddenly as it nates the re-
had been excited. Bacon, when ready to take the field, sicken-
ed and died. None of his followers poffiefed such talents, or
were so much objecs of the people's confidence, as entitled
them to aspire to the supreme command. Destit'ute of a leader
to conduc and animate them, their sanguine hopes of success
subsided; mutual distrust accompanied this universal despond-
ency: all began to wish for an accommodation; and after a
short negociation with Sir William Berkley, they laid down
their arms, and submitted to his government, on obtaining a
promise of general pardon.

THus terminated an infurretion, which, in the annals of

Virginia, is diftinguiihed by the name of Bacon's rebellion.
During seven months this daring leader was master of the co-
lony, while the royal governor was shut up in a remote and

* Beverlcy' Hiift. p. 75, 76.

N ill-

B 0 0 K ill-peopled corner of it. What were the real motives that

IX. IX- _ prompted him to take arms, and to what length he intended to

carry his plans of reformation, either in commerce or govern-
ment, it is not easy to discover, in the scanty materials from
which we derive our information with refpet to this tranfac-
tion. It is probable, that his condua, like that of other adven-
turers-in faction, would have been regulated chiefly by events;
and accordingly as these proved favourable or adverse, his
views and requisitions would have been extended or circum-
fcribed.

An assembly SIR WILLIAM BERKLEY, as soon as he was re-instated in
Called; its
moderation his office, called together the representatives of the people, that

by their advice and authority public tranquillity and order
might be perfecly established. Though this assembly met a
few weeks after the death of Bacon, while the memory of re-
ciprocal injuries was still recent, and when the pailions ex-
cited by such a fierce contefl, had but little time to subside, its
proceedings were conducted with a moderation seldom exer-
cifed by the successful party in a civil war. No man suffered
capitally; a small number were subjected to fines; others
were declared incapable of holding any office of trut; and with
those exceptions, the promise of general indemnity was con-
firmed by law. Soon after, Berkley was recalled, and Colonel
Jefferys was appointed his successor.

State of the FROM that period to the Revolution in 1688, there is scarcely
colony till the
Revolution in any memorable occurrence in the Hiltory of Virginia. A peace
i688. was concluded with the Indians. Under several fucceflive go-

vernors,

vernors, administration was carried on in the colony with the B o 0 K

Ix.

fame arbitrary spirit that diftinguilhed the latter years of .
Charles II. and the precipitate counsels of James II. The Vir-
ginians, with a constitution which, in form, resembled that of
England, enjoyed hardly any portion of the liberty which that
admirable system of policy is framed to secure. They were de-
prived even of the last consolation of the oppressed, the power
of complaining, by a law which, under severe penalties, pro-
hibited them from speaking difrefpedfully of the governor, or
defaming, either by words or writing, the administration of
the colony *. Still, however, the laws restraining their com-
merce were felt as an intolerable grievance, and nourished in
secret a spirit of discontent, which, from the necessity of con-
cealing it, acquired a greater degree of acrimony. But not-
withstanding those unfavourable circumstances, the colony con-
tinued to increase. The use of tobacco was now become gene-
ral in Europe; and though it had fallen considerably in price,
the extent of demand compensated that diminution, and by
giving constant employment to the industry of the planters dif-
fused wealth among them. At the Revolution the number of
inhabitants in the colony exceeded sixty thousand t, and in
the course of twenty-eight years its population had been more
than doubled $.

*Beverley, p. 81. Chalmers, p. 341.
t Chalmers' Annals, p. 356. t Ibid. p. 125.

N 2

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK X.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O
A M E R I C A.

BOOK X.
W HEN James I. in the year one thousand fix hundred B 0 K

X.

and fix, made that magnificent partition, which has been
mentioned, of a vast region in North America, extending from History of the

northern co-
the thirty-fourth to the forty-fifth degree of latitude, between lony, and of

the Plymouth

two trading companies of his fubjeds, he eftabliihed the refi- company.
dence of the one in London, and of the other in Plymouth.
The former was authorized to fettle in the southern, and the
latter in the northern part of this territory, then distinguished
ly the general name of Virginia. This arrangement seems to
have been formed upon the idea of some speculative refiner,
who aimed at diffusing the spirit of industry, by fixing the feat
of one branch of the trade that was now to be opened, on the
eaf. coast of the island, and the other on the weft. But London
possesses such advantages of situation, that the commer;ialwealth

I and

B 0 0 K and acivity of England have always centered in the capital. At
.._ _ I * the beginning of the last century, the superiority of the metro-

polis in both these refpeds was so great, that though the powers
and privileges conferred by the king on the two trading compa-
nies were precisely the fame, the adventurers fettled in Plymouth
fell far ihort of those in London, in the vigour and success of
their efforts towards accomplishing the purpose of their inftitu-
tion. Though the operations of the Plymouth company were
animated by the public-fpirited zeal of Sir John Popham, chief
justice of England, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and some other
gentlemen of the weft, all its exertions were feeble and un-
fortunate.

1606. THE first vessel fitted out by the company was taken by the

FirRattempts Spaniards. In the year one thousand fix hundred and seven, a
to fettle on
the northern feeble settlement was made at Sagahadoc; but, on account of

coa. the rigour of the climate, was soon relinquished, and for some

time nothing farther was attempted than a few fishing voyages
to Cape Cod, or a pitiful traffic with the natives for skins and

Smith fur- oil. One of the vessels equipped for this purpose was com-
veysthat
coatt, and manded by Captain Smith, whose name has been so often men-
calls tNw tioned with diftintion in the History of Virginia. The adven-

1614. ture was prosperous and lucrative. But his ardent enterprising

mind could not confine its attention to objects so unequal to it
as the petty details of a trading voyage. He employed a part
of his time in exploring the coast, and in delineating its bays
and harbours. On his return, he laid a map of it before Prince
Charles, and, with the usual exaggeration of discoverers, painted
the beauty and excellence of the country in such glowing co-

lours,

lours, that the';young Prince, in the warmth of admiration, B o o K
declared, that it ihould be called New England*: a name
which effaced that of Virginia, and by which it is still dif-
tinguilhed.

THE favourable accounts of the country by Smith, as well as Firflattempts

to fettle un-

the success of his voyage, seem to have encouraged private ad- fuccfsful.
venturers to prosecute the trade on the coast of New England with
greater briskness; but did not inspire the languishing company
of Plymouth with such vigour as to make any new attempt to-
wards establishing a permanent colony there. Something more
than the profpea of distant gain to themselves, or of future ad-
vantages to their country, was requisite, in order to induce men
to abandon the place of their nativity, to migrate to another
quarter of the globe, and endure innumerable hardships under
an untried climate, and in an uncultivated land, covered with
woods, or occupied by fierce and hostile tribes of savages. But
what mere attention to private emolument or to national uti-
lity could not effea, was accomplished by the operation of an
higher principle. Religion had gradually excited among a great Religiousdif-

putes give

body of the people, a spirit that fitted them remarkably for en- rife to the
countering the dangers, and surmounting the obstacles, which colony.gnd
had hitherto rendered abortive the schemes of colonization in
that part of America allotted to the company of Plymouth. As
the various settlements in New England are indebted for their
origin to this spirit, as in the course of our narrative we shall
discern its influence mingling in all their tranlfaions, and giv-
ing a peculiar tinaure to the clhrater of the people, as well as to

* Smith's Trav. Book vi. . 203, &c. Purchas, iv. p. 1837.

their

B 0 0 X their infitutions, both civil and ecclesiastical, it becomes necef-

._ , fary to trace its'rife and progress with attention and accuracy.

Different ren. WH EN the fuperfiitions and corruptions of the Romish church
timents re-
fpeaing prompted different nations of Europe to throw off its yoke, and
church go-
vernment to withdraw from its communion, the mode as well as degree of
that prevailed their separation was various. Wherever reformation was fud-
at the Refor-
mation. den, and carried on by the people without authority from their

rulers, or in opposition to it, the rupture was violent arnd total.
Every part of the ancient fabric was overturned, and a different
system, not only with refpea todotrine, but to church govern-
ment, and the external rites of worship, was established. Cal-
vin, who, by his abilities, learning, and austerity of manners,
had acquired high reputation and authority in the Protestant
churches, was a zealous advocate for this plan of thorough refor-
mation. He exhibited a model of that pure form of ecclesiastical
policy, which he approved in the constitution of the church of
Geneva. The simplicity of its institutions, and still more their
repugnancy to those of the Popish church, were so much ad-
mired by all the striaer reformers, that it was copied, with some
small variations, in Scotland, in the Republic of the United Pro-
vinces, in the dominions of the House of Brandenburgh, in
those of the Eleaor Palatine, and in the churches of the Hugo-
nots in France.

BUT in those countries where the steps of departure from

the church of Rome were taken with greater deliberation, and
regulated by the wisdom or policy of the supreme magistrate,
the Separation was not so wide. Of all the reformed churches,

that

that of England has deviated least from the ancient institutions. B o o K

x.

The violent but capricious spirit of Henry VIII. who, though x
he disclaimed the supremacy, revered the tenets of the Papal
fee, checked innovations in doEtrine or worship during his
reign. When his son ascended the throne, and the Protestant
religion was established by law, the cautious prudence of Arch-
bishop Cranmer moderated the zeal of those who had espoused
the new opinions. Though the articles to be recognized as
the system of national faith were framed conformably to the
dotrines of Calvin, his notions with refped to church govern-
ment and the mode of worship were not adopted. As the
hierarchy in England was incorporated with the civil policy of
the kingdom, and constituted a member of the legislature, arch-
bishops and bishops, with all the subordinate ranks of ecclesias-
tics subjed to them, were continued according to ancient form,
and with the fame dignity and jurifdiaion. The peculiar vest-
ments in which the clergy performed their sacred funcions,
bowing at the name of Jesus, kneeling at receiving the Sacra-
ment of the Lord's Supper, the sign of the Cross in baptism, the
use of the Ring in marriage, with several other rites to which
long usage had accustomed the people, and which time had ren-
dered venerable, were still retained. But though Parliament
enjoined the observance of these ceremonies under very revere
penalties *, several of the more zealous clergy entertained tcrul-
ples with refpe to the lawfulness of complying with this in-
jun&tion; and the vigilance and authority of Cranmer and Rid-
ley with difficulty saved their infant church from the dlilracc
of a fchifin on this account.

* 2 and 3 Edw. VI. c. x.

o ON

B Oo O ON the acceflon of Mary, the furious zeal with which she

X.

_ x- _j persecuted all who had adopted the tenets of the reformers:
Religious forced many eminent Protestants, laymen as well as ecclesiastics,
by Mary. to seek an asylum on the continent. Francfort, Geneva, Basil,

and Strafburgh,. received them with affecionate hospitality as-
sufferers in the cause of truth, and the magifirates permitted.
them to assemble by themselves for religious worlhip. The
exiles who took up their residence in the two former cities mo-
delled their little congregations according to the ideas of Calvin,.
and,with a spirit natural to men in their situation, eagerly adopt-
ed institutions which appeared to: be farther removed from the.
superstitions of Popery than those of their own church. They
returned to England as soon. as Elizabeth. re-established the Pro-
teftant religion, not only with more violent antipathy to the
opinions and pratices, of that church by which they had been.
opprefled, but with a strong attachment to that mode of wor-
ihip to which they had been for some years accustomed. As-
they were received by their countrymen with the veneration
due to confessors, they exerted all the influence derived. from
that opinion,, in order to obtain such a reformation in the Eng-
lifh ritual as might bring it nearer to the standard of purity in
foreign churches. Some of the queen's most confidential mini--
flers were warmly disposed to: co-operate with them in this.
measure. But Elizabeth paid little regard to the inclinations of

Qeen Eliza- the one, or the sentiments of the other. Fond of pomp and.
beth. ceremony, accustomed, according to the mode of that age, toftudy

religious controversy,. and possessing, like: her father, such confi-
dence in her own. understanding that she never doubted her capa-
city to judge and decide with refpe~t to every point in dispute

between

between contending fedts *, ihe chose to aa according to her B O K
own ideas, which led her rather to approach nearer to the church
of Rome, in the parade of external worihip, than to widen the
breach by abolishing any rite already established t. An aa of
parliament, in the first year of her reign, not only required an
exaa conformity to the mode of worship prescribed in the ser-
vice book, under most rigorous penalties, but empowered the
Queen to enjoin the observance of fuch'additional ceremonies
as might tend, in her opinion, to render the public exercises of
devotion more decent and edifying :.

* Of the high idea which Elizabeth entertained with refpe& to her own fupe-

rior skill in theology, as well as the haughty tone in which (he dicated to her
fubjeas what they ought to believe, we have a striking piture in her speech at
the loe of theparliament A. D. 1585.-" One thing I may not overlkip. Re-
ligion, the ground on which all other matters ought to take root, and being cor-
rupted, may mar all the tree. And that there be some fault-finders with the
order of the clergy, which so may make a dander to myself, and to the church,
whose over-ruler God hath made me, whose negligence cannot be excused, if
any schisms or errors heretical were suffered. Thus much, I must fay, that
some faults and negligences mulf grow and be, as in all other great charges it
happeneth; and what vocation without ? All which, if you my lords of the
clergy do not amend, I mean to depose you. Look ye, therefore, well to your
charges. This may be amended without needless or open exclamations. I am
supposed to have many studies, but molt philosophical. I must yield this to be
irue, that I suppose few (that be not profeflors) have read more. And I need
not tell you, that I am not so simple that I understand not, nor so forgetful that I
remember not; and yet, amnidft my many volumes, I hope'God'sbook hath not been
my feldomeft letures, in which we find that which by reason all ought to be-
lieve. I fee many over-bold with God Almighty, making too many subtle scan-
nings of his blessed will. The presumption is so great that I may not fuffcr it,"
&c. D'Ewes's Journal, p. 328.

t Neal's Hist, of the Puritans, i. x38. 176. t I Eliz. c. 2.

0 2 Trl.

B O O I TilE advocates :for a farther reformation, notwithstanding

X.' ^ this cruel disappointment of the sanguine hopes with which
Puritans, they returned to their native country, did not relinquish their

design. They disseminated their opinions with great industry
among the people. They extolled the purity of foreign
churches, and inveighed against the superstitious practices with
which religion was defiled in their own church. In vain did the
defenders of the effablifhed lfyftem represent that these forms
and ceremonies were, in themselves, things perfectly indifferent,
which, from long usage, were viewed with reverence; and, by
their impression upon the senses and imagination, tended not
only to fix the attention, but to assea the heart, and to warm it
with devout and worthy sentiments. The Puritans (for by that
name such as scrupled to comply with what was enjoined by
the ad of uniformity were distinguished) maintained, that
the rites in question were inventions of men, superadded to the
simple and- reasonable service required in the word of God. that
from the excessive solicitude with which 'conformity to them
was exaded, the multitude must conceive such an high opinion
of their value and importance, as might induce them to reft
satisfied with the mere form and Ihadow of religion, .and to
imagine that external observances may compensate for the want
of inward fanaity; that ceremonies which had been long
employed by a society manifeitly corrupt, to veil its own
defeas, and to seduce and fascinate mankind, ought now to
be rejeted as relics of superstition unworthy of a place in a
church which gloried in the name of Reformed.

Tn E

THE people, to whom in every religious controversy the B O O K
final appeal is made, listened to the arguments of the contend-

Intolerant

ing parties; and it is obvious to which of them, men who had spirit of the
lately beheld the superstitious spirit of Popery, and felt its per- church.
fecuting rage, would lend the most favourable ear. The desire
of a farther reparation from the church of Rome spread wide
through the nation. The preachers who contended for this,
and who refused to wear the surplice, and other vestments
peculiar to their order, or to observe the ceremonies enjoined
by law, were followed and admired, while the ministry of the
zealous advocates for conformity was deserted, and their persons
often exposed to insult. For some time the non-conformists
were connived at; but as their number and boldness increased,
the interposition both of Spiritual and civil authority was
deemed necessary in order to check their progress. To the dif-
grace of Christians, the sacred rights of conscience and private
judgment, as well as the charity and mutual forbearance suit-
able to the mild spirit of the religion which. they profefecf,
were in that age little understood. Not only the idea of tole-
ration, but even the word itself in the sense now affixed to it,
was then unknown. Every church claimed a right to employ
the hand of power for the protedion of truth and the extirpa-
tion of error. The laws of her kingdom armed Elizabeth with
ample authority for this purpose, and she was abundantly dif-
posed to exercise it with full vigour. Many of the most cmi-
ment among the Puritan clergy were deprived of their benc-
sices, others were imprisoned, several were fined, and some put
to death. But persecution, as usually happens, inflead of ex-
tinguilhing, inflamed their zeal to fuclh a height, that the jurif-

3~~~~~2 (dicliol

o o K .diction of the ordinary courts of law was deemed insufficient to
x_ ffupprefs it, and a new tribunal"was established under the title

-of the high comminonfor ecclejiaJical afairs,-whofe powers and
mode of procedure were hardly less odious or less hostile to
the principles of justice than .those of the Spanish inquisition.
Several attempts were made in the Ioufe of Commons to check
these arbitrary proceedings, and to moderate the rage of perse-
.cution; but the Queen always imposed silence upon those who
.presumed to deliver any opinion with refpeEt to a matter apper-
taining solely to her prerogative, in a tone as imperious and
arrogant as was 'ever used by Henry VIII. in addrefing his
Parliaments; and so tamely obsequious were the guardians
of the people's rights, that they not only obeyed those
-unconstitutional commands, but consented to an aa, by
which every person who should absent himself from church
during a month was fubjeaed to punishment by fine and im-
prifonment; and if after conviction he did not, within three
months, renounce his erroneous opinions and conform to the
laws, he was then obliged to abjure the realm; but if he either
refused to comply with this condition, or returned from banish-
ment, he Ihould be put to death as a felon without benefit of
clergy *.

Entire fepa. BY this iniquitous fatute, equally repugnant to ideas of civil
ration of the
Puritans and of religious liberty, the Puritans were cut off from any hope
from thhe of obtaining either reformation in the church or indulgence
church.

to themselves. Exasperated by this rigorous treatment, their

* 35 Eliz. c. x.

antipathy

antipathy to the eftabliihed religion increased, and, with the pro- B o o K
grefs natural to violent passions, carried them far beyond what
was their original, airm The first Puritans did not entertain any
scruples. with.refpea to the lawfulness of Episcopal government,.
arrd seem to have been very unwilling to withdraw from com-
munion with the church of which they were members. But
when they were thrown out of her bosom., and constrained to
hold separate assemblies for the worship of God, their followers
no longer viewed a society by which they were opprefled with
reverence or affection. Her government, her discipline, her
ritual, were examined with minute attention. Every error was
pointed out, and every defect magnified. The more boldly any
teacher inveighed against the corruptions- of the church, he was.
listened to with. greater approbation; and the farther he urged;
his disciples to depart from such. an impure' community, the
more eagerly did they follow him. By degrees, ideas of eccle-
fiaftical policy, altogether repugnant to those of the established"
church, gained' footing in the nation. The more fober and
learned Puritans inclined to that form which is known by.
the name of Presbyterian. Such as were more thoroughly
possessed with the spirit of innovation, however much they
might approve the equality of pastors which that system efla-
blifhes, reprobated the authority which it vests in various judi-
catories, descending from one to another in regular fubordina--
tion, as.inconfiftent with Christian liberty..

THESE wild notions floated for some time in the minds of'

the people, and'amufed them with many ideal schemes of eccle--
fiaftical policy. At length Robert Brown, a popular declaimer- Browniis..

1580.
n .

B o o K in high eftimation,-reduced them to a system, on which he mo-

x._ ' delled his own congregation. He taught, that the church of

England was corrupt, and antichriftians, its ministers not law-
fully ordained, its ordinances and sacraments invalid; and there-
fore he prohibited his people to hold communion with it in any
religious fundion. He maintained, that a society of Christians,
uniting together to worship God, constituted a church, possessed
of complete jurifdiaion in the condut of its own affairs, inde-
pendent of any other society, and unaccountable to any fupe-
rior; that the priesthood was neither a diftina order in the
church, nor conferred an indelible characer; but that every
man qualified to teach might be set apart for that office by the
elecion of the brethren, and by imposition of their hands; in
like manner, by their authority, he might be discharged from
that function, and reduced to the rank of a private Chriflian;
that every person when admitted a member of. a church ought
to make a public confession of his faith, and give evidence of
his being in a slate of favour with God; and that all the affairs
of a church were to be regulated by the decision of the majority
of its members.

Brownifse THIS democratical form of government, which abolished all
take refuge
in Holland. diftinfQion of ranks in the church, and conferred an equal por-

tion of power on every individual, accorded so perfetly with
the levelling genius of fanaticifin, that it was fondly adopted by
many as a complete model of Christian policy. From their
founder, they were denominated Brownifts; and as their tenets
were more hostile to the eftablilhed religion than those of other
separatists, the fiercest storm of persecution fell upon their heads.

Many

Many of them were fined or imprisoned, and some put to B 0oo K
death; and though Brown, with a levity of which there are
few examples among enthusiasts whose vanity has been sooth-
ed by being recognized as heads of a party, abandoned his difci-
ples, conformed to the eftabliihed religion, and accepted of a
benefice in the church, the fed not only subsisted, but con-
tinued to spread, especially among persons in the middle and
lower ranks of life. But as all their motions were carefully
watched, both by the ecclesiastical and civil courts, which, as
often as they were detected, punished them with the utmost
rigour, a body of them, weary of living in a state of continual
danger and alarm, fled to Holland, and fettled in Leyden,
under the care of Mr. John Robinson, their pastor. There
they resided for several years unmolested and obscure. But
many of their aged members dying, and some of the younger
marrying into Dutch families, while their church received no
increase, either by recruits from England, or by proselytes
gained in the country, they began to be afraid, that all their
high attainments in spiritual knowledge would be loft, and
that perfec fabric of policy, which they had ereced, would be
dissolved and consigned to oblivion, if they remained longer in
a strange land.

DEEPLY affected with the profpec of an event, which to Rcmovcfrom

them appeared fatal to the interests of truth, they thought Athence to
them appeared fatal to the interests of truth, they thought tAmerica.
themselves called, in order to prevent it, to remove to some
other place, where they might profess and propagate their
opinions with greater success. America, in which their
countrymen were at that time intent on planting colonies, pre-

P sented

B O 0 I sented itfelfto their thoughts. They flattered themselves with

x , hopes of being permitted, in that remote region, to follow their

own ideas in religion without disturbance. The dangers and
hardships to which all former emigrants to America had been ex-
posed, did not deter them. " They were well weaned, (according
to their own description) from the delicate milk of their mother
country, and enured to the difficulties of a strange land. They
were knit together in a stria and sacred band, by virtue of
which they held themselves obliged to take care of the good of
each other, and of the whole. It was not with them, as with
other men, whom small things could discourage, or small dif-
3618. contents cause to with themselves at home again *." The first

object of their solicitude was to secure the free exercise of their
religion. For this purpose they applied to the king; and
though James refused to give them any explicit assurance of
toleration, they seem to have obtained from him some promise
of his connivance, as long as they continued to demean them-
selves quietly. So eager were they to accomplish their fa-
vourite scheme, that, relying on this precarious security, they
began to negociate with the Virginian company for a traa of
land within the limits of their patent. This they easily pro-
cured from a society desirous of encouraging migration to a vast
country, of which they had hitherto occupied only a few spots.

t620. AFTER the utmost efforts, their preparations fell far ihort of

Firftattcept what was requisite for beginning the settlement of a new co-
Mofetchin lony. A hundred and twenty persons failed from England in a
Sets Bay.

* Hutchinson's Hist. of Mafach. p. 4.

single

single ship on this arduous undertaking. The place of their B o o K
destination was Hudson's River, where they intended to fettle;
but their captain having been bribed, as is said, by the Dutch,
who had then formed a scheme which they afterwards accom-
plifhed of planting a colony there, carried them so far towards
the north, that the first land in America which they made was
Cape-Cod. They were now, not only beyond the precincts of Nov. 1.
the territory which had been granted to them, but beyond
those of the company, from which they derived their right.
The season, however, was so far advanced, and sickness raged
so violently among men unaccustomed to the hardships of a
long voyage, that it became necessary to take up their abode
there. After exploring the coast, they chore for their station,
a place now belonging to the province of Massachuset's Bay,
to which they gave the. name of New Plymouth, probably out Settle at
of refpec to that company, within whose jurifdifion they now Nouth.'l
found themselves situated .

No season could be more unfavourable to settlement than

that in which the colony landed. The winter, which, from the
predominance of cold in America, is rigorous to a degree un-
known in parallel latitudes of our hemisphere, was already set
in; and they were slenderly provided with what was requisite
for comfortable fubfiftance, under a climate considerably more
severe than that for which they had made preparation. Above
one half of them was cut off before the return of spring, by
diseases, or by famine: the survivors, instead of having leisure

* Hubard's Pref. State, p. 3. Cotton's Magnalia, p. 7. Hutchinson's Iiafl.
p. 3, &c.

P 2 tO

B O O K to attend to the supply of their own wants, were compelled to

X. take arms against the savages in their neighbourhood. Happily
Plan of go- for the English, a pestilence, which raged in America the year

before they landed, had swept off so great a number of the na-
tives, that they were quickly repulsed and humbled. The pri-
vilege of profefing their own opinions, and of being governed
by laws of their own framing, afforded consolation to the colo-
nifts amidst all their dangers and hardihips. The constitution
of their church was the fame with that which they had efta-
blifhed in Holland. Their system of civil government was
founded on those ideas of the natural equality among men, to
which their ecclesiastical policy had accustomed them. Every
free man, who was a member of the church, was admitted
into the supreme legislative body. The laws of England were
adopted as the basis of their jurisprudence, though with some
diversity in the punishments inflicted upon crimes, borrowed
from the Mosaic institutions. The executive power was vested
in a governor and some assistants, who were elected annually
by the members of the legislative assembly ". So far their inftitu-
tions appear to be founded on the ordinary maxims of human
prudence. But it was a favourite opinion with all the enthu-
fiafis of that age, that the scriptures contained a complete
system, not only of spiritual inftruetion, but of civil wisdom
and polity; and without attending to the peculiar circumstances
or situation of the people whose history is there recorded, they
often-deduced general rules for their own conduct, from what
happened among men in a very different state. Under the in-

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 87.

fluence

fluence of this wild notion, the colonists of New Plymouth, in B o o K
imitation of the primitive Christians, threw all their' property x
into a common flock, and, like members of one family, carried Community

of goods.

on every work of industry by their joint labour for public be-
hoof *. But, however this resolution might evidence the
sincerity of their faith, it retarded .the progress of their co-
lony. The fame fatal effects flowed from this community
of goods, and of labour, which had formerly been experi- This inftitu-

tion hurtful

enced in Virginia; and it soon became necessary to relinquish to the colony.
what was too refined to be capable of being accommodated
to the affairs of men. But though they built a small town,
and surrounded it with such a fence as afforded sufficient fe-
curity against the aflaults of Indians, the foil around it was so
poor, their religious principles were so unsocial, and the filpply
sent them by their friends so scanty, that at the end of ten
years, the number of people belonging to the settlement did not
exceed three hundred I'. During some years they appear not to
have acquired right by any legal conveyance to the territory
which they had occupied. At length. they obtained a grant of 16
property from the council of the New Plymouth company, but This colony
were never incorporated as a body politic by royal charter . ot incorepo

rated by

Unlike all the other settlements in America, this colony mult be charter.
confidered merely as a voluntary association, held together by
the tacit content of its members to recognize the authority of
laws, and ftibmit to the jurifdiion of magistrates framed and
chosen by themselves. In this state it remained an indepen-
dent, but feeble community, until it was united to its more

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 89, Douglas's Summary, i. p. 370.
t Chalmcrs' Annals, p. 97. s Id. p. 97. 107.

powerful

B o OK powerful neighbour, the colony of Maflachufets Bay, the ori-

*_ -, gin and progress of which I now proceed to relate.

Grand coun- THE original company of Plymouth having done nothing
cil of Ply-
mouth ap- effectual towards establishing any permanent settlement in
pointed. America, James I. in the year one thousand fix hundred and

twenty, issued a new charter to the Duke of Lenox, the Mar-
quis of Buckingham, and several other persons of diftinAion in
his court, by which he conveyed to them a right to a territory
in America, still more extensive than what had been granted to
the former patentees, incorporating them as a body politic, in
order to plant colonies there, with powers and jurifdiaion fimi-
lar to those contained in his charters to the companies of South
and North Virginia. This society was distinguished by the
name of the Grand Council of Plymouth for planting and go-
verning New England. What considerations of public utility
could induce the king to commit such an undertaking to per-
sons apparently so ill qualified for conduaing it, or what pro-
fpea of private advantage prompted them to engage in it, the
information we receive from contemporary writers does not
enable us to determine. Certain it is, that the expectations of
both were disappointed, and after many schemes and arrange-
ments, all the attempts of the new aflbciates towards coloniza-
tion proved unsuccessful.
Projea ofa NEW England must have remained unoccupied, if the fame

ew coloy. caues which occasioned the emigration of the Brownifts had

not continued to operate. Notwithstanding the violent perse-
cution to which Puritans of every denomination were still ex-

10 posed,

posed, their number and zeal daily increased. As they now de- B o o K
fpaired of obtaining in their own country any relaxation of the
penal statutes enacted against their fedt, many began to turn
their eyes towards some other place of retreat, where they might
profess their own opinions with impunity. From the tranquil-
lity which their brethren had hitherto enjoyed in New Ply-
mouth, they hoped to find this desired asylum in New Eng-
land; and by the activity of Mr. White, a non-conformist mi-
nifter at Dorchester, an aflbciation was formed by several gen-
tlemen who had imbibed Puritanical notions, in order to con-
dud a colony thither. They purchased from the council of
Plymouth all the territory, extending in length from three
miles north of the River Merrimack, to three miles south of
Charles River, and in breadth, from the Atlantic to the M1627.

March 3 9.

Southern Ocean. Zealous as these proprietors were to accom-
plifh their favourite purpose, they quickly perceived their own
inability to attempt the population of such an immense re-
gion, and deemed it necessary to call in the aid of more opu,.
lent co-partners *.

OF there they found, without difficulty, a sufficient number,

chiefly in the capital, and among persons in the commercial
and other industrious walks of life, who had openly joined the
fe& of the Puritans, or secretly favoured their opinions. These
new adventurers, with the caution natural to men conversant in
business, entertained doubts concerning the propriety of found-
ing a colony on the basis of a grant from a private company

* Neal's Hist, of New Engl, i. p. 122.

of

B o o K of patentees, who might convey a right of property in the foil,

X_' __ but could not confer jurifdiaion, or the privilege of governing

that ifociety which they had in contemplation to establish, As
it was only from, royal authority that such powers could be
derived, they applied for these; and Charles granted their re-
quief, with a facility which appears astonishing, when we con-
fider the principles and views of. the men who were suitors for
the favour.. '

Charter to TIME has been confidered as the parent of political wisdom,
he ne of Ma- but its inftrutions are communicated slowly. Although the
fachufets experience of above twenty years might have taught the Eng-
Bay.

lifh the impropriety of committing the government of fettle-
ments in America, to exclusive corporations resident in Europe,
neither the king nor his fubjets had profited so much by what
passed before their eyes, as to have extended their ideas beyond
those adopted by James, in his first attempts towards coloniza-
tion. The charter of Charles I. to the adventurers associated
for planting the province of Maflachufets Bay, was perfectly
similar to those granted by his father to the two Virginian com-
panies and to the council of Plymouth. The new adventurers
were incorporated as a body politic, and their right to the ter-
ritory, which they had purchased from the council of Ply-
mouth, being confirmed by the king, they were empowered to
dispose of the lands, and to govern'the people who should fettle
upon them. The firfi governor of the company, and his afift-
ants, were named by the crown: the right of electing their
successors was vested in the members of the corporation. The exe-
cutive power was committed to the governor and afliftants; that
of legislation to the body of proprietors, who might make fta-

tutes

tutes and orders for the good of the community, not inconfifent B o o K'
with the laws of England, and inforce the observance of them, I_
according to the course of other corporations within the realm,
Their lands were to be held by' the fame liberal tenure with
those granted to the Virginian company. They obtained the
fame temporary exemption from internal taxes, and from duties
on goods exported or imported ; and notwithstanding their mi-
gration to America, they and their descendants were declared
to be entitled to all the rights of natural born fubjets *.

THE manifest objea of this charter was to confer on the ad-'

venturers who undertook to people the territory on Maflachu-
set's Bay, all the corporate rights possessed by the council of
Plymouth, from which they had purchased it, and to form them
into a public body, resembling other great trading companies,
which the spirit of monarchy had at that time multiplied in the
kingdom. The king seems not to have foreseen, or to have
fufpeaed, the secret intentions of those who projected the mea-
sure; for so far was he from alluring emigrants, by any hopes
of indulgence with refped to their religious cfruples, or from
promising any relaxation from the rigour of the penal statutes
againif non-conformists, that he expressly provides for having
the oath of supremacy administered to every person who ihall
pass to the colony, or inhabit there t.

BUVT

HIatchinfon's Colle&. of Orig. Papers, p. i, &c.
- Ibid. p. 18.-It is surprising, that Mr.Ncal, an indultrious, and generally a

well-informed writer, should affirm, that i' free liberty of conscience was grant-
ed by this charter to all who should fettle in those pars, to worship God in their
own wa)y." Hist. of N. Engl. i. 124. This he repeats in his Hiltory of the Puri.

Q. tansg

B O O E BUT whatever were the intentions of the king, the adven-

x. - _ turers kept their own objec fitadily in view. Soon after their
1629. powers to effablifh a colony were rendered complete by the

Settlement in
consequence royal charter, they fitted out five ships for NewEngland; on board
ofthis char. of which embarked upwards of three hundred passengers, with
ter.

a view of fettling there. These were mofily zealous Puritans,
whose chief inducement to relinquiih their native land was the
hope of enjoying religious liberty, in a country far removed
from the feat of government and the oppreflion of ecclesiastical
courts. Some eminent non-conformist ministers accompanied
them as their spiritual inftrudors. On their arrival in New
England, they found the wretched remainder of a small body
June 29. of emigrants, who had left England the preceding year, under

the condu& of Endicott, a deep enthusiast, whom, prior to
their incorporation by the royal charter, the associates had ap-
pointed deputy governor. They were fettled at a place called
by the Indians Naunekeag, and to which Endicott, with the
fond affe&ation of fanatics of that age to employ the language
and appellations of scripture in the affairs of common life, had
given the name of Salem.

tans, ii. 210o and subsequent historians have copied him implicitly. No per-
million of that kind, however, is contained in the charter s and such an indul-
gence would have been inconsistent with all the maxims of Charles and his mi-
nifers during the courfc of his reign. At the time when Charles issued the
charters the influence of Laud over his councils was at its height, the Puritans
were prosecuted with the greatest severity, and the kingdom was ruled entirely
by prerogative. This is not an asra in which one can expe& to meet with con-
cessions in favour of non.conformists, from a prince of Charles's character and
principles.

TH'E

THE emigrants under Endicott, and such as now joined B o K

them, coincided perfecly in religious principles. They were ,
Puritans of the ftriceft form; and to men of this charater the Begin with

estabiilhing a

institution of a church was naturally of such interesting concern church.
as to take place of every other objet. In this first rranfaaion,
they displayed, at once, the extent of the reformation at which
they aimed. Without regard to the sentiments of that mo-
narch under the fandion of whose authority they fettled in
America, and from whom they derived right to act as a body
politic, and in contempt of the laws of England, with which
the charter required that none of their ats or ordinances
ihould be inconsistent, they adopted in their infant church
that form of policy which has since been distinguished by the
name of Independent. -They united together in religious Aug.6,
society, by a solemn covenant with God, and with one ano-
ther, and in stria conformity, as they imagined, to the rules of
scripture. They eleaed a pastor, a teacher, and an elder,
whom they set apart for their refpeCive offices, by irnpofition
of the hands of the brethren. All who were that day admitted
members of the church, signified their assent to a confeflion of
faith drawn up by their teacher, and gave an account of the
foundation of their own hopes as Christians; and it was de-
clared, that no person lhould hereafter be received into com-
munion until he gave fatisfaCion to the church with refpe&
to his faith and, fandity. The form of public worship which
they instituted was without a liturgy, difincumbered of every
superfluous ceremony, and reduced to the lowest standard of Cal-
viniftic simplicity "

" Math. Magn;l, p, 18. Neal'sHift. ofN. Engl. i. x6. Chlalmers, p. 143.

Q-2 IT

B O O K IT was with the utmost complacence that men, paflionately

x.

*L I *-A attached to their own notions, and who had long been restrained
fntolerance from avowing them, employed themselves in framing this mo-
of the new
church. del of a pure church. But, in the first moment that they began

to taste of Christian liberty themselves, they forgot that other
men had an equal title to enjoy it. Some of their number, re-
taining an high veneration for the ritual of the Ehglifh church,
were so much offended at the total abolition of it, that they
withdrew from communion with the newly-inftituted church,
and assembled separately for the worship of God. With an in-
consistency, of which there are. such flagrant instances among
Christians of every denomination that it cannot be imputed as
a reproach peculiar to any fe&, the very men who had them-
selves fled from persecution became persecutors; and had re-
course, in order to enforce their own opinions, to the fame un-
hallowed weapons, against the employment of which they had
lately remonstrated with so much violence. Endicott called the
two chief malcontents before him; and though they were
men of note, and among the number of original patentees, he
expelled them from the society, and sent them home in the
ships which were returning to England *. The colonists were
now united in sentiments; but, on the approach of winter, they
suffered so much from diseases, which carried off almost one
half of their number, that they made little progress in occupy-
ing the country

MEANWHILE the diredors of the company in England ex-
erted their utmost endeavours in order to reinforce the colony

* Mather, p.. g1. Neal>. p. 129.

wit..

pith a numerous body of new settlers; and as the intolerant B o0 0
spirit of Laud exated conformity to all the injunctions of the x
church with greater rigour than ever, the condition of fucr as from Eng-
had any scruples with refped to this became so intolerable, landincreafed.

by the into-

that many accepted of their invitation to a secure retreat in New lerance of
England. Several of these were- persons of greater opulence Lu
and of better condition than any who had hitherto migrated to
that country. But as they intended to employ their fortunes,
as well as to hazard their persons, in establishing a permanent
colony there, and foresaw many inconveniences fromr their sub-
jeaion to laws made without their own cortfent, and framed by
a society which must always be imperfecly acquainted with
their situation, they insisted that the corporate powers of the,
company should be transferred from England to America, and
the government of the colony be vested entirely in those who,
by fettling in the latter country, became members of it*. The
company had' already expended considerable fums in profecut-
ing the design of their institution, without having received al-
most any return, and had no profpeet of gain, or even of re-
imburfement, but what was too remote and uncertain to be
suitable to the ideas of merchants, the most numerous class of
its members. They hesitated, however, with refpe& to the
legality of granting the. demand of the intended emigrants.
But such was their eagerness to be. disengaged from an unpro- Charter o
mifing adventure, that, " by general consent, it was determined; the companY
that the charter should be transferred, and the government be to tlhe co0-
fettled in New England't." To the members of the corporaL

* Iutchinfon'8 Coll. of Papers, p. 25.
] Mather, p. 2o. Hutchinson's Hist. p. 2. Chalmers, p. I50o

tion.

B o o K tion who chose to remain at home was reserved a ..hare. ui

the trading flock and profits of the company during seven
years.

IN this singular tranfatlion, to which there is nothing fimi-

lar in the history of Engliih colonization, two circumstances
merit particular attention: one. is the power of the company
to make this transference; the other is the silent acquiescence
with which the king permitted it to take place. If the validity
of this determination of the company be tried by the charter
which constituted it a body politic, and conveyed to.it all the
corporate powers with which it was inverted, it is evident that
it could neither exercise those powers in any mode different
from what the charter prescribed, nor alienate them in such a
manner as to convert the jurifdiaion of a trading corporation
in England into a provincial government in America. But from
the first institution of the company of Massachuset's Bay, its
members seem to have been animated with a spirit of innova-
tion in ciyil. policy, as well as in religion; and by the habit of
rejecing established usages in the one, they were prepared for
deviating from them in the other. They had applied for a
royal charter, in order to give legal effect to their operations in
England, as ats of a body politic; but the persons whom they
sent out to America, as soon as they landed there, confidered
themselves as individuals, united together by voluntary affociar
tion, pofcifing the natural right of men who form a society,
to adopt what mode of government, and to exat what lawp
they deemed most conducive to general felicity. Upon this
principle of being entitled to judge and to decide for them-

selves,

selves, they established their church in Salemi without regard to B 0 0 K

X.

the institutions of the church of England, of which the charter .
supposed them to be members, and bound of consequence to
conformity with its ritual. Suitably to the fame ideas, we shall
observe them framing all their future plans of civil and eccle-
fiatlical policy. The king, though abundantly vigilant in ob-
serving and checking flighter encroachments on his prerogative,
was either so much occupied at that time with other cares occa-
sioned by his fatal breach with his parliament, that he could not
attend to the proceedings of the company; or he was so much
pleased with the profpea of removing a body of turbulent sub-
jeds to a distant country, where they might be useful, and
could not prove dangerous, that he was disposed to connive at
the irregularity of a measure which facilitated their departure.

WITHOUT interruption from the crown, the adventurers Colony ex.

proceeded to carry their scheme into execution. In a general
court, John Winthrop was appointed governor, and Thomas
Dudley deputy-governor, and eighteen assistants were chosen;
in whom, together with the body of freemen who hould fettle
in New England, were veRied all the corporate rights of the 163o.
company. With such zeal and activity did they prepare for
emigration, that in the course of the ensuing year seventeen
ihips failed for New England, and aboard there above fifteen
hundred persons, among whom were several of refpefable fa-
milies, and in easy circumstances. On their arrival in New
England, many were so ill-fatisfied with the situation of Salem,
that they explored the country in quest of some better flation ;
and fettling in different placeg around the f3ay, according to

,5 ttheir

B 0 o K their various fancies; laid the foundations of Boston, Charleftown,'
_ - -'... Dorchester, Roxborough, and'other towns, which have'finee'

become.confiderable in the province.'; In each of these a church
was ieftablihed on the. fame model with that of Salem. This,
together with the care of making provision for their fubfitence
during winter, occupied them entirely'during some months.
on. 19. But in the firfi general court, their disposition to confider them-

selves as members of an independent society, unconfined by the,
regulations in their charter, began to appear.' The.eledcion of
the governor and deputy governor, the appointment of all other
officers, and even the power of making laws, all which were
granted by the charter to the freemen, were taken from them,
and vested in the council of assistants. But the ariftocratical
ipirit of this resolution did not accord with the ideas of equality
prevalent among the people, who had been surprised into an
1.63 . approbation of it. Next year the freemen, whose numbers had

been greatly.augmented by the admission of new members,
resumed their former rights.

None but B.UT, at the fame time, they ventured to deviate from the
thember of charter in a matter of greater moment, which deeply affected
admitted as all the future operations of the colony, and contributed greatly
freemen.

to form that peculiar character by which the people of New
England have been diftinguiihed. A law was pafred, declaring
that none shall hereafter be admitted freemen, or be entitled to.
any share in the government, or be capable of being chosen ma-
giftrates, or even of serving as jurymen, but such as have been
"ceived into the church as members *. By this resolution4

' Iutchinron, p. 26. Chalmnrs, p. j53.

every

*every person who did not hold the favourite opinions concern- B o o K
ing the doctrines of religion, the discipline of the church, or the .
rites of worship, was at once cast out of the society, and strip-
ped of all the privileges of.a citizen. An uncontrolled power
of approving or rejeting the claims of those who applied for
admission into communion with the church being vested in.the
ministers and leading men of each congregation, the most valu-
able of all civil rights was made to depend on their decision
with refpeac to qualifications purely ecclesiastical. As in exa- Pernicious
mining into these, they proceeded not by any known or efta- confequrncet

of this regu-

blifhed rules, but exercised a discretionary judgment, the clergy .lation.
rose gradually to .a degree of influence and authority, from
which the levelling spirit of the independent church policy was
calculated to exclude them. As by their determination the po-
litical condition of every citizen was fixed, all paid court to men
possessed of such an important power, by assuming those austere
and fandimonious manners which were known to be the most
certain recommendation to their favour. In consequence of
this ascendant, which was acquired chiefly by the vwildeft enthu-
fiafs .among the clergy, their notions became a flandard to
which all studied to conform, and the singularities charaCteristic
of the Puritans in that age increased, of which many remark-
able instances will occur in the course of our narrative.

THOUGi a considerable namber of planters was cut off by Indian terri-

tories dcpo-

the diseases prevalent in a country so imperfecly cultivated by pulated by
its original inhabitants as to be still almost one continued tlhernallll-ro
forest, and several, discouragcd by the hardships to which they 163z.
were e.xposed, returned to England, recruits fuflicicnt to re-

a& L~~~ place

B OO gK place them arrived. At the fame time the small-pox, a dif-

x. temper fatal to the people of the New World, swept away such

multitudes of the natives that some whole tribes disappeared;
and Heaven, by thus'evacuating a country in which the English
might fettle without molestation, was supposed to declare its in-
tention that they should occupy it.

Settlements As several of the vacant Indian flations were well chosen,
of the colo-
nifts extend- such was the eagerness of the English to take poffeflion of
ed. them, that their settlements became more numerous and more

widely dispersed than suited the condition of an infant colony.
This led to an innovation which totally altered the nature and

1634.. constitution of the government. When a general court was to

Vreemen be held in the year one thousand fix hundred and thirty-four,
meet by re-
prefentativep. the freemen, inifead of attending it in person as the charter

prescribed, eleaed representatives in their different difirias, au-
thorizing them to appear in their name, with full power to de-
liberate and decide concerning every point that fell under the
cognizance of the general court. Whether this measure was fug-
gested by some designing leaders, or whether they found it pru-
dent to sooth the people by complying with their inclination,
is uncertain. The representatives were admitted; and confidered
themselves, in conjuncion with the governor and affiflants, as
the supreme legislative assembly of the colony. In assertion of
their own rights they enacted, that no law fliould be passed,.

Extent of no tax should be imposed, and no public officer flould be ap-
t0rly iCtm. pointed, but in the general assembly. The pretexts for making
ed by the as- this new arrangement were plausible. The number of freemen
fembly.

was greatly increased; many resided at a distance from the places

where

where the supreme courts were held; personal attendance be- B o 0 K
came inconvenient; the form of government in their own country -
had rendered familiar the idea of delegating their rights, and
committing the guardianflip of their liberties, to reprcfentatives
of their own choice, and the experience of ages had taught them
that this important trust might with safety be lodged in their
hands. Thus did the company of Massachusets Bay, in less
than fix years from its incorporation by the king, mature and
perfect a scheme which, I have already observed, some of its
more artful and aspiring leaders seem to have had& in view
when the association for peopling NewEngland was firif formed.
The colony must henceforward be confidered, not as a cor-
poration whose powers were defined, and its mode of pro-
cedure regulated by its charter, but as a society, which, having
acquired or aflumed political liberty, had, by its own voluntary
deed, adopted a constitution or government framed on the model
of that in England.

BUT however liberal their system of civil policy might be, as Spirit of fa-
their religious opinions were no longer under any restraint of laticifm ia-

creases.

authority, the spirit of fanaticifin continued to spread, and became
every day wilder and more extravagant. Williams, a minister
of Salem, in high estimation, having conceived an antipathy to
the cross of St. George in the flandard of England, declaimed
against it with so much vehemence as a relic of fuperflition
and idolatry which ought not to be retained among a people so
pure and fandified, that Endicot, one of the members of the
court of afiftants, in a transport of ecal, publicly cut out the
cross from the ensign displayed before the governor's gate. This

R 2 frivolous

B 0 0 K frivolous matter interested and divided the colony. Some of

x.

t _
- the militia scrupled to follow colours in which there was a

cross, left they ihould do honour to an idol: others refused to
serve under a mutilated banner, left they should be fufpeaed of
having renounced their allegiance to the crown of England.
After a long controversy, carried on by both parties with that
heat and zeal which in trivial disputes supply the want of argu-
ment, the contest was terminated by a compromise. The cross
was retained in the ensigns of forts and ihips, but erased from
the colours of the militia. Williams, on account of this,. as. well
as of some other doctrines deemed unsound, was baniihed out
of the colony *.
New settlers. THE prosperous state of New England was now so highly ex-

tolled, and the simple frame of its ecclesiastic policy was so much
admired by all whose affetions were estranged from the church
1635. of England, that crowds of new settlers flocked thither. Among

these were two persons, whose names have been rendered me-
morable by the appearance which they afterwards made on a
more conspicuous theatre: one was Hugh Peters, the enthu-.
fiaftic and intriguing chaplain of Oliver Cromwell; the other
Mr. Henry Vane, son of Sir Henry Vane, a privy counsellor,
high in office, and of great credit with the king; a young
man of a noble family, animated with such zeal for pure reli-
gion and such love of liberty as induced him to relinquish all
his hopes in England, and to fettle in a colony hitherto no

* Ncal's Hilt. of N. Eng. p. 140, &c. Hutchinson, p. 37. Chalmers,
p. 156.

farther

farther advanced in improvement than barely to afford subsist- B OO K
ence to its members, was received with the fondest admiration.
His mortified appearance, his demure look, and rigid manners,
carried even beyond the itandard of preciseness in that society
which he joined, seemed to indicate a man of high spiritual at-
tainments, while his abilities and address in business. pointed
him out as worthy of the highest station in the community.
With universal content, and high expectations of advantage 1636.
from his adminiitration, he was elected governor in the year
subsequent to his arrival. But as the affairs of an infant colony
afforded not objects adequate to the talents of Vane, his busy
pragmatical. spirit occupied itself with theological fubtilties and
Speculations unworthy of his attention. These were excited by
a woman, whose reveries- produced such effects both within
the colony and beyond its precincts, that, frivolous as they
may now appear, they must be mentioned as an occurrence of
importance in. its. history.-

IT. was the custom at that time in New England, among the Antinomirn

chief men in every congregation, to meet once a week, in order fc.:
to repeat. the sermons which they had heard, and to hold reli-
gious conference with refpeA to the doctrine contained in them.
Mrs. Hutchinson, whose husband was among the most refped-
able members of the colony, regretting that persons of her sex
were excluded from the benefit of those meetings, assembled
statedly in her house a number of women, who employed
themselves in pious exercises imnilar to those of the men. At
first the satisfied herself with repeating what The could recollect
of the difcourfcs delivered by their teachers. She began after-

wards

B o o K wards to add illustrations, and at length proceeded to censure

X.--. some of the clergy as unsound, and to vent opinions and fan-

cies of her own. These were all founded on the system which
is denominated Antinomian by divines, and tinged with the
deepest enthusiasm. She taught, that fandtity of life is no evi-
<dence of justification, or of a state of favour with God; and
that such as inculcated the necessity of manifesting the reality
of our faith by obedience, preached only a covenant of works:
ihe contended that the spirit of God dwelt personally in good
men, and by inward revelations and impressions they received
the fullefl discoveries of the divine will. The fluency and con-
fidence with which she delivered there notions gained her many
admirers and proselytes, not only among the vulgar, but among
the principal inhabitants. The whole colony was interested
and agitated. Vane, whose sagacity and acuteness seemed to
forsake him whenever they were turned towards religion,

1637. espoused and defended her wildest tenets. Many conferences

Their doc- ,
trinescon- were held, days of falling and humiliation were appointed, a
demned by
a gtneral general fynod was called, and, after dissensions so violent as
fynod. threatened the dissolution of the colony, Mrs. Hutchinson's

opinions were condemned as erroneous, and Ihe herself banish-
ed. Several of her disciples withdrew from the province of
their own accord. Vane quitted America in disgust, unlament-
ed even by those who had lately admired him; some of whom
now regarded him as a mere visionary, and others as one of
those dark turbulent spirits doomed to embroil every society
into which they enter *.

r Mather, book vii. c. 3. Hutchinson, p. 53. 74. Ncal, p.I. 144. 165.
&c. Chalmers, p. 163.

6 I-IOWEVEwR

HOWEVER much these theological contests might disquiet the B o o Kr

colony of Maflachufets Bay, they contributed to the more x.
speedy population of America. When Williams was banished The feaaries

fettle in Pro-

from Salem in the year one thousand fix hundred and thirty- vidence and
four, such was the attachment of his hearers to a pastor whose
piety they revered, that a good number of them voluntarily ac-
companied him in his exile. They directed their march to-
wards the south; and having purchased from the natives a con-
fiderable trac of land, to which Williams gave the name of
Providence, they fettled there. They were joined soon after by
some of those to whom the proceedings against Mrs. Hutchin-
son gave disgust; and by a tranfadion with the Indians they
obtained a right to a fertile island in Naraganfet Bay, which ac-
quired the name of Rhode Island. Williams remained among
them upwards of forty years, refpeaed as the father and the
guide of the colony which he had planted. His spirit differed
from that of the Puritans in Maflachufets; it was mild and to- Their mode.

ration,

lerating; and having ventured himself to rejea established opi-
nions, he endeavoured to secure the fame liberty to other men,
by maintaining, that the exercise of private judgment was a na-
tural and sacred right; that the civil magistrate has no compul-
livc jurifdiaion in the concerns of religion; that the punifih-
ment of any person on account of his opinions, was an en-
croachment on conscience, and an aa of persecution *. These
humane principles he instilled into his followers; and all who.
felt or dreaded oppression in other settlements, resorted to a,
community in which universal toleration was known. to be a

Ncal's llil. of N. ELg. p. i4i.

fundamentali

B o OK fundamental maxim. In the plantations of Providence and

X.' _ Rhode Island, political union was established by voluntary afib-

ciation, and the equality of condition among the members, as
well as their religious opinions; their form of government was
purely democratical, the supreme power being lodged in the
freemen personally assembled. In this state they remained
until they were incorporated by charter *

Colony of To similar causes the colony of Conne&icut is indebted for
Conne&icut. its origin. The rivalfhip between Mr. Cotton and Mr. Hooker,

two favourite ministers in the settlement of Massachusets Bay,
disposed the latter, who was least successful in this contest for
fame and power, to wish for some settlement at a distance from
a competitor by whom his reputation was eclipsed. A good
number of those who had imbibed Mrs. Hutchinson's notions,
and were offended at such as combated them, offered to accom-
pany him. Having employed proper persons to explore the
country, they pitched upon the weft fide of the great river
Connecticut as the most inviting flation; and in the year one
thousand fix hundred and thirty-fix, about an hundred persons,
with their wives and families, after a fatiguing march of many
days through woods and swamps, arrived there, and laid the
foundation of the towns of Hartford, Springfield, and Weather-
field. This settlement was attended with peculiar irregularities.
Part of the difirict now occupied lay beyond the limits of the
territory granted to the colony of Massachusets Bay, and yet the

* Hutchinson, p. 38. Neal, ii. 142. Dougl. Sum. ii. p. 76, &c. Chal-
ners, hll. ii.

emigrants

emigrants.took a commlifin from the governor and court of B o0 K
affiflants, empowering them to exercise jurifdicion in that .-,-
country. The Dutch from Manhados or New York, having
discovered the river Connedicut, and established some trading
houses upon it, had acquired all the right that prior poffeflion
confers. Lord Say and Sele and Lord Brook, the heads of
two illustrious families, were so much alarmed at the arbitrary
measures of Charles I. both in his civil and ecclesiastical admi-
niftration, that they took a resolution, not unbecoming young
men of noble birth and liberal fentimnents, of retiring to the New
World, in order to enjoy such a form of religion as they ap-
proved of, and those liberties which they deemed essential to
the well-being of society. They, too, fixed on the banks of the
Conneaicut as their place of fettleinent, and had taken posses-
sion, by building a fort at the mouth of the river, which, from
their united names, was called Say Brook. The emigrants
from Maflachufets, without regarding either the defects in
their own right or the pretensions of other claimants, kept pof-
feflion, aid proceeded with vigour, to clear and cultivate the
country. By degrees they got rid of every competitor. The
Dutch, recently fettled in America, and too feeble to engage in
a war, peaceably withdrew from Connecticut. Lord Say and
Sele and Lord Brook made over to the colony whatever title
they might have to any lands in that region. Society was efta-
bliflled by a voluntary compaa of the freemen; and though
they soon disclaimed all dependence on the colony of Mafa-
chufets Bay, they retained such veneration for its legislative
wisdom, as to adopt a form of government nearly resembling
its inffitutions, with refpea both to civil and ccclefiaftical

s policy.

B oO K policy. At a subsequent period, the coiony of Conneticut was

l. likewise incorporated by royal charter *.

irOf

Ne THE history of the first attempts to people the provinces of

Hampshire
and Main. New Hampshire and Main, which form the fourth .and most

extensive division in New England, is obscure and perplexed,
by the interfering claims of various proprietors. The company
of Plymouth had inconsiderately parcelled out the northern part
of the territory contained in its grant among different persons:
of these only Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain Mason seem
to have had any serious intention to occupy the lands allotted
to them. Their efforts to accomplish this were meritorious and
persevering, but unsuccessful. The expence offettling colonies
in an uncultivated country must necessarily be great and imme-
diate; the profpea of a return is often uncertain and always
remote. The funds of two private adventurers were not ade-
quate to such an undertaking. Nor did the planters whom
they sent out poflefs that principle of enthusiasm, which ani-
mated their neighbours of Massachusets with vigour, to struggle
through all the hardships and dangers to which society, in its
infancy, is exposed in a savage land. Gorges and Mason, it is
probable, must have abandoned their design, if, from the fame
motives that settlements had been made in Rhode Island and
Connecticut, colonists had not unexpectedly migrated into New
Hampihire and Main. Mr. Wheelwright, a minister of some
note, nearly related to Mrs. Hutchinson, and one of her molt
fervent admirers and partisans, had, on this account, been

* Hutchihfon, p. 44, &c. Neal, i. 147. Douglas, ii. i58, &c. Chal-
iers' Annals, ch. 12.

banifled

banished from the province of Massachusets Bay F. In quefs of B o OK
a new station, he took a course opposite to the other exiles; _ _
and advancing towards the north, founded the town of Exeter,
on a small river flowing into Pifkataqua Bay. His followers,
few in number, but firmly united, were of such rigid principles,
that even the churches of Maflachufets did not appear to
them sufficiently pure. From time to time they received
some recruits, whom love of novelty, or diffatisfacion with
the ecclesiastical institutions of the other colonies, prompt-
ed to join them. Their plantations were widely dispersed, but
the country was thinly peopled, and its political slate extremely
unsettled. The colony of Maflachufets Bay claimed jurifdic-
tion over them, as occupying lands situated within the limits of
their grant. Gorges and Mason aflerted the rights conveyed to
them as proprietors by their charter. In several diflrids, the
planters, without regarding the pretensions of either party, go-
verned themselves by maxims and laws copied from thoif of
their brethren in the adjacent colonies t. The first reduacion
of the political constitution in the provinces of New Hampfhirc
and Main into a regular and permanent form, was subsequent
to the revolution.

BY extending their settlements, the English became exposed

to new danger. The tribes of Indians around Maflachufets Bay
were feeble and unwarlike; yet from regard to justice, as well
as motives of prudence, the sirss colonists were studious to

Htutcllinfon, p. 70.

i Ibid. p. 103, &c. 176. )ouglas's Sum. ii. 22, &c. Chalmers' Annals,
ch. 17.

S 4 obtaiu

B 0 0 K obtain the consent of the natives before they ventured to occupy

X. . p
I.- any of their lands; and though in such tranfadions the con-

The farther fideration given was. often very inadequate to the value of the
encroach-
ments of the territory acquired, it was sufficient to satisfy the demands of the
Englilh re-
silted by the proprietors. The Englifl took quiet poffliefon of the lands
natives.

thus conveyed to them, and no open hostility broke out be-
tween them and the ancient possessors. But the colonies of
Providence and Conneticut soon found that they were fur-
rounded by more powerful and martial nations. Among these
the moft-confiderable were the- Naraganfets and Pequods; the
former feated on the Bay which bears their name, and, the lat-
ter occupying the territory which stretches from the river
Pequod along the banks of the Connecticut. The Pequods
were a formidable people, who could bring into the field a
thousand warriors, not inferior in courage to any in the New
World. They foresaw, not only that the extermination of the
Indian race muff be the consequence of permitting the English
to spread over the continent of America, but that if measures
were not speedily concerted to prevent it, the calamity would
be unavoidable. With this view they applied to the Naragan-
sets, requesting them to forget ancient animofities for a mo-
ment, and to co-operate with them in expelling a common
enemy who threatened both with deftrution. They represent-
ed that, when those strangers first landed, the objec of their
visit was not fufpeded, and no proper precautions were taken
to check their progress; that now, by fending out colonies in
one year towards three different quarters, their intentions were
manifest, and the people of America must abandon their native
feats to make way for unjust intruders.

10 BUT

BUT the'Naraganfets and Pequods, like most of the contigu- B 0 o K

X.

ous tribes in America, were rivals, and there subsisted between
them an hereditary and implacable enmity. Revenge is the
darling parfion of savages; in order to secure the indulgence of
which there is no present advantage that they will not sacrifice,
and no future consequence which they do not totally disregard.
The Naraganfets, instead of closing with the prudent proposal War with
of their neighbours, discovered their hostile intentions to the go- thbPequod
vernor of Massachusets Bay; and, eager to lay hold onifuch a fa-
vourable opportunity of wreaking their vengeance on their an-
cient foes, entered into an alliance with the Engliih against
them. The Pequods, more exasperated than discouraged by the
imprudence and treachery of their countrymen, took the field,
and carried on the war in the :usual mode of Americans. They
surprised stragglers, and scalped them; they plundered and burnt
remote settlements; they attacked Fort Say Brook without
success, though garrisoned only by twenty men; and when the
English began to ac offensively, they retired to fastnesses
which they deemed inatceffible. The different colonies had
agreed to unite againit the common enemy, each furniflhing a
quota of men in proportion to its numbers. The troops of
Connecticut which lay most exposed to danger were soon afeem-
bled. . The march of those from Maflachufets, which formed
the'moit considerable body, was retarded by the most singular
cause that ever influenced the operations of a military force..
When they were mustered previous to their departure, it was Purification
found that some of the officers, as well as of the private soldiers, of the army.
were still under a covenant of works; and that the blefling of
God could not be implored or expected to crown the arms of

such.

B 0 0 K such unhallowed men with success. The alarm was' general,

X. _ and many arrangements necessary in order to cast out the un-

clean, and to render this little band sufficiently pure to fight
the battles of a people who entertained high ideas of their own
faltnity *.

Defeat of the MEANWHILE the ConneEticut troops, reinforced by a small
Indians. detachment from Say Brook, found it necessary to advance to-

wards the enemy. They were posted on a rising ground, in
the middle of a swamp towards the head of the river Miftick,
which they had surrounded with palifadoes, the best defence
that their slender ikill in the art of fortification had discovered.
Though they knew that the English were in motion, yet, with
the usual improvidence and security of savages, they took no
May 2o. measures either to observe their progress, or to guard against

being surprised themselves. The enemy, unperceived, reached
the palifadoes, and if a dog had not given the alarm by bark-
ing, the Indians must have been massacred without resistance.
In a moment, however, they flarted to arms, and railing the
war-cry, prepared to repel the assailants. But at that early
period of their intercourse with the Europeans, the Americans
were little acquainted with the use of gunpowder, and dreaded
its effecs extremely. While some of the English galled them
with an incessant fire through the intervals between the palifa-
does, others forced their way by the entries into the fort,
filled only with branches of trees; and setting fire to the huts
which were covered with reeds, the confusion and terror

*Neal, i. 68.

quickly

quickly became general. Many of the women and children B 0o K
perished in the flames; and the warriors, in endeavouring to
escape, were either slain by the English, or falling into the
hands of their Indian allies, who surrounded the fort at a dif-
tance, were reserved for a more cruel fate. After the juntion
of the troops from Massachusets, the English resolved to pursue
their victory; and hunting the Indians from one place of retreat
to another, some subsequent encounters were hardly less fatal
to them than the ation on the Miftick. In less than three
months the tribe of Pequods was extirpated: a few miserable
fugitives who took refuge among the neighbouring Indians,
being incorporated by them, loft their name as a diftina people.
In this first essay of their arms, the colonists of New England Cruelties ex-
seem to have been conduced by skilful and enterprising of- the Ienddiagn
ficers, and displayed both courage and perseverance as soldiers.
But they stained their laurels by the use which they made of
viaory. Instead of treating the Pequods as an independent
people, who made a gallant effort to defend the property, the
rights, and the freedom of their nation, they retaliated upon
them all the barbarities of American war. Some they mafia-
cred in cold blood, others they gave up to be tortured by their
Indian allies, a considerable number they fold as slaves in Ber-
mudas, the reft were reduced to servitude among themselves *.

BUT reprehensible as this condu& of the English must be Emigrations

from Eng-

deemed, their vigorous efforts in this decisive campaign filled land.
all the surrounding tribes of Indians with such an high opinion

*Hutchinson, p. 58. 76, &c. Mather, Magnalia, b. vi/. ch. 6. Hubbards
State of N. Eng. p. 5. 16, &c.

of

B 0 0 It of their vaburias f ecured a lomng tranqiillity- to ,all their ;Settjec

- ments. -At the fame time the violence of'adminiftratidori in

England continued to increase their population and /strength,
by forcing many refpedable fu-bjets to tear themfelves:fi-oin all
the tender connections that bind men to their native. country,
and to fly so '-refuge: to a region of the New World, which
hitherto presented 'to them nothing that could allure; thielm

Prohibited by thither but exemption from oppression. The number of those
royal procla-
mation.- emigrants drew the attention of government, -and appearad o

formidable, that a proclamation was issued, prohibitin'g masers
of Ihips from carrying passengers to New England without
special permission. On many occasions thi's injunction was
eluded or disregarded. Fatally for the kilig, it operated' vitli
full effect in one instance. Sir Arthur Haflerig, John Hamp;
den, Oliver Cromwell, and fomie other persons whose prin-
ciples and views coincided with theirs, impatient-to enjoy
those civil and religiousliberties which they ftruggled.in vain
to obtain in Great Britain, hired foine fliips to carry them and
their attendants to New England. By order of council, -anl
embargo was laid on these when on the point of failing; and
Charles, far from fufpeaing that the future revolutions in his
kingdoms were to be excited and direced by persons, in such
an humble sphere of life, forcibly detained the men destined to
overturn his throne, and to terminate his days by a violent
death *.

iBUT, in spite of all the efforts of government to check this
spirit of migration, the measures of the king and his ministers

* Mather, Magnalia, b. i. cIh., p. 23. Neal's Ilif. of N. Eng.i. ir1.
Chalmers' Annals, i, i55. 16o, &c.

were

were eonfidered by a great body of the people as so hostile to B o o K
those rights which they deemed most valuable, that in the course ._
oP the year one thousand fix hundred and thirty-eight, above
three thousand persons embarked for New England, choofing
rather to expose themselves to all the consequences of difre-
garding the royal proclamation, than to remain longer under
oppression. Exasperated at this contempt of his authority,
Charles had recourse to a violent but effectual mode of accom-
pjihing 'what he had in view. A writ of quo warranto was.
issued againit the corporation of Massachusets Bay. The colo- Colony of
nifts had conformed so little to the terms of their charter, that Bay ffchuat
judgment was given against them without difficulty. They were la, and av
found to have forfeited all their rights as a corporation, which forfeited its
of course returned to the crown, and Charles began to take
measures for new modelling the political frame of the colony,
and veiting the administration of its affairs in other hands. But
-is plans were never carried into execution. In every corner of
his dominions, the itorm now began'to gather, which soon burst
out with such fatal violence, that Charles, during the remainder
of his unfortunate reign, occupied with domestic and more in-
tereiting cares, had not leisure to bestow any attention upon, a
remote and inconsiderable province *.

ON the meeting of the Long Parliament, such. a Revolution

took place in England, that all the motives for migrating to the
new world ceased. The maxims of the Puritans with refped
to the government both of church and state, became predolni-

Hutchinson, p. 86, 502, &c. Chalmcrs' Annals,. i. 6I,

T nant

a o o K nant in the nation, and were enforced by the hand of :power.

.- , .
_ Their oppreflors were humbled ; that perfect fyPfem of reform-

ed polity, which had long been the objeac'of their 'admiraitioni
*and desire, was eflablifhedby law; and amidst the intrigues aind
conflicts of an obstinate civil war, turbulent-and afpiring'fiirits
'found such full occupation, that they had no inducement tb quit
.a busy theatre, on which they had risen to ad'a most confpicu-
ous part. From the year one thousand fix hundred and twenty,
when the first feeble colony was conduded to New England by

State ofthe the Brownifts, to the year one thousand fix hundred and
.colonies at
bis period. 'forty, it has been computed, that twenty-one thousand two

'hundred British subjes 'had fettled there. The money expend-
ed by various adventurers during that period in fitting out Ihips,
in purchasing flock, and transporting settlers, amounted, on i
moderate calculation, nearly to two hundred thousand pounds :
a vast fum in that age, and which no principles, inferior in
force to those wherewith the Puritans were animated, could
'have persuaded men to lay out, on the uncertain profpeA of ob-
taining an establishment in a remote uncultivated region,
which, from its situation and climate, could allure them with no
'hope but that of finding subsistence and enjoying freedom.
For some years, even subsistence was procured with difficulty;
and it was towards the close of the period to which our narra-
tive is arrived, before the product of the settlement yielded the
planters any return for their flock. About that time they began
to export corn in small quantities to the Welt Indies, and made
tome feeble attempts to extend the fiflery, and to open the

*Mather, B. i. ch.4. p. 17. c. 5. p. 23. Ilutchinfon, p. 193. Chalmers'
,Annals, p. 165.

trade

trade in lumber, which have since proved the flaple articles of B 0 0 K

X.

commerce in the colony *. Since the year one thousand fix
hundred and forty, the number of people with which New
England has recruited the population of the parent state, is
supposed at least to equal what may have been drained from it
by occasional migrations thither.

BUT though the sudden change of system in Great Britain

flopt entirely the influx of settlers into New England, the prin-
ciples.of the colonists coincided so perfe&tly with those of the
popular leaders in parliament, that they were soon diitinguithed
by peculiar marks of their brotherly affetion. By a vote of
the House of Commons in the year one thousand fix hundred
and forty-two, the people in all the different plantations of New Exemptlon

from certain

England were exempted from payment of any duties, either duties grant-
upon goods exported thither, or upon those which they im- tonies.
ported into the mother country, until the House shall take farther
order to the contrary. This was afterwards confirmed by the
authority of both Houses. Encouraged by such an extraordi, 1646.
nary privilege, industry made rapid progress in all the diftrids
of New England, and population increased along with it. In
return for those favours, the colonists applauded the measures
of parliament, celebrated its generous efforts to vindicate the
rights and liberties of the nation, prayed for the success of its
arms, and framed regulations in order to prevent any exer-
tion in favour of the king on the other fide of the Atlantic t.

* IHutchinfon, p. 91, 92.
l Hutchinson, p. 114. App. 517. Chalmers'Annals, i. 174. 176,

T 2 RELYING

B O K RELYING on the indulgent partiality with which all their

x.
.- _ proceedings were viewed by men thus closely united with them

in sentiments and wishes, the people of New England ventured
on a measure, which not only increased their security and
ipower, but may be regarded as a considerable ftep towards in-
dependence. Under the impreflion or pretext of the danger to
which. they were exposed from the surrounding tribes of In-

1643. dians, the four colonies of Massachusets, Plymouth, Connedti-

'May 'g.

-Confederacy cut, ;and Newhaven, entered into a league of perpetual confe-
f the New deracy, offensive and defensive; an idea familiar to several
England
Aites. leading men in the colonies, as it was framed in imitation of

the famous bond of union among the Dutch provinces, in
whose dominions the Brownifts had long resided. It was ftipu-
lated, that the confederates should henceforth be distinguished
by the name of the United Colonies of New England; that
each colony ihall remain separate and diftint, and have exclu-
five jurifdidion within its own territory; that in every war,
offensive or defensive, each of the confederates shall furnish its
quota of mien provisions5 and money, at a rate to be fixed from
time to time, in proportion to the number of people in each
Settlement; that an assembly composed of two commifioners
from each colony shall be held annually, with power to delibe-
*rate and decide in all points of common concern to the confe-
deracy; and every determination, in which fix of their num-
.ber concur, shall be binding of the whole *. In this tranfac-
tion the colonies of New England seem to have confidered
*themselves as independent societies, possesing all the rights of

Nea's Hist. of N, Eng. i. 202, &c. Hutchinson, p,b 124. Chalmers' Anmi
P. 177.

sovereignty,

sovereignty, and free from the controul of any superior power. B o O K
'The governing party in England, occupied with affairs of more _.
urgent concern, and no wife disposed to observe the conduC of
their brethren in America with any jealous attention, suffered
the measure to pass without animadversion.

EMBOLDENED by this connivance the spirit of independence

gathered strength, and soon displayed itself more openly: some
persons of note in the colony of Massachusets, averse to the
fyfiem of ecclesiastical polity established there, and preferring to
it the government and discipline of the churches of England or
Scotland, having remonstrated to the general court against the 1646.
injustice of depriving them of their rights as freemen, and of
their privileges as Christians, because they could not join as
members with any of the congregational churches, petitioned
that they might no longer be bound to obey laws to which they
had not assented, nor be subjea to taxes imposed by an assem-
bly in which they were not represented. Their demands were Petition of

the Dissent.

not only rejected, but they were imprisoned and fined as dif- ers rejeted.
turbers of the public peace; and when they appointed some of
their number to lay their grievances before parliament, the
annual court, in order to prevent this appeal to the supreme
power, attempted firit to seize their papers, and then to obftrud
their embarkation for England. But though neither of these
could be accomplished, such was the address and influence of
the colonies' agents in England, that no inquiry seems to have
been made into this tranfation '*. This was followed by an

* Neal's Hist. N. Eng. i. 213. Hutchinson's Hil. 145, &c. Collecq. 188,
&c. Chalm. Ann. 179. Mather, Magnal. B. iii. ch. i, p. 30.

14 indication

B o o K indication, still less ambiguous, of the aspiring spirit prevalent

x.

, among the people of Massachusets. Under every form of'

government the right of coining money has been confidered as
a prerogative peculiar to sovereignty, and which no Subordinate
member in any state is entitled to claim. Regardless of this
eltabliihed maxim, the general court ordered. a coinage of silver
money at Boston, stamped with the name of the colony, and

Right of a tree as an apt symbol of its progreflive vigour *. Even this
fumed by the usurpation escaped without notice. The Independents, having
colonists. now humbled all rival fees, engrossed the whole diretion of as-

fairs in Great Britain; and long accuAomed to admire the go-
vernment of New England, framed agreeably to those principles
which they had adopted as the most perfet model of civil and,
ecclesiastical polity, they were unwilling to stain its reputation,
by censuring any part its condut.

Cromwell WHEN Cromwell usurped the supreme power, the colonies
patronises the of New England continued to stand as high in his eflimation.
New EngA
land colonies. As he had deeply imbibed all the fanatical notions of the Inde-

pendents, and was perpetually surrounded by the most eminent
and artful teachers of that fedt, he kept a constant correspond-
ence with the leading men in the American settlements, who
seem to have looked up to him as a zealous patron t. He in
return confidered them as his most devoted adherents, attach-
ed to him no less by affection than by principle. He soon gave

Proposes to a striking proof of this. On the conquest of Jamaica, he
transport the
colonists to formed a scheme for the security and improvement of the ac-
Jamaita.

*Hutchinson, 177, 178. Chalmers' Annals, p. 18X.
t Hutchinfoll, App. 5ao, &c. Collea. p. 233.

quifition

quifition made by his vicorious arms, suited to the ardour of an B o o K

X.

impetuous spirit that delighted in accomplishing its ends by ex-
traordinary means. He proposed to transport the people of
New England to that island, and employed every argument cal-
culated to make impression upon them, in order to obtain their
content. He endeavoured to rouse their religious zeal by re-
presenting what a fatal blow it would be to the man of fin, if a
colony of the faithful were fettled in the midst of his territories
in the new world. He allured them with-profpeds of immense
wealth in a fertile region, which would reward the industry of
those who cultivated it, with all the precious productions of
the torrid zone, and expressed his fervent with that they might
take pofleffion of it, in order to fulfil God's promise of making
his people the head and not the tail. He assured them of being
supported by the whole force of his authority, and of vesting all
the powers of government entirely in their hands. But by this Colonifsde.

cline accept_
time the colonifs were attached to a country in which they ing this of

ser.

had resided for many years, and where, though they did not at-
tain opulence, they enjoyed the comforts of life in great abund-
ance; and they dreaded so much the noxious climate of the
Weft Indies, which had proved fatal to a great number of the
English who first fettled in Jamaica, that they declined, though
in the molt refpedful terms, closing with the ProteCtor's pro-
position *.

I-Iutchinfon, p. 19o, &c. Chalmers, p. 188.

TI-E END.
