THE

HIST ORY
H I S T 0 R Y

o
AM E R I C A.

BOOKS IX. AND X.

)

My

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

BOOKS IX. AND X.

CONTAINING
THE HISTORR OF FIRGINIA,

TO THE YEAR I688; AND
THE HISTORT OF NEW ENGLAND,

TO THE YEAR 1652.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL 0O THE UNIVI»lITY OF EDINBVIGC, NI$TORIOGIArPHL

TO Ill MAIJITY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEYIMBZ Or 1'T

IOYAL ACADEMY Or HISTORY AT MADRID.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STIAHAN j T. CADILL Jun. and W. D&VlY

(Sitcctlors to Mr. CADELL) in tiw Strand;

and E. BALFOR,I Edinburgh.

MDCCXCVI.

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEMENT.
T HE original plan of my Father, the

late Dr. Robertson, with refpedt

to the History of America, compre-
hended not only an account of the
discovery of that country, and of the
conquests and colonies of the Spa-
niards, but embraced also the history
of the Britifi and Portuguese Establish-
ments in the New World, and of the
Settlements made by the several na-
tions of Europe in the Weft India
Jflands. It was his intention not to
have published any part of the Work
until the whole was completed. In
the Preface to his History of America,
he has flated the reasons which in-
duced him to depart from that refolu-
tion, and to publish the Two Volumes
which contain an account of the dif-
covery of the New World, and of the

a progress

[ vi ]

progress of the Spanifi arms and colo-
nies in that quarter of the globe. He
fays, "he had made some progress in
the Hiflory of British America;" and he
announces his intention to return to
that part of his Work, as soon as the
ferment which at that tine prevailed
in the British Colonies in America,
should subside, and regular govern-
ment be re-established. Various causes
concurred in preventing him from
fulfilling his intention.

DURING the course of a tedious ill-

ness, which he early foresaw would
have a fatal termination, Dr. Robertson
at different times destroyed many of
his papers. But after his death, I
found that part of the History of British
America which he had wrote many
years before, and which is now offered
to the Public. It is written with his
own hand, as all his Works were; it
is as carefully corrected as any part
of his Manuscripts which I have ever
seen; and he had thought it worthy

of

[ vii ]

of being preserved, as it escaped the
flames to which so many other papers
had been committed. I read it with
the utmost attention; but, before I
came to any resolution about the
publication, I put the MS. into the
hands of some of those friends whom
my Father used to consult on such
occasions, as it would have been rash-
ness and presumption in me to have
trusted to my own partial decision. It
was perused by some other persons
also, in whose taife and judgment I
have the greatest confidence: by all of
them I was encouraged to offer it to
the Public, as a fragment curious and
interefling in itself, and not inferior
to any of my Father's Works.

WHEN I determined to follow that

advice, it was a circumitance of great
weight with me, that as I never could
think myself at liberty to destroy those
papers which my Father had thought
worthy of being preserved, and as I

could

[ viii ]

could not know into whose hands they
might hereafter fall, I confidered it
as certain that they would be published
at some future period, when they
might meet with an Editor, who, not
being acuated by the fame sacred
regard for the reputation of the Au-
thor which I feel, might make altera-
tions and additions, and obtrude the
whole on the Public as a genuine and
authentic work. The MS. is now pub-
lifhed, such as it was left by the Author;
nor have I presumed to make any ad-
dition, alteration, or correAion what.
ever.

WM ROBERTSON.

QUE a-ST EET,
E DINBUIt H,
April i796.

THE

# BOOK IX.

HISTORY

O F
A M E R I C A

B0 o K IX,
H E dominions of Great Britain in B 0 K

IX

T America are next in extent to those Ix
of Spain. Its acquisitions there are a re- sadit o
compence due to those enterprising talents awakened

in Eng-

which prompted the English to enter early land by
on the career of discovery, and to pursue columd,^
-it with persevering ardour. England was covcrics;
the second nation that ventured to visit the
*New Worid. The account of Columbma's
fucceifful voyage filled all Europe with
aftonihment and admiration. But in.Eng-
land it did something more it excited a

Ba Vehement

B o O K vehement desire of emulating the glory of

X. Spain, and of aiming to obtain some share

in those advantages which were expeced in
this new field opened to national acivity.
The attention of the English court had been
turned towards the discovery of unknown
countries, by its negociation with Bartho-
lemew Columbus. Henry VII. having lif-
tened to his propoftions with a more fa-
vourable ear than could have been expeced
from a cautious, distrustful prince, averse by
habit as well as by temper to new and ha-
zardous projedts, he was more easily in-
luced to approve of a voyage for discovery,
proposed by some of his own fubjeds, loon
after the return of Christopher Columbus.

checked BUT though the Engliffh had spirit to
,tLinsin form this scheme, they had not, at that pe-

aviga-- riod, attained to Iuch skill in navigation as
Uton;

qualified them for carrying it into execution.
From the inconsiderate ambition of its mo-
narchs, the nation had long wafted its genius
aud activity in pernicious and ineffeaual

efforts

efforts to conquer France. When this ill- B O K
directed ardour began to abate, the fatal -
contest between the houses of York and
Lancaster turned the arms of one half of
the kingdom against the other, and exhault-
ed the vigour of both. During the course
of two centuries, while industry and com-
merce were making gradual progress, both
in the south and north of Europe, the
Englilh continued so blind to the advan-
tages of their own situation, that they
hardly began to bend their thoughts to-
wards those objecs and pursuits, to which
they are indebted for their present opulence
and power. While the trading vessels of
Italy, Spain, and Portugal, as well as those
of the Hans Towns, visited the most re-
mote ports in Europe, and carried on an
active intercourse with its various nations,
the English did little more than creep along
their own coasts, in small barks, which con-
veyed the productions of one county to an-
other. Their commerce was almost wholly
paflive. Their wants were supplied by

X3 2 trangers;

B O O K ifrangers; and whatever necessary or luxury

IX.
e__y of life their own country did not yield, was

imported in foreign bottoms. The cross of
St. George was seldom displayed beyond the
precincts of the narrow seas. Hardly any
E-nglish {hip traded with Spain or Portugal,
before the beginning of the fifteenth cen-
tury; and half a century more elapsed be-
fore the Englifl mariners became so advcn-
turous as to enter the Mediterranean.

.3i,- IN this infancy of navigation, IIenry

tion from
Briol, could not commit the condu& of an arma-
tnder the meit, destined to explore unknown regi-
command
of Cabut. ons, to his own fubjeds. He invested Gio-

vanni Caboto, a Venetian adventurer, who
hlad Icttled int Bristol, with the chief com-
mand ; and issued a commifnion to him and
his three ions, empowering them to fail,
under the banner of England, towards the
cafn, north or weft, in order to discover
countries unoccupied by any Chriflian state;
to take potletfion of them in his name, and
to carry on an cxclufive trade with the in-

Il.i bitant;,

habitants, under condition of paying a fifth B o K

Ix.

part of the free profit on every voyage to ,
the crown. This commission was granted
on March Sth, 1495, in less than two years
after the return of Columbus from Ame-
rica *. But Cabot (for that is the name
ihe assumed ip England, and by which he
is best known) did not set out on his voy-
age for two years. He, together with his
second son Sebastian, embarked at Bristol, 1497.
on board a ship furnilhed by the king, and May.
was accompanied by four small barks, fitted
out by the merchants of that city.

Ad in that age the molt eminent navi- Cabot

di(coverl

gators, formed by the initrudions of Co- New-
lumbus, or animated by his example, were laund
guided, by ideas derived from his superior and fails

i , 1 , ~. ^ ialong the

knowledge and experience, Cabot had coaitof
adopted the fyitem of that great man, con- Virginia.
cerning the probability of opening a new
and fliortcr passage to the East Indies, by

Hakluyt, iii. 4.

3 3 holding

BOOK holding a weflern course. The opinion
,l- which Columbus had formed, with refped

to the islands which he had discovered, was
universally received. They were supposed
to lie contiguous to the great continent of
India, and to constitute a part of the vast
countries comprehended under that general
name. Cabot, accordingly, deemed it pro-
bable, that by steering to the north-well,
he might reach India by a ihorter course
than that which Columbus had taken, and
hoped to fall in with the coast of Cathay,
or China, of whose fertility and opulence
the descriptions of Marco Polo had excited
high ideas. After failing for some weeks
due weft, and nearly on the parallelof the
port from which he took his departure, he
discovered a large island, which he called
Prima Vifla, and his sailors Newforudland:;
and in a few days he descried a smaller
isle, to which he gave the name 'of St.
Ju;e 2... John. He landed on both there, made

iome obfcrvatiouis on their foil and pro-
ductions, and brought off three of the na-

tives.

tivae. Continuing his course westward, he-B o o K

IX.

soon reached the continent of North Ame- v -
rica, and failed aloqg it from the fifty-fixth
to the thirty-eighth degree of latitude,
from the coast of Labrador to that of Vir-
ginia. As his chief obje& was to dig
cover some inlet that might open a pafiage
to the weft, it does not appear that he
landed any where during this extensive run;
and he returned to England, without at-
tempting either settlement or conquest in
any part of that continent *.

I it had been Henry's purpose to Henry

dues not

prosecute, the objea of the commiflion profit by
given by him to Gabot, and to take pof- cdbot's
feflion of the countries which he had dif- very;
covered, the success of this voyage must
have answered his most sanguine expect-
ations. His fubjeAs were, undoubtedly,
the first Europeans who had visited that

* Monfon's Naval Trals, in Churchill', Collca. iii.
211.

B 4 part

**

B o o K part bs the American continent; and *4A .

Ix.
Ix- entitled to whatever right of property prior

discovery is supposed to confer. 'Countries
whidh stretched in an. uninterrupted course
through such a large portion of the tem-
perate zone, opened a profped of Iettling
to advantage under mild climates and in a
fertile foil. But by the time that Cabot re:
turned to England,. he found both the state'.
of affairs and the king's inclination unfa;
vourable to 'ahy scheme the execution of
which would have required tranquillity and
leisure. Henry was involved in a war with
Scotland, and his: kingdoms waig :iot :t
fully composed . fter the commo6tion excited
by a formidable irifurreaion of his- ow'
fubjeds in the ,we% An ambaffadof frbm
Ferdinand -of Arragon ws- then in Loi
don; and ,as Henry set a high"' le iiob
the friendship 'of that monarch,; or wh'o
charaaer '..he -fsed mnilt'h admfi Aiib: ,
perhaps from its similarity to his own, and
was endeavouriing to tltengthen their uniop
by negociating the marriage which after-

~; ~ wards

'1'8 took place between his eldest fbr and B OQ O
the princess Catharine, he was cautigus of ..
giving any offence to a prince, jealous to
excefo of. all his rights. From' the po-
fition of the islands and continent which
Cabot had cifcovered, it was evident that
they lay within the limits of the ample
donative which the bounty of Alexan-
der VI. had conferred upon Ferdinand and
Ifabela. No person, in that age, queftione4
the validity of a papal grant; and Ferdi-
nand was not of a temper to relinquiih any
claim to which he had a shadow of title.
Submia~i to the authority of the Pope,
and deference for an ally whom he oolurted
seem tohayv..conc.rred with Henry's own
situation, in determining.him to.abandon a
scheme, in which he had engaged with
some degree of ardour and exfec&atlon,
No attempt towards discovery was. . 4
in England during the remainder of
his reign; and Sebaftiai Cabot, find-
ing no encouragement for. his. adive ta.

. ..' lents

B.o o K lents there, entered into the service of

Ix.
A _-~- Spain *.

nor his TTIis is the mofl probablc account of the
nnimedi-
ate fuc- sudden cessation of Henry's activity, after

cflsrso such success in his first essay as might have

encouraged him to persevere. The ad-
vantages of commerce, as well as its na-
ture, were so little underltood in Eng-
land about this period, that by an ad
of parliament in the year 1488, the taking
of interest for the use of money was pro-
hibited under revere penalties t. And by

*Some schemes of difcovcry seem to have been

formed in England towards the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. But as there is no other memorial of
them, than what remains in a patent granted by the
king to the adventurers, it is probable that they were
feeble or abortive projets. If any attempt had been
made in concequence of this patent, it would not
have escaped the knowledge of a compiler so in-
duftrious and inquisitive as Hakluyt. In his patent,
Hlenry reftrits the adventurers from encroaching on
the countries discovered by the kings of Portugal, or
any other prince in confederacy with England. Ry.
r.er's Fadern, vol. xiii. p. 37.

t 3 eIcn. VII. c. 5.

another

another law, the profit arising from deal- B 0 0 K
ing in bills of exchange was condemned as *
favouring of ufiry . It is not surprising,
then, that no great effort should be made to
extend trade, by a nation whose commer-
cial ideas were fill so crude and illiberal.
But it is more difficult to discover what
prevented this scheme of Henry VII. from
being resumed during the reigns of his son
and grandson; and to give any reason why
no attempt was made, either to explore
the northern continent of America more
fully, or to fettle in it. Henry VIII. was
frequently at open enmity with Spain: the
value of the Spanish acquisitions in America
had become so well known, as might have
excited his desire to obtain some footing in
those opulent regions; and during a con-
fiderable part of his reign, the prohibitions
in a papal bull would not have refrained
him from making encroachment upon the
Spanish dominions. But the reign of

3 Hen. VII. c. 6.

Henry

B O0 K Henry was not favourable to the progress

IX,
i- _ of discovery. During one period of 'it;

the active part which he took in the as-
fairs of the continent, and the vigour with
which he engaged in the contest between
the two mighty rivals, Charles V. and
Francis I., gave full occupation to the en-
terprifing spirit both of the king and of his
nobility. During another period of his ad-
ministration, his famous controvcrfy with
the court of Rome kept the nation in per-
petual agitation and suspense. Engrossed
by those objeas, neither the king nor the
nobles had inclination or leisure to turn
their attention to new pursuits; and with-
out their patronage and aid, the com.
mercial part of the nation was too in-
considerable to make any effort of con-
sequence. Though England, by its total
reparation from the church of Rome, soon
after the acceflion of Edward Vl., dif-
claimed that authority, which, by its pre,
sumptuous partition of the globe between
two favourite nations, circumscribed the

9 activity

activity of every other state within very BO OK

IX.

-narrow limits, yet a feeble minority, dif- ,_
traded with facion, was not a juncture for
forming schemes of doubtful success and re-
mote utility. The bigotry of Mary, and her
marriage with Philip, disposed her to pay a
iacred regard to that grant of the Holy See,
which vested in a husband, on whom she
doated, an exclusive right to every part of
the New World. Thus, through a singular
succession of various causes, fixty-one years
elapsed from the time that the English
discovered North America, during which
their monarchs gave little attention to that
country which was destined to be an-
nexed to their crown, and to be a chief
source of its opulence and power.

BUT though the public contributed little Expedi-

tion to

towards the progress of discovery, naval South
ikill, knowledge of commerce, and a spirit America,

under the
'f enterprize, began to spread among the command

of Sc-

Englilh. During the reign of Henry VIII. bafian
fevcral new channels of trade were opened, Cabot.

and

00 arid private adventurers visited remote
Ix.
lx
- countries with which England had formerly

no intercourse. Some merchants of Bristol
having fitted out two [hips for the southern
regions of America, committed the conduc
of them to Sebastian Cabot, who had quit-
*zS6. tcd the service of Spain. He visited the

coasts of Brasil, and touched at the islands
of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico; and though
this voyage seems not to have been bene-
ficial to the adventurers, it extended the
sphere of English navigation, and added to
the national stock of nautical science *.
Though disappointed in thcir expecations
of profit in this first essay, the merchants
were not dilcouraged. They sent, fuc.
ceffively, fevcral vefcels from different ports
towards the fame quarter, and fecm to
have carried on an interloping trade in the
Portuguese fettlemcnts with 'uccefs t. Nor
was it only towards the well, that the adi-
vity of the Englifli wvas direcded. Other

* Hakluyt, iii. 498. 1 Ibid. iii. 7o.
-,-- r. 4 mcrclhants

merchants began to extend their commercial B O 0 K

Ix.

views to the east; and by cftablifhing an t._
intercourse with several islands in the Ar-
chipelago, and with some of the towns on
the coast of Syria, they found a new mar-
ket for woollen cloths, (the only manu-
fature which the nation had begun to cul-
tivate,) and supplied their countrymen with
various productions of the east, formerly
unknown, or received from the Venetians
at an exorbitant price '.

BUT the discovery of a shorter paflage Unrfc-

cefiful at-

to the East Indies, by the north-west, was tempt to
Rtill the favourite project of the nation,difcovera

of nation, north-
which beheld, with envy, the vast wealth weslpaC-

age to

that flowed into Portugal, from its cor- the n-
merce with those regions. The scheme dies.
was accordingly twice resumed under the
long adminifiration of HenryVIII.; first, 1517 and
with some slender aid from the king, and 's5'
then by private merchants. Both voyages

* lakluyt, ii. 96, &r.

were

0 0 K were disastrous and unsuccessful. In the
IX. x - former, one of the ihips. was loft, In the

litter,' the flock. of provisions was so ill-
proportioned to the number of the crew,
that although they were but .fit months at
lea, many periihed with hunger5 and the
survivors were constrained to support life
by feeding on the bodies of their dead
companions .

Sir Hugh Ti E vigour of the commercial spirit did
by filsn not relax in the reign of Edward VI. The
search of great fishery on the banks of Newfoundland
eaf pal- became an objet of attention; and from

some regulations for the encouragement of
that bltnch of ,trade, it. seems to have
been .prosecuted with activity and fuc-
cess -'. But the prospect of opening a
communication with China and the Spice
Islands; by some other route than round the
Cape of Good Hope, fRi~ contintl, to al-
lure the English, more rhan any scheme,

* I-lkluyt» i. 213, &c. iii. 129, 130.

· Ibid. iii. 131,

, . 4£U

of adventure. Cabot, whose opinion was BOO K
deservedly of high authority in whatever .
related to naval enterprise, warmly urged
the Englith to make another attempt to dif-
cover this passage. As it had been thrice
searched for in vain, by fleering towards the
north-west, he proposed that a trial should
now be made by the north-east; and sup-
ported this advice by such plausible reasons
and conjetures, as excited sanguine expect-
ations of success. Several noblemen and
persons of rank, together with some prin-
cipal merchants, having associated for this
purpose, were incorporated, by a charter
from the king, under the title of The
Company of Merchant Adventurers for the
Discovery of Regions, Dominions, Islands,
and Places unknown. Cabot, who was
appointed governor of this company, soon Issi;
fitted out two Ihips and a bark, furnished
with inftruaions in his own hand, which
discover the great extent both of his naval
ikill and mercantile sagacity.

c SIR

BOOK SIR Hugh Willoughby, who was en-

Ix. x-- trusted with the command, stood diretly
May 10. northwards along the coast of Norway,

and doubled the North Cape. But in that
tempestuous ocean, his small squadron was
separated in a violent storm. Willough-
by's ihip and the bark took refuge in an obh
fcure harbour in a desert part of Ruffian
Lapland, where he and all his companions

Wil- were frozen to death. Richard Chancelour,
loughby perifnes. the captain of the other veflfl, was more
hne of .fortunate; he entered the White Sea, and
his ships
winters at wintered in safety at Archangel. Though
.Arch-
n;lgl. no veflel of any foreign nation had ever

visited that quarter of the globe before, the
inhabitants received their new visitors with
an hospitality which would have done ho-
nour to a more polished people. The
English learned there, that this was a pro-
vince of a vast empire, subjed to the Great
Duke or Czar of Muscovy, who resided in
a great city twelve hundred miles from
Archangel. Chancelour, with a spirit be-

coming

coming an officer employed in an expe- B o K

Ix.
dition for discovery, did not hesitate a mo- .---

The cap.

ment about the part which he ought to ta, Vits
take, and set out for that distant capital. Mfcow.
On his arrival in Moscow, he was ad-
mitted to audience, and delivered a letter
which the captain of each ship had received
from Edward VI. for the sovereign of
whatever country they should discover, to
John Vafilowitz, who at that time filled
the Ruffian throne. John, though he ruled
over his subje&s with the cruelty and ca-
price of a barbarous despot, was not de-
ftitute of political sagacity. He instantly
perceived the happy consequences that
might flow from opening an intercourse
between his dominions and the western
nations of Europe; and, delightedwith the
fortunate event to which he was indebted
for this unexpeted benefit, he treated
Chancelour with great refpea; and, by a Feb.
letter to the king of England, invited his '55+
fubjeas to trade in the Ruffian dominions,

c 2 with

BOO K with ample promises of protecion and

IX. .v, favour i.

Trade CHANCELOUR, on his return, found
opened
with Mary feated on the English throne. The
Rufia success of this voyage, the discovery of a

new course of navigation, the establishment
of commerce with a vast empire, the name
of which was then hardly known in the
weft, and the hope of arriving, in this di-
rection, at those regions which had been
so long the object of desire, excited a won-
derful ardour to prosecute the design with
greater vigour. Mary, implicitly guided
by her husband in every at of adminifira-
tion, was not unwilling to turn the com-
mercial activity of her fubjets towards a
quarter, where it could not excite the
jealousy of Spain, by encroaching on its
poffeflions in the New World. She wrote
to John Vafilowitz in the most refpeaful

* Hakluyt, i. 226, &c.

terms,

terms, courting his friendship. She con- B 0 K

IX.

firmed the charter of Edward VI., em-

r --v

powered Chancelour, and two agents ap-
pointed hy the Company, to negociate with
the Czar in her name; and according to
the spirit of that age, she granted ancx.
clufive right of trade with Ruflia to the
Corporation of Merchant Adventurers *
In virtue of this, they not only eftablified
an aaive and gainful commerce with Ruflia,
but, in hopes of reaching China, they
pushed their discoveries eastwards to the
coast of Nova Zembla, the Straits of Wai.
gatz, and towards the mouth of the great
river Oby. But in those frozen seas, which
Nature seems not to have defined for navi.
gation, they were exposed to innumerable
disasters, and met with fucceflive difap-
pointments.

NOR were their attempts to open a Commu-

nication
communication with India made only iq with nl.

dia by
*Hakluyt, i. 258, &c. land.

c 3 this

B 0OK this channel. They appointed some of

IX.
- -,_ their fators to accompany the Ruffian

caravans, which travelled into Persia by
the way of Aftracan and the Caspian Sea,
inftruthig them to penetrate as far as pof-
fible towards the east, and to endeavour,
not only to establish a trade with those
countries, but to acquire every information
that might afford any light towards the
discovery of a passage to China by the
north-east *. Notwithstanding a variety of
dangers to which they were exposed in
travelling through so many provinces, in-
habited by fierce and licentious nations,
some of there fators reached Bokara, in
the province of Chorafanj and though
prevented from advancing farther by the
civil wars which desolated the country,
they returned to Europe with some hopes
of extending the commerce of the Com-
pany into Persia, and with much intelli-
gence concerning the state of those remote
regions of the east t.

* Ilakluyt. i. 3ol. t Ibid. i. 30xo &e.

THE

TIHE successful progress of the Merchant B O0 K

IX.

Adventurers in discovery, rouzed the emu- -
lation of their countrymen, and turned their Expedi-

tion to the
activity into new channels. A commercial coast of

Africa.

intercourse, hitherto unattempted by the
English, having been opened with the coast
of Barbary, the specimens which that as-
forded of the valuable productions of
Africa, invited some enterprising navi-
gators to visit the more remote provinces of
that quarter of the globe. They failed
along its western Ihore, traded in different
ports on both fides of the Line, and after
acquiring considerable knowledge of those
countries, returned with a cargo of gold.
dust, ivory, and other rich commodities,
little known at that time in England. This
commerce with Africa seems to have been
pursued with vigour, and was at that time
no less innocent than lucrative; for as the
English had then no demand for slaves, they
carried it on for many years, without vio-
lating the rights of humanity. Thus far
did the English advance during a period

c 4 which

B O O K which may be confidered as the infant state

Ix.

*sY of their navigation and commerce; and

feeble as its steps at that time may appear
to us, we trace them with an interesting
curiosity, and look back with fatisfation to
the early essays of that spirit which we
now behold in the full maturity of its
strength. Even in those first efforts of the
English, an intelligent observer will discern
presages of their future improvement. As
soon as the activity of the nation was put in
motion, it took various directions, and ex-
erted itself in each with that feady, perse-
vering industry, which is the foul and
guide of commerce. Neither discouraged
by the hardships and dangers to which
they were exposed in those northern seas
which they first attempted to explore, nor
afraid of venturing into the sultry climates
of the torrid zone, the English, during the
reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., an4
Mary, opened some of the most confider-
able sources of their commercial opulence,
and gave a beginning to their trade with

Turkey,

Turkey, with Africa, with Russia, and BooK
with Newfoundland,

BY the progress which England had Rliiegano

Elizabetl
already made in navigation and commerce, auspicious

to disco.

it was now prepared for advancing far- very.
ther; and on the accession of Elizabeth to
the throne, a period commenced, extremely
auspicious to this spirit which was rising
in the nation. The domestic tranquillity of
the kingdom, maintained, almost without
interruption, during the course of a long
and prosperous reign; the peace with so-
reign nations, that subsisted more than
twenty years after Elizabeth was feated on
the throne; the Queen's attentive eco-
nomy, which exempted her fubjets from
the burden of taxes oppressive to trade;
the popularity of her administration; were
all favourable to commercial enterprise,
and called it forth into vigorous exertion.
The discerning eye of Elizabetl having
early perceived that the security of a king-
dom, environed by the sea, depended on

its

B 0 0 K its naval force, she began her government

Ix. A_ with adding to the number and strength

of the royal navy; which, during a factious
minority, and a reign intent on no objee
but that of fupprefling heresy, had been
negleced, and suffered to decay. She
filled her arferals with naval stores; ihe
built several flips of great force, accord-
ing to the ideas of that age, and encouraged
her fubjcts to imitate her example, that
they might no longer depend on foreign-
ers from whom the English had hitherto
purchased all vessels of any considerable
burden *. By those efforts, the skill of
the English artificers was improved, the
number of sailors increased, and the at-
tention of the public turned to the navy,
as the moit important national objec. In-
stead of abandoning any of the new chan-
nels of commerce which had been opened
in the three preceding reigns, the Englifli
frequented them with greater assiduity, and

* Camd. Annalos. p. 70. edit. 1615 ; fol.

the

the patronage of their Sovereign added vi- B o o K
gour to all their efforts. In order to secure L
to them the continuance of their exclusive
trade with Ruflia, Elizabeth cultivated the
connecion with JohnVafilowitz, which had
been formed by her predecessor, and, by
fuccefive embassies, gained his confidence
so thoroughly, that the English enjoyed
that lucrative privilege during his long
reign. She encouraged the Company of
Merchant Adventurers, whose monopoly
of the Ruffian trade was confirmed by as
of parliament *, to resume their design of
penetrating into Persia by land. Their fe- s16z.
cond attempt, conduaed with greater pru-
dence, or undertaken at a more favourable
juncture than the firil, was more success-
ful. Their agents arrived in the Persian
court, and obtained such protection and
immunities from the Shah, that for a course
of years they carried on a gainful com-
merce in his kingdom t; and by fre-,

lHakluyt, i. 369. F Ibid. i. 344, &c.

quenting

BOOK quenting the various provinces of Persia,

IX.
A_ became so well acquainted with the vast

riches of the east, as strengthened their de-
sign of opening a more dire&t intercourse
with those fertile regions by sea.

Problfher BUT as every effort to accomplish this by
makes
three at- the north-east had proved abortive, a

tdifoer fchemrre was formed, under the patronage

the north. of the Earl of Warwick, the head of the
weft pas-
fge. enterprising family of Dudley, to make a

new attempt, by holding an opposite course
by the north-west. The conduct of this
enterprise was committed to Martin Fro-
bilher, an officer of experience and repu-

1576, tation. In three fucceflive voyages he ex-
,5778, plored the inhospitable coast of Labrador,

and that of Greenland, (to which Elizabeth
gave the name of Meta Incognita,) without
discovering any probable appearance of that
paflTge to India for which he fought.
This new disappointment was sensibly felt,
and might have damped the spirit of naval
enterprize among the Englifl, if it had not

resumeel

resumed fresh vigour, amidif the general B 00 K

Ix.

exultation of the nation, upon the success- 's--
ful expedition of Francis Drake. That Sir Fran-

cis Drake

bold navigator, emulous of the glory which fil, round
Magellan had acquired by failing round the tlhe world.
globe, formed a scheme of attempting a
voyage, which all Europe had admired for
sixty years, without venturing to follow the
Portuguese discoverer in his adventurous
course. Drake undertook this with a
feeble squadron, in which the largest vessel
did not exceed a hundred tons, and he ac-
compliflied it, with no less credit to him-
self, than honour to his country. Even in
this voyage, conduted with other views,
Drake seems not to have been inattentive to
the favourite obje& of his countrymen, the
discovery of a new route to India. Before
he quitted the Pacific Ocean, in order to
fAretch towards the Phillippine islands, he
ranged along the coast of California, as high
as the latitude of forty-two degrees north,
in hopes of discovering, on that fide, the
communication between the two seas, which

6 had

B O O K had so often been searched for in vain on

IX.
a_ the other. But this was the only unfuc-

cefsful attempt of Drake. The excessive
cold of the climate, intolerable to men who
had long been accustomed to tropical heat,
obliged him to flop short in his progress
towards the north; and whether or not
there be any passage from the Pacific to the
Atlantic Ocean in that quarter, is a point
still unafcertained *.

Enthu.i- FROM this period, the English seem to
asm of
discovery. have confided in their own abilities and

courage, as equal to any naval enterprize.
They had now visited every region to
which navigation extended in that age,
and had rivalled the nation of highest re-
pute for naval skill in its most splendid ex-
ploit. But notwithstanding the knowledge
which they had acquired of the different
quarters of the globe, they had not hitherto
attempted any fettlemcnt out of their own

Hakluyt, iii. 440. Camd. Annal. 301, &c.

country.

country. Their merchants had not yet BOOK

IX.

acquired such a degree, either of wealth or _
of political influence, as were requisite to-
wards carrying a scheme of colonization
into execution. Persons of noble birth
were destitute of the ideas and Information
which might have disposed them to pa-
tronize such a design. The growing power
of Spain, however, and the ascendant over
the other nations of Europe to which it had
attained under Charles V. and his son, na-
turally turned the attention of mankind to-
wards the importance of those settlements in
the New World, to which they were so
much indebted for that pre-eminence. The
intercourse between Spain and England,
during the reign of Philip and Mary; the
resort of the Spanish nobility to the English
court, while Philip resided there; the ltudy
of the Spanish language, which became
fafhionablc; and the translation of several
histories of America into English, diffused
gradually through the nation a more dif-
tind knowledge of the policy of Spain in

5 planting

B o K planting its colonies, and of the advan-

IX. .ysm tages which it derived from them. When

hostilities commenced between Elizabeth
and Philip, the profped of annoying Spain
by sea opened a new career to the enter-
prifing spirit of the English nobility. Al-
mofl every eminent leader of the age aimed
at diflinguifhing himself by naval explotis.
That service, and the ideas conneted with
it, the discovery of unknown countries, the
eftablifhmcnt of distant colonies, and the
enriching of commerce by new commodi-
ties, became familiar to persons of rank.

First pro. IN consequence of all those concurring
je/[ of a
eolon°y in causes, the English began seriously to form
orthc plans of fettling colonies in those parts of
America.

America, which hitherto they had only
visited. The projectors and patrons of
these plans were mostly persons of rank
and influence. Among them, Sir Hum-
phry Gilbert, of Compton in Devonshire,
ought to be mentioned with the diftindion
due to the conductor of the first Englilh

colony

colony to America. He had early reh- Bo o
dered himself conspicuous by his military i -x.
services both in France and Ireland; and
having afterwards turned his attention to
naval affairs, he published a discourse con-
cerning the probability of a north-west
passage, which discovered no inconsiderable
portion both of learning and ingenuity,
mingled with the enthusiasm, the credu-
lity, and sanguine expectations which in.
cite men to new and hazardous under-
takings *. With those talents, he was
deemed a proper person to be employed
in establishing a- new colony, and easily
obtained from the Queen letters patent, June I,
veiling in him sufficient powers for this 5
purpose.

As this is the first charter to a colony, Charter

granted by the Crown of England, the ar- by QOn
ticles in it merit particular attention, as they bit^a
unfold the ideas of that age, with refpet to

Hkluyt, iii. in.

9 the

B O O K the nature of such settlements. Elizabeth

IX.
h--~ authorizes him to difcovdr and take pof-

fclfion of all remote and barbarous lands,
unoccupied by any Christian prince or
people. She veits in him, his heirs and
afligns for ever, the full right of property
in the foil of those countries whereof he
shall take pofreflion. She permits such of
her subjeCts, as were willing to accom-
pany Gilbert in his voyage, to go and
fettle in the countries which he shall plant.
She empowers him, his heirs and assigns, to
dispose of whatever portion of those lands
lie shall judge meet to pcrfons fettled there,
in fee-fimple, according to the laws of
England. She ordains, that all the lands
granted to Gilbert ihall hold of the Crown
of England by homage, on payment of the
fifth part of the gold or silver ore found
there. She confers upon him, his heirs
and afligns, the complete jurifdidions and
royalties, as well marine as other, within
the said lands and seas thereunto adjoin-
ing; and as their common safety and in-

terest

terest would render good government ne- B O K
ceflary in their new settlements, she gave .a
Gilbert, his heirs and assigns, full power
to convict, punish, pardon, govern, and
rule, by their good discretion and policy,
as well in causes capital or criminal as ci-
vil, both marine and other, all persons
who shall from time to time fettle within
the said countries, according to such fla-
tutes, laws, and ordinances as shall be by
him, his heirs and assigns, devised and
established for their better government.
She declared, that all who fettled there
ihould have and enjoy all the privileges of
free denizens and natives of England, any
law, custom, or usage to the contrary not-
withstanding. And finally, she prohibited
all persons from attempting to fettle within
two hundred leagues of any place which
Sir Humphry Gilbert, or his aflociates,
shall have occupied, during the space of
fix years*.

* Hakluyt, iii. 135.

D 2 WiTH

B 0 0 K WITH those extraordinary powers, suited

Ix.
_ ' to the high notions of authority and pre-

Firti e rogative prevalent in England during the
fails. sixteenth century, but very repugnant to

more recent ideas with refped to the
rights of free men, who voluntarily unite
to form a colony, Gilbert began to collet
aflbciates, and to prepare for embarkation.
His own character, and the zealous es-
forts of his half-brother, Walter Ralegh,
who, even in his early youth, displayed
those splendid talents, and that undaunted
spirit, which create admiration and confi-
dence, soon procured him a sufficient num-
ber of followers. But his success was not
suited either to the sanguine hopes of his
countrymen, or to the expence of his
preparations. Two expeditions, both of
which he conducted in person, ended dif-
1580. afiroufly. In the last, he himself perihed,

without having effeted his intended fettle-
mcnt on the continent of America, or per-
forming any thing more worthy of no-
tice, than the empty formality of taking

poffeflion

possession of the island of Newfoundland, B O OK

IX.

in the name of his sovereign. The dif- -
fenfions among his officers; the licentious
and ungovernable spirit of some of his
crew; his total ignorance of the countries
which he purposed to occupy; his misfor-
tune in approaching the continent too far
towards the north, where the inhospitable
coast of Cape Breton did not invite them
to fettle; the Ihipwreck of his largest vef-
fel; and above all, the scanty provision
which the funds of a private man could
make of what was requisite for establishing
a new colony, were the true causes to
which the failure of the enterprise muff
be imputed, not to any deficiency of abili-
ties or resolution in its leader *.

BUT the miscarriage of a scheme, in The plan

resumed

which Gilbert had wafted his fortune, did by Ra.
not discourage Ralegh. He adopted all his lkge.
brother's ideas; and applying to the

Hakluyt, iii. 143, &c.

D 3 Queen,

B OOK Queen, in whose favour he flood high at

IX.

X_ - that time, he procured a patent, with ju-
M58'S4 rifdiaion and prerogatives as ample as had
M.archz6.

been granted unto Gilbert *. Ralegh, no
less eager to execute than to undertake the
April 27. scheme, instantly dispatched two finall

vessels, under the command of Amadas
and Barlow, two officers of trust, to visit
the countries which he intended to fettle,
and to acquire some previous knowledge of
their coasts, their foil, and productions.
Dircovery In order to avoid Gilbert's error, in holding

fia.r' too far north, they took their course by the

Canaries and the Well India islands, and
approached the North American continent
by the Gulph of Florida. Unfortunately
their chief researches were made in that
part of the country now known by the
name of North Carolina, the province in
America most destitute of commodious har-
bours. They touched firfi at an island,
wlich they call Wokocon (probably Oca-

* llkluyt, iii. 243.

koke),

koke), situated on the inlet into Pamplicoe B ox K
Sound, and then at Raonoke, near the -
mouth of Albemarle Sound. In both,
they had some intercourse with the na-
tives, whom they found to be savages,
with all the charaderiftic qualities of un-
civilized life, bravery, aversion to labour,
hospitality, a propensity to admire, and a
willingness to exchange their rude pro-
ductions for English commodities, efpe-
cially for iron, or any of the useful metals
of which they were destitute. After spend-
ing a few weeks in this traffic, and in visit-
ing some parts of the adjacent continent,
Amadas and Barlow returned to England s:pt. iS.
with two of the natives, and gave such
splendid descriptions of the beauty of the
country, the fertility of the foil, and the
mildness of the climate, that Elizabeth, de-
lighted with the idea of occupying a terri-
tory, filpcrioi, so far, to the barren regions
towards the north hitherto visited by her
fubjcds, bestowed on it the name of Vir-
ginia; as a memorial that this happy

D 4 discovery

BOO K discovery had been made under a virgin
r - - Queen *.

Colony THEIR report encouraged Ralegh to
establithed
in Virgi- haiten his preparations for taking posses-
,ia by Sir sion of such an inviting property. He fitted
Richard
Green- out a squadron of seven small Chips, under
ville

the command of Sir Richard Greenville, a
man of honourable birth, and of courage
so undaunted as to be conspicuous even
in that gallant age. But the spirit of that
predatory war which the English carried
on against Spain, mingled with this scheme
of settlement; and on this account, as
well as from unacquaintance with a more
dired and shorter course to North Ame-
rica, Greenville failed by the Wefl India
islands. He spent some time in cruising
among these, and in taking prizes; so that
it was towards the close of June before he
arrived on the coast of North America.
He touched at both the islands where
Amadas and Barlow had landed, and made

* Hakluyt, iii. 246.

some

some excursions into different parts of the BOO K

Ix.

continent round Pamplicoe and Albemarle -
Sounds. But as, unfortunately, he did
not advance far enough towards the north,
to discover the noble Bay of Chefapeak,
he established the colony which he left on AuguR
the island of Raonoke, an incommodious 2s
station, without any safe harbour, and al-
most uninhabited *.

THIS colony consisted only of one hun- In danger

of perinh-

dred and eighty persons, under the corn- ing by fa-
mand of Captain Lane, assisted by some tirn to'-
men of note, the most distinguished of England.
whom was Hariot, an eminent mathema-
tician. Their chief employment, during
a residence of nine months, was to obtain a
more extensive knowledge of the country;
and their researches were carried on with
greater spirit, and reached farther than could
have been expected from a colony so
feeble, and in a station so disadvantageous.

Hakluyt, iii. 25 1.

But

B o0 K But from the fame impatience of indigent

Ix.

adventurers to acquire sudden wealth,
which gave a wrong dircdion to the in-
diifry of the Spaniards in their settlements,
the greater part of the English seem to have
confidered nothing as worthy of attention
but mines of gold and silver. These thcy
fought for, wherever they came; thcic
they enquired after with unwearied eager-
nces. The savages soon discovercd the fa-
vourite objets which allured them, and
artfully arnufed them with so many tales
concerning pearl fisheries, and rich mines
of various metals, that Lane and his com-
panions wafted their time and activity
in the chimerical pursuit of these, inftcad
of labouring to raise provisions for their
own fubliftencc, On discovering the de-
ceit of the Indians, they were so much ex-
alperated, that from expostulations and
reproaches, they proceeded to open hof-
ss86. tility. The supplies of provisions which

they had leen accustomed to receive from
the natives were of course withdrawn.

8 'Through

Through their own negligence, no other B OO K
precaution had been taken for their sup- -
port. Ralegh, having engaged in a scheme
too expensive for his narrow funds, had not
been able to fend them that recruit of stores
with which Greenville had promised to fur-
nifh them early in the spring. The colony,
reduced to the utmost distress, and on the
point of perishing with famine, was pre-
paring to disperse into different districts
of the country in quest of food, when Sir Junc i.
Francis Drake appeared with his fleet, re-
turning from a successful expedition against
the Spaniards in the Weft Indies. A
scheme which he formed, of furnishing
Lane and his aflociates with such supplies
as might enable them to remain with com-
fort in their station, was difippointed by a
ifdden llorm, in which a finall vcf'el that
lie destined for their service was dafled to
pieces; and as he could not fiupply them
with another, at their joint rcquelt, as
they were worn out with fatigue and

falmine,

BOO K famine, he carried them home to Eng-

IX
. - land *
June 19.

Know- SUCH was the inauspicious beginning
ledge of
thecoun. of the English settlements in the New
qryadin World; and after exciting high expeaa-
this expe- tions, this first attempt produced no effec

but that of affording a more complete know-
ledge of the country; as it enabled Harlot,
a man of science and observation, to de-
scribe its foil, climate, producions, and the
manners of its inhabitants, with a degree
of accuracy which merits no inconsiderable
praise, when compared with the childish
and marvellous tales published by several of
the early visitants of the New World.
There is another consequence of this abor-
tive colony important enough to entitle it
to a place in history. Lane and his affoci-
ates, by their constant intercourse with the
Indians, had acquired a relish for their fa-

* Hakluyt, iii. 255. Camd. Annal. 387.

xo vourite

vourite enjoyment of smoking tobacco; to B 0 0 K
the use of which, the credulity of that -'
people not only ascribed a thousand imagi- bae oft.
nary virtues, but their superstition con- troduced
fidered the plant itself as a gracious gift of lnd.
the gods, for the solace of human kind, and
the most acceptable offering which man can
present to heaven *. They brought with
them a specimen of this new commodity
to England, and taught their countrymen
the method of using it; which Ralegh, and
some young men of fashion, fondly adopted.
From imitation of them, from love of no.
velty, and from the favourable opinion of
its.falutary qualities entertained by several
physicians, the practice spread among the
English. The Spaniards and Portuguese
had, previous to this, introduced it in other
parts of Europe. This habit of taking to-
bacco gradually extended from the extremir
ties of the north to those of the south, and
in one form or other seems to be equally

* Hariot ;p. Hakluyt, iii. 271. De Bry. America,
Pars i.

grateful

B OO K grateful to the inhabitants of every climate;
A-_.--i and by a singular caprice of the human fpe-

cies, no less inexplicable than unexampled,
(so bewitching is the acquired taste for a
weed of no manifest utility, and at first not
only unpleasant, but nauseous,) that it has
become almost as universal as the demands
of those appetites originally implanted in
our nature. Smoking was the first mode of
taking tobacco in England; and we learn
from the comic writers towards the close of
the sixteenth century and the beginning of
the seventeenth, that this was deemed one
of the accomplishments of a man of fashion
and Ipirit.

A FEW days after Drake departed from

Roanoke, a small bark, dispatched by Ra-
legh with a supply of stores for the co-
lony, landed at the place where the Englifl
had fettled; but on finding it deserted by
their countrymen, they returned to Eng-
land. The bark was hardly gone, when
Sir Richard Greenville appeared with three

ships.

(hips. After searching in vain for the co- B K

Ix.

lony which he had planted, without being ,
able to learn what had befallen it, he left
fifteen of his crew to keep pofleffion of the
island. This handful of men was soon
overpowered and cut in pieces by the fa-
vages *.

THOU H all Ralegh's efforts to establish Ralegh's

second at-
a colony in Virginia had hitherto proved tempt:o

fttlce a

abortive, and had been defeated by a fuc- colony in
cession of disasters and disappointments, Virginia.
neither his hopes nor resources were ex-
haufted. Early in the following year, he s537.
fitted out three ships, under the command
of Captain John White, who carried
thither a colony more numerous than that
which had been fettled under Lane. On
their arrival in Virginia, after viewing the
face of the country covered with one con-
titnued forest, which to them appeared an
uninhabited wild, as it was occupied only

IIakluyt, iii, 265. 28j.

by

B O K by a few scattered tribes of savages, they

IX.
* , discovered that they were deititute of many

things which they deemed essentially ne-
ceffary towards their subsistence in such an
uncomfortable situation; and, with one
voice, requested White, their commander,
to return to England, as the person among
them most likely to solicit, with efficacy,
the supply on which depended the exist-
ence of the colony. White landed in his
native country at a most unfavourable sea-
son for the negociation which he had un-
dertaken. He found the nation in uni-
versal alarm at the formidable preparations
of Philip II. to invade England, and col-
leding all its force to oppose the fleet to
which he had arrogantly given the name
of the Invincible Armada. Ralegh, Green-
ville, and all the most zealous patrons of
the rnew settlement, were called to at a
distinguished part in the operations of a
,5s8. year equally interefling and glorious to

England. Amidst danger so imminent, and
during a contest for the honour of their

sovereign

sovereign and the independence of their Bo o

IX.

country, it was impossible to attend to a I-
less important and remote obje& The cl°f^
unfortunate colony in Roanoke received fa-
no supply, and perished miserably by fa-
mine, or by the unrelenting cruelty of
those barbarians by whom they were fur-
rounded.

DURINO the remainder of Elizabeth's Raleh

reign, the scheme of establishing a colony the de-
in Virginia was not resumed. Ralegh, fetng
with a most aspiring mind and extraordi- colony in

Virginia.

nary talents, enlightened by knowledge no
less uncommon, had the spirit and. the de-
seas 6f a projector. Allured by new ob-
je&s, and always giving the preference to
such as were most splendid and arduous,
he was apt to engage in undertakings so
vast and so various, as to be far beyond
his power of accomplishing. He was now
intent on peopling and improving a large
(iRrit of country in Ireland, of which
he had obtained a grant from the Queen.

E Ho

B 0 0 K He was a deep adventurer in the scheme of

,_ .y) fitting out a powerful armament against

Spain, in order to eflablifh Don Antonio
on the throne of Portugal. He had begun
to form his favourite, but visionary plan,
of penetrating into the province of Guiana,
where he fondly dreamed of taking poflef-
lion of inexhaustible wealth, flowing from
the richest mines in the New World.
Amidst this multiplicity of projecs, of such
promising appearance, and recommended
by novelty, he naturally became cold to-
wards his ancient and hitherto unprofit-
able scheme of fettling a colony in Vir-
ginia, and was easily induced to assign his
right of property in that country, which he
had never visited, together with all the
privileges contained in his patent, to Sir
March, Thomas Smith, and a company of mer-

chants in London. This company, satisfied
with a paltry traffic carried on by a few
finall barks, made no attempt to take pof-
feflon of the country. Thus, after a period
of a hundred and fix years from the time

.· that

that Cabot discovered North America, in 0 OOK

IX.

the name of Henry VII., and of twenty _
years from the time that Ralegh planted
the firfR colony, there was not a single En-
glifhman fettled there at the demise of
Queen Elizabeth, in the year one thousand
fix hundred and three.

I HAVE already explained the causes of Circum.

fiances in
this, during the period previous to the ac- Eliza.

beth's

cefflon of Elizabeth. Other causes pro- ,ignun.
duced the fame effea under her admini- favour-

able to

ftration. Though for one half of her reign coloniza.
England was engaged in no foreign war,
and commerce enjoyed that perfec security
which is friendly to its progress; though
the glory of her latter years gave the
highest tone of elevation and rigour to the
national spirit; the Queen herself, from
her extreme parsimony, and her aversion
to demand extraordinary supplies of her
fubjets, was more apt to restrain than to
second the ardent genius of her people. Se-
veral of the mot fplcndid enterprizes in

El 2 her

BO o K her reign were concerted and executed by
'IX. .-, private adventurers. All the schemes for

colonization were carried on by the funds
of individuals, without any public aid.
Even the felicity of her government was
adverse to the efablifhment of remote colo-
nies. So powerful is the attraction of our
native foil, and such our fortunate parti-
ality to the laws and manners of our own
country, that men seldom choose to aban-
don it, unlefl they be driven away by op-
pression, or allured by vast profpeas of
sudden wealth. But the provinces of Ame-
rica in which the English attempted to
fettle did not, like those occupied by Spain,
invite them thither by any appearance of
silver or golden mines. All their hopes
of gain were distant; and they saw that
nothing could be earned but by persevering
exertions of industry. The maxims of
Elizabeth's administration were, in their
general tenor, so popular, as did not force
her fubjeas to emigrate, in order to escape
from the heavy or vexatious hand of power.

It

It seems to have been with difficulty that Ba o K
these slender bands of planters were col-
Icted, on which the writers of that age
bestow the name of the sirs and second
Virginian colonies. The fulness of time
for English colonization was not yet ar-
rived.

BUT the succession of the Scottilh line to 1603.

the crown of England hastened its approach. james fa.
James was hardly feated on the throne be- tvorable
fore he discovered his pacific intentions, efablih-

ment of

and he soon terminated the long war which colonies.
had been carried on between Spain and
England, by an amicable treaty. From
that period, uninterrupted tranquillity con-
tinued during his reign. Many persons of
high rank, and of ardent ambition, to
whom the war with Spain had afforded
constant employment, and presented allur.
ing profpets, not only of fame but of
wealth, soon became so impatient of lane
guifhing at home without occupation or
objea, that their invention was on the

E 3 stretch

B 0 0 K stretch to find some exercise for their aai-

Ix.
_-- vity and talents. To both there, North

America seemed to open a new field, and
schemes of carrying colonies thither be-
came more general and more popular.

Direst A VOYAGE, undertaken by Barthole-
courle
from mew Gofnold in the last year of the
Etongrth Q0een, facilitated, as well as encouraged,
America the execution of there schemes. He failed
birft at-
tempted from Falmouth in a small bark, with thirty-
by Gof-
old.t two men. Instead of following former na-

vigators in their unnecessary circuit by the
Weft India ifies and the Gulf of Florida,
Gofnold fleered due weft, as nearly as the
winds would permit, and was the first Eng-
lifh commander who reached America by
this shorter and more direc course. That
part of the continent which he firR de-
fcried was a promontory in the province
now called Massachusets Bay, to which he
gave the name of Cape Cod. Holding
along the coast, as it stretched towards the
south-west, he touched at two islands, one

of

of which he called Martha's Vineyard, B 1K
the other Elizabeth's Island; and visited -
the adjoining continent, and traded with its
inhabitants. He and his companions were
so much delighted every where with the
inviting aspet of the country, that not-
withstanding the smallness of their number,
a part of them consented to remain there.
But when they had leisure to reflect upon
the fate of former settlers in America, they
retra&ed a resolution formed in the first
warmth of their admiration; and Gofnold
returned to England in less than four
months from the time of his departure *.

THIS voyage, however inconsiderable it confe.

quences

may appear, had important effecs. The of Go-
English now discovered the asped of the voyage.
American continent to be extremely invit-
ing far to the north of the place where
they had formerly attempted to fettle. The
coast of a vast country, fretching through
the most desirable climates, lay before

*Purchas,iv. p. 1647.

E 4 them.

BO O K them. The richness of its virgin foil pro.

. '. mifed a certain recompence to their indus-

ftry. In its interior provinces unexpected
sources of wealth might open, and un-
known objeas of commerce might be
found. Its distance from England was di-
minifhed almost a third part, by the new
course which Gofnold had pointed out.
Plans for eflablifhing colonies began to be
formed in different parts of the kingdom;
and before these were ripe for execution,
one finall vetfel was sent out by the mer-
chants of Bristol, another by the Earl of
Southampton and Lord Arundel of War-
dour, in order to learn whether Gofnold's
account of the country was to be confider-
ed as ajuft representation of its state, or
as the exaggerated description of a fond dif-
coverer. Both returned with a full con-
firmation of his veracity, and with the ad-
dition of so many new circumstances in
favour of the country, acquired by a more
cxtenfive view of it, as greatly incrcafed
the dcfirc of planting it.

TilE

THE most a&ive and efficacious pro- BOO
0

lX.

moter of this was Richard Hakluyt, pre- '.-
bendary of Westminster, to whom Eng- ,Hakluy
land is more indebted for its American tbecom'

merciel
poffeflions than to any man of that age. and naval

&ill of

Formed under a kinsman of the fame name, that age.-
eminent for naval and commercial know-
ledge, he imbibed a similar taRe, and ap-
plied early to the study of geography and
navigation. These favourite sciences en-
grossed his attention, and to diffuse a re.
lilh for them was the great objet of his
life. In order to excite his countrymen to
naval enterprize, by flattering their national
vanity, he published, in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and eighty-nine, his va-
luable collection of voyages and difcove-
ries made by Englishmen. In order to
lupply them with what information might
be derived from the experience of the most
'uccefsfill foreign navigators, he translated
omne of the belt accounts of the progrefa
of the Spaniards and Portuguese in their
voyages both to the East and Welt Indies,

into

B O K into the Englilh tongue. He was consulted

IX. Cr.1^ with refpet to many of the attempts to-

wards discovery or colonization during the
latter part of Elizabeth's reign. He cor-
responded with the officers who conducted
them, directed their researches to proper
objets, and published the history of their
exploits. By the zealous endeavours of a
person, equally refpeted by men of rank
and men of business, many of both orders
formed an afrociation to efiablifh colonies
in America, and petitioned the king for
the fantion of his authority to warrant the
execution of their plans.

divides JAMES, who prided himself on his pro-
ivides
te coast found skill in the science of government,
of North
America and who had turned his attention to con-
itO two fider the advantages which might be de-

rived from colonies, at a time when he
patronised a scheme for planting them in
tome of the ruder provinces of his an-
cient kingdom, with a view of introducing

industry

industry and civilization there *, was now B 0
o K

lx.

no less fond of direting the active genius *
of his English fubjets towards occupa-
tions not repugnant to his own pacific max.
ims, and listened with a favourable ear to
their application. But as the extent as well
as value of the American continent began
now to be better known, a grant of the
whole of such a vast region to any one
body of men, however refpeaable, ap-
peared to him an at of impolitic and pro-
fuse liberality. For this reason, he divided
that portion of North America, which
firetches from the thirty-fourth to the
forty-fifth degree of latitude, into two dif-
triss, nearly equal; the one called the first
or south colony of Virginia, the other, the
second or north colony. He authorized 1606.

April to0.

Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers,
Richard Hakluyt, and their aflociates,
mostly resident in London, to fettle any
part of the former which they should

* Hilt. of Scotland, ii. 239.

choose,

B 00 K choose, and vested in them a right of pro-

Ix.
&-.» perty to the land extending along the coast

fifty miles on each fide of the place of
their first habitation, and reaching into the

and interior country a hundred miles. The
grants charters latter diftria he allotted, as the place of
compa. settlement, to sundry knights, gentlemen,
nies. and merchants of Bristol, Plymouth, and

other parts in the weft of England, with
a similar grant of territory. Neither the
monarch who issued this charter, nor his
fubjedts who received it, had any con-
ception that they were proceeding to lay
the foundation of mighty and opulent
states. What James granted was nothing
more than a simple charter of corporation to
a trading company, empowering the mem-
bers of it to have a common feal, and to
at as a body politic. But as the obje&
for which they associated was new, the plan
established for the administration of their
affairs was uncommon. Instead of the
power usually granted to corporations, of
electing officers and framing by-laws for

the

the conduc of their own operations, the B 0oK

ix.
supreme government of the colonies to be '-

Tenor o'

fettled was vested in a council resident in these
England, to be named by the king, accord- charters.
ing to such laws and ordinances as ihould
be given under his sign manual; and the
subordinate jurifdiftion was committed to
a council resident in America, which was
likewise to be nominated by the king, and
to aa conformably to his inftru&ions. To
this important clause, which regulated the
form of their constitution, was added, the
concession of several immunities, to en-
courage persons to fettle in the intended
colonies. Some of these were the fame
which had been granted to Gilbert and
Ralegh; such as the securing to the emi-
grants and their descendants all the rights
of denizens, in the fame manner as if they
had remained or had been born in Eng-
land; and granting them the privilege of
holding their lands in America by the freest
and least burdensome tenure. Others were
more favourable than those granted by

Elizabeth.

BOOK Elizabeth. He permitted whatever was

Ix.
,c__ _necessary for the sustenance or commerce

of the new colonies to be exported from
England, during the space of seven years,
without paying any duty; and as a far-
ther incitement to indufiry, he granted
them liberty of trade with other nations,
and appropriated the duty to be levied
on foreign commodities, for twenty-one
years, as a fund for the benefit of the co-
lony *.

Defeas IN this singular charter, the contents of
of there
char- which have been little attended to by the
£c'r. historians of America, some articles are as

unfavourable to the rights of the colonists,
as others are to the interest of the parent
state. By placing the legislative and exe-
cutive powers in a council nominated by
the crown, and guided by its inftrudions,
every person fettling in America seems to
be bereaved of the noblest privilege of a

* Stith. Hist. of Virginia, p. 35. Append. p. I.
Purclhas, v. 1683.

6 free

free man; by the unlimited permiflion of B o o K
trade with foreigners, the parent fiate is v_
deprived of that exclusive commerce which
has been deemed the chief advantage result-
ing from the establishment of colonies.
But in the infancy of colonization, and
without the guidance of observation or
experience, the ideas of men with refpea
to the mode of forming new settlements,
were not fully unfolded, or properly ar-
ranged. At a period when they could not
foresee the future grandeur and importance
of the communities which they were about
to call into existence, they were ill qualified
to concert the best plan for governing them.
Besides, the English of that age, accuf-
tomed to the high prerogative and arbi-
trary rule of their monarchs, were not ani-
mated with such liberal sentiments, either
concerning their own personal or political
rights, as have become familiar in the more
mature and improved state of their confti-
tution.

WITHOUT

BOOK WITHOUT hesitation or relutance the

Ix.
-I *- proprietors of both colonies prepared to

colonies execute their respective plans; and under
giniaand the authority of a charter, which would
Newv
England. now be rejeted with disdain, as a violent

invasion of the sacrcd and inalienable rights
of liberty, the first permanent settlements
of the English in America were eftablithed.
From this period, the progress of the two
provinces of Virginia and New England
form a regular and conneced story. The
former in the south, and the latter in the
north, may be confidered as the original
and parent colonies; in imitation of which,
and under whose shelter, all the others
have been successively planted and reared.

Advan. THE frft attempts to occupy Virginia
tlages of
tracing and New England were made by very fee-
the hio ble bodies of emigrants. As.thefe fettled,
Ithfe co- under great disadvantages, among tribes of
loniesin
their in- savages, and in an uncultivated desert; as
tantnlte. they attained gradually, after long ftrug-

gles and many disasters, to that maturity

of

of frength, and order of policy, which B O K
entitles them to be confidered as rofpe&t- .-
able fates, the history of their perfever-
ing efforts merits particular attention. It
will exhibit a fpeatacle no less friking than
inRrudive, and presents an opportunity,
which rarely occurs, of contemplating a so-
ciety in the firfR ,noment of its political
exifence, and of observing how its spirit
forms in its infant fRate, how its principles
begin to unfold as it advances, and how
those' chara&eriftic qualities, which dif-
tinguiih its maturer age, are successively ac-
quired. The account of the establishment
of the other Englilh colonies, undertaken
at periods when the importance of such
possessions was better understood, and
effected by more dired and vigorous exer-
tions of the parent fate, is less interesting.
I shall therefore relate the hitory of the
two original colonies in detail. With re-
fpet to the subsequent settlements, tome
more general observations concerning the
time, the motives, and circumstances of

their

B OOK their establishment, will be sufficient. 1

IX.

begin with the hiflory of Virginia, the
moa ancient and most valuable of the
Britilh colonies in North America.

Newport THOUGH many persons of diftintion
fails ior
Virginia. became proprietors in the company which
)cc. 9' undertook to plant a colony in Virginia, its'

funds seem not to have been confidcrablc,
and its firit effort was certainly extremely
feeble. A Ilmall vessel of a hundred tons,
and two barks, under the command of
Captain Newport, failed with a hundred
and five men, destined to remain in the
country. Some of these were of refped-
ablle families, particularly a brother of the
Earl of Northumberland, and several of-
ficers who had served with reputation in
the reign of Elizabeth. Newport, I know
not for what reason, followed the ancient
2607. course by the Well Indies, and did not

reach the coast of North America for four
months. But lie approached it with better
fortune than any former navigator ; for

having

having been driven, by the violence of a B °0 K
storm, to the northward of Roanoke, the .--.-a
place of his deitination, the first land he
discovered was a promontory which he
called Cape Henry, the southern boundary Dircovers

the Che-

of the Bay of Chefapeak. The English fapeak.
flood direcly into that spacious inlet, which
seemed to invite them to enter; and as they
advanced, contemplated, with a mixture of
delight and admiration, that grand rc-
fervoir, into which are poured the waters
of all the vast rivers, which not only dif-
fuse fertility through that diftridt of Ame-
rica, but open the interior parts of the
country to navigation, and render a com-
mercial intercourse more extensive and
commodious than in any other region of
the globe. Newport, keeping along the
southern shore, failed up a river, which
the natives called Powhatan, and to which
he gave the name of James-River. After Sails up

James.

viewing its banks, during a run of above giver.
forty miles from its mouth, they all con-
cluded that a country, where safe and con-

F 2 venient

B 0 0 X venient harbours seemed to be numerous,

IX.

would be a mote suitable station for a trad-
ing colony, than the fhoally and danger-
ous coast to the south, on which their
countrymen had formerly fettled. Here
then they determined to abide; and having
chosen a proper spot for their residence,
they gave this infant settlement the name

Founds of James-Town, which it Rill retains; and
James-
Tovwn. though it has never become either popu-

lous or opulent, it can boast of being the
most ancient habitation of the English in
the New World. But however well-chofen
the situation might be, the members of the
colony were far from availing themselves of
its advantages. Violent animofities had
broke out among some of their leaders, du-
ring their voyage to Virginia. These did
not subside on their arrival there. The
first deed of the council, which assumed
the government in virtue of a commiflion

, iiada- brought from England under the feal of the
uion company, and opened on the day after they

landed, was an aa of injustice. Captain

Smith,
s

Smith, who had been appointed a member B O K

Ix.

of the council, was excluded from his feat .
at the board, by the mean jealousy of his
colleagues, and not only reduced to the
condition of a private man, but of one sus-
pe6ded and watched by his superiors. This
diminution of his influence, and restraint
on his activity, was an essential injury to
the colony, which at that juncure flood
in need of the aid of both. For soon after
they began to fettle, the English were in.
volved in a war with the natives, partly
by their own indiscretion, and partly by
the suspicion and ferocity of those barba-
rians. And although the Indians, scattered Colony
over the countries adjacent to James-River, annyed

'by the

were divided into independent tribes, so Iudin,
extremely feeble that hardly one of them
could muster above two hundred warriors*,
they teazed and annoyed an infant colony
by their inceflant hoftilitiea. To this was
added a calamity till more 4readful; the

Purchas, vol. iv. 1692. Smith's Travels, p. 23,

F 3 ock

B O OK stock of provisions left for their subsistence,

IX.
A^ on the departure of their lhips for England,
June s. was so scanty, and of such bad quality,

that a fearcity, approaching almost to ab-

Suffers solute famine, soon followed. Such poor
from Icar-
city, and unwholesome fare brought on diseases, the
the un-
hcalthi violence of which was so much increased
netl-of the by the sultry heat of the climate, and the
climate.

moitfure of a country covered with wood,
that before the beginning of September,
one half of their number died, and most
of the survivors were sickly and dejected.
In such trying extremities, the compara-
tive powers of every individual are disco-
vered and called forth, and each naturally
takes that flation, and assumes that as-
cendant, to which he is entitled by his ta-

Smith lents and force of mind. Every eye was
called to
tilecom- now turned to*ards Smith, and all wil-
fmand, re lingly devolved on him that authority, of
flores the
proifprity which they had forrmerly deprived him.
of the co-
loby. His undaunted temper, deeply tinCtured

with the wild romantic spirit charaferiftic
of military adventures in that age, was pe-

culiarly

culiarly suited to such a situation. The B O K

IX,

vigour of his constitution continued, for- _
tunately, fill unimpaired by disease, and
his mind was never appalled by danger.
He instantly adopted the only plan that
could save them from deftrudtion. He
began by surrounding James-Town with
such rude fortifications as were a sufficient
defence against the aflaults of savages. He
then marched, at the head of a small de-
tachment, in quest of their enemies. Some
tribes he gained by caresses and presents,
and procured from them a supply of pro-
visions. Others he attacked with open
force; and defeating them on every occa.
sion, whatever their superiority in num-
bers might be, compelled them to impart
to him some portion of their winter ftorese
As the recompence of all his toils and dan.
gers, he saw abundance and c¢ntentmept
re-eftablilhed in the colony, and hoped
that he should be able. to maintain them in
that happy slate, until the arrival of ships
from England in the spring: but in onc

F 4 of

B O OK of his excursions he was surprised by a

Ix.
.--. , numerous body of Indians, and in mak-

ing his escape from .them, after a gallant
defence, he funk to the neck in a swamp,

Hle i and was obliged to surrender. Though
taken grisoner he knew well what a dreadful fate awaits

y the
Indians. the prisoners of savages, his presence of

mind did not forsake him. He shewcd those
who had taken him captive a mariner's
compass, and amused them with so many
wonderful accounts of its virtues, as filled
them with aftoniihment and veneration,
which began to operate very powerfully in
his favour. They led him, however, in
triumph through various parts of the
country, and conducted him at last to
Powhatan, the most considerable Sachim
in that part of Virginia. There the doom
of death being pronounced, he was led to
the place of execution, and his head al-
ready bowed down to receive the fatal
blow, when that fond attachment of the
American women to their European in.
vaders, the beneficial effects of which the

Spaniards

Spaniards often experienced, interposed in B 0 o i

IX.

his behalf. The favourite daughter ofi--
Powhatan rushed in between him and the
executioner, and, by her intreaties and
tears, prevailed on her father to spare his
life. The beneficence of his deliverer,
whom the early Engliih writers dignify
with the title of the Princess Pocahuntas,
did not terminate here; (he soon after
procured his liberty, and sent him from
time to time seasonable presents of provi-
sions *,

SMITH, on his return to James-Town, On hi

found the colony reduced to thirty-eight i"', ti
perfpns, who, in despair, were preparing con*y '
to abandon a country which did not feerd m.
defined to be the habitation of English-
men. He employed carefies, threats, and
even violence, in order to prevent them
from executing this fatal refolutlon. With
difficulty he prevailed on them to defer it

Smith's Travels, p 44, &rc Purchat, iv. 1704.
3tith. p.45, &c.

so

B 0 0K so long, that the succour anxiously ex.

IX.

.

_ peted from England arrived. Plenty was

Seafoib-
able fuc- infantly restored; a hundred new planters
cours were added to their number, and an ample
from Eng-
land. flock of whatever was requisite for clear.

ing and sowing the ground was delivered
to them. But, an unlucky incident turned
their attention from that species of indultry
which alone could render their situation

Colonins comfortable. In a small stream of water
by theap- that iflued from a bank of, sand near
pfargonce James Town, a sediment of some shining

mineral substance, which had some re-
semblance of gold, was discovered. At a
time when the precious metals were con.
ceived to be the peculiar and only valuable
; produtions of the New World, when
every mountain was supposed to contain a
treasure, and every rivulet was searched
for its golden sands, this appearance was
fondly confidered as an infallible indication
of a mine. Every hand was eager to dig;
large quantities of this glittering dust were
.amassed. Fr6bn some assay of its nature,

made
Lt\

made by an artist as unfkiJful as his corn- B 0 K
panions were credulous, it was pronounced _
to be extremely rich. "There was now"
(fays Smith) " no talk, no hope, no
"work, but dig gold, wash gold, refine
" gold *." With this imaginary wealth the
first vessel returning to England was load,
ed, while the culture of the land, and every
useful occupation, were totally neglected.

THE effeas of this fatal delusion were Smith

under-

soon felt. Notwithflanding all the pro-t,kc,,,
vident activity of Smith, in procuring corn furvhY
from the natives by traffic or by force, the count"
colony began to susser as much as formerly
from scarcity of food, and was wafted ,by
the fame distempers. In hopes of obtaipar
ing some relief, Smith proposed, as they
had not hitherto extended their researches
beyond the countries contiguous to James-
River, to open an intercourse with the
more remote tribes, and to examine into the
state of culture and population among

* Smith's Travels, p. 53.

them.

0o K them. The execution of this arduous de.
IX.
m sign he undertook himself, in a finall open

boat, with a feeble crew, and a very scanty
flock of provisions. He began his survey
at Cape Charles, and in two different
excursions, which continued above four
months, he advanced as far as the river
Sufquehannah, which flows into the bot-
tom of the Bay. He visited all the coun-
tries both on the east and weft ihores; he
entered most of the considerable creeks; he
failed up many of the great rivers as far as
their falls. He traded with some tribes;
he fought with others; he observed the
nature of the territory which they occupied,
their-mode of subsistence, the peculiarities
in their manners; and left among all a
wonderful admiration either of the bene-
ficence or valour of the English. After fail-
ing above three thousand miles in a paltry
veflel, ill fitted for such an extensive navi-
gation, during which the hardships towhich
he was exposed, as well as the patience
with which lie endured, and the fortitude

with

'with which he surmounted them, equal B 0

Ix.

whatever is related of the celebrated Spar
nifh discoverers in their most daring en-
terprizes, he returned to James-Town; he
brought with him an account of that large
portion of the American continent now
comprehended in the two provinces of Vir-
ginia and Maryland *, so full and exat,
that after the progress of information and
research for a century and a half, his
map exhibits no inaccurate view of both
countries, and is the original upon which
all subsequent delineations and descriptions
have been formed t.

BUT whatever pleasing profpet of future

benefit might open upon this complete dif-
covery of a country formed by nature to
be the feat of an exclusive commerce, it
afforded but little relief for their present
wants. The colony flill depended for sub-
fiftence chiefly on supplies from the na-
tives; as, after all the efforts of their own

* Sinith' Travels, p. 6j, &c. t Stith. p. 83.

I industry,

B o K industry, hardly thirty acres of ground
-v--a , were yet cleared so as to be capable of gul-

ture *. By Smith's attention, however,
the stores of the Englith were so regularly
filled, that for some time they felt no con-
fiderable distress; and at this juncure a
change was made in the constitution of the
company, which seemed to promise an in-
crease of their security and happiness. That
supreme dircdion of all the company's
operations, which the king by his charter
had reserved to himself, discouraged persons
of rank or property from becoming mem-
bers of a society so dependant on the arbi-

1609. trary will of the crown. Upon a repre-
May23. fentation of this to James, he granted
A new
charter them a new charter, with more ample pri-
granted.

vileges. He enlarged the boundaries of
the colony; he rendered the powers of
the company, as a corporation, more ex-
plicit and complete; he abolished the jurif-
dieion of the council resident in Virgi-

* Stith. p. 97.

nia ;

nia; he vested the government entirely in B o K

IX.

a council residing in London; he granted A,_
to the proprietors of the company the
right of electing the persons who were to
compose this council, by a majority of
voices; he authorized this council to efta-
blifh such laws, orders, and forms of go-
vernment and magistracy, for the colony
and plantation, as they in their discretion
should think to be fittest for the good of
the adventurers and inhabitants there; he
empowered them to nominate a governor
to have the administration of affairs in
the colony, and to carry their: orders into
execution *. In consequence of there con-
ceflions, the company having acquired the
power'of regulating all its own tranfations,
the number of proprietors increased, and
among them we find the most refpetable
names in the nation.

THIE first deed of the new council was Lord
to appoint Lord Delaware governor and D^^;

pointed

* Stith, Append. 8. governor.
4 captair-

BOOK captain-general of their colony in Vir-
- -I ginia. To a person of his rank, those

high-founding titles could be no allure-
ment; and by his thorough acquaintance
with the progress and slate of the fettle-
ment, he knew enough of the labour and
difficulty with which an infant colony is
reared, to expect any thing but anxiety
and care in discharging the duties of that
delicate office. But from zeal to promote
an establishment which he expected to
prove so highly beneficial to his country,
he was willing to relinquifi all the com-
forts of an honourable station, to under-
take a long voyage to fettle in an uncul-
tivated region deflitute of every accom-
modation to which he had been accuf-
tomed, and where he forelaw that toil and

Gates
and Sum. trouble and danger awaited him. But as
mersap. he could not immediatelyleave England,
pointed to
comnmand the council dispatched Sir Thomas Gates
till the
arrivalof and Sir George Summers, the former of
Lord De whom had been appointed lieutcnant-ge-
laware.

neral and the latter admiral, with nine lhips

and

and five hundred planters. They carried B 0O K
with them commiflions, by which they l
were empowered to supersede the jurifdic-
tion of the former council, to proclaim
Lord Delaware governor, and, until he
ihould arrive, to take the administration
of affairs into their own hands. A vio- Their ship

franded

lent hurricane separated the vessel in which o the
Gates and Summers had embarked from COit of

Bcrmu-

the ref of the fleet, and stranded it on the das.
coall of Bermudas. The other ihips arrived Augull
safely at James-Town. But the fate of "
their commanders was unknown. Their
commiflion for new-modelling the govern-
ment, and all other public papers, were sup-
posed to be loft, together with them. The
present form of government, however, was
held to be abolished. No legal warrant
could be produced for establishing any
other. Smith was not in a condition at
this jupnure to aflert his own rights, or
to a&t with his wonted vigour. By an ac-
cidental explosion of gunpowder, he had
been so miserably scorched and mangled,

~~o ~ that

B o oK that he was incapable of moving, and

_x. under the necessity of committing himself

to the guidince of his friends, who car-
ried him aboard one of the ships returning
to England, in hopes that he might reco-
ver by more skilful treatment than he
could meet with in Virginia *.

Anarchy AFTER his departure, every thing tend-
in th co- ed fast to the wildest anarchy. Fa&ion
lony.

and discontent had often risen so high
among the old settlers, that they could
hardly be kept within bounds. The spirit
of the new-comers was too ungovernable
to bear any restraint. Several among them
of better rank were such dissipated hopeless
young men, as their friends were glad to
fend out in quest of whatever fortune might
betide them in a foreign land. Of the
lower order, many were so profligate or
desperate, that their country was happy
to throw them out as nuisances in society,

* Purchas, iv. 1734, &c. Smith's Travels, p. 89.
Stith, p. 102, &c.

Such

Such persons were little capable of the re- B 0 K

IX.

gular subordination, the striA ceconomy, ) .
and persevering industry, which their fitua-
tion required. The Indiana observing their
mifcondu&, and that every precaution for
sustenance or safety was negleted, not only
withheld the supplies of provisions which
they were accustomed to furnish, but ha-
rafled them with continual hostilities. All The co.
their subsistence was derived from the tores daored b
which they had brought from England: fmine-
these were soon consumed ; then the do-
meftic animals sent out to breed in the
country were devoured; and by this in.
considerate waste, they were reduced to
such extremity oF famine, as not only to
eat the most nauseous and unwholesome
roots and berries, but to feed on the bodies
of the Indians whom they flew, and even
on those of their companions who funk
under the oppression of fuchi complicated
liftrefs. In lokf than fix months, of five
hundred persons whom Smith left in Vir-,
ginia, only sixty remained; and there so

o 2 feeble

BOO0 K feeble and deje&ed, that they could not

IX.

.-J have survived for ten days, if succour had

not arrived from a quarter whence they
did not expeCt it *.

Gates and WHEN Gates and Summers were thrown
Summers
arrive ashore on Bermudas, fortunately not a
from Ber- single person on board their ship perished.
mudas.

A considerable part of their provisions and
stores too was saved, and in that delightful
spot, Nature, with spontaneous bounty,
presented to them such a variety of her
producions, that a hundred and fifty people
subsisted in affluence for ten months on an
uninhabited island. Impatient, however, to
escape from a place where they were cut
off from all intercourse with mankind,
they set about building two barks with such
tools and materials as they had, and by
amazing efforts of perseverance and inge-
nuity they finished them. In these they
embarked, and steered diretly towardsVir-
ginia, in hopes of finding an ample confo-

* Stith, p. x16. Purchas, iv. 1748.

lation

lation for all their toils and dangers in the B OO K
embraces of their companions, and amidst -
the comforts of a flourilhing colony. After
a more prosperous navigation than they
could have expected in their ill-conitnlred
veflels, they landed at James-Town. But May 3.
instead of that joyful interview for which
they fondly looked, a fpedtacle presented
itself which struck them with horror. They Find the

colony in

beheld the miserable remainder of their cicutmoiR
countrymen emaciated with fmine and difirefs.
sickness, funk in despair, and in their figure
and looks rather resembling fpe&res than
human beings. As Gates and Summers, in
full confidence of finding plenty of provi-
lions in Virginia, had brought with them
no larger flock than was deemed necessary
for their own support during the voyage,
their inability to afford relief to their
countrymen, added to the anguilh with
which they viewed this unexpeted scene
of difrefs. Nothing now remained but
infRantly to abandon a country, where it
was impoflible to subsist any longer; and

G 3 , though

B O K though all that could be found in the fores

IX.

-of the colony, when added to what remain-

ed of the stock brought from Bermudas,
did not amount to more than was sus-
ficient to support them for sixteen days, at
the most scanty allowance, they set fail, in
hopes of being able to reach Newfound.
land, where they expeced to be relieved by
their countrymen employed at that season
in the fiihery there *.

Are about BUT it was not the will of Heaven that
to return
to Eng- all the labour of the English, in planting
lahn this colony, as well as all their hopes of
Lord De. benefit from its future posterity, should be
laware ar-
rives. for ever loft. Before Gates, and the me-

lancholy companions of his voyage, had
reached the mouth of James-River, they
were met by Lord Delaware, with three
ships, that brought a large recruit of provi-

* A minute and curious account of the shipwreck

of Gates and Summers, and of their adventures in
Bermudas, was composed by Strachy, a gentleman
who accompanied them, and was publified by Purchas,
iv. 1734.

6 sions,

sions, a considerable number of new set- B O0 K
tiers, and every thing requisite for defence »-.
or cultivation. By persuasion and authority
he prevailed on them to return to James-
Town, where they found their fort, their
magazines, and houses entire, which Sir
Thomas Gates, by some happy chance, had
preserved from being set on fire at the
time of their departure. A society so fee-
ble and disordered in its frame required a
tender and skilful hand to'cherifi it, and
restore its vigour. This it found iri Lord wife ad-
Delaware: he searched into the caures of tion of

Lord De.

their misfortunes, as far he dooM dif- Ilwe'
cover them, amidst the tflence of their
mutual accusations; but Inflead of exert-
ing his power in punishing crimes that
were pafl, he employed his prudence in
healing their dilenfions/and in guarding
against a repetition of the fame fatal errors.
By unwearied afliduity, by the refpe't due
to an amiable and beneficent charaaer, by
knowing how to mingle severity with in-
dulgence, and when to assume the dignity

G4 of
/

B 0 OK of his office, as well as when to display

Ix.
»-- the gentleness natural to his own temper,

he gradually reconciled men corrupted by
anarchy to Subordination and discipline, he
turned the attention of the idle and profli-
gate to industry, and taught the Indians
again to reverence and dread the Englilh

Marchs8. name. Under such an administration, the
His health colony began once more to assume a pro-
obliges
him tore- mifing appearance; when unhappily for it,
Englad. a complication of diseases brought on by

the climate obliged Lord Delaware to quit
the country *; the government of which he
committed to Mr. Percy.

May 10. Hz was soon superseded by the arrival
Thomas of Sir Thomas Dale; in whom the com-
Dale ap- pany had vested more absolute authority
pointed
governor. than in any of his predecessors, impower-
Martial ing him to rule by martial law; a ihort
lawheela- code of which, founded on the practice of
blifhcd.

the armies in the Low Countries, the most
rigid military school at that time in Europe,

* Stith, p. 117. Purchas, iv. 1764.

they

they sent out with him. This system of BOX K
government is so violent and arbitrary, that v -'
even the Spaniards themselves had not ven-
tured to introduce it into their settlements;
for among them, as soon as a plantation be-
gan, and the arts of peace succeeded to the
operations of war, the jurifdition of the.
civil magistrate was uniformly established.
But however unconfitutional or oppressive
this may appear, it was adopted by the
advice of Sir Francis Bacon, the most en-
lightened philosopher, and one of the most
eminent lawyers of the age*. The com-
pany, well acquainted with the inefficacy
of every method which they had hitherto
employed for restraining the unruly muti-
nous spirits which they had to govern,
eagerly adopted a plan that had the fanc-
tion of such high authority to recommend
it. Happily for the colony, Sir Thomas
Dale, who was entrusted with this danger-
ous power, exercised it with prudence and
moderation. By the vigour which the fum-

* Bacon, Eflay on Plantations, p. 3.

mary

B O O K mary mode of military punishment gave to

Ix. ..- his administration, he introduced into the

colony more perfea order than had ever
been eftablilhed there; .and at the fame
time he tempered its vigour with so much
discretion, that no alarm seems to have been
given by this formidable innovation *.

i6 iz. THE regular form which the colony now
Newchar. began to assume, induced the King to issue
ter issued
to the a new charter for the encouragement of the
coony: adventurers, by which he not only con-
new pri-
vileges firmed all their former privileges, and pro-
confer
red. longed the term of exemption from pay-

ment of duties on the commodities ex-
ported by them, but granted them more
extensive property, as well as more ample
jurifdidion. All the islands lying within
three hundred leagues of the coast were
annexed to the Province-of Virginia. In
consequence of this, the company took
poffeflion of Bermudas, and the other small
isles discovered by Gates and Siimmers;

* Stit, p. 122.

and

and at the fame time prepared to fend out B O O
a considerable reinforcement to the colony -.-
at James-Town. The expence of thofqi-x-
traordinary efforts was defrayed by the pro-
fits of a lottery, which amounted nearly to
thirty thousand pounds. This expedient,
they were authorized to employ by their
new charter *; and it is remarkable, as
the first instance, in the English history, of
any public countenance given to this per-
nicious reducing mode of levying money.
But the House of Commons, which to-
wards the close of this reign began to ob-
serve every measure of government with
jealous attention, having remonstrated
against the institution as unconllitutional
and impolitic, James recalled the licence
under the fandion of which it had been
eftabliffied t.

BY the revere discipline of martial law, Culida.
the activity of the colonists was forced into tion ofthe

lands pro-
a proper direction, and exerted itself in moted.

* Stith, p. 191. Appendix, 23, &c.
t Chalmers' Annals, i. 32.

useful

BO OK useful indufiry. This, aided by a fertile
_ -,_ foil and favourable climate, soon enabled

theJn to raise such a large flock of pro-
visions, that they were no longer obliged
to trust for fubfiltance to the precarious
supplies which they obtained or extorted
from the Indians. In proportion as the
Engliih became more independent, the na-
tives courted their friendship upon more
equal terms. The happy effets of this

Treaty were quickly felt. Sir Thomas Dale con-
wthhe cluded a treaty with one of their most
nautves.

powerful and warlike tribes, situated on
the River Chickahominy, in which they
consented to acknowledge themselves sub-
jeds of the King of Great Britain, to as-
filme henceforth the name of Englishmen,
to fend a body of their warriors to the
afliftance of the English, as often as they
took the field againfi any enemy, and to
deposit annually a stipulated quantity of
Indian corn in the store-houses of the co-
lony *. An event, which the early hifto-

* I-Hamr Solida Narratio, ap. dc Bry. Pars x. p. 33.
Stith, p. 130.

rians

rians of Virginia relate with peculiar fa- BO OK
tisfadion, prepared the way for this union. L
Pocahuntas, the favourite daughter of
the great Chief Powhatan, to whose in-
tercefilon Captain Smith was indebted for
his life, persevered in her partial attach-
ment to the English; and as die fre-
quently visited their settlements, where the
was always received with refpeffill hof-
pitality, her admiration of their arts and
manners continued to increase. During
this intercourse, her beauty, which is re-
presented as far superior to that of her
countrywomen, made such impreflion on
the heart of Mr. Rolfe, a young man of Rolfe
rank in the colony, that he warnly soli- tarrice
cited her to accept of him as a, hufand. daughter
Where manners are simple, courtship is not dian

Chief.

tedious. Neither artifice prevents, nor cere-
mony forbids the heart from declaring its
fcntiments. Pocahuntas readily gave her
content; Dale encouraged the alliance, and
Powhatan did not disapprove it. The mar-
riage was celebrated with extraordinary

I pomp;

BOO K pomp; and from that period a friendly
t .-y. correspondence subsisted between the colo-

ny and all the tribes subjec to Powhatan,
or that flood in awe of his power. Rolfe
and his Princess, (for by that name the
writers of the lalt age always distinguish
her,) set out for England, where she was
received by James and his Queen with the
refpeft fiited to her birth. Being care-
fully inftruded in the principles of the
Christian faith, ihe was publicly baptized,
but died a few years after, on her re-
turn to America, leaving one son; from
whom are sprung some of the most respect-
able families in Virginia, who boast of their
descent from the race of the ancient rulers
of their country *. But notwithstanding
the visible good effeas of that alliance,
none of Rolfe's countrymen seem to have
imitated the example which.he set them, of
intermarrying with the natives. Of all

* Ilamer Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry; Parn x.
p. 23. Stith, p. 129.146. Smith's Travels, p. 113.

the

the Europeans who have fettled in Ame- B o o
rica, the Englilh have availed themselves _
least of this obvious method of concilia-
ting the affeaion of its original inhabit-
ants; and, either from the shyness con-
fpicuous in their national character, or
from the want of that pliant facility of
manners which accommodates itfelfto every
situation, they have been more averse than.
the French and Portugucfe, or even the
Spaniards, from incorporating with the na-
tive Americans. The Indians, courting such
an union, offered their daughters in mar-
riage to their new guets : and when they
did not accept of the proffered alliance,
they naturally imputed it to pride and to
their contempt of them as an inferior or-
der of beings *.

DURING the interval of tranquillity pro- Land n

Virginia

cured by the alliance with Powhatan, an fir be.
important change was made in the fate comes

property.
of the colony. Hitherto no right of pri.

Beverley's Hist. ofVirg. p. 25.

vate

B O O K vate property in land had been established.

Ix. *^.'-. The fields that were cleared had been cul-

tivated by the joint labour of the colonists;
their produc was carried to the common
store-houses, and distributed weekly to
every family, according to its number and
exigencies. A society, destitute of the first
advantage resulting from social union, was
not formed to prosper. Industry, when not
excited by the idea of property in what
was acquired by its own efforts, made no
vigorous exertion. The head had no in-
ducement to contrive, nor the hand to la-
bour. The idle and improvident trusted
entirely to what was issued from the com-
mon store; the assiduity even of the fober
and attentive relaxed, when they perceived
that others were to reap the fruit of their
toil; and it was computed, that the united
industry of the colony did not accomplish
as much work in a week as might have
been performed in a day, if each indivi-

Advan- dual had laboured on his own account. In
tage. order to remedy this, Sir Thomas Dale

dividcd

divided a considerable portion of the land B 00 K

IX.

into finall lots, and granted one of thlee to I-._
each individual in full property. From the
moment that industry had the certain pro-
fpe& of a recompence, it advanced with
rapid progress. The articles of primary
necessity were cultivated with so much at-
tention as secured the means of subsistence;
and such schemes of improvement were
formed as prepared the way for the in-
troduaion of opulence into the colony *.

THE industrious spirit, which began to Culture of

rife among the planters, was soon direced introa
towards a new objec; and they applied duced.
to it for some time with such in-
considerate ardour as was productive of
fatal consequences. The culture of to-
bacco, which has since become the flaple of
Virginia and the source of its prosperity,
was introduced about this time into the 1616.
colony. As the taSte for that weed con-
tinued to increase in England, notwith-

· Smith's Travels, p. 114. Stith, p. 131.

H flanding

B 0 K standing the zealous declamations of James

against it, the tobacco imported from Vir-
ginia came to a ready market; and though
it was so much inferior in quality or in
estimation to that raised by the Spaniards
in the Weft Indian islands, that a pound of
the latter fold for eighteen shillings, and of
the former for no more than three shillings,

Bad con- it yielded a considerable profit. Allured by
sequences
arising the profped of such a certain and quick
from it.

return, every other species of industry was
neglected. The land which ought to have
been reserved for raising provisions, and
even the streets of James-Town, were
planted with tobacco. Various regulations
were framed to restrain this ill-direaed ac-
tivity. But from eagerness for present
gain, the planters disregarded every ad-
monition. The means of subsistence be-
came so scanty as forced them to renew
their demands upon the Indians, who, fee-
ing no end of those exactions, their anti-
pathy to the English name revived with
additional rancour, and they began to form

6 schemes

schemes of vengeance, with the secrecy and B o o K
silence peculiar to Americans *. -

M ANWHILE the colony, notwithftand-

ing this error in its operations, and the
cloud that was gathering over its head,
continued to wear an afpe& of prosperity.
Its numbers increased by successive migra-
tions; the quantity of tobacco exported
became every year more considerable, and
several of the planters were not only in an
easy situation, but advancing fast to opu-
lence t; and by two events, which hap-
pened nearly at the fame time, both po-
pulation and industry were greatly pro-
moted. As few women had hitherto ven-
tured to encounter the hardships which
were unavoidable in an unknown and un-
cultivated country, most of the colonists,
conitrained to live single, confidered them-
selves as no more than sojourners in a land
to which they were not attached by the

* Stith, p. 140. 147. 164. 168. Smith, p. 140.
Purchas, iv. 1787. t Smith, p. 139.

H 2 tender

B OO K tender ties of a family and children. In

IX.
*-- order to induce them to fettle there, the

company took advantage of the apparent
tranquillity in the country, to fend out a

Young considerable number of young women, of
wnmen
migrate humble birth, indeed, but of unexception-
and En able character, and encouraged the planters,
Virginia. by premiums and immunities, to marry

them *. These new companions were re-
ceived with such fondness, and many of
them so comfortably established, as invited
others to follow their example, and by de-
grees thoughtless adventurers, assuming the
sentiments of virtuous citizens and of pro-
vident fathers of families, became solicitous
about the prosperity of a country, which
they now confidered as their own. As the
colonists began to form more extensive
plans of industry, they were unexpectedly
furnished with means of executing them
with greater facility. A Dutch ship from
the Coast of Guinea, having failed up

*Stith, p. 166. 19.

James-

James-River, fold a part of her cargo of B 0O K

IX.

negroes to the planters *; and as that hardy *x--
race was found more capable of endur- Negroe

first intro-

ing fatigue under a sultry climate than duced.
Europeans, their' number has been in-
creased by continual importation; their aid
seems now to be eflential to the existence
of the colony, and the greater part of field
labour in Virginia is performed by servile
hands.

BUT as the condition of the colony im-

proved, the spirit of its members became
more independent. To Englishmen the
fummaryand feveredecifions of martial law,
however tempered by the mildness of their
governors, appeared ihtolerably oppressive;
and they longed to recover the privileges
to which they had been accustomed under
the liberal form of government in their
native country. In compliance with this 16z9.
spirit, Sir George Yeardley, in the year Firjtge.
J6x9, called the sirs general assembly that femblya

* Beverley, p. 37.

11~ 3 was

B O O K was ever held in Virginia and the num-

IX.

- - _ bers of the people were now so increased,
of repre- and their settlements so dispersed, that

eleven corporations appeared by their re-.
refentatives in this convention, where they
were permitted to assume legislative power,
and to exercise the noblest fvnnaion of free
men. The laws enaced in it seem neither
to have been many, nor of great import-
ance; but the meeting was highly accept-
able to the people, as they now beheld
among themselves an image of the Engliff
constitution, which they reverenced as the
most perfct model of free government. In
order to render this resemblance -more com-
plete, and the rights of the planters more

july 24. certain, the company isTued a charter or or-
New con- dinance, which gavea legal and permanent
ftitution
given to form to the government of the colony.
the co-
lony. The supreme legislative authority in Virgi-

nia, in imitation of that in Great Britain,
was divided and lodged partly in the
governor, who held the place of the
Ibvereign; partly in a council of slate

named

named by the company, which possessed BOO
some of the diftintions, and exercised
some of the funCions belonging to the
peerage; partly in a general council or as-
fembly compoied of the representatives of
the people, in which were vested powers
and privileges similar to those of the House
of Commons. In both these councils all
questiones were to be determined by the ma-
jority of voices, and a negative was re-
served to the' governor; but no law or or-
dinance, though approved of by all the
three members of the legislature, was to be
of force,.until it was ratified in England by
a genzeral court of the company, and return-
ed under its feal *. Thus the contitution
of.the colony was fxed, and the members
of it are henceforth to be confidered, not
merely as servants of a commercial. com-
pany, dependant on the will and orders
of their superior, but as free men and
citizens.

* Stith, Appendix, p. 32, &c.

lI 4 TIll

B 00 K THE natural effet of that happy change

IX.
v-- -' in their condition was an increase of their
incresd. induflry. The produ&c of tobacco in Vir-

ginia was now equal, not only to the con-
fumption of it in Great Britain *, but could
furniih some quantity for a foreign mar-

Direa ket. The company opened a trade for
trade of
the colony it with Holland, and eftabliihed warehouses
lait Hol. in Middleburgh and Flushing. James, and
land.
Givesof- his privy council, alarmed at feeing the
fence to
james. commerce of a commodity, for which the

* It is a matter of some curiosity to trace the pro.

grefs of the consumption of this unneceifary commo-
dity. The use of tobacco seems to have been first in-
troduced into England about the year 1586. Pollibly
a few sea-faring persons may have acquired a relish for
it by their intercourse with the Spaniards previous to
that period; but the use of it cannot be denominated
a national habit sooner than the time I have mention.
ed. Upon an average of the seven ecars immediately
preceding the year 1622, the whole import of tobacco
into England amounted to a hundred and forty-two
thousand and eighty-five pounds weight? Stith, p. 246.
From this it appears, that the taste had spread with a
rapidity which is remarkable. But how inconsiderable
is that quantity to what is now consumed in Great
Britain !

demand

demand was daily increasing, turned into BOO 00
a channel that tended to the diminution of lx'_
the revenue, by depriving it of a confider-
able duty imposed on the importation of
tobacco, interposed with vigour to check
this innovation. Some expedient wag
found, by which the matter was adjuRed
for the present; but it is remarkable as
the firit inflance of a difference in senti-
ment between the parent slate and the co-
lony, concerning their refpedive rights.
The former concluded, that the trade of
the colony should be confined to England,
and all its productions be landed there.
The latter claimed, not only the general
privilege of Englishmen to carry their com-
modities to the bes market, but pleaded
the particular concefifons in their charter,
by which an unlimited freedom of com-
merce seemed to be granted to them*.
The time for a more full difcudion of thi
important question was not yet arrived.

* Stith, p. 6do, &c.

BUT

B 0O0 BUT while the colony continued to in-

Ix.
, -- create so fast, that settlements were scatter-

Thy col ed, not only along the banks of James and
glens the York Rivers, but began to extend to the
precau.
tions ne- Rapabannock, and even to the Potowmack,
ceflary for
its de-o tire English, relying on their own. numbers
fence and deceived by this appearance of pro-
againRi
the in- fperity, lived in full security. They nei-
dians.

ther attended to the movements of the In-
dians, nor fufpeaed their machinations,
and though surrounded by a people whom
tbey might have known from experience
to be both artful and vindictive, they ne-
gleted every precaution for their own
safety that was.requifite in such a situation.
Like the peaceful. inhabitants of a society
completely established, they were no longer
soldiers but citizens:, and were so intent on
what was subservient to the comfort or em-.
' bellifmnent of civil life, that every martial

exercise began to be laid aside as unnecef-
fary. The Indians, whom they commonly
employed as hunters, were furnished with
fire-arms, and taught to ife them with dex-

terity.

terity. They were permitted to. frequent the B o

IX.

habitations of the English at all hours, and I
received as innocent vifi~apns whom there
was no reason to dread. This inconfide,
rate security enabled the Indians to prepare
for the execution of that plan of vengeancea
which they meditated with all the deliberate
forethought which is agreeable to their
temper. Nor did they want a leader ca-
pable of conducting their ihemes with ad"
dress. On the death of Powhatan, in the General

.. . . - massacre
year x 6 8, Qpechanqanopgh fucceqded;him.' of the

Engli/h

not only as wirowanee or chjef of his own, plaied
tribe, but in that extenive .ifl-ence over. th

a.

all the Indian nations of Virginia, which,
induced the English writers to diingthi.
them by the name of Emperor. Accord-
ing to the Indian tradition, he was. not a.
native of Virginia, but came from a ditant.
country to the south-west, possibly from,
some province of the Mexican Empire *,
But as he was conspicuous for all the qua-.
lities of. highest estimation among savages,

* Beverlcy, p. 51.

a fearless

B O O K a fearless courage, great strength and agility

Ix*. of body, and crafty policy, he quickly rose

to eminence and power. Soon after his
elevation to the fipreme command, a ge-
neral massacre of the English seems to
have been resolved upon; and during four
years, the means of perpetrating it with
the greatest facility and success were con-
certed with amazing secrecy. All the tribes
contiguous to the Engliih settlements were
successively gained, except those on the
Eastern shore, from whom, on account
of their peculiar attachment to their new
neighbours, every circumfRance that might
discover what they intended was carefully
concealed. To each tribe its station was
allotted, and the part it was to ad pre-
Mar.22. fcribed. On the morning of the day con-

fecrated to vengeance, each was at the place
of rendezvous appointed, while the English
were so little aware of the impending
deltruaion, that they received with un-
suspicious hospitality, several persons sent
by Opcchancanough, under pretext of de-
livering presents of venison and fruits, but

13 in

in reality to observe their motions. Find- B 0 0 K
ing them perfectly secure, at mid-day, the --v-

Executed

moment that was previously fixed for this on molt of
deed of horror, the Indians rufled at once he etl'-
upon them in all their different fettlemeits,
and murdered men, women, and children,
with undiftinguihfing rage, and that ran-
corous cruelty with which savages treat
their enemies. In one hour, nearly a
fourth part of the whole colony was cut
off, almost without knowing by whose
hands they fell. The faughter would have
been universal, if compassion, or a sense of
duty, had not moved a converted Indian,
to whom the secret was communicated the
night before the mafiacre, to reveal it to
his master in such time as to save James-
Town, and some adjacent settlements; and
if the English, in other distriCts, had not
run to their arms with resolution prompted
by despair, and defended themselves so
bravely as to repulse their assailants,
who, in the execution of their plan, did
not discover courage equal to the saga-

city

B o K city and art with which they had concetted

lx- .

it

BUT though the blow was thus prevent-

ed from descending with its full effea, it
proved very grievous to an infant colony.
In some settlements not a single Englith-
man escaped. Many persons of prime note
in the, colony, and among thtfe several
members of the council, were slain. The
survivors, overwhelmed with grief, afto-
iifhment, and terror, abandoned all their
remote settlements, and, crowding together
for safety to James-Town, did not occupy
a territory of greater extent thari had been
/planted soon after the arrival of their
countrymen in Virginia. Confined within
those narrow boundaries, they were less
intent on schemes of industry than on
thoughts of revenge. Every man took

Bloody arms. A bloody war against the Indians
war with commenced; and, bent on exterminating
the In.
diano.

* Stith, p. 2o0, &c, Purchas, iv. 7788, &c.

the

the whole race, neither old nor young were B O0 K

Ix.

spared. The conduct of the Spaniards in v-a
the Southern regions of America was openly
proposed as the most proper model to imi-
tate*; and, regardless like them of those
principles of faith, honour, and humanity,
which regulate hostility among civilized
nations and set bounds to its rage, the
English deemed every thing allowable that
tended to accomplish their design. They
hunted the Indians like wild beafs, rather
than enemies; and as the pursuit of them
to their places of retreat in the woodsy
which covered their country, was both dif-
fficult and dangerous, they endeavoured to
allure them from their inacceffable fast-
nefles, by offers of peace and promises of
oblivion, made with such an artful appear- 16,s .
ance of sincerity as deceived their crafty
leader, and induced them to return to
their former settlements, and resume their
usual peaceful occupations. The behavi-
our of the two people seemed now to be

* Stith, p. 233.

perfedly

B o0 K perfealy reversed. The Indians, like men

Exe acquainted with the principles of integrity

and good faith, on which the intercourse
between nations is founded, confided in the
reconciliation, and lived in absolute fecu-
rity without suspicion of danger; while
the English, with perfidious craft, were
preparing to imitate savages in their re-
venge and cruelty. On the approach of
harvest, when they knew an hostile attack
would be most formidable and fatal, they
fell suddenly upod all the Indian planta-
tions, murdered every person on whom
they could lay hold, and drove the reft to
the woods, where so many periihed with
hunger, that some of the tribes nearest to
the English were totally extirpated. This
atrocious deed, which the perpetrators la-
boured to reprefcnt as a necessary ad of
retaliation, was followed by some happy
efects. It delivered the colony so entire-
ly from any dread of the Indians, that its
settlements began again to extend, and its
industry to revive.

BuT

BUT unfortunately at this juncure the B OOK

state of the company in England, in which I..L
the property of Virginia and the govern- Company

at home
ment of the colony fettled there were dividedby

fa/tions.

vested, prevented it from seconding the
efforts of the planters, by such a rein-
forcement of men, and such a supply of
necefiaries, as were requisite to replace what
they had loft. The company was origin-
ally compored of many adventurers, and
increased so fast by the junction of new
members, allured by the profpe& of gain,
or the desire of promoting a scheme of
public utility, that its general courts form-
ed a numerous assembly *. The operation
of every political principle and passion, that
spread through the kingdom, was felt in
tlhofe popular meetings, and influenced their
decilions. As towards the close of James's
reign more just and enlarged sentiments
with refpea to constitutional liberty were
diffused among the people, they came to

* Stith, p. 272. 276.

X; ~ underhand

B 0O OK underfland their rights better, and to a"lert
'x them with greater boldness; a diiUndiou

formerly little known, but now fmiliar in
Englilh policy, began to be eftabliied be.
tween the court and country parties, and
the leaders of each endeavoured ta derive
power and consequence from every quarter.
Both exerted themselves with emulation, in
order to obtain the diretion of a body so
numerous and refpetable as the company
of Virginian adventurers. In consequence
of this, business had been conduted in
every general court for some years, not with
the temperate spirit of merchants deliberat-
ing concerning their mutual interest, but
with the animosity and violence natural to
numerous affembliea, by which rival sac-
tions contend for superiority*.

JamI in. As the king did not often alemrble tle'
stitatee an
inqiry great council of the nation in parliament,
m d^ai, the general courts of the company became

a theatre, on which popular orators dif

* Stith, p.2; , &c. Chalmers, p.59. :

played

played their talents; the proclamations of B 0o 0
the erton, and assh of the privy council, -
with rtlped to the conlnerce and police of
the colony, *ete canvafled there with free-
dom, and cetfufed with severity iHl-fuited
to the lofty Ideas which James entertained
of his bwn wisdom, and the extent of his
prerogative. In order to check this grow.
ing fSpit of difcuflion, the miniiters em-
ployed all their address and influence to
gain as many members of the company as
might give'them the direaion of their deli-
berations. But so unfucceTsful were they
in- this attempt, that everi measure pro-
pored by them was reprobated tby a vast
majority, and sometimes without any rea-
son, but because they were the proposers of
it. James, little favourable to the power of
any popular af'embly, and weary of con-
tending with one over which he had la.
b6iired in vain to obtain an ascendant, began
to entertain thoughts of difiblving the com-
pany, and of new-modelling its conftitu-
tion. Pretexts, neither unplaufible, nor

1 deftituto

B 0K destitute of some foundation,. seemed to

1X.
Iv-. jijuify this measure. The flow progress of

the colony, the large fums of money ex-
pended, and great number of men who had
perified in attempting to plant it, the late
massacre by the Indians, and every disaster
that hlad befallen the English from their
first migration to America, were imputed
solely to the inability of a numerous com-
pany to conduct an enterprise so complex
and arduous. The nation felt sensibly its
disappointment in a scheme in which it
had engaged with sanguine expecations of
advantage, and wiihed impatiently for such
an impartial scrutiny into former proceed-
ings as might suggest more salutary mea-
flres in the future administration of the
colony. The prefcnt state of its affairs, as
well as the wishes of the people, seemed to
call for the interposition of the crown; and
Jamcs, eager to display the, superiority of
his royal wisdom, in correting those errors
into vwhich the company had been betrayed
by inexperience in the arts of government,

7 boldly

boldly undertook the work of reformation. B o K

iX.

Without regarding the rights conveyed to _--
the company by their charter, and without 16a3.

May 9.

the formality of any judicial proceeding for
annulling it, he, by virtue of his preroga-
tive, ifflued a commiflion, empowering some
of the judges, and other persons of note, to
examine into all the tranfations of the con-
pany from its first eflablilhment, and to lay
the result of their inquiries, together with
their opinion concerning the most effec-
tual means of rendering the colony more
prosperous*, before the privy council. At
the fame time, by a {train of authority still
higher, he ordered all the records and papers
of the company to be ieized, and two of its
principal officers to be arrested. Violent
and arbitrary as these ads of authority may
now appear, the commiflioners carried on
their inquiry without any ol)fruclion but
what arose from some feeble and ineffecdual
remonstrances of the company. The coin-
mifioners, though they conlduted their

* Stirh, p.288.

1 3 scrutiny

B OK scrutiny with much activity and vigour*,

-* - did not communicate any of their proceed-

ings to the company; but their reportr
with refpe&t to its operations, ieems to
have been very unfavourable, as the king,
in consequence of it, signified to the com-
pany his intention of vefiing the supreme

oa. 8. government of the company in a governor
Company
required and twelve afliftants, to be resident in Eng-
(o fur.
render its land, and the executive power in a coon.
d 'er* cil of twelve, which Ihould reside in Vir-

ginia. The governor and assistants were
to be originally appointed by the king,
Ftture vacancies were to be supplied by
the governor and his aflifants, but their
nomination was not to take etiet until it
Ihould be rat$ifed by the privy qouncil,
The twelve ¢ounfellors in Vliigiia were to
be chopen by the governor and aTiftants;
and this choke was likewise fubjeted to
the review of the privy council. With an
intention to quiet the minds, of the colo.
nilfs, it was declared, that private property

* Smith' Travels, p. 165, &c.

fliould

sild .b deemed f ;-pdand for the mor B O OOK
Pfedul. security of i, all gants of land* _-v
from the former company were to be con,
firmed by the new one. In order to faci.
iitate th, execution of tis plan, the king
required the company inRantly to surrender
itr charter into his hands .

BPT here Janes and hi minilfrs en- Cmnr

countered a spirit, of which they seem nsn
to have been aware, They found the
members of the company unwilling tamely
to relinquib rights of franchiles conveyed
to them with such legl formality, that
upon faith in. their validity they had ex-
pended considerable fums t; and fill more
averse to the abqlition of a popular form of
government, in w4hih ery proprptor hat
a voice, in order to fubjeta a colony, in
which they were deeply interested, to the
dominion of a small junto absolutely dew
pendent on the crown. Neither promises

* tith, p. 293, &c. t Chalmers, p. 6x.

I 4 nor

B K nor threats could induce them to depart

IX.
- -- from these sentiments; and in a general
O, -o.

2 court the king's proposal was almost una-

nimoufly rejected, and a resolution taken
to defend to the utmost their chartered
rights, if there should be called in question
in any court ofjuftice. James, highly of-
fended at their presumption in. daring to
Nov. 1o. oppose his will, direaed a writ of quo

warranto to be issued against the com-
pany, that the validity of its charter might
be tried in the Court of King's Bench;
and in order to aggravate the charge by
collecting additional proofs of mal-admi-
niftration, he appointed some persons, in
whom he could confide, to repair to Vir-
ginia to infped the Rtate of the colony,
and inquire into the conduc of the com-
pany, and of its officers there.

Tril in THE law-fiit in the King's Bench did
the King's
Bench, not hang long in suspense. It terminated,
utddinfof as was usual in that reign, in a decision
the corn- perfetly consonant to the wifhcs of the
pany.

monarc~h.

monarch. The charter was- forfeited, the B 0 0 K

Ix.

company was dissolved, and all the rights
and privileges conferred upon.it returned Jne
to the king, from whom they flowed *.

SOME writers, particularly Stith, the Defealsi

the first

most intelligent and belt informed hifto- conftitu-
rian of Virginia, mention the dissolution of colonief.t
the company as a most disastrous event to
the colony. Animated with liberal senti-
ments, imbibed in an age when the prin-
ciples of liberty were more fully unfolded
than under the reign of James, they viewed
his violent and arbitrary proceedings on
this occasion with such indignation, that
their abhorrence of the means which he
employed to accomplish his design teems
to have rendered them incapable of con-
templating its effects with discernment and
candour. There is not perhaps any mode
of governing an infant colony leTs friendly
to its liberty,. than the dominion of an ex-

Rymer, vol. xvii. p. 618, J&c. Chalmcrs, p. 62.

chlll ve

BOO K dlufive corporation, possessed, of all the

lx.
Imw- powers which James had conferred upon

the company of adventurers in Virginia,
During fcveral years the colonists can
hardly be confidered in any other light
than as servants to the company, nourished
out of its stores, bound implicitly to obey
its orders, and fubjeAed to the most ri-
gorous of all forms of government, that of
martial law. Even after the active fpiritof
Englishmen began to rouse under opprefr
sion, and had extorted from their fupe.
riors the right of enasing laws for the go-
vernment of that community of which they
were members, as no ad, though approved
of by all the branches of the provincial
legislature, was held to be of legal force,
until it was ratified by a general court in
England, the company htill retained the
paramount authority in its pwn hands. Nor
was the power of the company more fa-
vourable to the prpfperity of the colony,
than to its freedom. A numerous body of
merchants, as long as its operations are.

I .purely

purely commercial, may carry .thr on 1 oo0
with discermment and fucccfi. But thlie ,,
mercantile spirit seem ill-adapted to con,
duck an enlarged and liberal plan of civil
policy, and colonies have seldom grown
up to matprity and vigour pnder its nar-
tow and interested regulations. To the un,
avoidable defecs in adminiftation which
this occafione4, werp added errors rtfing
from inexperience, The Englifi mer
chants ps that age had not those extensive
views which a gnnral commerce opens to
such as hayv the ciredion of it. When
they first began to venture out of the
beaten track, they groped their way with
timidity and hesitation. Unacquainted with
the climate and foil of America, and igno-
rant of the produtions best fited to them,
they seem to have had no setted pln pof
improvement, and their schemes were col.
tinually varying. Their system of govern-
ment was equally flutuating. In the courfi
of eighteen years ten different perfob pre-
fided over the province a| chief governors,

No
*

BOOK No wonder that under such administration

IX X-_ all the efforts to give vigour and ftabitity

to the colony should prove abortive, or
produce only slender effets. These efforts,
however, when estimated according to the
ideas of that age, either with refpea to
commerce or to policy, were very confide-
rable, and conducted with astonishing per-
severance.

Weakness ABOVE an hundred and fifty thousand
of the co-
lony. pounds were expended in this lft attempt

to plant an English colony in America *;
and more than nine thousand persons were
sent out from the mother country to people
this new settlement. At the dissolution of
the company, the nation, in return for this
waste of treasure and of people, did not
receive from Virginia an annual importa-
tion of commodities exceeding twenty
thousand pounds in value; and the colony
was so far fron having added strength to
the slate by all increase of population, that,

* .S.Ii!i's Travcls, p. 42. 167.

in

in the year one thousand fix hundred and B O O K
twenty-four, scarcely two thousand persons a
survived*, a wretched remnant of the nu-
merous emigrants who had flocked thither,
with sanguine expecations of a very dif-
ferent fate.

THE company, like all unprofperous so- Tempo-

cleties, fell unpitied. The violent hand rarYpcou
with which prerogative had invaded its pointed

for the

rights was forgotten, and new profpe&s of govern-
success opened, under a form of govern- Venginf.
ment exempt from all the defeas to which
pals disasters were imputed. The king and
the nation concurred with equal ardour in
resolving to encourage the colony. Soon
after the final judgment in the Court of
King's Bench against the company, James.
appointed a council of twelve persons to
take the temporary direaion of affairs in
Virginia, that he might have leisure to Aug. 26.
famine with deliberate consideration proper

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 69.

regulations

o o tlguations for the permanent government
Ix , of the colony *. Pleased with such an dp,

portunity of eertcifng:his tlents ast a legi.
flator, he began to turn his attention to-
wards the fiubjeLa; blit death prevelted
him from completing his plan.

,62$, CHARLES I. on his acceflion to the
AcMflfon throne, adopted all his father's maxims
ofChab. . with refpe& to the colony in Virginia.
lia arbi-
trary go He declared it to be a part of the empire
ment of
theco° annexed to the crown, and immediately
lony. subordinate to its jurlfdioion: he conferred

the title of Governor on Sir George
Yardely, and appointed him, in conjunc-
tion with a council of twelve, and a fe-
eretary, to exercise supreme authority there,
and enjoined them to conform in every
point to such inftrudlons as from time to
time they might receive from him t. From
the tenor of the king's commiflion, as well
as from the known spirit of his policy, it

Rymer, xvii. 6i8, &c. t Ibid. xviii. 72.31 1'

is

r appentt,. that he inteaded to vest eery B o o
power of goveramo~t, both legislative and .
executive, in the governor and council#
without recourse to the repreentatives of
thE.-people, as poflefling a right to enac
laws for the community, or to impose taxes
upon it. Yardely and his council, who seem
to have been fit instruments for carrying
this system of arbitrary rule into execu-
tion, did not fail to put such a conftruc-
tion on the words of their commission as
was mot .fiavurable th teir own jurif-
didion. During a gaat part of Charles's
reign, Virginia knew no other law than
the will of the sovereign. Statutes were
publffihd, and taxes imposed, without once
calling the representatives of the people to
authorize them by their fanidton. At the
fame time that the colonists were bereaved
of political rights, which they deemed
essential to freemen and citizens, their pri-
vate property was violently invaded. A Grant

apd mo.

proclamation was iflued, by which, under hopoly of
pretexts equally absurd and frivolous, they tobacco

were

B 0 0 K were prohibited from felling tobacco to any

ix.
»-p .^ person but certain commifioners appointed

by the king to purchase it on his account *;
and they had the cruel mortification to
behold the sovereign, who ihould have
afforded them protection, engross all the
profits of their industry, by seizing the
only valuable commodity which they had
to vend, and retaining the monopoly of it
in his own hands. While the staple of the
colony in Virginia funk in value under
the oppreflion and restraints of a mono-
poly, property in land was rendered in-
secure by various grants of it, which Charles
inconfideratelybeftowed upon his favourites.
These were not only of such exorbitant
extent as to be unfavourable to the progrefi
of cultivation; but from inattention, or im-
perfea acquaintance with the geography of
the country, their boundaries were so inac-
curately defined, that large tra&s already
occupied and planted were often included
in them.

* Rymer, xviii. 19,

TIIE

THe murmurs and comp14ints whiSh BOO

such. - system of a4mniuifation excited, -m '
were augmented by the rigour ,with whiqch
Sir Johbi Harvqy, who fucceded Yardely
in the government of te coloq*% enforced
every aa of power. Rapaciotw, unfeeling1 t6s
and haughty, he added infolcqce t, qp-
prefion, and neither regarded the .fepti-
mentB, nor listened to the remoniraanps
of the pepple under his comrNud, The
colonists, fua from the foat of govrqiCnt,
and oiferawed by AutbPrity divqd frog
a royai commifon, fnibmitted long tQ ht
tyranny and ,eytaiqns. Their patience c'a
was at Jafi e.haodl, a4 ip a 'i4ppt of fg..
poptUar rage and indignation, they seized ven
their governor, and font him a prs~ er tq b
England, ,ccompanied by two oft aur- °onp*it
ber, whom they deputed to prefer their
accusations againf him to the king. Bt4
this attempt to redreft their own wrqng?,
by a proceeding so summary and violent a
is hardly consistent with any idea of reg

* Rymer, viii. 980.

X lar

BO o K lar government, and can'be justified oonly
=C.' _ in cafes of such urgent necessity as rarely

occur in civil society, was altogether re-
pugnant to every notion which Charles
entertained with refpet to the obedience
due by fubjeds to their sovereign. To
him the conduA of the colonists appeared
to be not only an usurpation of his right to
judge and to punish one of his own officers,
but an open and audacious a£t of rebellion
against his authority. Without deigning
to admit their deputies into his pretence, or
to hear one article of their charge against

Ite is re- Harvey, the king instantly Cent him back
leafed by
theking, to his former station, with an ample re-
!-ated newal of all the powers belonging to it.
in his go But though Charles deemed this vigorous
rpeat. ftep necetlary in order to afert his own

authority, and to testify his displeasure with
those who had presumed to offer such an
insult to it, he seems to have been fo'fenfible
of the grievances under which the colonists
groaned, and of the chief source from which
1639. they flowed, that soon after he not only re-

moved

moved a governor so jutly odious to them, B O O K
but aimed as a fuccefTor Sir William .
Berkeley, a person far superior to Harvey
in rank and abilities, and still more diftin-
guilbed by poflfefing all the popular vir-
tues to which the other was a stranger *.

UNDER his government the colony in SirW.

Berke-

Virginia remained, with some Ihort inter- cy ap.
vals of interruption, almost forty years, ponted
and to his mild and prudent administration H ild

and wife

its increase and prosperity is in a great adni.-
measure to be ascribed. It was indebted, sion.
however, to the king himself for such a
reform of its constitution and policy, as
gave a different asped to the colony, and
animated all its operations with new spirit.
Though the tenor of Sir William Berke-
ley's commifflon was the fame with that
of his predecefor, 'he received inftru&ions
under the great feal, by which he was em-
powered to declare, that in all its' concerns,

*Beverley's His. of Virg. p. 5o. Chalmer' An-
nals, z x a8, &c.

K 2 civil

o0 oK civil as well as eccefiaftical, the colons was
Ix. -.. to be governed according to the laws of

New ri- Engladtd: he was directed to issue writs for
granted eletling representatives of the people, who,
Charles. .in conjundion with the governor and coun-

cil were to form a general aflembly, and to
poflefs supreme legislative authority in the
community; he was ordered, to establish
courts of justice, in which all questions,
whether civil or criminal, were to be de-
cided agreeably to the forms of judicial
procedure in the mother country. It is
iot easy to discover what were the motives
which induced a monarch tenacious in ad-
hering to any opinion or system which he
had once adopted, jealous to excess of his
own rights, and adverse on every occasion
to any extension of the privileges claimed
by his people, to relinquish his original
plan of adminifiration in the colony, and
to grant such immunities to his subje&s
fettled there. From the historians of Vir-
ginia, no less superficial than ill-informed,
no light can be derived with refpeC to this

point.

point. It is most probable, that dread of B 6* 16
the spirit then rising in Great Britain óx .-J
torted from Charles concessions si favtur- Motive

that ap-

able to Virginia. After an interniffl~ of pear t
almost twelve years, the slate of. hit affir flueaced
compelled him to have recourse to the great the kig
council of the nation. There his Afbjets
would find ajurifdition independant of the
crown, ahd able to control its authority.
There. they hoped for legal redrefa of all
their grievances. As the colonists in Vir-
ginia had applied for relief to a former
parliament, it might be expe&ted with cer.
tainty, that they would lay their cafe before
the first meeting of an assembly, in which
they were secure of a favourable audience.
Charles knew, that if the spirit of his ad-
ministration in Virginia were to be tried by
the maxims of the Englilh conftitutioh, it
must be severely reprehended. He was
aware that many measures of greater mo-
ment in his government would be brought
under a friat review in parliament and

K 3 unwilling

B00 K unwilling to give mal-contents the advan-

Ix.
*kv tage of adding a charge of oppreflion in

the remote parts of his dominions to a ca-
talogue of domestic grievances, he artfully
endeavoured to take the merit of having
granted voluntarily to his people in Vir-
ginia such privileges as he foresaw would
be extorted from him.

virginia BUT though Charles established the in-
dourishes
under the ternal government of Virginia on a model
ew go. fimiar to that of the English constitution,
meitr. and conferred on his fubjeQs there all the

rights of freemen and citizens, he was ex.
tremely solicitous to maintain its connec-
tion with the parent state. With this view
he inftruded Sir William Berkeley firifly
to prohibit any commerce of the colony
with foreign nations; and in order more
certainly to secure exclusive possession of all
the advantages arising from the sale of its
productions, he was required to take a bond
from the mailer of each vessel that failed

from

from Virginia, to land his cargo in obme oQo
part of the king's dominions in Europe *. . I
Even under this restraint, such is the kindly
influence of free government on society,
the colony advanced so rapidly in indufry
and population, that at the beginning of
the civil war, the English fettled in it ex.
ceeded twenty thousand t.

GRATITUDE towards a monarch, from RemaiM

whose hands they had received.immunities totbe
which they had long wiihed, but hardly ;?1.
expeled to enjoy, the influence and ex-
ample of a popular governor, passionately
devoted to the interests of his master, con-
curred in preserving inviolated loyalty
among the colonists. Even after mo-
narchy was- abolished, after one king had
been beheaded, and another driven into .
exile, the authority of the crown continued.
to be acknowledged and revered in Vir- i1o..

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 219. 232.
t Ibid. p. 125.

K 4 ginia.

tSo X0 ginia. Irritated at this open defiance of its

,
* i «power, the parliament issued an ordiilnnce,

declaring, that as the settlement in Virginia
had been made at the cost and by the
people of England, it ought to be fubor-
dinate to and dependant upon the Eng-
lifh commonwealth, and fubje& to such
laws and regulations as are or shall be
made in parliament: that, initead of this
dutiful submission, the colonists had dif-
claimed the authority of the slate, and au-
dacioufly rebelled against it; that on this
account they were denounced notorious
traitors, and not only all veflels belonging
to natives of England, but those of foreign
nations, were prohibited to enter their ports,
or to carry on any commerce with them.

Parlia- IT was not the mode of that age to wage
ghent wako.s a war of words alone. The efforts of an
iguaM. high-fpirited government in afierting its

own dignity were prompt and vigorous.
A powerful squadron, with a considerable
body of land forces, was dispatched to re-

duce

duce the Virginians to obedience. After B0 o0
compelling the colonies in Barbadoes and
the other islands to submit to the com-
monwealth, the squadron entered the Bay ba6z.
of Chefapeak. Berkeley, with more courage
than prudence, took arms to oppose this
formidable armament; but he could not
long maintain such an unequal contest. His
gallant refitance, however, procured fa-
vourable terms to the people under his go-
vernment. A general indemnity for al Virginia

-~~~~~

^ , , is forced
past offences was granted; they acknow- to ac-

klnow-

ledged the authority of the commonwealth, ledgethe
and were admitted to a participation of all comrnlm"-
the rights enjoyed by citizens *. Berke-
ley, firdr to his principles of loyalty, dif-
dained to make any itipulation for him-
self; and choofing to pass his days far re-
moved from the feat of a government which
he detested, continued to reside in Virginia
as a private man, beloved and refpe&ed by
all over whom he had formerly presided.

Thurlow's State Papers, i. 197. Chalmers'
Annals, p. 12. Bcverley', Hit. p. 59.

NOT

BOOK NOT satisfied with taking measures to

l IX fubje& the colonies, the commonwealth

Rftraints turned its attention towards the most effec-
on the
trade of tual mode of retaining them in dependance
the co-
lony. on the parent state, and of securing to it

the benefit of their increasing commerce.
With this view the parliament framed two
165i. laws, one of which expressly prohibited all

mercantile intercourse between the colonies
and foreign fates, and the other ordained,
that no production of Asia, Africa, or Ame-
rica, should be imported into the dominions
of the commonwealth, but in vessels be-
longing to English owners, or to the people
of the colonies fettled there, and navigated
by an Engliih commander *, and by crews
of which the greater part must be Englilh-
men. But while the wisdom of the com-
monwealth prescribed the channel in which
the trade of the colonies was to be carried
on, it was solicitous to encourage the cul-
tivation of the staple commodity of Vir-
3652. ginia by an aa of parliament, which gave

* Scobcls Ads, p. 132. 176.

legal

legal force to all the injuncions of James BO O 1K
and Charles against planting tobacco in Eng- , -
land *.

UNIER governors appointed by the com-

monwealth, or by Cromwell, when he
usurped the Supreme power, Virginia rd-
mained almost nine years in-perfelt tran-
quillity. During that period, many ad-
herents.to the royal party, and among
there fame gentlemen of good families, in
order to avoid danger and oppression, to
which they were exposed in England, or
in hopes of repairing their ruined fortunes,
resorted thither. Warmly attached to the The co-

lonifts dif.

cause for which they had fought and sus- fatisfed
sered, ard animated with all the passions with these

resiraints.

natural to men recently engaged in a fierce
and long protrated civil war, they, by
their intercourse with the colonists, con-
firmed them in principles of loyalty, and
added to their impatience and indignation
under the reRraints imposed on their crn-

Scobel's ACts, p. 187.

merce

B 0 O merce by their new masters. On the death

Ix.
*..L of Mathews, the last governor named by

Cromwell, the sentiments and inclination
of the people, no longer under the control
of authority, burf out with violence.
They forced Sir William Berkeley to quit
his retirement; they unanimnitfly eleced
him governor of the colony: and as he
refused to aft under an usurped authority,

Are the
£r to ac. they boldly ere/ted the royal flandard, and,
dkow. acknowledging Charles II. to be their law-
ledge
Charls ful sovereign, proclaimed him with all his

titles; and the Virginians long boasted,
that as they were the last of the king's sub-
jeas who renounced their allegiance, they
were the first who returned to their duty*.

Tbner HAPPILY for the people of Virginia, a
loyalty
il-tre. revolution in England, no less sudden and
garded. unexpected, feated Charles on the throne

of his anceflors, and saved them from the
severe chastisement, to which' their pre-
mature declaration in his favour must have

* Bcvcrlcy, p. 55. Chalmers, p. 124.

exposed

exposed them. On receiving the first ac- Bo o K

IX.

count of this.event, the joy and exultation h -
of the colony were universal and unbound-
ed. These, however, were not of long con-
tinuance. Gracious, but unproducive pro.
feflions of dcteem and good-will were the
only return made by Charles to loyalty and
services, which in their own estimation
were so diftinguilhed that no recompencu
was beyond what they might claim. If the
king's negle& and ingratitude disappoint-
ed aH the sanguine hopes which their va.
nity had founded on the merit of their past
condu&, the spirit which influenced parliar
ment in its commercial deliberations opened
a profpeC that alarmed them with refpeEt
to their future situation. In framing re-
gulations for the encouragement of trade,
which, during the convulions of civil war,
and amidst continual fluctuations in go-
vernment, had met with such obftrution
that it declined in every quarter; the House
of Commons, instead of granting the colo-
nies that relief which they expedled from

the

B 0 the restraints in their commerce imposed

lx.
*- L- by the commonwealth and Cromwell, not

only adopted all their ideas concerning this
branch of legislation, but extended them

Naviga- farther. This produced the ag of naviga-
tion adt.

tion, the most important and memorable of
any in the statute book with refped to the
hitfory of English commerce. By it, be-
fides several momentous articles foreign to
the fubje& of this work, it was enaaed,
that no commodities flould be imported
into any settlement in Asia, Africa, or
America, or exported from them, but in
vefiels of English or plantation built, where-
of the malter and three-fourths of the ma-
riners shall be English fubjeas, under pain
of forfeiting ship and goods; that none but
natural-born fubjeas, or such as have been
naturalized, shall exercise the occupation of
merchant or factor in any Englilh fettle-
ment, under pain of forfeiting their goods
and chattels; that no. sugar, tobacco,
cotton, wool, indigo, ginger, or woods
used in dying, of the growth or manu-

faaure

fadure of the colonies, Ihall be shipped B 0 K

Ix.

from them to any other country but Eng- .-
land; and in order to secure the perform-
ance of this, a sufficient bond, with one
surety, shall be given, before failing, by the
owners, for a specific fum proportional to
the rate of the veflel employed by them *.
The productions fubje&ed to this reftric-
tion are distinguished, in the language of
commerce and finance, by the name of
enumerated commodities; and as industry in
its progress furnilhed new articles of value,
these have been fucceflively added to the
roll, and fubjeaed to the fame restraint.
Soon after, the a& of navigation was ex- 1663.
tended, and additional retraints were im-
posed, by a new law, which prohibited the
importation of any European commodity
into the colonies, but what was laden in
England in veftels navigated and manned
as the a& of navigation required. More
effeCtual provision was made by this law

* I Car. II. c. 18.

7 for

B0 OK for exating the penalties to which the

Ix.
_ *' transgressors of the a& of navigation were

fubjedted; and the principles of policy, on
which the various regulations contained in
both flatutes are founded, were openly
avowed in a declaration, that as the planta-
tions beyond seas are inhabited and peopled
by fubjeds of England, they may be kept
in a firmer dependance upon it, and ren-
dered yet more beneficial and advantage-
ous unto it, in the further employment and
increase of Engliih ihipping and seamen,
as well as in the vent of Engliih woollen
and other manufactures and commodities;
and in making England a fiaple, not only
of the commodities of those plantations,
but also of the commodities of other
countries and places, for the supplying of
them; and it being the usage of other na-
tions to keep the trade of their plantations
to themielves *. In prosecution of those
favourite maxims, the English legislature
proceeded a Rep farther. As the a& of

15 Car. II. c. 7.

navi-

navigation had left the people of the co- B o o K
lonies at liberty to export the enumerated lx.
commodities from one plantation to ano-
ther without paying any duty, it fubjeated 1672.
them to a tax equivalent to what was paid
by the consumers of these commodities in
England *.

BY these fucceflive regulations, the plan EffeAs of

of securing to England a monopoly of the
commerce with its colonies, and of shutting
up every other channel into which it might
be diverted, was perfected and reduced into
complete system. On one fide of the At.
lantic, these regulations have been extolled
as an extraordinary effort of political saga-
city, and have been confidered as the great
charter of national commerce, to which the
present state is indebted for all its opulence
and power. On the other, they have been
execrated as a code of oppreiflon, more
suited to the illiberality of mercantile ideas,
than to extensive views of legislative wis-

* aS Car. II. c. 7.

L dom.

B 0 K dom. Which of these opinions is belf

Ix.
E.~i founded, I shall examine at large in another

part of this work. But in writing the his-
tory of the Engliih settlements in America,
it was ncceffary to trace the progress of
those restraining laws with accuracy, as in
every fubfcquent tranfa&ion we may ob-
serve a perpetual exertion, on the part of
the mother-country, to enforce and extend
them; and on the part of the colonies,
endeavours no less unremitting, to elude or
to obftrud their operation.

Colonifis HARDLY was the aa of navigation
remon-
irate known in Virginia, and its effecs begun
again:t to be felt, when the colony remonstrated

against it as a grievance, and petitioned
earnestly for relief. But the commercial
ideas of Charles and his ministers coin-
cided so perfectly with those of parlia-
ment, that, instead of listening with a fa-
vourable ear to their applications, they la-
boured afliduouny to carry the aa into
firia execution. For this purpose, infiruc-

tions

tlons were issued to the governor, forts were B O O K
built on the banks of the principal rivers, ._b
and finall vessels appointed to cruize on the
coait. The Virginians, feeing no profped
of obtaining exemption from the a&, set
themselves to evade it, and found means,
notwithstanding the vigilance with which
they were watched, of carrying on a con-
fiderable clandefline trade with foreigners,
particularly with the Dutch fettled on
Hudson's River. Emboldened by observing
difaffeation spread through the colony, some
veteran soldiers who had served under
Cromwell, and had been banished to Vir-
ginia, formed a design of rendering them- 1663.
selves masters of the country, and of assert-
ing its independence on England. This
ralh project was discovered by one of their
associates, and disconcerted by the vigorous
exertions of Sir William Berkeley. But
the spirit of discontent, though repressed,
was not extinguished. Every day some-
thing occurred to revive and to nourish it.
As it is with extreme difficulty that com-

L 2 mcrce

*

B O O K merce can be turned into a- new channel,

Ix.
., A tobacco, the staple of the colony, funk

prodigiously in value, when they were
compelled to fend it all to one market. It
was some time before England could fur-
nifh them regularly full assortments of
those neceflary articles, without which the
industry of the colony could not be carried

Colony on, or its prosperity secured. Encouraged
by the by the symptoms of general languor and

despondency, which this declining state of
the colony occasioned, the Indians feated
towards the heads of the rivers ventured
first to attack the remote settlements, and
then to make incursions into the interior
parts of the country. Unexpe&ed as there
hostilities were, from a people who during
a long period had lived in friendship with
the English, a measure taken by the king
seems to have excited fill greater terror
among the most opulent people in the co-

tents pro- on'. Charles had imprudently imitated
duced by the example of his father, by granting such
the grants
of land by large tra1s of land in Virginia to several of
the crown. 6

u his

his courtiers, as tended to unsettle the dif- B O K

IX.

tribution of property in the country, and
to render the title of the most ancient
planters to their estates precarious and quef- 1676.
tionable. From those various causes, which
in a greater or lesser degree affeced every
individual in the colony, the indignation of
the people became general, and was worked
up to such a pitch, that nothing was want-
ing to precipitate them into the most de-
fperate ads, but some leader, qualified to
unite and to diret their operations .

SUCH a leader they found in Nathaniel An in-

furreaion

Bacon, a colonel of militia, who, though in Virgi-
he had been fettled in Virginia only three ahead-

ed by N.

years, had acquired, by popular manners, Bacon.
an insinuating address, and the consideration
derived from having been regularly train-
ed in England to the profession of law,
fucll general efteern, that he had been ad-

* Chalmers' Annals, ch. 10. 13, 14. paflin. Be-
ver! y, p. 58, &c.

1. 3 mitted

B o o K mitted into the council, and was regarded
.· .-. as one of the most refpe&able persons in

the colony. Bacon was ambitious, eloquent,
daring, and prompted either by honest
zeal to redress the public wrongs, or allured
by hopes of raising himself to diftinaion
and power, he mingled with the malcon-
tents, and by his bold harangues and con-
sident promises of removing all their griev-
ances, he inflamed them almost to madness.
As the devastations committed by the In-
dians was the calamity most sensibly felt by
the people, he accused the governor of hav-
ing negleted the proper measures for re-
pelling the invasions of the savages, and
exhorted them to take arms in their own
defence, and to exterminate that odious
race. Great numbers assembled, and chose
Bacon to be their general. He applied to
the governor for a commission, confirming
this election of the people, and offered to
march instantly against the common enemy.
Berkeley, accustomed by long poffeflion of
fuprcme command to high ideas of the

refpca

refpcct due to his station, confidered this B 0 0 K
tumultuary armament as an open insult to
his authority, and fufpeaed that, under
icpcious appearances, Bacon concealed most
dangerous designs. Unwilling, however, to
give farther provocation to an incensed mul-
titude, by a direct refusal of what they
demanded, he thought it prudent to nego-
ciate, in order to gain time; and it was not
until he found all endeavours to sooth them
ineffecdual, that he issued a proclamation,
requiring them, in the king's name, under
the pain of being denounced rebels, to
disperse.

BUT Bacon, sensible that he had now

advanced so far as rendered it impoflible to
recede with honour or safety, instantly took
the only resolution that remained in his
situation. At the head of a chofcn body
of his followers he marched rapidly to
James-Town, and surrounding the house
where the governor and council were as-
fcmbled, demanded the commiflion foi

L 4 which

B 0 0 K which he had formerly applied. Berkeley,

IX.
_r-_ with the proud indignant spirit of a cava-

lier, disdaining the requisitions of a rebel,
peremptorily refused to comply, and calmly
presented his naked breast to the weapons
which were pointed against it. The coun-
cil, however, foreseeing the fatal confe-
quences of driving an enraged multitude,
in whose power they were, to the last
extremities of violence, prepared a com-
mission, constituting Bacon general of all
the forces in Virginia, and by their entrea-
ties prevailed on the governor to sign it.
Bacon with his troops retired in triumph.
Hardly was the council delivered by his
departure from the dread of present danger,
when, by a transition not unusual in feeble
minds, prcfumptuous boldness succeeded to
excessive fear. The commission granted to
Bacon was declared to be null, having been
extorted by force; he was proclaimed a
rebel, his followers were required to
abandon his standard, and the militia or-
dered to arm, and to join the governor.

ENRAG ED

ENRAGED at conduct which he branded B o o

IX.

with the name of base and treacherous, ...V
Bacon, instead of continuing his march to- Bacon

forces Sir
wards the Indian country, inflantly wheeled W.Berke.

Icy and

about, and advanced with all his forces to thecoun-
James-Town. The governor, unable to ciltoflI
resist such a numerous body, made hisefcape,
and fled across the bay to Acomack on the
Eastern shore. Some of the counsellors
accompanied him thither, others retired to
their own plantations. Upon the flight of
Sir William Berkeley, and dispersion of the
council, the frame of civil government in
the colony seemed to be dissolved, and Ba-
con became possessed of supreme and un-
controlled power. But as he was sensible
that his countrymen would not long sub-
mit with patience to authority acquired and
held merely by force of arms, he endea-
voured to found it on a more constitutional
basis, by obtaining the fanaion of the
people's approbation. With this view he
called together the most considerable gen.-
tlemen in the colony, and having pre-

vailed

B o0 K vailed on them to bind themnfelves by oath

Ix.
.- . to maintain his authority, and to resist

every enemy that should oppose it, he
from that time confidered his jurifdidion as
legally eftablithed.

Sir W. BERKELEY, meanwhile, having collcted
Berkeley
applies some forces, made inroads into difflrent
fiOr uO parts of the colony, where Bacon's au-
England. thority was recognized. Several sharp con-

flics happened with various success. James-
Town was reduced to ashes, and the belt
cultivated difirids in the province were laid
waftc, sometimes by one party, and some-
times by the other. But it was not by his
own exertions that the governor hoped to
terminate the contest. He had early tranf-
mittcd an account of the tranfations in
Virginia to the king, and demanded fucih a
body of soldiers as would enable him to
quell the insurgents, whom he representcd
as so exafpcrated by the reflraints im.
posed on their trade, that they were in-
patient to shake off all dependance on the

parent

parent itate. Charles, alarmed at a commo- B o o K
tion no less dangerous than unexpected, i_'
and solicitous to maintain his authority
over a colony, the value of which was daily
increasing, and more fully understood,
speedily dispatched a finall squadron, with
such a number of regular troops as Berke-
ley had required. Bacon and his followers
received information of this armament, but
were not intimidated at its approach. They
boldly determined to oppose it with open
force, and declared it to be confifent with
their duty and allegiance, tp treat all who
should aid SirWilliam Berkeley as enemies,
until they should have an opportunity of
laying their grievances before their fove-
reign *.

BUT while both parties prepared, with 1677:

Death of

equal animosity, to involve their country Bacon
in the horrors of civil war, an event hap- ^'ntermi-
pened, which quieted the commotion al- rebellio.

* Bevcrlcy's Hit. p. 75, 76.

most

B 0 K most as suddenly as it had been excited.

Ix.
imym, Bacon, when ready to take the field, sicken-

ed and died. None of his followers pof-
sessed such talents, or were so much ob-
jeds of the people's confidence, as entitled
them to aspire to the supreme command.
Destitute of a leader to conduct and ani-
mate them, their sanguine hopes of success
subsided; mutual distrust accompanied this
universal despondency: all began to wish
for an accommodation; and after a short
negociation with SirWilliam Berkeley, they
laid down their arms, and submitted to his
government, on obtaining a promise of ge-
neral pardon.

THUS terminated an infurre&ion, which,

in the annals of Virginia, is distinguished
by the name of Bacon's rebellion. During
seven months this daring leader was master
of the colony, while the royal governor was
ihut up in a remote and ill-peopled corner
of it. What were the real motives that
prompted him to take arms, and to what

length

length he intended to carry his plans of re- B o o K

Ix.

formation, either in commerce or govern- ...
ment, it is not easy to discover, in the
scanty materials from which we derive our
information with refped to this tranfac-
tion. It is probable, that his conduct, like
that of other adventurers in fation, would
have been regulatedchiefly by events; and
accordingly as there proved favourable or
adverse, his views and requisitions would
have been extended or circumscribed.

SIRWILLIAM BERKELEY, as foonas he Anaflem.

bly called;

was re-inflated in his office, called together its mode-
the representatives of the people, that by ration.
their advice and authority public tranquil-
lity and order might be perfectly efta-
blifhed. Though this aflembly met a fcw
weeks after the death of Bacon, while the
memory of reciprocal injuries was still re-
cent, and when the paflions excited by
fiich a fierce contest had but little time to
ifl)fide, its proceedings were condulcd
with a moderation fcltloi excrcifed by the

fucc efs'ul

BOOK successful party in a civil war. No man

IX.

*- ifutffered capitally; a finall number were

fubjeted to fines; others were declared in-
capable of holding any office of trust; and
with those exceptions, the promise of ge-
neral indemnity was confirmed by law.
Soon after, Berkeley was recalled, and
Colonel Jefferys was appointed his fuc-
cefior.

State of FROM that period to the Revolution in
the colony
tillthe I688, there is scarcely any memorable oc-
Relu,, currence in the history of Virginia. A
168-. peace was concluded with the Indians.

Under several successive governors, admi-
uiftration was carried on in the colony
with the fame arbitrary spirit that dif-
tinguiihed the latter years of Charles II.
and the precipitate counsels of James II.
The Virginians, with a constitution which,
in form, rcfcmbled that of England, enjoy-
ed hardly any portion of the liberty which
that admirable system of policy is framed
to Iccure. They were deprived even of the

i I last

last consolation of the oppressed, the power B o K

IX.

of complaining, by a law which, under _-
revere penalties, prohibited them from
speaking diflefpedtfully of the governor,
or defaming, either by words or writing,
the administration of the colony *. Still,
however, the laws restraining their com-
merce were felt as an intolerable grievance,
and nourished in secret a spirit of difcon-
tent, which, from the necessity of con-
cealing it, acquired a greater degree of
acrimony. But notwithstanding those un-
favourable circumstances, the colony con-
tinued to increase. The use of tobacco was
now become general in Europe; and
though it had fallen considerably in price,
the extent of demand compcnefted that
diminution, and by giving conRant em-
ployment to the industry of the planters
diffused wealth among them. At the Re-
volution the number of inhabitants in tlir

* Bcverley, p. 81. Chalmcrs, p. 341.

colony

BOOK colony exceeded sixty thousand *, and

ix.

. in the course of twenty-eight years its

population had been more than dou-
bled -(-.

' CL.ihlncrs' Annals, p. 356. 1 Ibid. p. 125.

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

F
AMERICA.

BOOK X.
W E N James I. in the year one thou- o o

sand fix hundred and fix, made that x.

magnificent partition, which has been men- Hifory of
tioned, of a vast region in North America, erncoo.-
extending from the thirty-fourth to the Y and of

the Ply-

forty-fifth degree of latitude, between two mouth
trading companies of his fubjeds, he efta- company.
blifhed the residence of the one in London,
and of the other in Plymouth. The for-
mer was authorized to fettle in the southern,
and the latter in the northern part of this

M territory,

B o O K territory, then distinguished by the general

X.

*-.~
- name of Virginia. This arrangement seems

to ha*e been formed upon the idea of some
speculative refiner, who aimed at diffusing
the spirit of industry, by fixing the feat of
one branch of the trade that was now to be
opened, on the east coast of the island, and
the other on the weft. But London pof-
fesses such advantages of situation, that the
commercial wealth and activity of England
have always centered in the capital. At the
beginning of the last century, the fuperi-
ority of the metropolis in both these re-
fpeas was so great, that though the powers
and privileges conferred by the king on the
two trading companies were precisely the
fame, the adventurers fettled in Plymouth
fell far short of those in London, in the
vigour and success of their efforts towards
accomplishing the purpose of their inftitu-
tion. Though the operations of thcd Ply-
mouth company were animated by the
public-fpirited zeal of Sir John Popham,
chief juflice of England, Sir Ferdinando

Gorges,

Gorges, and some other gentlemen of the B o K
wefl, all its exertions were feeble and un- ..
fortunate.

THE first vessel fitted out by the corn'- 606.

Sird ato

pany was taken by the Spaniards. In the tempts
year one thousand fix hundred and seven, to ettle

on the

a' feeble settlement was made at Sagaha- no thcrn
doc; but, on account of the rigour of the
climate, was soon relinquished, and for some
time nothing farther was attempted than a
few fihing voyages to Cape Cod, or a piti.
ful traffic with the natives for skins and
oil. One of the veltels equipped for this Smith

surveys
purpose was commanded by Captain Smith* that coast

and calls

whose name has been so often mentioned it New
with diftintion in the History of Virginia England.
The adventure was prosperous and lucra-
tive. But his ardent enterprising mind
could not confine its attention to objects so
unequal to it as the petty details of a trad-
ing voyage. He employed a part of his
time in exploring the coast, and in deli-
neating its bays and harbours. On his

M a return,

.B o O K return, he laid a map of it before Prince

_-y Charles, and, with the usual exaggeration of

discoverers, painted the beauty and ex-
cellence of the country in such glowing
colours, that the young Prince, in the
warmth of admiration, declared, that it
should be called New England *: a name
which effaced that of Virginia, and by
which it is still diftinguilhed.

Sirs at. THE favourable accounts of the country
tempts
to fettle by Smith, as well as the success of his
cefsful. voyage, seem to have encouraged private

adventurers to prosecute the trade on the
coast of New England with greater brisk-
ness; but did not inspire the languishing
company of Plymouth with such vigour as
to make any new attempt towards efta-
blifhing a permanent colony there. Some-
thing more than the profpe& of distant
gain to themselves, or of future advantages
to their country, was requisite, in order to

* Smith's Tray. Book vi. p. 203, &c. Purchas, iv..
p. 1837.

induce

induce men to abandon the place of their B 0 o K
nativity, to migrate to another quarter of -....
the globe, and endure innumerable hard-
ships under an untried climate, and in an
uncultivated land, covered with woods, or
occupied by fierce and hostile tribes of fa-
vages. But what mere attention to private
emolument or to national.utility could not
effet, was accomplished by the operation
of an higher principle. Religion had gra- Religiouk

disputes

dually excited among a great body of the give rie
people, a spirit that fitted them remarkably New en
for encountering the dangers, and surmount- andco-

lony.

ing the obstacles, which had hitherto ren-.
dered abortive the schemes of colonization
in that part of America allotted to the comr
pany of Plymouth. As the various fettle*
ments in New England are indebted for
their origin to this spirit, as in the course
of our narrative we Ihali discern its influ.
ence mingling in all their tranfadtions, and
giving a peculiar tindure to the ch ira&er of
the people, as well as to their inflitutions,
both civil and ecclefiaftica, it becomes ne,

M 3 ceffary

B 0 0 K ceirary to trace its rife and progress with

-'- _ s attention and accuracy.

Different WHEN the superstitions and corruptions
senti- inents re- of the Romish church prompted different
fpheaing nations of Europe to throw off its yoke,
church
govern- and to withdraw from its communion, the
wnent that
prevailed mode as well as degree of their reparation
ft'aRn- was various. Wherever reformation was
tion. sudden, and carried on by the people with-

out authority from their rulers, or in op-
position to it, the rupture was violent and
total. Every part of the ancient fabric was
overturned, and a different system, not only
with refpea to dotrine, but to church go-
vernment, and the external rites of wor-
ihip, was established. Calvin, who, by his
abilities, learning, and austerity of man-
ners, had acquired high reputation and au-
thority in the ProteRant churches, was a
zealous advocate for this plan of thorough
reformation. He exhibited a model of that
pure form of ecclesiastical policy, which he
approved in the conftittti9o of the church

of

of Geneva. The simplicity of its irititu- B OO K
tions, and still more their repugnancy to s
those of the Popiih church, were so much
admired by all the firicer reformers, that
it was copied, with some small variations,
in Scotland, in the Republic of the United
Provinces, in the dominions of the House
of Brandenburgh, in those of the Eletor
Palatine, and in the churches of the Hugo-
nots in France.

BUT in those countries where the steps

of departure from the church of Rome
were taken with greater deliberation, and
regulated by the wisdom or policy of the
supreme magifirate, the separation was not
so wide. Of all the reformed churches,
that of England has deviated least from the
ancient institutions. The violent but ca-
pricious spirit of Henry VIII. who, though
he disclaimed the supremacy, revered the
tenets of the Papal fee, checked innovations
in doctrine or worship during his reign.
When his son ascended the throne, and the

M 4 Protestant

BO0 0 K Protestant religion was eftablilhed by law,

x. _-q.. the cautious prudence of Archbishop Cran-

mner moderated the zeal of those who had
espoused the new opinions. Though the
articles to be recognized as the system of
national faith were framed conformably to
the doctrines of Calvin, his notions with
refpea to church government and the
mode of worship were not adopted. As
the hierarchy in England was incorporated
with the civil policy of the kingdom, and
constituted a member of the legislature,
archbishops and bishops, with all the sub-
ordinate ranks of ecclefiaitics subjet to
them, were continued according to ancient
form, and with the fame dignity and jurif-
diaion. The peculiar vetments in which
the clergy performed their sacred funtions,
bowing at the name of Jesus, kneeling at
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup.
per, the sign of the Cross in baptism, the
use of the Ring in marriage, with several
other rites to which long usage had accuf-
tomed the people, and which time had ren-

dered

dered venerable, were fRill retained. But B 00
though Parliament enjoined the observance -
of these ceremonies under very severe pe-
nalties *, several of the more zealous clergy
entertained scruples with refpe& to the law-
fulness of complying with this injunction;
and the-vigilance and'authority of Cranmer
and Ridley with difficulty saved their in-
sant church from the disgrace of a schism
on this account.

ON the accefion of Mary, the' furious Religiou
zeal with which ihe persecuted all who had Pefc-'

tion by

adopted the tenets of the reformers forced Mary.
many eminent Protestants, laymen as well
as ecclesiastics, to seek an asylum on the
continent. Francfort, Geneva, Basil, and
Strafburgh, received them with affetionate
hospitality as sufferers in the cause of truth,
and the magistrates permitted them to as-
femble by themselves for religious worship.
The exiles who took up their gefidence in

*2 and 3 Edw. VI. c. I.

the

BOOK the two former cities modelled their little

X.^ congregations according to the ideag ds Cal-

vin, and, with a spirit natural to ifeih in
their situation, eagerly adopted institutions
which appeared to befarther removed from
the superstitions of Popery than those of
their own church. They returned to Eng-
land as soon as Elizabeth te-eftablifhed the
Protestant religion, not only with more
violent antipathy to the opinions and prac-
tices of that church by which they had
been oppressed, but with a strong attach-
ment to that mode of worihip to which
they had been for some years accustomed.
As they were received by their country-
men with the veneration due to confessors,
they exerted all the influence derived from
that opinion, in order to obtain such a re-
formation in the English ritual as might
bring it nearer to the standard of purity
in foreign churches. Some of the queen's
most confidential miaifters were warmly
disposed to co-operate with them in this

EQla" measure. But Elizabeth paid little regard
beth. -to

*

to the inclinations of the one, or the fe-n B O O x
timents of the other. Fond of pomp and *-r-;
ceremony, accustomed, according to the
mode of that age, to fudy religious con-
troverfy, and poffefling, like her father, such
confidence in her own understanding that
she never doubted her capacity tQ judge
and decide with refped to every point
in dispute between contending fes *,

{he

Of the high idea which Elizabeth entertained with

refpef to her own superior skill in theology, as well as
the haughty tone in which flie dictated to her sub.
jels what they ought to believe, we have a striking
pi&ure in her speech at the close of the parliament
A.D. Is85.-" One thing I may not overlkip. Re-
ligion, the ground on which all other matters ought to
take root, and being corrupted, may mar all the tree,
And that there be some fault-finders with the order
of the clergy, which so may make a slander to myself,
and to the church, whose over-ruler God hath made
me, whose negligence cannot be excused, if any schisms
or errors heretical were suffered. Thus much, I mur
fay, that some faults and negligences muff grow and
be, as in all other great charges it happeneth and
what vocation without ? All which, if you my lords
of the clergy do not amend, I mean to depose you.

Look

BOO K she chore to at according to her own ideas,

x.
I_ ^_ which led her rather to approach nearer to

the church of Rome, in the parade of ex-
ternal worship, than to widen the breach
by abolishing any rite already established *.
An a& of parliament, in the first year of
her reign, not only required an exa& con-
formity to the mode of worship prescribed
in the service book, under most rigorous
penalties, but empowered the Queen to en-
join the observance of such additional cere-
monies as might tend, in her opinion, to

Look ye, therefore, well to your charges. This may
be amended without needless or open exclamations. I
am supposed to have many studies, but most philofo-
phical. I must yield this to be true, that I suppose
few (that be not profeflors) have read more. And I
need not tell you, that I am not so simple that I under-
itand not, nor so forgetful that I remember not; and
yet, amidlt my many volumes, I hope God's book hath
not been my feldomeft leaures, in which we find that
which by reason all ought to believe. I fee many
over-bold with God Almighty, making too many subtle
scannings of his blessed will. The presumption is so
great that I may not susser it," &c. D'Ewes's Journal,
p. 328.

* Neal's HiR. of the Puritans, i. 138. 176.

render

render the public exercises of devotion more B o o K
decent and edifying *.

TIE advocates for a farther reformation, Paritans.

notwithfianding this cruel disappointment
of the sanguine hopes with which they re-
turned to their native country, did not re-
linquifh their design. They disseminated
their opinions with great industry among
the people. They extolled the purity of
foreign churches, and inveighed against the
superstitious practices with which religion
was defiled in their own church. In vain
did the defenders of the established system
represent that these forms and ceremonies
were, in themselves, things perfectly indif-
ferent, which, from long usage, were view-
ed with reverence; and, by their impreflion
upon the senses and imagination, tended
not only to fix the attention, but to asset
the heart, and to warm it with devout and
worthy sentiments. The Puritans (for by
that name such as scrupled to comply with

* Eliz. c. 2,

what
9

B OO K what was enjoined by the a& of uniform-

X. 'YI ity were distinguished) maintained, that

the rites in question were inventions of
men, superadded to the simple and reason-
able service required in the word of God;
that from the excessive solicitude with which
conformity to them was exa&ed, the mul-
titude must conceive such an high opinion
of their value and importance, as might
induce them to reft satisfied with the mere
form and Ihadow of religion, and to ima-
gine that external observances may com-
penfate for the want of inward san&ity;
that ceremonies which had been long em-
ployed by a society manifestly corrupt, to
veil its own defeas, and to seduce and
fascinate mankind, ought now to be rejet-
ed as relics of fuperRition unworthy of a
place in a church which gloried in the
name of Reformcd.

Intolerant THE people, to whom in every religious
spirit of controversy the final appeal is made, listened
the
church. to the arguments of the contending parties;

5 and

and it is obvious to which of them, W~ B. o-,
who had lately beheld the fupErftRitiou; ,..,,
spirit of Popery, and felt is. perfcuting
rage, would lend the most favourable er..
The desire of a farther separation from the
church of Rome spread wide through, the
nation. The preachers who contended for.
this, and whp refused to, wear the fur-
plice, and other vestments peculiar to their
order, or to observe the ceremonies en-
joined by law, were followed and admired,.
while the ministry of the zealous advocates
for conformity was deserted, and:their per-
sons often exposed to insult. For some
time the non-conformits were connived
at; but as their number and boldness in-
created, the interposition both of spiritual:
and civil authority was deemed neceflary in.
order to check their progress. To the dif-
grace of Christians, the sacred rights of
conscience and private judgment, as well as
the charity and mutual forbearance suit-
able to the, mild spirit of the religion
which they professed, were in that age litte,

understood.

BOOK understood. Not only the idea of tole-

'_, ration, but even the word itself in the

sense now affixed to it, was then un-
known. Every church claimed a right to
employ the hand of power for the protec-
tion of truth and the extirpation of error.
The laws of her kingdom armed Elizabeth
with ample authority for this purpose, and
she was abundantly disposed to exercise it
with full vigour. Many of the most emi-
ment among the Puritan clergy were de-
prived of their benefices, others were im-
prisoned, several were fined, and some put
to death. But persecution, as usually hap-
pens, instead of extinguishing, inflamed
their zeal to such a height, that the jurif-
didion of the ordinary courts of law was
deemed insufficient to suppress it, and a
new tribunal was established under the title
of the high commffion for ecclefiaticalaffairs,
whose powers and mode of procedure were
hardly less odious or less hostile to the
principles of justice than those of the Spa-
n!h inquisition. Several attempts were

made

made in the House of Commons to check B Qo'
these arbitrary proceedings, and to mode- X
rate the rage of persecution; but the Queen
always imposed silence upon those who
presumed to deliver any opinion with re-
Ipc to a matter appertaining solely to her
prerogative, in a tone as imperious and
arrogant as was ever used by Henry VIII.
in addressing his Parliaments; and so tame-
ly obsequious were the guardians of the
people's rights, that they not only obeyed
those unconstitutional commands, but con-
sented to an a&, by which every person
who should absent himself from church
during a month was fubjeted to punilh-
ment by fine and imprisonment; and if
after conviAion he did not, within three
months, renounce his erroneous opinions
and conform to the laws, he was then
obliged to abjure the realm; but if he
either refused to comply with this condi-
tion, or returned from banilhment, he
should be put to death as a felon without
benefit of clergy *.

i* 3 Eliz. c. x.

NT BY

B 0 K BY this iniquitous statute, equally re-

x.

- pugnant to ideas of civil and of religious

Entire f¢.
paration liberty, the Puritans were cut off from any
uritans hope of obtaining either reformation in the
from the church or indulgence to themselves. Ex-
church.

afperated by this rigorous treatment, their
antipathy to the established religion in-
creased, and, with the progress natural to
violent paflions, carried them far beyond
what was their original aim. The first
Puritans did not entertain any scruples with
refpe& to the lawfulness of Episcopal go-
vernment, and seem to have been very un-
villing to withdraw from communion with
the church of which they were members.
But when they were thrown out of her
bosom, and conitrained to hold separate as-
femblies for the worship of God, their fol-
lowers no longer viewed a society by wlIicl
they were oppressed with reverence or as-
feCion. Her government, her discipline,
her ritual, were examined with minute at-
tention. Every error was pointed out, and
every defect magnified. The more boldly
any teacher inveighed againft'the corrup-

12 tions

tions of the church, he was listened to with B 0 0 K

x.

greater approbation; and the farther he h -__.
urged his disciples to depart from such an
impure community, the more eagerly did
they follow him. By degrees, ideas of eccle-
fiaftical policy, altogether repugnant to those
of the established church, gained footing in
the nation. The more fober and learned
Puritans inclined to that form which is
known by the name of Preibyterian. Such
as were more thoroughly possessed with the
spirit of innovation, however much they
might approve the equality of pastors which
that system establishes, reprobated the au-
thority which it vests in various judicato-
ries, descending from one to another in re-
gular Subordination, as inconsistent with
Christian liberty.

THESE wild notions floated for some

time in the minds of the people, and amused
them with many ideal schemes of eccle-
fiaftical policy. At length Robert Brown, Brownis,.
a popular declaimer in high estimation, re- 580.

N 2 duced

B O K duced them to a fyftcm, on which he mo-

X. ·

, ^
x delled his own congregation. He taught,

that the church of England was corrupt,
and antichriftians, its ministers not lawfully
ordained, its ordinances and sacraments in-
valid; and therefore he prohibited his people
to hold communion with it in any religious
funacion. He maintained, that a society of
Christians, uniting together to worlhip God,
constituted a church, possessed of complete
jurifdiaion in the conduct of its own as-
fairs, independent of any other society, and
unaccountable to any superior; that the
priesthood was neither a diftind order in
the church, nor conferred an indelible cha-
racter; but that every man qualified to
teach might be set apart for that office by
the election of the brethren, and by im-
position of their hands; in like manner,
by their authority, he might be discharged
from that function, and reduced to the
rank of a private Christian; that every
person when admitted a member of a
church ought to make a public confeflion

9 of

of his faith, and give evidence of his being B O K
in a state of favour with God; and that all . _
the aflairs of a church were to be regulated
by the decision of the majority of its mem-
bers.

THIS democratical form of government, Brownifts

which abolished all distinction of ranks in fakger
the church, and conferred an equal portion Holland.
of power on every individual, accorded so
perfectly with the levelling genius of fana-
ticism, that it was fondly adopted by many
as a complete model of Christian policy.
From their founder, they were denomi-
nated Brownifts; and as their tenets were
more hostile to the established religion than
those of other separatists, the fiercest storm
of persecution fell upon their heads. Many
of them were fined or imprisoned, and
some put to death; and though Brown,
with a levity of which there are few ex-
amples among enthusiasts whose vanity
has been soothed by being recognized as
heads of a party, abandoned his disciples,

N 3 conformed

B O K conformed to the established religion, and

x.
Q.w-, accepted of a benefice in the church, the

fed not only subsisted, but continued to
spread, especially among persons in the
middle and lower ranks of life. But as
all their motions were carefully watched,
both by the ecclesiastical and civil courts,
which, as often as they were deteced,
puniihed them with the utmost rigour, a
body of them, weary of living in a ifate of
continual danger and alarm, fled to Hol-
land, and fettled in Leyden, under the
care of Mr. John Robinson, their pastor.
There they resided for several years un-
molested and obscure. But many of their
aged members dying, and rome of the
younger marrying into Dutch families,
while their church received no increase,
either 'by recruits from England, or by
proselytes gained in the country, they be-
gan to be afraid, that all their high at-
tainments in spiritual knowledge would be
loft, and that perfect fabric of policy,
which they had ereded, would be dissolved

andt

and consigned to oblivion, if they remain- B o K
*ed longer in a strange land.

DEEPLY affected with the profpe& of Remove

from

an event, which to them appeared fatal thence to
to the interests of truth, they thought America.
themselves called, in order to prevent it,
to remove to some other place, where they
might profess and propagate their opinions
with greater success. America, in which
their countrymen were at that time in-
tent on planting colonies, prelented itself
to their thoughts. They flattered them-
selves with hopes of being permitted, in
that remote region, to follow their own
ideas in religion without disturbance. The
dangers and hardships to which all former
emigrants to America had been exposed, did
not deter them. "They were well weaned,
(according to their own description) from
the delicate milk of their mother country,
and enured to the difficulties of a strange
land. They were knit together in a itria
and sacred band, by virtue of which they

N 4 held

B O O K held themselves obliged to take care of the

X.

-- good of each other, and of the whole. It

was not with them, as with other men,
whom small things could discourage, or
small discontents cause to wish themselves
61z8. at home again *." The first object of their

(olicitude was to secure the free exercise of
their religion. For this purpose they ap-
plied to the king; and though James re-
fused to give them any explicit assurance of
toleration, they seem to have obtained from
him some promise of his connivance, as
long as they continued to demean them-
selves quietly. So eager were they to ac-
complifh their favourite scheme, that, rely-
ing on this precarious security, they begain
to negociate with the Virginian company
for a tract of land within the limits of
their patent. This they easily procured
from a focicty desirous of encouraging mi-
gration to a vast country, of which they
had hitherto occupied only a few spots.

* IIutchinfon's Hilt. of Maffich. p. 4.

AFTER

AFTER the utmost efforts, their prepara- B o 0

tions fell far short of what was requisite for X.
beginning the settlement of a new colony. £62o.

Sept. 6.

A hundred and twenty persons failed from Firaat-
England in a single ihip on this arduous fettlpti
undertaking. The place of their deftina- Muafea
tion was Hudson's River, where they in- Bay.
tended to fettle; but their captain having
been bribed, as is said, by the Dutch, who
had then formed a scheme which they as-
terwards accomplished of planting a colony
there, carried them so far towards the
north, that the first land in America which
they made was Cape-Cod. They were Nov. ,.
now, not only beyond the precin/ts of the
territory which had been granted to them,
but beyond those of the company from
which they derived their right. The sea.
son, however, was so far advanced, and
ticknefs raged so violently among men un-
accultomed to the hardships of a long
voyage, that it became necessary to take
up their abode there. After exploring the
coast, they chose for their station, a place

nOW

B O K now belonging to the province of Mafia-
A_-' chufets Bay, to which they gave the name
Settlep t of New Plymouth, probably out of refped
Pouth. to that company, within whole jurifdidion

they now found themselves situated *.

No season could be more unfavourable

to settlement than that in which the colony
landed. The winter, which, from the pre-
dominance of cold in America, is rigorous
to a degree unknown in parallel latitudes
of our hemisphere, was already set in; and
they were slenderly provided with what
was requisite for comfortable fubfiftance,
under a climate considerably more fevcre
than that for which they had made prepa-
ration. Above one half of them was cut
off before the return of spring, by diseases,
or by famine: the survivors, inflead of hav-
ing Icifure to attend to the supply of their
own wants, were compelled to take arms

" Hubard's Pref. State, f. 3. Cotton's Alagllalia,
p; 7. Hutchlilfon's IIit. p. 3, &c.

a gainit

against the savages in their neighbourhood. B 0 0
,

X.
Happily for the English, a pestilence, which -,- ~

Plan of

raged in America the year before they govern-
landed, had fvept off fa great a number of ment.
the natives, that they were quickly re-
pulsed and humbled. The privilege of
profefling their own opinions, and of being
governed by laws of their own framing,
afforded consolation to the colonists amidst
all their dangers and hardships. The con-
ftitution of their church was the fame with
that which they had established in Hol-
land. Their system of civil government
was founded on those ideas of the natural
equality among men, to which their eccle-
fiaftical policy had accustomed them. Every
free man, who was a member of the
church, was admitted into the supreme
legislative body. The laws of England
were adopted as the basis of their jurif.
prudence, though with some diversity in
the punifhmcnts infliced upon crimes, bor-
rowed from the Mosaic institutions. The
executive power was vestcd in a governor

and

B O K and some afliftants, who were eleced an.

x.
S.-v. nually by the members of the legislative as-

fembly *. So far their institutions appear to
be founded on the ordinary maxims of
human prudence. But it was a favourite
opinion with all the enthusiasts of that
age, that the scriptures contained a com-
plete fyflem, not only of spiritual infiruc-
tion, but of civil wisdom and polity; and
without attending to the peculiar circum-
fiances or situation of the people whose
liiflory is there recorded, they often de-
duced general rules for their own condu&t,
from what happened among men in a very
different slate. Under the influence of this
wild notion, the colonists of New Piy-

C:ommu- mouth, in imitation of the primitive Chris-
"itY of tians, threw all their property into a corn

mon stock, and, like members of one fa-
mily, carried on every work of induflry by
their joint labour for public behoof t. But,

* Chilnmers' Annals, p. 87.
t Ib1.
l p. 89. Dougl.,s's nummary, i. p. 370.

howvevc

however this resolution might evidence the B 0 o K

x.

sincerity of their faith, it retarded the pro- l-;-
grefs of their colony. The fame fatal effeats
flowed from this community of goods, and
of labour, which had formerly been ex-
perienced in Virginia; and it soon became This in-
necessary to relinquish what was too re- hurtfulto
fined to be capable of being accommo- thecolo.
dated to the affairs of men. But though y'
they built a small town, and surrounded
it with such a fence as afforded sufficient
security against the assaults of Indians, the
foil around it was lb poor, their religious
principles were so unsocial, and the supply
sent them by their friends so scanty, that
at the end of ten years, the number of
people belonging to the settlement did not
exceed three hundred *. During Tome years
they appear not to have acquired right by
any legal conveyance to the territory which
they had occupied. At length they ob- 16;c.
tained a grant of property from the coun-
cil of the New Plymrouth company, but

* Chalmre' Annals, p. 97.

were

B ° K and £ome afliftants, who were eleaed an-
A_-k nually by the members of the legislative as-

fembly *. So far their inflitutions appear to
he founded on the ordinary maxims of
human prudence. But it was a favourite
opinion with all the enthusiasts of that
age, that the scriptures contained a com-
plete system, not only of spiritual infiruc-
tion, but of civil wisdom and polity; and
without attending to the peculiar circum-
itances or situation of the people whose
iiftory is there recorded, they often de.
duced general rules for their own condut,
from what happened among men in a very
different slate. Under the influence of this
wild notion, the colonists of New liy-

Commu- mouth, in imitation of the primitive Chris-
nlty of tians, threw all their property into a corn-
goals.

rnon flock, and, like members of one fa.
mily, carried on every work of industry by
theirjoint labour for public behoof t. But,

* Clilmers' Annals, p. 87.
t Ilil. p. 89. Douglis'. Summary, i. p. 370.

howevci

however this resolution might evidence the B 0OO K
sincerity of their faith, it retarded the pro- ;J
grefs of their colony. The fame fatal effects
flowed from this community of goods, and
of labour, which had formerly been ex-
perienced in Virginia; and it soon became This in-
necessary to relinquish what was too re- hurtfulto
lined to be capable of being accommo- thecolo-
dated to the affairs of men. But though y'
they built a small town, and surrounded
it with such a fence as afforded sufficient
security against the assaults of Indians, the
foil around it was lb poor, their religious
principles were so unsocial, and the supply
sent them by their friends so scanty, that
at the end of ten years, the number of
people belonging to the settlement did not
exceed three hundred *. During some years
they appear not to have acquired right by
any legal conveyance to the territory which
they had occupied. At length they oh- 16;c.
tained a grant of property from the coun-
cil of the New Plymouth company, but

* Chalmere' Annals, p. 97.

were

B 0 O K were never incorporated as a body politic
a_» by royal charter *. Unlike all the other
This co- settlements in America, this colony must be
lony not
incorpo- confidered merely as a voluntary affocia-
rated by
charter. tion, held together by the tacit consent of

its members to recognize the authority of
laws, and submit to the jurifdiftion of
magifirates framed and chosen by them-
selves. In this ltate it remained an in-
dependent, but feeble community, until it
was united to its more powerful neighbour,
the colony of MafLachufets Bay, the ori-
gin and progress of which I now proceed
to relate.

Grand THE original company of Plymouth hav-
council of
Plymouth ing done nothing effetual towards efta-
appotnt blifhing any permanent settlement in Ame-

rica, James I. in the year one thousand fix
hundred and twenty, issued a new charter
to the Duke of Lenox, the Marquis of
Buckingham, and several other persons of

* Chanlmcrs' Annals, p. 97. ro7.

diftintion

diftindion in his court, by which he con- B O 0 K

X.

veyed to them a right to a territory in ,
America, still more extensive than what
had been granted to the former patentees,
incorporating them as a body politic, in
order to plant colonies there, with powers
and jurifdicion similar to those contained
in his charters to the companies of South
and North Virginia. This society was
diftinguilhed by the name of the Grand
Council of Plymouth for planting and go-
verning New England. What confidera-
tions of public utility could induce the
king to commit fuich an undertaking to
persons apparently lo ill qualified for con-
duting it, or what profped of private ad-
vantage prompted them to engage in it,
the information we receive from contem-
porary writers does not enable us to de-
termine. Certain it is, that the expeda-
tions of both were difiappointcd, and after
many schemes and arrangements, all the
attempts of the new afldciatcs towards co-
lonization proved uinfuccefsful.

New

B O0 K NEW England must have remained tui-

X.
--% occupied, if the fame causes which occa-
Projeac sioned the emigration of the Brownilts had
Iony. not continued to operate. Notwithstanding

the violent persecution to which Puritans.
of every denomination were still exposed,
their number and zeal daily increased. As
they now despaired of obtaining in theit
own country any relaxation of the penal
statutes enacted against their fe&, many
began to turn their eyes towards some
other place of retreat, where they might
profess their own opinions with impunity.
From the tranquillity which their brethren
had hitherto enjoyed in New Plymouth,
they hoped to find this desired asylum in
New England; and by the aAivity of Mr.
White, a non-conformist minilter at Dora
chester, an association was formed by feve.
ral gentlemen who had imbibed Puritani-
cal notions, in order to conduc a colony
thither. They purchased from the coun-
cil of Plymouth all the territory, extend-
ing in length from three miles north of

the

the River Merrimack, to three miles south B 0 o t

X.

of Charles River, and in breadth, from the a
Atlantic to the Southern Ocean. Zealous M'ar.6^.
as these proprietors were to accomplish
their favourite purpose, they quickly pet-
ceived their own inability to attempt the
population of such an immense region, and
deemed it necessary to call in the aid of
more opulent co-partners *.

OF these they found, without difficulty,

a sufficient number, chiefly in the capitals
and among perbons in the commercial and
other indtitrious walks of life, who had
openly joined the fed of the Puritans, or
secretly favoured their opinions. These
new adventurers, with the caution natural
to men conversant in business, entertained
doubts concerning the propriety of found-
ing a colony on the basis of a grant from
a private company of patentees, who might
convey a right of property in the foil, but
could not confer. jurifdidion, or the privi.

* Neal's atlt. of New Engl. i, p. a12.

o Icge

B o O K lege of governing that society which they

X.
i. - had in contemplation to eflablifh. As it

was only from royal authority that such
powers could be derived, they applied for
these; and Charles granted their request,
with a facility which appears astonishing,
when we confider the principles and views
of the men who were suitors for the fa-
vour.

Charterto TIME has been confidered as the parent
the new
colony of of political wisdom, but its inftru&ions are
Mafachu.
fit Bay. communicated slowly. Although the ex-

perience of above twenty years might have
taught the English the impropriety of com-
mitting the government of settlements in
America, to exclusive corporations resident
in Europe, neither the king nor his sub-
jets had profited so much by what passcd
before their eyes, as to have extended their
ideas beyond those adopted by James, in
his first attempts towards colonization.
The charteirof Charles I. to the adven-
turers associated for planting the province

of

of Massachusets Bay, was perfetly similar B X00 K

x.

to those granted by his father to the two * i
Virginian companies and to the council of
Plymouth. The new adventurers were in-
corporated as a body politic, and their right
to the territory, which they had purchased
from the council of Plymouth, being con-
firmed by the king, they were empowered
to dispose bs the lands, and to govern the
people who should fettle upon them. The
first governor of the company, and his
assistants, were named by the crown: the
right of electing their successors was vested
in the members of the corporation. The
executive power was committed to the go-
vernor and assistants; that of legislation to
the body of proprietors, who might make
statutes and orders for the good of the com-
munity, not inconsistent with the laws of
England, and inforce the observance of
them, according to the course of other cor-
porations within the realm. Their lands
were to be held by the fame liberal tenure
with thofc granted to the Virginian com-

2 pany.

B3 0 K pany. They obtained the fame temporary

x.
" _s exemption from internal taxes, and from

duties on goods exported or imported; and
notwithstanding their migration to Ame-
rica, they and their defccndants were de-
clared to be entitled to all the rights of na-
tural-born fubjeds *.

TIIE manifelt objea of this charter was

to confer on the adventurers who under-
took to people the territory on Malfachu-
sets Bay, all the corporate rights possessed
by the council of Plymouth, from which
they had purchased it, and to form them
into a public body, .resembling other great
trading companies, which the spirit of mo-
narchy had at that time multiplied in the
kingdom. The king seems not to have fore-
fcen, or to have fufpeded, the secret in-
tentions of those who projected the mea-
fuirc; for so far was he from alluring emi-
grants, by any hopes of indulgence with

* Hutchlinufon's Collec, of Orig. Papers, p. 1, &c.

Ircfpca

refpce to their religious scruples, or from B O0 K

X.

promising any relaxation from the rigour *
of the penal statutes against non-conformists,
that he expressly provides for hSaving the
oath of supremacy administered to every
person who lhall pass to the colony, or in-
habit there *.

BUT whatever were the intentions of the 1629.
king, the adventurers kept their own objecd iettn

* Hutclinfon's Colle.d of Orig. Papers, p. 18.-

It is surprising, that Mr. Neal, an industrious, and
generally a well-informed writer, flould affirm, that
4' free liberty of conscience Mwas granted by this
charter to all who should fettle in those parts, to
worship God in their own wa,." Hist. of N. Engl. i.
124. This he repeats in his Hifiory of the Puri-
rans, ii. 20o; and fubfcquent hiflorians have copied
him implicitly. No permiftion of that kind, however,
is contained in the charter; and such an indulgence
would have been incotniftent with all the maxims of
Charles and his ministers during the course of his reign,
At the time when Charles issued the charter, the in.
fluence of Laud over his councils was at its height, the
Puritans were prosecuted with the greatelt severity, and
the kingdom was ruled entirely by prerogative. This
is not an xera in which one can cxpec to meet with
conceflions in favour of non-conformists, from a prince
of Charles's characer and principles.

o 3 Ieadily

BOOK fleadily in view. Soon after their powers

x ^ _to establish a colony were rendered com-

confr. plete by the royal charter, they fitted out
this char- five ships for New England; on board of

r which embarked upwards of three hundred

passengers, with a view of fettling there.
These were mostly zealous Puritans, whose
chief inducement to relinquish their native
land was the hope of enjoying religious li-
berty, in a country far removed from the
c~at of government and the opprcffion of
ecclesiastical courts. Some eminent non-
conformist ministers accompanied them as
their spiritual inftrutors. On their arri-
val in New England, they found the
wretched remainder of a small body of
June 29.' emigrants, who had left England the pre-

ceding year, under the conduct of Endi-
cott, a deep enthusiast, whom, prior to their
incorporation by the royal charter, the as-
fociates had appointed deputy governor.
They were fettled at a place called by the
Indians Naunekeag, and to which Endicott,
with the fond affeCation of fanatics of that

ago

age to employ the language and appella- B 0 K

X.

tions of scripture in the affairs of common -
life, had given the name of Salem.

TIE emigrants under Endicott, and such Begin

withl efta-

as now joined them, coincided perfectly in blihing a
religious principles. They were Puritans church.
of the ftriecft form; and to men of this
characer the institution of a church was
naturally of such interesting concern as to
take place of every other objec:. In this
first tranfadion, they displayed, at once, the
extent of the reformation at which they
aimed. Without regard to the sentiments
of that monarch under the fandion of whose
authority they fettled in America, and from
whom they derived right to aa as a body
politic, and in contempt of the laws of
England, with which the charter required
that none of their ads or ordinances should
be inconsistent, they adopted in their infant
church that form of policy which has fincc
been distinguishcd by the name of Inde-
pendent. They united together in religious Aug. 6.

0 4 society,

B 0 0 K society, by a solemn covenant with God,
. .. and with one another, and in ftridc con-

formity, as they imagined, to the rules of
scripture. They eleted a paflor, a teacher,
and an elder, whom they let apart for their
refpeclive offices, by imposition of the
hands of the brethren. All who were that
day admitted members of the church, fig-
nified their assent to a confession of faith
drawn up by their teacher, and gave an
account of the foundation 9f their own
hopes as Chriltians; and it was declared,
that no person flould hereafter be received
into communion until he gave fatisfadion
to the church with refpe't to his faith and
fandity. The form of public worihip which
they instituted was without a liturgy, diimn-
cumbered of every filperfluous ceremony,
and reduced to the loweit tfandard ps Cal-
vinillic funplicity %

Into:c- I'T was with the utmost complacence
ranee of
the ,ew that men, paflionately attached to their own
church.

* Math. Alagnal. p. i 8. Ncal's Hist. of N. ELgl. i.
a6. Clhalmers, p. 143.

notions,

notions, and who had long been refirained B o K

x.

from avowing them, employed themselves _
in frarming this model of a pure church.
But, in the first moment that they began to
taste of Christian liberty themselves, they
forgot that other men had an equal title to
enjoy it. Some of their number, retaining
an high veneration for the ritual of the
Englilh church, were so much offended at
the total abolition of it, that they with-
drew from communion with the newly-
inRfituted church, and assembled separately
for the worship of God. With an incon-
fiftency, of which there are such flagrant
inflances among Christians of every deno-
mination that it cannot be imputed as a
reproach peculiar to any fedt, the very men
who had themselves fled from persecution
became persecutors; and had recourse, in
order to enforce their own opinions, to the
fame unhallowed weapons, against the em-
ployment of which they had lately remon-
firated with so much violence. Endicott
galled the two chief malcontents before

him;
I

B O K him; and though they were men of note,

x.
Ay,. and among the number of original paten-

tees, he expelled them from the society,
and sent them home in the ships which
were returning to England *. The colo-
nifts were now united in sentiments; but
on the approach of winter, they suffered so
much from diseases, which carried off al-
moif one half of their number, that they
made little progress in occupying the
country.

MEANWHILE the diretors of the com-

pany in England exerted their utmost en-
deavours in order to reinforce the colony

omigra-o with a numerous body of new settlers; and
tions from
England as the intolerant spirit of Laud exated con-
increared
by the formity to all the injunctions of the church
rance of with greater rigour than ever, the condi-
Laud. tion of such as had any scruples with re-

fpea to this became so intolerable, that
many accepted of their invitation to a fc-
cure retreat in New England. Several of

* Mathlr, p. 19. Neal, p. 129.

these were persons of greater opulence and a o O K
of better condition than any who had hi- X.
therto migrated to that country. But as
they intended to employ their fortunes, as
well as to hazard their persons, in erta-
blifhing a permanent colony there, and,
foresaw many inconveniences from their
fubjecion to laws made without their own
consent, and framed by a society which
must always be imperfecly acquainted with
their situation, they insisted that the cor-
porate powers of the company ihould be
transferred from England to America, and
the government of the colony be veited en-
tirely in those who, by fettling in the latter
country, became members of it *. The
company had already expended confider-
able fums in prosecuting the design of their
inititution, without having received almost
any return, and had no prospect of gain,
or even of reimbursement, but what was
too remote and uncertain to be suitable to

Hutchinson's Coll. of Papers, p. 25.

the

B OO K the ideas of merchants, the most numer-

^ ous class of its members. They hesitated,

however, with respect to the legality of
granting the demand of the intended emi-

Cltrter grants. But such was their eagerness to be
company disengaged from an unpromising adven-
tl an her-
rcd to the ture, that, " by general content, it was de-
c)lonilts. termined, that the charter should be trans-

ferred, and the government be fettled in
New England *." To the members of the
corporation who chose to remain at home
was reserved a share in the trading llock and
profits of the company during seven years.

IN this singular tranfadion, to which

there is nothing similar in the history of
English colonization, two circumstances
merit particular attention: one is the power
of the company to make this transference;
the other is the silent acquiescence with
which the king permitted it to take place.
If the validity of this determination of the

* Mather, p. 20. Hutchinson', Hist. p. 2. Chal.
plcrs, p. 1so.

company

company be tried by the charter which con- B 0
O K

X.

flituted it a body politic, and conveyed to *- _
it all the corporate powers with which it
was invetfed, it is evident that it could
neither exercise thofc powers in any mode
different from what the charter prescribed,
nor alienate them in such a manner as to
convert the jurifdidion of a trading cor-
poration in England into a provincial go-
vernment in America. But from the first
institution of the company of Maffachu-
sets Bay, its members seem to have been
animated with a spirit of innovation in
civil policy, as well as in religion; and by
the habit of xejeting eftblithed usages in
the one, they were prepared for deviating
from them in the other. They had applied
for a royal charter, in order to give legal
effea to their operations in England, as
ads of a body politic; but the persons
whom they font out to Americ', as foor
as they landed there, confidered thetfelves
as individuals, united together by voluntary
association, poffcsling the natural right of

men

BOOK men who form a society, to adopt what

x.

mode of government, and to exact what
laws they deemed molt conducive to gene-
ral felicity. Upon this principle of being
entitled to judge and to decide for them-
selves, they established their church in Sa-
lem, without regard to the institutions of
the church of England, of which the char-
ter supposed them to be members, and
bound of consequence to conformity with
its ritual. Suitably to the fame ideas, we
ihall observe them framing all their future
plans of civil and ecclesiastical policy. The
king, though abundantly vigilant in ob-
serving and checking flighter encroach-
ments on his prerogative, was either so
much occupied at that time with other cares
occasioned by his fatal breach with his par-
liament, that he could not attend to the pro-
ceedings of the company; or he was so
much pleased with the profped of remov-
ing a body of turbulent fubjeds to a dif-
tant country, where they might be use-
ful, and could not prove dangerous, that

he

he was disposed to connive at the irregu- B o o K
larity of a measure which facilitated their X.
departure.

WITIHOUT interruption from the crown, Colony

the adventurers proceeded to carry their cxtendd.
scheme into execution. In a general court,
John Winthrop was appointed governor,
and Thomas Dudley deputy-governor, and
eighteen assistants were chosen; in whom,
together with the body of freemen who
Ihould fettle in New England, were vefled 1630.
all the corporate rights of the company.
With such zeal and activity did they pre-
pare for emigration, that in the course of
the ensuing year seventeen ships failed for
New England, and aboard these above
fifteen hundred persons, among whom were
several of refpedable families, and in easy
circumstances. On their arrival in New
England, many were so ill-fatisfied with the
situation of Salem, that they explored the
country in quest of some better station;
and fettling in different places around the

*5 Bay,
J

B OOK Bay, according to their various fancies,
A-;- laid the foundations of Boston, Charles-

town, Dorchelter, Roxborough, and other
towns, which have since become confider-
able in the province. In each of tlefe a
church was established on the fame miodel
with that of Salem. This, together with
the care of making provision for their sub-
filtcnce during winter, occupied them en-
tirely during some months. But in the
ot. 19. first general court, their disposition to con-

fider themselves as members of an inde-
pendent society, unconlined by the regula-
tions in their charter, began to appear.
The clcCtion of the governor and deputy
governor, the appointment of all other of-
licers, and even the power of making laws,
all which were granted by the charter to
the freemen, were taken from them, and
vested in the council of afliftants. But the
ariflocratical spirit of this resolution did not
accord with the ideas of equality prevalent
among the people, who had been surprised
1631. into an approbation of it. Next year the

~*~~7 friecmcn,

freemen, whose numbers had been greatly B o o i
augmented by the admiiffon of new mem- .
bers, resumed their former rights.

BUT, at the fame time, they ventured to None bat

members

deviate from the charter in a matter of of the
greater moment, which deeply asseted all amitted
the future operations of the colony, and "efnrc-
contributed greatly to form that peculiar
characer by which the people of New Eng- -
land have been distinguished. A law was
pafled, declaring that none shall hereafter
be admitted freemen, or be entitled to any
share in the government, or be capable of
being chosen magitrates, or even of serving
as jurymen, but such as have been received
into the church as members *. By this re-
solution, every person who did not hold
the favourite opinions concerning the doc.
trines of religion, the discipline of the
church, or the rites of worship, was at once
cast out of the society, and fripped of all
the privileges of a citizen. An uncon-

* Hutchinson, p. 26. Chalmers, p. 153.

P trolled

B o o K trolled power of approving or rejecing the

X.
,-,- .claims of those who applied for admiflion

into communion with the church being
veiled in the ministers and leading men of
each congregation, the most valuable of all
civil rights was made to depend on their
decision with refpet to qualifications purely

Pernicious ecclcfiaftical. As in examining into these,
conre -
qucncc3 they proceeded not by any known or efta-
of this r. Iblifhed rules, but exercised a discretionary

judgment, the clergy rose gradually to a
degree of influence and authority, from
which the levelling spirit of the inde-
pendent church policy was calculated to
exclude them. As by their determination
the political condition of every citizen was
fixed, all paid court to men possessed of
fucl an important power, by affiuming
those auflere and sanctimonious manners
which were known to be the molt certain
recommendation to their favour. In con-
fequencc of this ascendant, which was ac-
quired chiefly by the wildetl enthufiafls
among the clergy, their notions became a

standard

standard to which all studied to conform, B 00 K
and the singularities charateriftic of the -
Puritans in that age increased, of which
many remarkable inflances will occur in
the course of our narrative.

THOUGH c a considerable number of plant- indianter.

ritories

ers was cut off by the diseases prevalent in depopu-
a country so imperfecly cultivated by its Iated by
original inhabitants as to be fill almost one pox.
continued forest, and several, discouraged
by the hardships to which they were ex-
posed, returned to England, recruits fuffi- 163z;
cient to replace them arrived. At the fame
time the fmall-pox,.a distemper fatal to
the people of the New World, swept away
such multitudes of the natives that tome
whole tribes dilappeared; and Heaven, by
thus evacuating a country in which the
English might fettle without molestation,
was supposed to declare its intention that
they ihould occupy it.

As several of the vacant Indian flations Settle.

Ients of
were well chosen, such was the eagerness eth. col

P 2 of

B O0 K of the English. to take poflefion of them,

x.
.-.. . that their settlements became more nume-
nifts ex- rous and more widely dispersed than suited
tended.

the condition of an infant colony. This
led to an innovation which totally altered
the nature and conflitution of the govern-

1634. ment. When a general court was to be
Yroeme held in the year one thousand fix hundred

meet by
reprcfen- and thirty-four, the freemen, instead of
tatives.

attending it in person as the charter pre-
fcribed, eleted representatives in their dif-
ferent diftrics, authorizing them to appear
in their name, with full power to deliberate
and decide concerning every point that fell
nnder the cognizance of the general court.
Whether this measure was suggested by
some designing leaders, or whether they
found it prudent to sooth the people by
complying with their inclination; is un-
certain. The representatives were admitted;.
and confidered themselves, in conjunction
with the governor and assistants, as the
lfpreme legislative aflembly of the colony.
In assertion of their own rights they en-
adied, that no law lhould be paled, no tax

lhould.

fliould beimpofed,andnopublic officerfhould B 0.0
o

X.

be appointed, but in the general assembly. _
The pretexts for making this new arrange- Extent of

political
ment were plausible. The number of free- liberty as-

fumed by

men was greatly increased; many resided at the assem.
a distance froni the places where the fu- bly.
preme courts were held; personal attend-
ance became inconvenient; the form of go-
vernment in their own country had rendered
familiar the idea of delegating their rights,
and committing the guardianship of their
liberties, to representatives of their own
choice, and the experience of ages had
taught them that this important truR might
with safety be lodged in their hands. Thus
did the company of Mafiachufets Bay, in
less than fix years from .its incorporation
by the king, mature and perfec a scheme
which, I have already observed, some of
its more artful and aspiring leaders seem to
have had in view when the affociatibn for
peopling New England was first formed,
The colony muff henceforward be confi-
lered, not as a corporation whose powers

P 3 were

B o OK were defined, and its mode of procedure

X-.^_- regulated by its charter, but as a society,

which, having acquired or assumed politi-
cal liberty, had, by its own voluntary deed,
adopted a constitution or government fram-
ed on the model of that in England.

Spirit of BUT however liberal their system of civil
fanaticism
incrcafes. policy might be, as their religious opi-

nions were no longer under any restraint
of authority, the spirit of fanaticism con-
tinued to spread, and became every day
wilder and more extravagant. Williams,
a minister of Salem, in high estimation,
having conceived an antipathy to the cross
of St. George in the standard of England,
declaimed against it with so much vehe-
mence as a relic of superstition and idol-
atry which ought not to be retained among
a people so pure and fandiified, that Endi-
cot, one of the members of the court of
affiflants, in a tranlport of zeal, publicly
cut out the cross from the cnfign displaycd
before the governor's gate. T'his frivolous

Ilhlttcl

matter interested and divided the colo- BOOK
uy. Some of the militia scrupled to _.,
follow colours in which there was a cross,
left they should do honour to an idol:
others refused to serve under a mutilated
banner, left they should be fulpeaed of
having renounced their allegiance to the
crown of England. After a long contro-
verfy, carried on by both parties with that
heat and zeal which in trivial disputes sup-
ply the want of argument, the contest was
terminated by a compromise. The cross
was retained in the ensigns of forts and
ihips, but erased from the colours of the
militia. Williams, on account of this, as
well as of some other docrines deemed
unsound, was banished out of the colony *.

Ti E prosperous state of New England New set-

was now so highly extolled, and the simple lrs.
frame of its ecclesiastic policy was so much
admired by all whose affecions were

* Neal's [ilt. of N. Eng. p. 140, &c. Hutch-
infon, p. 37. Chalmers, p. i56.

P 4 estranged

B00 K estranged from the church of England,

X- that crowds of new settlers flocked thither.
635. Among these were two persons, whose

names have been rendered memorable by
the appearance which they afterwards made
on a more conspicuous theatre: one was
Hugh Peters, the enthusiastic and intriguing
chaplain of Oliver Cromwell; the other
Mr. Henry Vane, son of Sir Henry Vane,
a privy counsellor, high in office, and of
great credit with the king; a young man of
a noble family, animated with such zeal
for pure religion and such love of liberty
as induced him to relinquish all his hopes
in England, and to fettle in a colony hi-
therto no farther advanced in improvement
than barely to afford fubfitence to its
members, was received with the fondest
admiration. His mortified appearance, his
demure look, and rigid manners, carried
even beyond the standard of preciseness in
that focicty which he joined, seemed to in-
dicate a man of high spiritual attainments,
while his abilities and address in business

13 pointed

pointed him out as worthy of the highest B o o K

X.

station in the community. With universal
consent, and high expetations of advan- 1636.
tage from his adminifiration, he was eleaed
governor in the year subsequent to his ar-
rival. But as the affairs of an infant colony
afforded not objeds adequate to the talents
of Vane, his busy pragmatical spirit occu-
pied itself with theological fubtilties and
speculations unworthy of his attention.
These were excited by a woman, whose
reveries produced such effe&s both within
the colony and beyond its precints, that,
frivolous as they may now appear, they
must be mentioned as an occurrence of
importance in its history.

IT was the custom at that time in New Annt;-

England, among the chief men in every E
congregation, to meet once a week, in
order to repeat the sermons which they
had heard, and to hold religious confer-
ence with refped to the dotrine contained
in them. Mrs. Hutchinson, whose husband

was

B O OK was among the most rcipetcablc members

X_. of the colony, regretting that persons of

her fcx wcrc excluded from tle benefit of
those meetings, affeinbled flatedly in ler
house a number of women, who employed
themfelvcs in pious cxercifes similar to those
of the men. At first Ihe satisfied hcrfelf
with repeating what ihe could rccollet of
the discourses delivered by their teachers.
She began afterwards to add illustrations,
and at length proceeded to censure some
of the clergy as unlound, and to vent opi-
nions and fancies of her own. Theie were
all founded on the system which is deno-
minated Antinomian by divines, and tinged
with the deepest enthufiafi. She taught,
that fandity of life is no evidence of julli-
fication, or of a state of favour witl God;
and that such as inculcated the neceflity of
manifesting the reality of our faith by obe-
dience, preached only a covenant of works:
.fhc contended that the fj)irit of God dwelt
personally in good men, and by inward
revelations and imprciions they received

the

the fullest dicfoveries of the divine will. Bo oK

x.

The fluency and confidence with which she _
delivered there notions gained her many
admirers and proselytes, not only among
the vulgar, but among the principal inha-
bitants. The whole colony was interested
and agitated. Vane, whose sagacity and
acuteneis seemed to forsake him whenever.
they were turned towards religion, espoused
and defended her wildest tenets. Many 637.

Thcirdoc-

conferences were held, days of fasting and trinescon-
humiliation were appointed, a general fynod by gene.
was called, and, after dissensions so violent ralfynod.
as threatened the dissolution of the colo-
ny, Mrs. Hutchinson's opinions were con-
demned as erroneous, and the herself ba-
nifhed. Several of her disciples withdrew
from the province of their own accord.
Vane quitted America in disgust, unlament-
ed even by those who had lately admired
him; some of whom now regarded him as
a mere visionary, and others as one of
those dark turbulent spirits doomed to

embroil

B 0 K embroil every society into which they

x.

a,_-i. enter .

The sec. HOWEVER much these theological con-
taries set-
tle in Pro- tefs might disquiet the colony of Mafia-
videneod chufets .Bay, they contributed to the more
ldand. speedy population of America. When

Williams was banished from Salem in the
year one thousand fix hundred and thirty-
four, such was the attachment of his hearers
to a pastor whole piety they revered, that a
good number of them voluntarily accom-
panied him in his exile. They directed
their march towards the south; and having
purchased from the natives a considerable
traat of land, to which Williams gave the
name of Providence, they fettled there.
They were joined soon after by some of
those to whom the proceedings againfi
Mrs. Hutchinson gave disgust; and by a
tranfaftion with the Indians they obtained

* Mather, book vii. c. 3. Hutchinson, p. 53. 74.
Neal, p. I. 144. 165, &c. Chalmers, p. 163.

a right

a right to a fertile island in Naraganfet Bay, B o o t

x.

which acquired the name of Rhode Ifiand. x-
Williams remained among them upwards
of forty years, refpeded as the father and
the guide of the colony which he had
planted. His spirit differed from that of
the Puritans in Maf(achufets; it was mild Theirmo.
and tolerating; and having ventured him- dratin.
self to reje& eftablilhed opinions, he endea-
voured to secure the fame liberty to other
men, by maintaining, that the exercise of
private judgment was a natural and sered
right; that the civil magistrate has Mn trm-
pulfive jurifdi&ion in the concerno of't e-
ligion; that the punishment of any person
on account of his oinions, was th en-
croachment on conscience, and an a&: of
persecution *. These humane principles
he instilled into his followers; and' who
felt or dreaded oppression in other 'ettle-
ments, retorted to a community in wfidh
universal toleration was known to be a

*Ncal's Hill. of N. Eng. p. X14.

funda-

B OK fundamental maxim. In the piantations

x.
L" -_, of Providence and Rhode Illand, political

union was eftabliffhed by voluntary affo-
ciation, and the equality of condition among
the members, as well as their religious opi-
nions'; their form of government was pure-
ly democratical, the supreme power being
lodged in the freemen personally assem-
bled.- In this state they remained until
they were incorporated by charter *.

Colony of To similar causes the colony of Con-
Conneti-.
cut. neticut is indebted for its origin. The

riv'lihip between Mr. Cotton and Mr.
Hooker, two favourite ministers in the set-
tlement of Massachusets Bay, difpoFfd the
latter, who was least ficcefsful in this con-
test for fame and power, to wish for some
settlement at a distance from a competitor
by whom his reputation was eclipied. A
good number of thole who had imbibed
Mrs. Hutchinfonls notions, and were of-

*Hutchinson, p. 38. Neal, ii. 142. Dougl.
Sum. ii. p. 76, &c. Chalmers, cl. ii.

7 fendcd

fended at such as; Qombated them, offered to BOO K
accompany hiln. Having, employed pro-. x.
per persons to explore the country, they
pitched upon the weft fide of the great
river ConneCticut as the most inviting fta-
tion; and in the year one thousand fix
hundred and thirty-fix, about an hundred
persons, with their wives and families, after
a fatiguing march of many days through
woods and fwamrps, arrived there, and laid
the foundation of!the towns of Hartford,
Springfield, and Weatherfield. This fettle;'
mnent was attended with peculiar irregu-.
larities. Part of the diftriC now occupied
lay beyond the limits of the territory grant-
ed to the colony of Maflachufets Bay, and
yet the emigrants took a commission from
the governor and court of afliftants, em-
powering them to exercise. jurifdittion in
that country. The Dutch from Manha-
dos or New York, having discovered the
river Conneaicut, and established some
trading houfcs upon it, had acquired all the
right that prior poffcflion confers. Lord

Say

B O O Bay and Sele and Lord Brook, the heads of

X- ;two illustrious families, were so much alarm-

ed at the arbitrary measures of Charles I.
both in his civil and ecclesiastical admi-
niftration, that they took a resolution, not
unbec6ming young men of noble birth and
liberal sentiments, of retiring to the New
World, in order to enjoy such a form of
religion as they approved of, and those
liberties Which they deemed essential to the
well-being of society. They, too, fixed on
the banks of.the Connecticut as their place
of settlement, and had taken pofeffion, by
building a fort at the mouth of the river,
which, from their united names, was called
Say Brook. The emigrants from Mafia-
chufets, without regarding either the de-
fedts in their own right or the pretensions
of other claimants, kept poffeflion, and
proceeded with vigour to clear and culti-
vate the country. By degrees they got rid
of every competitor. The Dutch, recently
fettled in America, and too feeble to engage
in a war, peaceably withdrew from Con-

neaicut.

nedticut. Lord Say and Sele and Lord BOOK
Brook made over to the colony whatever .
title they might have to any lands in that
region. Society was established by a vo-
luntary compa&t of the freemen; and though
they soon disclaimed all dependence oh the
colony of Massachusets Bay, they retained
such veneration for its legifiative wisdom,
as to adopt a form of government nearly
resembling its inffitutions, with refpe& both
to civil and ecclefiafical policy. At a sub-
Sequent period, the colony of Conne&icut
was likewise incorporated by royal charter*.

THE history of the first attempts to people of New

the provinces of New Hampshire and Main, hre and
which form the fourth ard most exten- Main.
five division in New England, is obscure
and perplexed, by the interfering claims of
various proprietors. The company of Ply-
mouth had inconsiderately parcelled out the
northern part of the territory contained in

* lutchinfon, p. 44, &c. Neal, i. 147. Dou.
1lau, ii. ri8, &c. hlalmers' Annals, ch. 12,

<Q its

-. 0 K itB grant among different persons: of there
.-,- only Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain

Mason seem to have had any serious inten.
tion to occupy the lands allotted to them.
Their efforts to accomplish this were meri-
torious and persevering, but unsuccessful.
The expence of fettling colonies in an un-
cultivated country must necessarily be great
and immediate; the profpe& of a return is
often uncertain and always remote. The
funds of two private adventurers were not
adequate to such an undertaking. Nor did
the planters whom they sent out pofTefs that
principle of enthusiasm, which animated
their neighbours of Massachusets with vi-
gour,. to struggle through all the hardships
and dangers to which society, in its in-
fancy, is exposed in a savage land. Gorges
and Mason, it is probable, must have aban-
doned their design, if, from the fame mo-
tives that settlements had been made in
Rhode Island and Connefticut, colonifls
had not uncxpectedly migrated into New
Hamplhire and Main. Mr. Wheelwri.ht,

a miniftcr

a minister of Come note, nearly related to o OK
Mrs. Hutchinson, and one of her noft ser- .
vent admirers and partisans, had, on this
account, been banished from the province of
Massachusets Bay *. In quest of a new fta-
tion, he took a course opposite to the other
exiles; and advancing towards the north,-
founded the town of Exeter, on a small'
river flowing into Pifkataqua Bay. His
followers, few in number, but firmly united,
were of such rigid principles, that even the
churches of Massachusets did not appear to
them sufficiently pure. From time to time
they received some recruits, whom love of
novelty, or diffatisfadion with the eccle-
fiaflical institutions of the other colonies,
prompted to join them. Their plantations
were widely dispersed, but the country was
thinly peopled, and its political state ex-
tremely unsettled. The colony of Mafla.
chufets Bay claimedjurifdi6ttion over them,
as occupying lands situated within the li-
mits of their grant. Gorges and Mason

Hutchinson, p. 70.

O(z asserted

BOOK afterted the rights conveyed to them as

X. proprietors by their charter. In several dif-

trits, the planters, without regarding the
pretensions of either party, governed them-
selves by maxims and laws copied from
those of their brethren in the adjacent co-
lpnies*. The first reduction of the poli-
tical contfitution in the provinces of New
Hampshire and Main into a regular and
permanent form, was subsequent to the re-
volution.

By extending their Iettlements, the Eng.

lifh became exposed to new danger. Thq
tribes of Indians around Maflachufets Bay
,vere feeble and unwarlike; yet from re-
gard to justice, as well as motives of pru-
denge, the first colonists were studious to
obtain the cpnfent of the natives before they
ventured to occupy iny of their lands; and
though in such tranfaaions the confidera-
tion given was often very inadequate to the
value of the territory acquired, it was sus-

F Hutchinson, p. 103, &c. z76. Douglas's Sum. ii.

2, c,
c Cialimcrs' Annals, ch. 17.

ficient
.

ficient to satisfy the demands of the pro- B 0o, K
prietors. The English took quiet poflef- . x.
lion of the lands thus conveyed to them, The far-

ther en-

and no open hostility brokd out between ¢roach.
them and the ancient possessors. But the menuof
colonies 6f Providerice and Conneticut lilh refit;
soon found that they were furrourdcd e bYr the
by more powerful and martial nations.
Among there the most considerable were
the Naraganfets and Pequods; the former
feated on the Bay which bears their name,
and the latter occutpying the territory which
fretches from the rivet Pequod along' tlhe
banks of the Connecticut. The Peqqods
wvere a formidable people, who could bring
into the field a tho'usand warriors, rlot ii-
ferior in courage to' any id the sew World.
They foresaw, n6ot only that the extermi-
nation of tle Indian race must be the con-
sequence of permitting the English tO spread
6ver the continent of America, but that if
measures were not speedily concerted to
prevent it, the calamity would be unavoid-
able. With'this view they applied to the

Qc . Nara-

B OO K Naraganfets, requesting them to forget an-

X.

cient animofities for a moment, and to co-
operate with them in expelling a common
enemy who threatened both with defRruc-
tion. They represented that, when those
strangers first landed, the objet of their
visit was not fufpedted, and no proper pre-
cautions were taken to check their progress;
that now, by fending out colonies in one
year towards three different quarters, their
intentions were manifest, and the people of
America must abandon their native feats to
make way for unjust intruders.

BUT the Naraganfets and Pequods, like

most of the contiguous tribes in America,
were rivals, and there subsisted between
them an hereditary and implacable enmity.
Revenge is the darling palion of savages;
in order to secure the indulgence of which
there is no present advantage that they will
not sacrifice, and no future consequence

War with which they do not totally disregard. The
the Pe-
quod Naraganfets, inficad of closing with the
tribes, prudent proposal of their neighbours, dif-

9 covered

covered their hostile intentions to the go- B O K
vernor of Massachusets Bay; and, eager to - ,
lay hold on such a favourable opportunity
of wreaking their vengeance on their an-
cient foes, entered into an alliance with
the English against them The Pequods,
more exasperated than discouraged. by the
imprudence and treachery of their country-
men, took the field, and carried on the war
in the usual mode of Americans. They
surprised stragglers, and scalped them; they
plundered and burnt remote settlements;
they attacked Fort Say Brook without fuc-
cess, though garrisoned only by twenty
men; and when the English began to a&
offensively, they retired to fastnesses which
they deemed inaccessible. The different co-
lonies had agreed to unite against the com-
mon enemy, each furnishing a quota of
men in proportion to its numbers. The
troops of Connecticut which lay most ex-
posed to danger were soon assembled. The
march of those from Massachusets, which
formed the most considerable body, was re-
tarded by the most singular cause that ever

q.4 influenced

B OO K influenced the operations of a military force.

x.

~'. When they were mustered previous to their

Ptrifica departure, it was found that some of the
army. officers, as well as of the private soldiers,

were till under a covenant of works; and
that the blefling of God could not be im-
plored or expeted to crown the arms of
such unhallowed men with success. The
alarm was general, and many arrangements
necessary in order to cast out the unclean,
and to render this little band sufficiently
pure to fight the battles of a people who
entertained high ideas of their own fanc-
tity .

Defeat of MEANWHILE the Connecticut troops,
be In-
dian,' reinforced by a small detachment from Say

Brook, found it ncceffary to advance to-
wards the enemy. They were polled on
a rising ground, in the middle of a swamp
towards the head of the river Aliftick,
which they had surrounded with palifa-
does, the best defence that their slender

* Neal, i. 168.

{kill

skill in the art of fortification had discover- B o o K
ed. Though they knew that the English .-X
were in motion, yet, with the uiual impro-
vidence and security of savages, they took
no measures either to observe their r.o-
grefs, or to guard against being surprised
themselves. The enemy, unperceived, May o;
reached the palifadoes, and if a dog had
not given the alarm by barking, the In-
dians must have been massacred without
resistance. In a moment, however, they
started to arms, and raising the war-cry,
prepared to repel the assailants. But at
that early period of their intercourse with
the Europeans, the Americans were little
acquainted with the use of gunpowder, and
dreaded its effeas extremely. While rome
of the Englilh galled them with an in-
ceffant fire through the intervals between
the palifadoes, others forced their way by
the entries into the fort, filled only with
branches of trees; and setting fire to the
huts which were covered with reeds, the
confulion and terror quickly became gene-
ral. Many of the women and children

perifled

B O0 K perished in the flames; and the warriors,

X.
-x_ in endeavouring to escape, were either lain

by the English, or falling into the hands of
their Indian allies, who surrounded the fort
at a distance, were reserved for a more cruel
hite. After the juntion of the troops from
Massachusets, the English resolved to pursue
their vitory; and hunting the Indians from
bie place of retreat to another, some sub-
sequent encounters were hardly less fatal
to them than the action on the Miftick.
In less than three months the tribe of
Pequods was extirpated: a few miserable
fugitives who took refuge among the neigh-
bouring Indians, being incorporated by
them, loft their name as a diftine people.

Cruelties In this firit efray of their arms, the colo-
exercised egainllthe nifts of New England seem to have been

conduted by skilful and enterprising of-
ficers, and displayed both courage and per-
severance as soldiers. But they stained their
laurels by the ufc which they made of vic-
tory. Instead of treating the Pequods as
an independent people, who made a gallant
effort to defend the property, the rights,

and

and the freedom of their nation, they re- B O o ,.
taliated upon them all the barbarities of. x'-.
American war. Some they massacred in
cold blood, others they gave up to be tor-
tured by their Indian allies, a considerable
number they fold as slaves in Bermudas,
the reft were reduced to servitude among
themselves *.

BUT reprehensible as this condut of the Emigr-

English must be deemed, their vigorous rions from
efforts in this decisive campaign filled all England
the surrounding tribes of Indians with such
an high opinion of their valour as fe-
cured a long tranquillity to all their fettle-
ments. At the fame time the violence of
administration in England continued to in-
crease their population and strength, by
forcing many refpedable fubjets to tear
themselves from all the tender connetions
that bind men to their native country, and

* Hutchinson, p. 58. 76, &c. AMnther, M.ignalin,

b. vi;. ch. 6. Hlubbarl's State of N. Eng. r. . 1x 6,
&c.

to

B O O K to fly for refuge to a region of the New`
,._-. jWorld, which hitherto presented to them

nothing that could allure them thither but

Prohibit- exemption from oppression. The number
ed b royal of those emigrants drew the attention of
proclama-
lion. government, and appeared so formidable,

that a proclamation was issued, prohibiting
masters of ships from carrying passengers
to NewEngland without special permiflion.
On many occasions this injunction was
eluded or disregarded. Fatally for the king,
it operated with full effect in one instance.
Sir Arthur Haflerig, John Hampden, Oli-
ver Cromwell, and some other persons
whole principles and views coincided with
theirs, impatient to enjoy those civil and
religious liberties which they struggled ih
vain to obtain in Great Britain, hired some
lhips to carry them and their attendants to
New England. By order of council, an
embargo was laid on these when on the
point of failing; and Charles, far from
fufpeling that the future revolutions in his
kingdoms were to be excited and directed

J5 by

by persons in such an humble sphere of B O O K
life, forcibly detained the men destined to .'
overturn his throne, and to terminate his
days by a violent death *.

BUT, in spite of all the efforts of govern-

ment to check this spirit of migration, the
measures of the king and his ministers
were confidered by a great body of the
people as so hostile to those rights which
they deemed most valuable, that in the
course of the year one thousand fix hun-
dred and thirty-eight, above three thou.
sand persons embarked for New Englartd,
phoofing rather to expose themselves to
all the consequences of disregarding the
royal pro;laination, than to remain longer
pnder oppression. Exasperated at this con-
tempt of his authority, Charles had recourse
to a violent but effectual mode of accom-
plifhing what he had in view. A writ of
auo warrants was iffed against the corpo-

Mather, Magnalia, b. i. ch. . p. 23. Neal'h

Hift.'of N.Eng.'i. i'5. Chalmcrs'Annals, i. 55.
J6o, &c.

ration

OO O x ation of Mafiachufets Bay. The colonists

X-

.. ^ had conformed so little to the terms of their

Colony of charter, that judgment was given against
chufets them without difficulty. They were found
Bay sued
atlaw,and to have forfeited all their rights as a cor-
foundto
-ave for- p'ortion, which of course returned to the
feited its crown, and Charles began to take mea-
rights.

fures for new modelling the political frame
bfthe colony, and vefiing the adminiftra-
tion of its affairs in other hands. But his
plans were never carried into execution. In
every corner of his dominions, the itorm
now began to gather, which soon burst out
with such fatal violence, that Charles, dur-
ing the remainder of his unfortunate reign,
occupied with domestic and more interesting
cares, had not leisure to bestow any atten-
tion upon a remote and inconsiderable pro-
vince *.

ON the meeting of the Long Parliament,
such a Revolution took place in England,

* Hutchilfon, p. 86, 502, &c. Chalmers' Annals,
i. I6z.

that

that all the motives for migrating to the B 0 OX'

X.

new world ceased. The maxims of the i. -
Puritans with refpe&t to the government
both of church and itate, became predomi-
nant in the nation, and were enforced by
the hand of power. Their apprefl'ors were
humbled; that perse& system of reform-
ed polity, which had long been the objec
of their admiration and desire, was efta-
blifhed by law; and amidst the intrigues
and conflits of an obstinate civil war, tur-
bulent and aspiring spirits found such full
occupation, that they had no inducement
to quit a busy theatre, on which they had
risen to ad a most conspicuous part. From
the year one thousand fix hundred and
twenty, when the first feeble colony was
conducted to New England by the Brown- State of
iRs, to the year one thousand fix hundred ioatthis
and forty, it has been 'computed, that eriod.
twenty-one thousand two hundred Britifl
fubjeas had fettled there. The money ex-
pended by various adventurers during that
period in fitting out ships, in purchasing

stock,

BO OK stock, and transporting settlers, amounted,

X.
AmJ on a moderate calculation, nearly to two

hundred thousand pounds *: a vat fum in
that age, and which no principles, inferior
in force to those wherewith the Puritans
were animated, could have persuaded men
to lay out, on the uncertain profpea of ob-
taining an establishment in a remote uncul-
tivated region, which, from its situation
and climate, could allure them with no hope
but that of finding subsistence and enjoy-
ing freedom. For fqme years, even sub-
fiftence was procured with difficulty; and
it was towards the cloe of the period to
which our narrative is arrived, before the
product of the fettlemert yielded the plant-
ers any return for their Rock, About that
time they began to export coin in small
quantities to the Weft Indies, and made
some feeble attempts to extend the fiflery,
and to open the trade in lumber, which
have since proved the staple articles of

* Mather, b. i. ch. 4. p. 17. ch. 5. p. 23. IHutch-
iofon, p. 193. Chalierb' Annals, p. 165.

commerce

commerce in the colony *. Since the year B O O E
one thousand fix hundred and forty, the .
number of people with which New Eng-
land has recruited the population of the
parent state, is supposed at least to equal
what may have been'drained from it by oc-
cafional migrations thither.

BUT though the sudden change offyftem

in Great Britain itopt entirely the influx of
settlers into New England, the principles of
the colonists coincided so perfetly with
those of the popular leaders in parliament,
that they were soon distinguished by pecu-
liar marks of their brotherly affection. By
a vote of the House of Commons in the
year one thousand ,fix hundred and forty-
two, the people in all the different planta- Exep-
tions of New England were exempted from tion from

certain

payment of any duties, either upon goods duties
exported thither, or upon those which they thecoldo-
imported into the mother country, until the ni's.
House fiall take farther order to the con-

*Hutchinson, p. 91, 92.

R trary.

B O O K trary. This was afterwards confirmed by

X.
L- ~ the authority of both Houses. Encouraged

1646. by fich an extraordinary privilege, industry

made rapid progress in all the diftri&s of
New England, and population increased
along with it. In return for those favours,
the colonists applauded the measures of par-
liament, celebrated its generous efforts to
vindicate the rights and liberties of the na-
tion, prayed for the success of its arms,
and framed regulations in order to prevent
any exertion in favour of the king on the
other fide of the Atlantic *.

RELYING on the indulgent partialitywith

which all their proceedings were viewed by
men thus closely unitedwith them in senti-
rnents and wishes, the people of New Eng-
land ventured on a measure, which not only
increased their security and power, but may
be regarded as a considerable ftep towards
independence. Under the impreflion or

* IIutchinfon, p. 114. App. 517. Chalmers' An.
nals, i. 174. 176.

pretext

pretext of the danger to which they were B 0 0 K

X.

exposed from the surrounding tribes of In- '
dians, the four colonies of Mairachufets, 1643.
Plymouth, Connecicut, and Newhaven, Confede-
entered into a league of perpetual confe- racyofthe

New Eng-

deracy, offensive and defensive; an idea fa- land lates.
miliar to several leading men in the colo-
nies, as it was framed in imitation of the
famous bond of union among the Dutch
provinces, in whose dominions the Brown-
isis had long resided. It was stipulated,
that the confederates should henceforth be
distinguished by the name of the United
Colonies of New England; that each colo-
ny shall remain separate and distinCt, and
have exclusive jurifdiltion within its own
territory; that in every war offensive or
defensive, each of the confederates shall
furnish its quota of men, provisions, and
money, at a rate to be fixed from time to
time, in proportion to the number of people
in each settlement; that an assembly com-
posed of two commiflioners from each co-
lony {hall be held annually, with power to

R 2 deliberate

B O O K deliberate and decide in all points of com-

x.

. mon concern to the confederacy; and every

determination, in which fix of their num-
ber concur, ihall be binding on the whole *.
In this tranfadion the colonies of New Eng-
land seem to have confidered themselves
as independent societies, poffefling all the
rights of sovereignty, and free from the
controul of any superior power. The go-
verning party in England, occupied with
affairs of more urgent concern, and no wife
dilpofed to observe the conduc of their
brethren in America with any jealous at-
tention, suffered the measure to pass with-
out animadversion.

EMBOLDENED by this connivance the

spirit of independence gathered firength,
and soon displayed itself more openly:
some persons of note in the colony of
Massachusets, averse to the system of eccle-
fiaftical polity eftablilhed there, and pre-
ferring to it the government and discipline

* Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. i. 202, &c. Hutchinson,
p. 124. Chalmers' Ann. p. 177.

of the churches of England or Scotland, B 0
o K

X.

having remonitrated to the general court -..
against the injustice of depriving them of 16,6.
their rights as freemen, and of their privi-
leges as Chriflians, because they could not
join as members with any of the con-
gregational churches, petitioned that they
might no longer be bound to obey laws to
which they had not aflented, nor be subjet
to taxes imposed by an assembly in which
they were not represented. Their demands Petitionof

the Dt-

were not only rejected, but they were im- fenters re-
prisoned and fined as disturbers of the jeCed
public peace; and when they appointed
some of their number to lay their griev-
ances before parliament, the annual court,
in order to prevent this appeal to the
supreme power, attempted first to seize
their papers, and then to obftrud their
embarkation for England. But though
neither of these could be accomplifled,
such was the addrcfs and influence of the
colonies' agents in England, that no in-.
quiry seems to have been made into this

R 3 tranfaldion.

B O O K tranfa&ion *. This was followed by an

X.'_ ,indication, itill less ambiguous, of the afpir-

ing spirit prevalent among the people of
Massachusets. Under every form of go-
vernment the right of coining money has
been confidered as a prerogative peculiar to
sovereignty, and which no subordinate
member in any fiate is entitled to claim.
Regardless of this established maxim, the
general court ordered a coinage of silver

1652. money at Boston, stamped with the name

Right of
coiningaf- of the colony, and a tree as an apt symbol
fumed by of its progressive vigour t. Even this
the colo.
nihs, usurpation escaped without notice. The

Independents, having now humbled all
rival feds, engrossed the whole direction of
affairs in Great Britain; and long accuf-
tomed to admire the government of New
England, framed agreeably to those princi-
ples which they had adopted as the most

*Neal's His. N. Eng. i. 213. Hutchinson's Hilt.

i4i, &c. Collekt. 188, &c. Chalm. Ann. 179.
Mather, Magnal. B. iii. ch. i. p. 30.

t Hutchinfol, 177, 178. Chalmers' Annals, p.

pcrfect

perfec model of civil and ecclesiastical BO ox
polity, they were unwilling to stain its re-
putation, by censuring any part of its
conduct.

WIIEN Cromwell usurped the supreme Crom-

well pa-

power, the colonies of New England con- tronife
tinued to stand as high in his estimation. the New

England

As he had deeply imbibed all the fanatical colonies.
notions of the Independents, and was per-
petually surrounded by the most eminent
and artful teachers of that fe&, he kept a
constant correspondence with the lead-
ing men in the American settlements,
who seem to have looked up to him as a
zealous patron *. He in return confidueed
them as his most devoted adherents, at-
tached to him no less by affetion than by
principle. He soon gave a striking proof
of this. On the conquest of Jamaica, he Propote

to tranf-

formed a scheme for the security and im- port the
provement of the acquisition made by his coloniss

to Jamai-
vidorious arms, suited to the ardour of ca.

Hutchinson, App. 53o, &c. Collea. p. 233.

8 an

BOOK an impetuous spirit that delighted in

X. accomplishing its ends by extraordinary

means. He proposed to transport the people
of New England to that island, and em-
ployed every argument calculated to make
impression upon them, in order to obtain
their content. He endeavoured to rouse
their religious zeal by representing what a
fatal blow it would be to the man of fin, if
a colony of the faithful were fettled in the
midst of his territories in the new world.
He allured them with profpe&s of immense
wealth in a fertile region, which would re-
ward the induitry of those who cultivated
it, with all the precious productions of the
torrid zone, and expressed his fervent wish
that they might take pofleffion of it, in
order to fulfil God's promise of making his
people the head and not the tail. He as-
fured them of being supported by the whole
force of his authority, and of veiling all the
powers of government entirely in their

Cotoninf hands. But by this time the colonifis were
dechineac.
cepting attached to a country in which they had
this ffcr. 6 rcfidcd

resided for many years, and where, though B 0 0 K

X.

they did not attain opulence, they enjoyed '_ _
the comforts of life in great abundance;
and they dreaded so much the noxious
climate of the Wetl Indies, which had
proved fatal to a great number of the Eng-
lifh who firlt fettled in Jamaica, that they
declined, though in the moll refpedful
terms, closing with the Protector's propofi-
tion *.

* Hutchinson, p. 190, &c. Chalmers, p. 188.

THE END.

# Just published, Written by the same AUTHOR,

/ufj publi hed,

IWritlen by the fame AUTHOR,
z. The HISTORY of AMERICA, Vol.1. and II.

Illultrated with Maps. 2 1. 2s.

*** ANOTHER EDITION, in 3 Vols. 8vo. I8 s.
2. The HISTORY of SCOTLAND, during the

Reigns of Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.
till his Accefflon to the Crown of England; with
a Review of the Scottish History previous to that
Period; and an APPENDIX, containing Original
Papers. The Sixth Edition, 2 Vols. 4to. 2 1. 2 s.

*** ANOTHER EDITION, in 2 Vols. 8vo. 14 s.

t-t ANOTHER EDITION, in one Vol. 7 s. 6d.
3. The HISTORY of the REIGN of the EMPEROR

CHARLES V. with a View of the Progress of
Society in EUROPE, from the Subversion of the
Roman Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth
Century. Embellished with four Plates, elegantly
engraved. 3 Vols. 4to. 3 1. 3 s.

%* ANOTHER EDITIOM, inl 4 Vols. 8vo. 11.

4 s.
4. An HISTORICAL DISQUISITION Concern-

ing the Knowledge which the Ancients had of
INDIA, and the Progress of Trade with that
Country prior to the Discovery of the Cape of
Good Hope. 4to. I8 $.

*e ANOTHER EDITION, in one Vol. 8vo. 8s.
