*.

s E sS,* 79
- l /

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCO TLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y, and of King J A M E S VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

I T H A
REVIEW of the S o T T I S H I S T ORY previous to that Period;

And an APP ENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPER s.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WI LLIAM R OBERT S ON, D.D.

Minister of LADY Y E T R'S, Edinburgh.

VOLU ME I.
TIIHE FIFTH EDI TION.

L O N D ON:
Printed for A. MiJ I L A 1, in the Strand.

MDCCLXII.

# PREFACE.

P R E F A C E.
IDeliver this book to the world with all the diffidence

and anxiety natural to an Author on publishing his

first performance. The time I have employed, and
the pains I have taken, in order to render it worthy of
the public approbation, it is, perhaps, prudent to con-
ceal, till it be known whether that approbation shall
ever be bellowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many instances, from

former Hilforians, as I have placed fads in a different
light, and have drawn characters with new colours, I
ought to account for this conduct to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the distance of
two centuries, I presume to contradict the testimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary historians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated against each other with
the fiercell political hatred, embittered by religious zeal.
Each of these produced Historians of considerable me-
rit, who adopted all their sentiments, and defended all
their acions. Truth was not the sole objec of these

A 2 Authors.

Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and heated by the
part which they themselves had a&ed in the scenes they
describe, they wrote an apology for a faftion, rather
than the history of their country. Succeeding Hifto~-
rians have followed these guides almost implicitly, and
have repeated their errors and misrepresentations. But
as the fame passions which inflamed parties in that
age have descended to their poflerity; as almost every
event in Mary's reign has become the objec of doubt
or of dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon dif-
covered, that without some evidence more authentic and
more impartial than that of Historians, none of the
point; in question could be decided with certainty.
Records have therefore been searched, original papers
have been produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties. The
attention of Cecil to collect whatever related to that
period, in which he ated so conspicuous a part, hath
provided such an immense flore of original papers for
illustrating this part of the English and Scottish history,
as are almost sufficient to satisfy the utmost avidity of
an Antiquarian. Sir Robert Cotton (whose library is
now the property of the public) made great and vahi-

able

able additions to Cecil's collection; and from this ma-
gazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabbala, Ander-
son, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn mors of the
papers which they have printed.' No History of Scot-
land, that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
since these collections were published, By consulting
them, I have been enabled, in many instances, to cor-
reEt the inaccuracies of former Hiflorians, to avoid their
mistakes, and to detect their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the notice

of those industrious Colleetors, and after all they have
produced to light, much Rill remained in darkness, un--
observed or unpublished. It was my duty to search for
these, and I found this unpleasant task attended withI
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large colletion of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the public
offices in England. Of all these, the Curators of that
library were pleated to allow me the perusal.

THOUG H

THOUGH the British Mufxeum be not yet open to

the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is well
known, procured me access to that noble collection,
which is worthy the magnificence of a great and po-
lifhed nation.

THAT vast and curious colledion of papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr. For-
bes, and of which he published only two volumes, hav-
ing been purchased, since his death, by the Lord Vis-
count Royfton, his Lordship was so good as to allow me
the use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing that
part of them which is connected with my subjed.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very va-

luable colleEtion of original papers, in two large Vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbishop Spotfwood's
hand; and it appears from several passages in his history,
that he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Clergyman

of the last century, compiled an History of Scotland from
the beginning of the reign of James V. to the death of
James VI. in fix large Volumes; wherein he has in-

ferted

ferted many papers of consequence, which are no where
else to be found. A copy of this history, which ,ill
remains in manuscript, in the pofleffon of the Church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy friend,
the Reverend Mr. George Wifhart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to me

the papers which he has colleted relating to Gowrie's
conspiracy; but by explaining to me his sentiments with
regard to that problematical paflage in the Scottish his-
tory, has enabled me to place that tranfadion in a light
which difpells much of the darkness and confusion in
which it has been hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with

regard to the conduc and chara&er of Queen Mary
to be extremely different from his own, communicated
to me a Volume of manuscripts in his possession, which
contains a great number of valuable papers copied from
the originals in the Cottonian Library and Paper Office,
by the late Reverend Mr. Crawford, Regius Professor of
Church History in the University of Edinburgh. I like-
wife received from him the original Register of letters.
kept by the Regent Lennox during his adminifiration.

I .HAVE

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I thought

they could be of any use towards illustrating that period
of which I write the history. With what success I have
employed them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine what was
contraverted, the public must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different repofi-

tories to which 1 had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the most
bulky collection of my predecessors. But I have satisfied
myself with publishing a few of the most curious among
them, to which I found it necessary to appeal as vouch-
ers for my own veracity. None of these, as far as I
can recolleC, ever appeared in any former collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical DiSerta-

tion concerning the murder of King Henry, and the ge-
nuinenes of the tuseen's letters to Bothwell. The fadts
and observations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe
to my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to
the Signet, who hath examined this point with his usual
acuteness and industry.

# BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

OF
S COT L A ND.

BOOK I.
Containing a review of the SCOT TTISH HiSfory previous

to the Death of JAMES V.
P1T HE first ages of the Scottish history are dark and fabulous. BOOK I.

Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees, The origin of
and the events, which happened during their infancy or loiato ,d h.

early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not to be remem-fcure.
bered. The gross ignorance, which anciently covered all the North
of Europe, the continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the fre-
quent and deftru&ive revolutions which there occasioned, render
it impossible to give any authentic account of the origin of the dif-
ferent kingdoms now established there. Every thing beyond that
short. period, to which well attested annals reach, is obscure; an im-
mense space is left for invention to occupy; each nation, with a va-
nity inseparable from human nature, hath filled that void with

VOL. I. B events

events calculated to display its own antiquity, and lustre. And his-
tory, which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets
out with retailing fictions and absurdities.
Origin of the THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high, as any of

their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and the tradi-
tions of their bards, still more uncertain, they reckon up a series of
kings several ages before the birth of Christ; and give a particular
detail of the occurrences, which happened in their reigns. But with
regard to the Scots, as well as the other northern nations, we re-
ceive the earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from their
A. D. 81. own, but from the Roman authors. When the Romans, under

Agricola, first carried their arms into the northern parts of Britain,
they found it possessed by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike
people; and having repulsed, rather than conquered them, they erec-
ted a strong wall between the firths of Forth and Clyde, and there
fixed the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on account of the
difficulty of defending such a distant frontier, contracted the limits
A. D. iz1. of the Roman province in Britain, by building a second wall, which

ran between Newcastle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had abandoned; and
the country between the two walls was alternately under the domi-
nion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the beginning
of the fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other Barbarians
obliged the Romans, in order to defend the centre of their empire,
to recal those legions, which guarded the frontier provinces; and
at that time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.
A. D; 42t. THE R long residence in the island had pol:r.hed, in tome degree,

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their inter-

6 course

course with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of BooK; I.
numbers, without which it is impossible long to preserve the me- ~-
mory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left under the dominion

of the Scots and Pids. The former, who are not mentioned by any
Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were pro-
bably a colony of the Celte or Gauls; their affinity to whom ap-
pearsfrom theirlanguage, their manners, and religious rites; circum-
stances more decisive, with regard to the origin of nations, than ei-
ther fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and credulous
Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending themselves by degrees,
landed at last on the coasts opposite to that island, and fixed their
habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several ages,
carried on between them, and the Pids. At length, Kenneth II. A. D. 838.
the fixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to their own fabulous
authors) obtained a complete victory over the Pids, and united un-
der one monarchy the whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to
the northern ocean. And his kingdom became known by its
prefeint name, which it derived from a people who at first fettled
there as firangers, and remained long obscure and inconsiderable.

FROM this period the history of Scotland would merit some History of

attention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But as our re- ciarly o-d
mote antiquities are involved in the fame darkness witl those of sc'c.
other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost an
equal obscurity over our more recent tranfictions. This was occa-
sioned by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch called in queflion

B 2 the

BOOK I. the independence of Scotland; pretending that that kingdom was

'~' held as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjered to all the

conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to establish his claim, he
seized the public archieves, he ransacked churches and monasteries,
and getting poffefiion, by force, or fraud, of many historical monu-
ments, which tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king-
dom, he carried some of them into England, and commanded the
reft to be burned *. An universal oblivion of past tranfaacions might
have been the effect of this fatal event, but some imperfect Chro-
nicles had escaped the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
some important fats relating to Scotland; and the traditions con-
cerning recent occurrences were freih and worthy of credit. These
broken fragments, John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, colleced with a pious industry, and from them picked
out materials, which he formed into a regular history. His work
was received by his countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of the
authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copied in many mona-
fteries, and the thread of the narrative was continued, by different
monks, through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Major and Hector Boethius published their
histories of Scotland, the former a succinct and dry writer, the lat-
ter a copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance
of his taste, and to the purity and vigour of his style, his history
might be placed on a level with the most admired compositions of
the ancients. But, instead of rejecing the improbable tales of
Chronicle writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn them; and

Inncs, Essay 552.

hath

hath clothed with all the beauties and graces of fition, those le- BaoK I.
gends, which formerly had only its wildness and extravagance. '-- '

THE history of Scotland may properly be divided into four pe- Four remark-

riods. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to the tbe Scottilh
reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conquet ofHilRory.
the Pids, to the death of Alexander II. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the acceflion of
James VI. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and conjecture, and

ought to be totally neglected, or be abandoned to the industry and
credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second pe-
riod, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually increasing; and the
events, which then happened, may be slightly touched, but merit
no particular or laborious enquiry. In the third period, the history
of Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in England, be-
comes more authentic: not only are events related, but their causes
and effects explained; the characters of the actors are displayed,
the manners of the age described; the revolutions in the conftitu-
tion pointed out: and here every Scotsman should begin not to
read only, but to study the history of his country. During the
fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those
of other nations, its situation in the political Rate of Europe was
so important, its influence on the operations of the neighbouring
kingdoms was so visible, that its history becomes an objec of atten-
tion to foreigners; and without some knowledge of the various and
extraordinary revolutions which happened there, they cannot form
a just notion either of the most illustrious events, or of the charac-
ters of the most distinguished personages, in the sixteenth century.

Tl E

BOOI I. THE following history is confined to the last of these periods:
Areview of To give a view of the political tfate of the kingdom, during that
the third sera. which immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary

Book. The imperfet knowledge which strangers have of the as-
fairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotsmen themselves have im-
bibed with regard to the various revolutions in the government of
their country, render such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from
the year 1286, to the year 1542.

Rife of the IT opens with the famous controversy concerning the indepen-
controning dence of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms, this was
the ndepen- a question ofmuch importance. If the one Crown had been confi-
dence of Scot- estion of much importance. If the one Crown had been confi-
land. dered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to the other,

a treaty of union could not have been concluded on equal terms, and
every advantage which the dependent kingdom procured, muff have
been esteemed the concession of a Sovereign to his vassal. Accord-
ingly, about the beginning of the present century, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy
was agitated with all the heat, which national animofities naturally
inspire. What was then a subjet of serious concern, the union
of the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But
though the objects, which at that time warmed and interested both
nations, cxift no longer, a question, which appeared so momentous to
our ancestors, cannot be altogether indifferent or uninftrutive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were early in the hands
of the Scottifll kings, who, as far back as the feudal customs can be

traced,

traced, held these polTefions of the Kings of England, and did ho- BOOK I.
mage to them on that account. This homage, due only for the ter- - -
ritories which they held in England, was in no wife derogatory from
their royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a Vassal, indepen-
dent inone capacity, and dependent in another . The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and independent, though the
Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the vassals of the Kings
of France; and, in consequence of their poffefiions in that kingdom,
bound to perform all the services which a feudal Sovereign has a
title to exat. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scot-
land; free and independent as Kings, but, as poffeiTng English ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided by them into many finall
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
land, united at that time under one Monarch. And though these
petty principalities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the
reigning princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often fubjeated to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of eftablifll-

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hilory. Arpin fold the vi-

compt6 of the city Bourges to Philip I. who did homage to the Count of Sancerrc
for a part of thcfc lands, which held of that Noblcman, A. D. I oo. I believe that
no example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own subje&s, is to be met with
in the hiftorks either of England or Scotland. Philip le Bel abolifaed this practice
in France, A. D. 1302. I-lenaut AbregeGChrono. Somewhat similar to this, is a char-
ter of the Abbot of Mclrofs, A. D. 1535, conflitnting James V. the Bailiff or Stew-
ard of that Abbey, veiling in him all the powers which pertained to that officc, and
requiring him to be anfwcrable to the Abbot for his exercise of the fame. ,srcbiv.
pubI, Edin.

i'

BOOK I. ing new rights in that country. The first Kings of the Norman

v- Y- race, buffed with introducing their own laws and manners into the

kingdom which they had conquered, or with maintaining themselves
on the throne which some of them possessed by a very dubious title,
were as little solicitous to acquire new authority, or to form new
pretensions in Scotland. An unexpected calamity that besel one of
the Scottish Kings first encouraged the English to think of bringing
his kingdom under dependence. William King of Scotland being
taken prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not
only extorted from him an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to
Surrender the places of greatest strength in his. dominions, but
compelled him to do homage for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a
generous Prince, solemnly renounced this claim of homage, and ab-
solved William from the hard conditions which Henry had imposed.
Upon the death of Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I.
availing himself of the situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an
influence in that kingdom, which no English Monarch before him
ever possessed, and imitating the interested policy of Henry, ra-
ther than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of so-
vereignty to which the former had pretended.

Pretensions of MARGARET of Norway, Grandaughter of Alexander, and heir
rce and B- to his Crown, did not long survive him. The right offucceffion be-

longed to the descendants of David Earl of Huntington, third son
of King David I. Among there, Robert Bruce, and John Baliol,
two illustrious competitors for the crown, appeared. Bruce was
the son of Isabel Earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the grand-
son of Margaret the eldest daughter. According to the rules of fuc-
cession which are now established, the right of Baliol was preferable,
and notwithstanding Bruce's plea, of being nearer in blood to Earl
David, Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother and grand-

5 mother,

mother would be deemed inconteffible. But, in that age, the or- BOOK f.
der of fucceflion was not ascertained with the fame precision. The -
question appeared to be no less intricate, than it was important. And
though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps the laws of the
kingdom, favouredBruce, each of the rivals was supported by a pow-
erful faction. Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire, and both parties
agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal
to the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by its eagerness to
guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to that calamity, but
almost fubjeded to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which prevailed in Scotland,
and the ambition of competitors ready to sacrifice their country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first to seize,
and thento subjeA thekingdom. The authorityofan umpire, which
had been unwarily bestowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his
schemes with the greater facility. Under pretence.ofexamining the
question with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottifl
Barons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and Ba-
liol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the English
Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or Liege Lord.
This rtepled to another fill more important. As it was vain to pro-
nounce a sentence which he had not power to execute, Edward de-
manded pofleffion of the kingdom, that he might be able to deliver
it to him whose right ihould be found preferable. And such was the
pusillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient ambition of the com-
-VOL. I. C petitors,

Boon I. petitors, that both afented to this strange demand, and Gilbert de
.-v -' Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who refused to four

render the cafles in his custody to the enemy of his country. Ed-
ward, finding Baliol the most obsequious and the least formidable of
the two competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour. Ba-
liol once more professed himself the vassal of England, and submitted
to every condition, which his Sovereign, whom he had now ac-
knowledged, was pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nob'les to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to con-
elude that his dominion was now fully established. But he began
too soon to afiume the matter; his new vassals, fierce and indepen-
dent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Ba.
liol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly at-
tempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the rebellion of his vassal..
At that critical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero to whom
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous
ads of prowess, though his.real valour, as well as integrity and wis-
dom, is such, as needs not the heightenings of fi&ioa. He, almost
single, ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce,.
the grandson of him who flood in competition with Baliol, appeared
to assert his own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his country.
The nobles, aihamed of their former bafenefi, and inraged at the
many indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. In
order :ocrufh him at once, the Englifi monarch entered Scotland,

at

at the head of a mighty army. Many battles were fought, and the BOOK I.
Scots, though often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent "-
zeal with which the nobles contended for the independence of the
kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national en-
thufiafm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, andcounterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number, and wealth of his subjects. And though the war con-
tinued with little intermiflion upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept possession of the throne of Scotland, and ruled
with an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

But while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes between

contending iations, was employedto terminate this controversy, nei
therEdwardnorthe Scotsfeemedto distrust thejuftice of their cause;
and both appealed to history and records, and from these produced,
in their own favour, such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The lettersand memorialsaddrefled by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and often appealed
to as thecommonjudgeofallChriftian Princes, are ftillextant. The
fabulous talesof the earlyBritiih history; the partial testimony of ig-
norant chroniclers; supposititious treatiesand charters; arethe proofs,
on which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland;
and the homage done by the Scottish Monarchs for their lands in
England, isprepofteroully supposed to imply the fubjedion of their
whole kingdom*. Ill founded, however, as their right was, the
English did not fail to revive it,.in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost
indignation. To this, we must impute the fierce and implacable ha-
tred to each other, which long.inflamed both. Their national an-

* Anderson's Hiltorical Eflay concerning the Independency, &c.

C 2 tipathies

BOOK I. tipathies were excited, not only by the usual circumstances of fie-

LY--~ quent hoflilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the English confidered

the Scots as vaflals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in
their turn, regarded the English, as usurpers, who aimed at enflav-
ing their country.

st3o0. h AT the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland, the

Sta'e of the
kingdom fame form of government was established in all the kingdoms of Eu-
when Bruce
began his rope. And the surprising similarity in their contfitution and laws
Reign. demonstrates that the'nations whichoverturned the Roman empire,.

and erected these kingdoms, though divided into different tribes, and
distinguished by different names, were originally the fame people.
When we take a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that
stupendous and singular fabric erected'by them; the first objec that
firikes us is the King. And when we are told that he is the Iole
proprietor of all the lands within his dominions, that all his fubjedcs
derive their possessions from him, and in return consecrate their lives
to his service; when we hear that all marks of diftindtion, and titles of
dignity, flowfromhim as the only fountainof honour; when we be-
hold the most potent peers, on their bended knees, and with folded
hands, swearing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their
Sovereign, and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a
powerful, nay an absolute monarch. No conclusion, however,
would be more rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royal-
ty, and with many appearances of despotic power, a feudal King
was the most limited of all Princes.

Crigin of the BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations to conquer the
Feudal Go-
vernment, and world, many of the northern nations seem not to have been subjed
its ariltocrati-
cal genius. to

9

to the government of kings*; and even where monarchical govern- BOOK I.
ment was eitablifhed, the prince poifeffed but little authority. A '--
general rather than a king, his military command was extensive,
his civil jurifdition almost nothing -. The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his itandard . These con-
quered not for their leader, but for themselves; and being free in
their own country, renounced not their liberty when they acquired
new settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient inhabitants
of the countries, which they subdued, but seizing the greater part
of their lands, they took their persons under protection. And the:
difficulty of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the danger of
being attacked by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be always
in a posture of defence, the form of government which they efta-
blifhed was altogether military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accustomed in their native country. Their general
lill continuing to be the head of the colony, part of the conquered
lands were allotted to him; the remainder, under the name of bene-
ficia orfiefs, was divided amongst his principal officers. As the com-
mon safety required that these officers should, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence, and Ihould con-
tinue obedient to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number of men, in
proportion to the extent of their territory. These great officers,
again parcelled out their lands among their followers, and annexed
the fame condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was properly
the encampment of a great army; military ideas predominated,
military subordination was eftabliihed, and the poflhefionofland was
the pay which soldiers received for their personal service. In con-

* Ca. lib. vi. c. 13. 1' Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 7. 1, :. Caf. ibid.

sequence

Boor I. sequence of these notions, the poffetlion of land was granted dur-

--' ing pleasure only, and kings were elective. In other words, an

officer disagreeable to his general was deprived of his pay, and
the person who was most capable of condu&ing an army, was cho-
fen to command it. Such were the first rudiments, or infancy of
feudal government.

Bu'rlong before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal system had undergone many changes, of which the follow-
ing were the most considerable. Kings formerly ele&ive, were
then hereditary; and fiefs granted at frft during pleasure, de-
scended from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles, than to the prince,
made no alteration in the aritocratical spirit of the feudal confti-

General cau- tution. The king, who at a diiance, seemed to be inveRted with
fes which 11-
mited the majesty and power, appears, oh a nearer view, to possess none of
power of the
feudal mo-e thole advantages, which beflow' on monarchs their grandeur and
narchs. authority. 'His revenues were ¥canty; he had not a sanding army;

and he enjoyed no proper jurrfdition.

Their reve- AT a tiime when ,potp and splendor wee umknown, evenin
rmall.wre the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown received

little alary betides the fees and perquisites :of their office.; when
embassies to foreign bcorts 'were rare-; when armies were coin.
pdfed odfbldiers who served without ipay; it was not neceflfay that
a kingfhould <possess a'great :revenue ; nor did 'the condition of Es-
rope, in those ages, allow its :princes 'to be opulent. Commerce
made little progief ;in the kingdoms, twhere the (feetil igovernmett
was established. Iihftitutions, which had no other objet but to
irfpiire a martial spirit, to traih mnen to be soldiers, and to make
arms she only honourable profeflion, naturally discouraged the

*4 'taommer-

commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes imposed on BOOK I.
the different branches of commerce, were by consequence inconfi- ^- '-
derable, and the prince's trearure received little supply from a source,
which, among trading people, flows with such abundance, and
is almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied even on land;
such a burthen would have appeared intolerable to men who re-
ceived their estates, as the reward of their valour, and who con-
fidered their service in the field. as a full retribution for what they
possessed. The king's demenjes, or the portion of land which he
still retained in his own hands unalienated, furniflhed subsistence
to his court, and defrayed the ordinary expence of government *.
The only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vassals to pay
to the king or to those of whom they held their lands, were three;
one when his eldest son was made a knight; another when his eldest
daughter was married; and a third in order torasnfomhi.mifhelfhould.
happen to be taken prisoner. Besides there, the king received the
feudal casualties of the ward, narriage, &c. of his own vaflals-
And, on ibme extraordinary occasions, his fubjeds granted him
an aid,, which they diftinguifshed by the name of a benevolence, in
order to declare that he received it not in consequence of any
right, but as a gift, flowing from their good-will -. All these
added together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that could excite
the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependence.

NooR could the king supply the defed of his revenues, by the They had n

terror of his arms. Mercenary troops, and standing armies were RIanding ar-
unknown as long as the feudal government fubfiflod in vigour.

* Craig, de Feud, lib. x. Dleg. 14. Du Cange Gloi. voc., Dominicum.

t Du Cange voc. Auxilium.

Europe.

BOOK I. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and
iY ^ the fub-vaffals of the barons were all obliged to carry arms. And

while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their
frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little discipline, was sufficient for all the purposes both of the
security and of the glory of a nation. Such an army, however,
far from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less
formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike any
people were, the more independent they became; and the fame
persons being both soldiers and fabje&s, civil privileges and immu-
nities were the consequence of their victories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, under our
present forms of government, often render the tyrants of their own
people, as well as the scourges ofmankind, were commonly, under the
feudal constitution, themoftindulgent of all princes to their fubjefs,
because they stood most in need of their assistance. A prince whom
even war and vicories did not render the master of his own army,
possessed no shadow of military power during times of peace. His
disbanded soldiers mingled with his other fubjeas; not a single man
received pay from him; many ages elapsed even before a guard
was appointed to defend his person; and destitute of that great in-
ftrument of dominion a standing army, the authority of the king
continued always feeble, and was often contemptible.

Their jurif- NOR were there the only circumstances, which contributed to-
didion was li-
mited. wards depressing the regal power. By the feudal system, the king's

judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At first, princes
seem to have been the supreme judges of their people, and, in per-
fon,heard and determined all controversies amongthem. The mul-

tiplicity

tiplicity of causes soon made it necessary to appoint judges, who BOOK I.
in the king's name decided matters, that belonged to the royal -"v-
jurifdiaion. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Europe, having
destroyed most of the great cities, and the countries which they
seized being cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protect from every injury; the administration of
justice was greatly interrupted, and the execution of any legal
sentence became almost impracticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and
disorder of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a
degree almost incredible, and scarce compatible with the fubfiflence
of civil society. Every offender sheltered himself under the pro-
tection of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to punish a criminal, of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom . In order

* A remarkable inflance of this occurs in the following hillory, so late as the

year i56t. Mary, having appointed a court of juflice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person,
who was to at as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions, p. 2 34. The
wards of a Proclamation, which afford such a convincing proof of the feebleners of
the feudal government, deserve our notice.--" And because it is necelrary for the
execution of her highness' commandments, and service, that her justice be well ac-
companied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a good
power of her faithful fubjeCs - Therefore commands and charges all and sundry
Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling
within the said counties, that they, and every one of them, with their kin, friends
servants, and houlhold men, well bodin in feir of war, in the most fubftantious
manner, [i. e. compleatly armed and provided,] and with twenty days victuals, to
meet and to pass forward with him ,to the borrough of Jedburgh, and there to re-
main during the said space of twenty days, and to receive such direction and com-
mands, as hall be given by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's name, for quiet-
nefe of the country; and to put the fame in execution under the pain of losing their
life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hiit. of Scotland, 198.

VOL. I D to

BooK I. to remedy these evils, many persons of diftindion were entrusted

L-^' with the adminifiration of jufiice within their own territories.

But what we may presume was, at firit, only a temporary grant,.
or a personal privilege, the encroaching spirit of the nobles soon con-
verted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of some
were erected into Baronies, those of others into Regalities. The
jurifdidtion of the former was extensive, that of the latter, as the
name implies, royal, and almost unbounded. - All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the re-
gality appointed; and if the king's courts called any person within.
his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a flop to
their proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, remove the
cause to his own court, and even punish his vassal, if he submitted
to a foreign jurifdition *. Thus almost every queition, in which.
any person who resided on the lands of the nobles, was interested,,
being determined by judges appointed by the nobles themselves,.
their vassals were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, fubjedc
to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into many small princi-
palities, almost independent, and held together by a feeble and com-
monly an imperceptible bond of union. And the king was not
only stripped of the authority annexed to the person of a supreme
judge, but his revenue suffered no small diminution, by the loss of
those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that age, due to the
person who adminiftred justice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

rose towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained a
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-

* Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

sure,

Lure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and by introducing BooK I.
entails, endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity and invention can '-- -*
reach that end, to render their pofeffions unalienable and ever-
lassing. As they had full power to add to the inheritance transmit-
ted to them from their ancestors, but none to diminiih it; time
alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought
continual acceflions of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of its course, and as
it rolled on, new honours and new property flowed successively
into it. Whatever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons, likewise, possessed in an ample manner. These
marks of diftinacion are, in their own nature, either official or per-
fonal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illustrious characters, ought to be
appropriated to these. But the son, however unvorthy, could not
bear to be stripped of that appellation, by which his father had
been distinguished. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and added new lustre
to nobles already in possession of too much power, Something more
audacious, and more extravagant still remained. The supreme di-
rection of all affairs, both civil and military, being committed to the
great officers of the crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well
as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these
officers. But such was the preposterous ambition of the nobles, and
so successful even their wildest attempts to aggrandize themselves,
that in all the kingdoms where the feudal institutions prevailed,
most of these offices were annexed to great families, and held, like
fiefs, by hereditary right. A person, whose undutiful behaviour
rendered him odious to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed him

D 2 to

BooK I. to the contempt of the people, often held a place of power and trufi,

'- of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord

Justice General, Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Con-
Itable, Earl Marshal, and High Admiral, were all hereditary; and in
many counties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame manner.

NOBL.ES, whose property was so extensive, and whose power so

great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable. Nor did
they want initruments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among their fol-
lowers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vassals; while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The great
hall of an ambitious baron was often more crowded than the court
of his Sovereign. The strong castles, in which they resided, as-
forded a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but
bold retainers. And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even
in times of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual
retinue of William the sixth Earl of Douglas consisted of 2000
horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and forgetting their pro-
per rank, such potent and haughty barons were the rivals, rather
than the fubjets of their Prince. They often despised his orders,
insulted his person, and wrested from him his crown. And the
history of Europe, during several ages, contains little else, but the
accounts of the wars and revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant
ambition.

BUT,

BuT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its. proper BOOK I.

bounds in the ofher nations of Europe, we may affirm that the Tjeirper
balance which ought to be preserved between a King and his nobles greater in

Scotland than.

was intirely loit in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in in any other
common with those of other nations, all the means for extending kingdom.
their authority which arise from the ariftocratical genius of the
feudal government. Besides these, they possessed advantages pe-
culiar to themselves; the accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumntances concurred with the spirit
of the constitution to aggrandize them. To enumerate the mofl The particu-
remarkable of these, will serve both to explain the political state of larcaufes of
the kingdom, and to illustrate many important occurrences, in the
period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of the power and The nature of

independence of the Scottish nobility. Level and open countries the country'
are formed for servitude. The authority of the supreme magistrate
reaches with ease to the most distant corners, and when nature. has
ereted no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious
are soon deteaed, and punished. Mountains, and fens, and rivers
set bounds to despotic power, and amidst these, is the natural feat
of freedom and independence. In such places, did the Scottili
nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring, to his own castle,
a mutinous Baron could defy the power of his Sovereign, it being
impracicable to lead an army, through a barren country, to places,
almost inaccessible to a single man. The famecaufes, which checked
the progress of the Roman arms, and rendered. all, the efforts of
Edward I. abortive, often protected the Scottish nobles from the
vengeance of their Prince; and they owed their personal indepen--

dence,,

BoOK. I. dence, to those very mountains and marshes, which raved their
'-"-- .country from being conquered.

The small 'II. 'THE want of great cities inScotland contributed not a little
number of
:great cities. to increase the power of the nobility, and to weaken that of the

Prince. Where-ever numbers of men afiemble together, order must
be eflabliflhed, and a regular form of government instituted, the
authority of the magistrate must be recognized, and his decisions
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and Subordination
take rife in cities; and where there are few cities as in Poland, or
none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of any fort of police.
But under the feudal governments, commerce, the chief means of
assembling mankind, was negleced; the nobles in order to strength-
en their influence over their vaifals, resided among them, and fel-
dom appeared at court, where they found a superior, or dwelt in
cities, where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich coun-
ties in the South lying open to the English, no town situated there
could rife to be great or populous amidit continual inroads and
.alarms; the residence of our monarchs was not fixed to any parti-
cular place; many parts of the country were barren and unculti-
vated; and in consequence of these peculiar circumfiances, ad-
ded to the general causes flowing from the nature of the feu-
dal institutions, the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and.
very inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron occupied a diftind
portion of the kingdom, and formed a separate and almost inde-
pendent society. Inflead of giving aid towards reducing to obe-
dience their seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his
protection, they were all in arms for his defence, and obftruted the
operations of justice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at criminals, whom he could not reach; the nobles, con-

2 fcious

£cious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and the diff- BooK I.
culty ofpunishing almost assured them of impunity;.

III. THE division of the country into clans had nofinall effet in'rlie inftlitt

tion of clans.~

rendering the nobles considerable. The nations, which over-ran
Europe, were originally divided into many finall tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquered, it
was natural for every chieftain to bestow a portion, in :the first
place; upon those of his own: tribe or family., These all held
their lands of him; and as the safety of each individual depended on
the general union, there small societies clung together, and were.
distinguished by. some common appellation, either patronymical, or -
local, long before the introduction of firnames, or ensigns armorial..
But when these became common, the descendants and relations of
every Chieftain assumed the fame name and arms with him; other -
vassals were proud to imitate their example, and by degrees they
were communicated to all those who held of the iame superior..
Thus clanfhips were formed; and in: a generation. or two, that
consanguinity which was, at first, in.a great measure, imaginary,.
was believed to be real. An artificial union :was converted into a
natural one; men willingly followed a leader, whom they regarded
both as the superior of their lands, and the chief of their blood,
and served him .not only with the fidelity of vaflals, but.with the:
affedion of friends. In.the other feudal kingdoms, we may ob-
serve such unions, as we have described, imperfecly formed; but in;
Scotland, whether they were the production ;of chance, or the es- -
set of policy, or introduced by the Iriflh colony above-mentioned,,
and: strengthened by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge-
nuine and fabulous, clanihips were universal. Such a confederacy
might be overcome, it could not be broken and no change of man-

ners ,,

BOOK I. ners, or of government, has been able, in some parts of the king-
-' ~'- dom, to dissolve associations which are founded upon prejudices so

natural to the human mind. How formidable were nobles at the
head of followers, who counting that cause just and honourable
which their chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at his
command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person, or
of his fame ? Againit such men, a king contended with great dif-
advantage, and that cold service, which money purchases, or au-
thority extorts, was not an equal match for their ardour and zeal.

The finall IV. THE smallness of their number may be mentioned among the
number °fthcaufes of the grandeur of the Scottiih nobles. Our annals reach
nobles.

not back to the firfl division of property in the kingdom; but so
far as we can trace the matter, the original possessions of the nobles
seem to have been extensive. The ancient Thanes were the
equals and the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls and
barons who succeeded them, were masters of territories no less
ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile, afforded
settlements to a numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not contain many such
overgrown proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always
diminishes, in proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble if di-
vided among a multitude; irresistible if centered in a few. When
nobles are numerous, their operations nearly resemble those of the
people, they are routed only by what they feel, not by what they
apprehend; and submit to many arbitrary and oppreflive adts, be-
fore they take arms againit their sovereign. A small body, on the
contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick in discern-
ing, and prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are as sudden,
us those of the other are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jea-

lousy,

lousy, with which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs, and BOOK I.
the fierceness with which they opposed their incroachments. Even -
the virtue of a prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager
to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the
splendor of his victories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their refiflance no less than his
unpopular defcenderit James III. Besides this, the near alliance of
the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the natural con-
sequence of their finall number. And as consanguinity was, in
those ages a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a nobleman
interested themselves in his quarrel, as a common cause, and every
contest the king had, though with a single baron, soon drew upon
him the arms of a whole confederacy.

V. THOSE natural connections both with their equals, and with Their leagues

their inferiors, the Scottifl nobles strengthened by a device, which and 'om"lnna
if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more frequent among them,
than in any other nation. Even in times of profound peace, they
formed associations, which when made with their equals, were called
leagues of mutual defence; and when with their inferiors, bonds of
manrent. By the former the contrating parties bound themselves
mutually to affifteach other, in all causes, and againit all persons. By
the latter, protection was stipulated on the one hand, and fidelity
and personal service promised on the other *. Self-prefervation, it
is probable, forced men at first into these confederacies, and while
disorder and rapine were universal, while government was unsettled,
and the authority of laws little known or regarded, near neigh-
bours found it necessary to unite in this manner for their security,

* A& .

3 Pnrl. 1424. ACt. 43. P0 1S5.
VOL. I. E and

BOOK I. and the weak were obliged to court the patronage of the firong.

L'"V -- By degrees these associations became so many alliances offensive and

defensive against the throne; and as their obligation was held to be
more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to
our kings, and contributed not a little to the power and indepen-
dence of the nobility. In the reign of James II. William the eighth
earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with the earls
of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Bal-
veny, &c. and so formidable was this combination to the king, that
he had recourse to a measure no less violent than unjust, in order to
dissolve it.

The frequent VI. The frequent wars between England and Scotland proved
was wlth another cause of augmenting the power of the nobility. Nature

has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a river almoat
every where fordable, divides them towards the east; on the weft
they are separated by an imaginary line. The small revenues of
our kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons in
the towns on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of their fubjeats
have permitted such a method of defence. The barons, whose
estates lay near the borders, confidered themselves as bound both in
honour and in interest to repell the enemy. The warden/hips of the
different marches, offices of great trust and dignity, were always
betlowed on them. This gained them the leading of the warlike
counties in the south; and their vassals, living in a state of perpetual
hostility, or enjoying at belt an insecure peace, became more inu-
red to war than even the refR of their countrymen, and more wil-
ling to accompany their chieftain in his most hardy and dangerous
enterprizes. It was the valour, no less than the number of their
followers that rendered the Douglases great. The nobles in the
northern and midland counties were often dutiful and obsequious to

the

the crown, but our monarchs always found it impra&icable to sub- BooK I.
due the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all ' '
our domestic quarrels, those, who could draw to their fide the
inhabitants of the southern counties, were f5re of vitory; and con-
fcious of this advantage, the lords who pofleffed authority there,
were apt to forget the duty which they owed their sovereign, and to
aspire beyond the rank of fubjeEts.

VII. THE calamities which besel our kings contributed more than Thie frteque

any other cause to diminish the royal authority. Never was any race wicl" .-
of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix fucceflive prin- penedin Scot-
ces, from Robert III. to James VI. not one died a- natural death;
and the minorities, during that time were longer, and more fre-
quent, than ever happened in any other kingdom. From Robert
Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of these were
called to the throne, while they were minors, and almost infants.
Even the molt regular and best established governments feel fenfi-
bly the pernicious effecs of a minority, and either become languid
and inactive, or are thrown into violent and unnatural convulsions.
But, under the imperfec and ill adjusted system of government in
Scotland, there effects were still more fatal; and the fierce and mu-
tinous spirit of the nobles, unrestrained by the authority of a king,
scorned all subjection to the delegatedjurifdition of a regent, or
to the feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority was
circumscribed within narrower limits than ever; the prerogatives of
the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were reduced almost to no-
thing; and the ariftocratical power gradually rose upon the ruins
of the monarchical. Left the personal power of a regent flould
enable him to at with too much vigour, the authority annexed
to that office, was sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being

E 2 divided ;

BoOK I. divided; or if a single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and

'1" ~the heads of the more illustrious families, were seldom railed to that

dignity. It was often conferred upon men, who possessed little
influence and excited no jealousy. They, conscious of their own
weakness, were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and to per-
mit others; and in order to support their authority, which was de-
flitute of real strength, they endeavoured to gain the most power-
ful and active barons, by granting them possessions and immunities,
which raised them to frill greater power. When the king him-
self came to afitime the reins of government, he found his revenues
wafted or alienated, the crown lands seized or given away, and
the nobles so accustomed to independence, that after the firug-
gles of a whole reign, he was seldom able to reduce them to the
fame state in which they had been at the beginning of his minority,

Peview of the or to wref fro m

them what they had usurped during that time. If

events favour-
able to the we take a view of what happened to each of our kings, who was so
nobles during
each minori- unfortunate as to be placed in this situation, the truth and impor-
ty. tance of this observation will fully appear..

TnIE minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, wasdif-
Dl.vid 11.

turbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who, relying on the
aid of England, and on the support of some disaffected barons
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which at
first attended his arms, obliged the young king to retire to France;
and Baliol took poffefiion of the throne. A finall body of the
nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove
Baliol out of Scotland; and after an abtence of nine years, David
returned from France, and took the government of the kingdom
into his own hands. But nobles who were thus wafting their
blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-

5 ndillurbed

dEfturbed possession of their ancient privileges; and even some title, BOOK I.
to arrogate new ones. It seems to have been a maxim, in that age, ----.
that every leader might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquisitions were gained
by the nobility in that way; and to these the gratitude and liberali-
ty of David added, by distributing, among such as adhered to him,
the vast possessions which fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his
enemies. The family of Douglas, which began to rife above the
other nobles, in the reign of his father, augmented both its power-
and its property, during his minority.

JAMES I. was seized by the English during the-continuance of c

a truce, and ungenerously detained a prisoner, almost nineteen James L
years. During that period, the kingdom was governed, first by
his uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his son.
Both these noblemen aspired to the crown, and their unnatural am-
bition, if we may believe most of our historians, not only cut short
the days of Prince David the King's elder brother, but prolonged
the captivity of James. They flattered themselves, that they might,.
ftep with less opposition into a throne, when almost vacant; and
dreading the King's return, as the extintion of their authority, and
the end of their hopes, they carried on the ncgociations for ob-
taining his liberty with extreme remiflnefs. At the fame time,
they neglected nothing that could either sooth or bribe the nobles
to approve their scheme. They slackened the reins of government,
they allowed the prerogative to be encroached upon; they suffered
the most irregular ads of power, and even wanton instances of op-
preflion to pass with impunity; they dealt out the patrimony of
the crown among those whose enmity they dreaded, or whose fa-
your they had gained ; and rcduced the royal authority to a state

of

BooK I. of imbecility, from which succeeding monarchs laboured in vain
^~ " ""' to raise it.

1437. DURING the minority of James II. the adminiflration of affairs
James 11 and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir Wil-

liam Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingiton. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the effets of their conjunct authority, and each of them,
in order to strengthen himself, bellowed new power and privileges
upon the great men, whose aid he courted. While the young
Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, ereced a fort of in-
dependent principality within the kingdom; and forbidding his vas-
fals to acknowledge any authority but his own, he created Knights,
appointed a privy council, named officers civil and military, affum-
ed every ensign of Royalty, but the title of King, and appeared
on public with a magnificence more than royal.

m460ei. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom during the
James IIi.

minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing the per-
son of the young King, and by the ascendant which he acquired,
over him soon engrossed the whole authority. He formed the am-
bitious project of railing his family to the fame pitch of power and
grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and he effected it.
While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of government, and the
Barons became accustomed, once more, to anarchy and indepen-
dence. The power which Boyd had been at so much pains to
acquire, was of no long continuance, and the fall of his family, ac-
cording to the fate of favourites, was sudden and deftrutive;
but upon its ruins, the family of Hamilton rose, which soon at-
tained the highest rank in the kingdom.

As

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise more Booj I.

turbulent than those of the preceding Kings. And the contending James V.
nobles, encouraged or protected either by the King of France, or
of England, formed themselves into more regular factions, and dif-
regarded more than ever the restraints of order and authority. The
French had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their interest,
raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, a native of
France, and a grandson of James II. But Alexander Lord Home,
the mofi eminent of all the Scottifll peers, who survived the fatal
battle ofFlowden, thwarted all his measures, during the first years
of his administration; and the intrigues of the Qieen Dowager,
sifter of Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no less feeble.
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised his
authority, and regardless either of his threats, or his entreaties, pe-
remptorily refused, two several times, to enter England, to the bor-
ders of which kingdom he had led them. Provoked by there re-
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandoned his troublesome
tfation, and retiring to France, preferred the tranquillity of a pri-
vate life, to an office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat
Douglas Earl of Angus became mailer of the King's person, and.
governed the kingdom in his name. Many efforts were made
to deprive him of his usurped authority. But the numerous
vafrals, and friends of his family adhered to him, because he
divided with them the power and emoluments of his office ;
the people reverenced and loved the name of Douglas; he ex-
ercifed, without the title of regent, a fuller and more absolute
authority than any who had enjoyed that dignity; and the anci-
ent, but dangerous preeminence of the Douglases, seemed to;
be retfored.

TeO

BoOK. I. To these, and to many other causes, omitted or unobserved by

~"~
- us, did the Scottish nobility owe that exorbitant and uncommon

power, of which inltances occur, so frequently, in our history.
Nothing, however, demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,
as the length of its duration. Many years after the declension of
the feudal systems in the other kingdoms of Europe, and when the
arms or policy of Princes had, every where, shaken or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remained, in a great
measure, firm and untouched in Scotland.

The power of THE powers, which the feudal institutions vefled in the nobles,
the feudal
nobles becr.me feon became intolerable to all the princes of Europe, who longed
intolerable to
Princes. to poflefs something more than a nominal and precarious authority.

Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of England,
Edward II. and some other weak Princes, into rash and premature
attempts against the privileges of the Barons, in which they were
disappointed, or periflled. Princes, of greater abilities, were con-
tent to mitigate evils which they could not cure, they fought oc-
cupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars;
and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign expeditions,
which, if they brought no other advantage, secured at least do-
meflic tranquillity. But, time and accidents ripened the feudal go-

The attempts vernments for deftru&ion. Towards the end of the fifteenth cen-
to humble the
nobles success- tury, and beginning of the fixtccnth, all the Princes of Europe at-
ful in France
and in Eng. tacked, as if by concert, the power of their nobles. Men c,fge-
land. nius then undertook with success, what their unikilful predecefiors

had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France the most profound
and the most adventrous genius of that age, began, and in a tingle
reign, almoit complcated the scheme of their destruction. The sure
but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England p:oduced the fame

effect.

asse&t. The means, indeed, employed by these monarchs were BooK I.
very different. The blow, which Lewis Ltruck, was sudden and '
fatal. The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons, which
waste the constitution, but become not mortal till some distant pe-
riod. Nor did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging them to fell their
lands, which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in
the legislature unknown to their predecessors. But while these great But the nobles

continue to

revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot- gather
land was intimately connected, no alteration happened there; the SfOtngth in
King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the com-
mons to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only retain-
ed their ancient privileges and possessions, but daily made new ac-
quifitions.

THIS was not owing to the inattention of our Princes, or tO OurKingsern

their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the ex- xtend the
orbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble roy;" aUltho-

ty.

that order. They did not, however, possess means fufficicnt for ac-
complifling that end. The resources of our monarchs were few,
and the progress which they made inconsiderable. But as the num- Gclcr
her of their followers, and the extent of their jurifdition, were ,'isthi
the two chief circumstances which rendered the nobles formidable; cld.
in order to counterballance the one, and to refrain the other, all
our Kings had recourse to the fame expedients.

I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpolifled man- ,,ncllg
ners, surrounded with vassals bold and licenticus, whom they were di°corda'o'ng

the noblcs.
bound by interest and honour to protet, the causes of difeord

VOL. I. F were

BooK I.' were many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could

C''" seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-

rior or judge, and their impatient spirit would seldom wait the flow
decisions of justice, their quarrels were usually terminated by the
sword. The offended Baron assembled his vassals, and wafted the
lands, or shed the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury, was
mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly *. Hence quar-
rels were transmitted from father to son, and under the name of
deadly feuds, subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated ran-
cour. It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than to ex-
tinguifh these quarrels, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds of
discord among the nobles, that union which would have rendered
the arifiocracy invincible, and which muff at once have annihilated
the prerogative, was effetually prevented. To the fame cause, our
Kings were indebted for the success, with which they sometimes at-
tacked the most powerful chieftains. They employed private re-
venge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming against the

* The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but what is

more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought the prosecution
of an injury offered to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the Salique
laws permitted him publickly to defilt from demanding vengeance; but the fame
laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and want of affection to his family, de-
prived him of the right of fuccefflon. Henaut. Abreg6 Chronol. p. 81. Among
the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular inflitution diftinguifled by the name offJoda
litium; a voluntary afrociation, the objeEt whereof was the pcrfonal security of those
who joined in it, and which the feebleness of government at that time rendered ne-
ceffary. Among other regulations, which are contained in one of those still ex.
tant, the following dcferves notice. " If any aflociate fliall either eat or drink
with a person who has killed any member of the fJdalitiumi unlcfs in the presence
of the King, the Bishop, or the Count, and unless he can prove that he did not
know the pcrfon, let him pay a great Fine." Hicks Difcert. Epitlolar. apud Thefaulr.
Ling. Septcntr. vol. i, p. 21.

3 pertbn

person who had incurred their displeasure, those rival families which BooIe I.
wished his fall, they rewarded their service, by sharing among
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the body of the nobi-
lity. Those, who were now the instruments of their Prince's ven-
geance, became in a short time the objecs of his fear. Having
acquired power and wealth by serving the crown, they, in their
turn, set up for independence: and though there might be a fluc-
tuation of power, and of property; though old families fell, and
new ones rose upon their ruins; the rights of the ariflocracy remain-
ed intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration of justice is one of the most powerful Extend the ju-

rifdiftion of

ties between a King and his subjects, all our monarchs were at the the King's
utmost pains to circumscribe thejurifdiation of the Barons, and to
extend that of the crown. The external forms of subordination,
natural to the feudal system, favoured this attempt. An appeal lay
from the judges and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first inflance, belonged to the
nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the effed of ap-
peals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. The royal ju-
rifdiction was almost confined within the narrow limits of the King's
demesnes, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed much autho-
rity, but possessed next to none. Our Kings were sensible of these
limitations, and bore them with impatience. But it was impossible
to overturn in a moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to itrip
the nobles, at once, of privileges which they had held so long, and
which were wrought almost into the frame of the feudal conflitu-
tion. To accomplifll this, however, was an ob jet of uniform and
anxious attention to all our princes. James I. led the way, here,
as well as in other initances, towards a more regular and perfc'

F 2 police.

BOOK I. police. He made choice, among the estates of parliament, of a

L' " certain number of persons, whom he distinguished by the name

of Lords of Sefion, and appointed them to hold courts for determin-
ing civil causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a time,
in whatever place he pleated to name. Their jurisdiCtion extended
to all matters, which formerly came under the cognizance of the
King's council, and being a committee of parliament, their deci-
sions were final. James II. obtained a law, annexing all regalities,
which should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring the right of
jprifdidtion to be unalienable for the future. James III. imposed
severe penalties upon those judges appointed by the Barons, whose
decisions should be found on a review to be unjust; and by many
other regulations, endeavoured to extend the authority of his own
court *. James IV. on pretence of remedying the inconveniencies
arising from the short terms of the court of Session, appointed
other judges called Lords of dailycouncil. The Se,/ion was an am-
bulatory court, and met seldom; the Daily council, was fixed,
and fat contiantly at Edinburgh; and though not compoied of
members of parliament, the fame powers, which the Lords of
Session enjoyed, were veiled in it. At lass, James V. erected a
new court, that still: subsists, and which he named the College of
fufltice, the judges or Senators of which were called Lords of
Council and' Sefion. This court not only exercised the fame ju-
rifdi&tion which formerly belonged to the Session and Daily Coun-
cil, but new rights were added. Privileges of great importance
were granted to its members, its forms were prescribed, its terms
fixed, and regularity, power and splendor conferred upon it. The
persons conitituted judges in all these different courts, had, in

A&, a6. P. 1469. A&. 94. P. 1493. Aft 99. P. 1487.

7 many

many refpeds, the advantage of those who presided in the courts BooK I.
of the Barons; they were more eminent for their skill in law, their
rules of proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions more
confifdent. Such judicatories became the objets of confidence,
and of veneration. Men willingly submitted their property to their
determination, and their encroachments on the jurifdlitions of the
nobles were popular, and for that reason successful. By device, of
a similar nature the jurifdidion of the nobles in criminal causes was
restrained, and the authority of the court of YJlficiary extended.
The crown, in this particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles,
recovered more ample authority; and the King, whose furifdidion
once resembled that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign *,

came

* The most perfect idea of the feudal system of government may be attained by

attending to the slate of Germany, and to the history of France. In the former,
the feudal institutions fill subsist with great vigour; and though altogether abo-
lifhed in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved, that the
French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more certainty and pre-
cifion, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress,
and revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be considered as a fief, and all
its great Princes as vassals, holding of the Emperor : they pofTcfs all the feudal privi-
leges; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifdiftions within their own territories, fe-
parate and extensive; and the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and ani-
nexed to particular families. At the fame time, the Emperor retains many of the
prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretcnfions are
innumerable, and his power small; his juriifdlidion within his own1 dcmlefies, or he-
reditary countries, is compleat; beyond the bounds of these it is almoflt nothinig.
And so permanent are feudal principles, that although the feudal fyfletn be over-
turned in almost every particular slate in Germany, and although its Princes have
a;l become absolute, the original feudal conflitution of the empire hlill remainls, ;1al
ideas peculiar to that form of government, direct all its operatiolls, and dctclrmlli
the rights of all its Piinccs. Our obfervatiuns, with regand to tile limitil jllTi i
diAiLn of Kings under the feudal governments, arc greatly illufiratcd by whiat

ha ppelCed

BOOK I. came more and more to be confidered as the head of thecommu-

-~
- nity, and the supreme dispenser of jutice to his people. These ac-

quifitions of our Kings, however, though comparatively great, were
in reality inconsiderable; and notwithitanding all their efforts, ma-
ny of the separate jurifditions possessed by the nobles remained
in great vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a distant
and more happy period.

Each of our BUT besides there methods of defending their prerogative,
Kings pursued
some plan of and humbling the ariftrocracy, which may be confidered as com-
noblines, mon to all our princes, we flall find, by taking a review of

their reigns, that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce
to James V. had formed some particular system for depressing the
authority of the nobles, which was the objed both of their jea-
lousy and terror. This conduct of our monarchs, if we reft satis-
sied with the accounts of their historians, must be confidered as
flowing entirely from their resentment againit particular noblemen;
and all their attempts to humble them, must be viewed as the sallies
of private paflion, not as the consequences of any general plan of
policy. But, though some of their adcions may be imputed to

happened in France. The fecblcnefs and dotage of the defccndants of Charle-
maigne encouraged the Peers to usurp an independent jurisdiCtion. Nothing remain-
ed in the hands of the crown; all was seized by them. When Hugh Capet
ascendcd the throne, A. D. 987, he kept pofleflion of his private patrimony the
Comtó of Paris, and all the jurifdiation, which the Kings his successors excrcifed
for some time, was within its territories. There were only four towns in France,
where he could eflablifl Grands Baillis, or royal judges; all the other lands, towns,
and baillages belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French monarchs
had recourse for extending their jurifdition were exa&tly similar to tholf employed
by our Princes. lHnaut's Abreg:, p. 617, &c. DC L'Efprit des Loix, Liv. 30.
ch. 20, &c.

those

those passions, though the different genius of the men, the temper BoOK I.
of the times, and the state of the nation necessarily occasioned great
variety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceffive refinement, we may affirm that their end was uniformly the
fame. And the project of reducing the power of the ariflocracy This proved

by a review of
sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; Sometimes concealed, the events in

sd t i i i i ~~~~their reigns.
or seemingly suspended; was never altogether abandoned their reigns.

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert Robert Bruce.

Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him on
the throne. His gratitude and generosity bestowed on them the
lands of the vanquished. Property has seldom undergone greater
or more sudden revolutions, than those to which it was subjet, at
that time, in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the eflates of
most of the ancient Scottiih Barons, granted them to his English
fubjeas. These were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new malters. Amidst such rapid changes, confusion was una-
voidable; and many possessed their lands by titles extremely defec-
tive. During one of those truces between the two nations, occa-
floned rather by their being weary of war, than desirous of peace,
Robert formed a scheme for checking the growing power and
wealth of the nobles. He summoned them to appear, and to shew
by what rights they held their lands. They assembled accordingly,
and the question being put, they started up, at once, and drew
their swords, "( By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and
with these we will defend them." The King, intimidated by their
boldness, prudently dropt the project. But so deeply did they re-
sent this attack upon their order, that notwithstanding Robert's
popular and fpllendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous conspiracy
against his life.

DAVID

BooK0 I. DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, afterwards a prisoner

Id '
l in England, and involved in continual war with Edward IlI. had

not leisure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.
Robert ir. OUR historians have been more careful to relate the military,

than the civil tranfations of the reign of Robert II. Skirmishes
and inroads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but with
regard to every thing that happened, during several years of tran-
cuillity, they are altogether silent.
Robert lir. THE feeble administration of Robert III. must likewise be passed

over slightly. A Prince, of a mean genius, and of a frail and
sickly conflitution, was no fit person to enter the lifts with active
and martial barons, or to attempt wresting from them any of their
rights.
James I. THE civil tranfaaions in Scotland are 6etter known since the be-

ginning of the reign of James I. and a compleat series of our laws
supplies the defect of our historians. The English made some a-
mends for their injustice in detaining that prince a prisoner, by their
generous care of his education. During his long residence in Eng-
land, he had an opportunity of observing the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many of the imperfections which
still adhered to it, in his own kingdom. He saw there nobles great,
but not independent; a King powerful, though far from absolute;
he saw a regular administration of government; wife laws enaAed;
and a nation flourishing and happy, because all ranks of men were
,ccuftomed to obey them. Full of these ideas, he returned into his
native country, which presented to him a very different scene. The

royal

royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by having BOOK I.
been so long delegated to regents. The ancient patrimony, and re-
venues of the crown, were almost totally alienated. During his
long absence, the name of a King was little known, and less regar-
ded. The licence of many years had rendered the nobles indepen-
dent. Universal anarchy prevailed. The weak were exposed to
the rapine and oppression of the firong. In every corner some bar-
barous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the King,
nor pitied the people *.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open force to correct

such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have
born it. He applied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately after his return, he
gained the confidence of his people, by many wife laws, tending
visibly to re-etfablifh order, tranquility and justice in the kingdom.
But, at the fame time that he endeavoured to secure these bleflings
to his fubjeds, he discovered his intention to recover those posses-
sions, of which the crown had been unjustly bereaved; and for that
purpose obtained an aac by which he was impowered to summon
those, who had obtained crown lands during the three last reigns,
to produce the rights by which they held them t. As this ifatute
threatened the property of the nobles, another which passed in a
subsequent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their power. By

* A cotemporary Monkifl writer dcfcribes there calamities very feelingly, in his

rude Latin. In diebus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, fed quilibet potentiorum junio-
rem oppreflit; et totum regnum suit unum latrocinium; homicidia, depra:dationes,
incendia, ct cetcra maleficia remanferunt impunita; et juflitia relegata extra termi-
nos regni exulavit. Chartular. Morav. apud Innes Essay, vol. i p. 272.

Aft. 9. P. 1474.
VOL. I. G it,

BOOK .. it, the leagues and combinations, which we have already described,,

-* ' and which rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown, were de-

clared unlawful *. Encouraged by this success in the beginning of
his enterprize, James's next ftep was still bolder and more decisive.
During the fitting of parliament, he seized, at once, his cousin
Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons; the Earls of Douglas, Len-
nox, Angus, March, and above twenty other Peers and Barons of
prime rank. To all of them, however, he was immediately recon-
ciled, except to Albany, and his sons and Lennox. These were
tried by their Peers, and condemned; for what crime is now un-
known. Their execution firuck the whole order with terror, and.
their forfeiture added vast possessions to the crown. He seized, like-
wife, the earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon different pre-
texts; and that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The patience
and inacivity of the nobles, while the King was proceeding so rapid-
ly towards aggrandizing the crown, are amazing. The only ob-
ftrudtion he met with was from a flight infurredion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was easily suppressed.
The splendor and pretence of a King, to which the great men had
been long unaccustomed, inspired reverence: James was a Prince of
great abilities, and conducted his operations with much prudence.
He was in friendship with England, and closely allied with the
French King: He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un-
usual security and happiness under his adminiftrationi: And all his
acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the nobles, had been gained
by attacks upon individuals; were obtained by decisions of law; and
being founded on circumstances peculiar to the persons who sus-
sered, might excite murmurs and apprehensions, but afforded no
colourable pretext for a general rebellion. It was not so with the

* A. 30. P. 1424.

next

next attempt which the King made. Encouraged by the facility BOOK I.
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a measure "
that irritated the whole body of the nobility, and which the event
-fiews either to have been entered into with too much precipitancy,
or to have been carried on with too much violence. The father of
George Dunbar Earl of March had taken arms against Robert III.
the King's father; but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands
restored by Robert Duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had exceeded his power, and that it was the prerogative of
the King alone to pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed to
the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to be void, and
depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Many of the great men held
lands by no other right than what they derived from grants of the
two Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, though they had reason
to expec it in consequence of the statute which the King had ob-
tained, occasioned a general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at pre-
sent, the only sufferer, the precedent might be extended, and their
titles to possessions, which they confidered as the rewards of their
valour, might be fubje'ted to the review of courts of law, whose
forms of proceeding, and jurifdiAion, were in a martial age little
known and extremely odious. Terror and discontent ipread fast
upon this discovery of the King's intentions; the common danger
called on the whole order to unite, and to make one bold stand, be-
fore they were stripped successively of their acquisitions, and redu-
ced to a state of poverty and insignificance. The prevalence of there
sentiments among the nobles encouraged a few desperate men, the
friends or followers of those who had been the chief sufferers under
the King's administration, to form a conspiracy againfl his life. The
first uncertain intelligence of this was brought him, while he lay in
his camp before Roxburgh cafile. He durif not confide in nobles,

G 2 to

3oo0K I. to whom he had given so many causes of difguit, but instantly dif-

mniffed them and their vassals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth,
was soon after murdered there, in the most cruel manner. All our
historians mention, with astonishment, this circumstance of the
King's disbanding his army, at a time, when it was necessary for
his preservation. A King, they fay, surrounded with his Barons, is
secure from secret treason, and may defy open rebellion. But those
very Barons were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it is
evident from this review of his administration, that he had greater
reason to apprehend danger, than to expect defence, from their
hands. It was the misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners were too refined for the age in which he lived. Happy had
he reigned in a kingdom more civilized; his love of peace, of jus-
tice, and of elegance, would have rendered his schemes successful;
and instead of perihfing because he had attempted too much, a grate-
ful people would have applauded and seconded his efforts to reform
and to improve them.
James II. CRICHTON, the most able man of those, who had the direction

of affairs during the minority of James II. had been the minister of
James I. and well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobility. He did not relinquilh the design, and he endeavoured to
inspire his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what James had
attempted to effect slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crichton
pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scotsmen, and with the
fierceness peculiar to that age. William the sixth Earl of Douglas
was the first victim to their barbarous policy. That young noble-
man (as we have already observed) contemning the authority of
an infant Prince, almost openly renounced his allegiance, and as-
pired to independence. Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such

an

an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring to justice so powerful BOOK I.
an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an interview in the
castle of Edinburgh, and, notwithitanding these, murdered both
him and his brother. Crichton, however, gainedlittle by this aa
of treachery, which rendered him universally odious. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas was nolefs powerful, and no less formidable
to the crown. By forming the league which we already mentioned
with the Earl of Crawfurd and other Barons, he had united against
his Sovereign almost one half of his kingdom. Buthis credulity led
him into the fame snare, which had been fatal to the former Earl.
Relying on the King's promises, who had now attained to the years
of manhood, and having obtained a safe condua under the great
feal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling castle. James urged him
to dissolve that dangerous confederacy into which he had entered;
the Earl obstinately refused; " If you will not," said the enraged
monarch, drawing his dagger, " this Ihall;" and flabbed him to
the heart. An ation so unworthy of a King filled the nation
with astonishment, and with horror. The Earl's vafihls ran to
arms with the utmost fury, and dragging the safe conduct, which
the King had granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they marched
towards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to besiege the
castle. An accommodation ensued, on what terms is not known.
But the King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power and resentment,.
prevented it from being of long continuance. Both took the
field, at the head of their armies, and met near Abercorn. That
of the Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far superior to the
King's both in number, and in valour; and a single battle must,
in all probability, have decided whether the house of Stewart or of
Douglas was henceforth to posiess the throne of Scotland. But
while his troops impatiently expeAed the signal to engage, the

Earl

BOOK I. Earl ordered them to retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton
'' ~ of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,

convinced of his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or of
his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted him that very night.
This example was followed by many; and the Earl, despised, or
forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged
to depend for his subsistence, on the friendship of the King of Eng-
land. The ruin of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which such an ex-
ample of unsuccessful ambition filled the nobles, secured the King,
for some time, from opposition; and the royal authority remained
uncontrouled and almost absolute. James did not susser this favour-
able interval to pass unimproved; he procured the consent of parlia-
ment to laws more advantageous to the prerogative, and more sub-
verfive of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were ever obtained
by any former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

BY one of there, not only all the vast possessions of the Earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future alie-
nations of crown lands were declared to be void, and the King was
impowered to seize them at pleasure without any process or form
of law, and oblige the possessors to refund whatever they had re-
ceived from them *. A dreadful instrument of oppreffon in the
hands of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the marches to be

granted hereditarily ; refrained, in several instances, the jurifdidion
of that office; and extended the authority of the King's courts +.

* At. 4. P. 1455. + Ibid. Ad. 42.

BY

BY a third, it was enacted that no Regality, orexclufive right BOOK L

of adminiftring juitice within a man's own lands, Should be grant-
ed in time to come, without the consent of parliament *, a condi-
tion, which implied almost an express prohibition. Those nobles
who already poffefled that great privilege, would naturally be folli-
citous to prevent it from becoming common, by being bestowed on.
many. Those, who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of such a flattering distinction; and boths
would concur in rejecting the claims of new pretenders.

BY a fourth at, all new grants of hereditary offices were-prohi-

bited, and those obtained since the death of the last King were re-
voked t.

EACH of these statutes undermined some of the great pillars, onm

which the power of the aristocracy refied. During the remainder
of his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which he had begun,
with the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death occalioned
by the splinter of a cannon which burfl near him at the siege of
Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius nor
courage to perfect it: and Scotland might, in all probability, have
been the first kingdom in Europe, which would have seen the sub-
version of the feudal system.

JAMES III. discovered no less eagerness than his father or grand- James li..

father to humble the nobility; but far inferior to either of them in
abilities and address, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical. Under the
feudal governments, the nobles were not only the King's miniiilers,

* Ibid. AA, 43. ' *t Ad. 44.
z 2 andi

BOOK I. and poffefied of all the great offices of power or of trust; they were,

likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce any but them
approached his person or were entitled to his regard. But James,
who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
liftance, and belfowed every mark of confidence and affection
upon a few mean persons, of professions so dishonourable, as ought
to have rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up with
these, in his caitle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
amused himself with architecture, music, and other arts, which
were then little esteemed. The nobles beheld the power and fa-
vour of there minions, with indignation. Even the sanguinary
measures of his father provoked them less than his neglect. Indi-
viduals alone suffered by the former; by the latter, every man
thought himself injured, because all were contemned. Their
discontent was much heightened by the King's recalling all rights to
crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities and every other concef-
sion, which was detrimental to his prerogative, and which had been
extorted during his minority. Combinations among themselves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the usual preparatives for ci-
vil war, were the effecs of their resentment. Alexander Duke of
Albany, and John Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young
men of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed against James,
who treated them with the fame coldness as he did the other great
men, entered deeply into all their cabals. The King deteced their
designs, before they were ripe for execution, and seizing his two bro-
thers, committed the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The
Earl of Mar having remonstrated with too much boldness againftthe
King's condut, was murdered, if we may believe our historians,
by his command. Albany, apprehensive of the fame fate, made
his escape out of the castle, and fled into France. Concern for the

King's

dignation at his measures, were perhaps the motives, which first BooK I.
induced him to join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to the nobles, the
profpea of the advantages which might be derived from their ge-
neral difaffedtion, added to the resentment which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon inspired Albany
with more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty
with Edward IV. of England, in which he aflhmed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the aflillance which was
promised him towards dethroning his brother, he bound himself, fb
soon as he was put in possession of the kingdom, to swear fealty and
to do homage to the English monarch, to renounce the ancient alli-
ance with France, to contract a new one with England, and to fur-
render some of the strongest cailes, and most valuable counties in
Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke so basely purchased at the
price of his own honour, and the independence of his country,
was punctually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with a
powerful army conducted him towards Scotland. The danger of
a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the afliftance of those
nobles whom he had so long treated with contempt. Some of them
were in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of all his pretensions. Others were impatient for any event, which
would restore their order to its ancient pre-eminence. They took
the field, however, at the head of a powerful army of their fol-
lowers, but with a flronger dilfofition to redrcfs their own grievan-
ces, than to annoy the encemy; and with a fixed resolution of pu-
nifhing those minions, whose insolence they could no longer tolerate.
This resolution they executed, in the camp near Lawder, with a

Abcrcr, Mart. Atch. v. ii. 44 ,
Vo.. I, II rmilitary

Boole I. military dispatch and rigour. Having previously concerted their
'^~-' plan, the Earls of Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost all

the Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly entered the apart-
ment of their Sovereign, seized all his favourites, except one Ram-
fay, whom they could not tear from the King, in whose arms he
took shelter, and without any form of trial, hanged them instantly
over a bridge. Among the molt remarkable of those who had en-
grossed the King's affection, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a tay-
lor, Leonard a fiiith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan a fencing-
master. So despicable a retinue discovers the 'capriciousness of
James's characer, and accounts for the indignation of the nobles,.
when they beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such un-
Worthy objecs.

JAMES had no reason to confide in ta army so little under his

command, and dismissing it, slut himself up in the catle of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to have regained his
brother's favour, by some important services. But their friendflip.
was not of long duration. James abandoned limfelf, once more,
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who had sus-
sered at Lawder, did not deter others, from courting that dangerous
pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been made
to take away his life by poison, fled from court, and retiring to
his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater number of Barons than
attended on the King himself. At the fame time, he renewed his
former confederacy with. Edward; the Earl of Angus openly nego-
ciatcd that infamous intreaty; other Barons were ready to concur
with it; and if the sudden death of Edward had not prevented Al-
bany's receiving any aid from. England, the crown of Scotland

6 would

would, probably have been the reward of this unworthy combina- BooI I.
tion with the enemies of his country. But, instead of any hopes
of reigning in Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward, that
he could not reside there in safety, and flying firit to England, and
then to France, he seems from that time to have taken no part in
the affairs of his native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Ministers multiplied the insults which they offered to
the nobility. A Sanding guard, a thing unknown under the feudal
governments, and inconsistent with the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles, was raised for
the King's defence, and the command of it given to Ramsay, late-
ly created Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who had so narrowly
escaped when his companions were put to death at Lawder. And, as
if this precaution had not been sufficient, a proclamation was iflued
forbidding any person to appear in arms within the precincts of the
court *; which, at a time, when no man of rank left his own house
without a numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in effe&t, de-
barring the nobles from all access to the King. James at the fame
time became fonder of retirement than ever; and funk in indolence,
or superstition, or attentive only to amufemcnts, devolved his whole
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries provoked the most
considerable nobles to take arms, and having perfwaded or obliged
the Duke of Rothfay, the King's eldcll son, a youth of fifteen,
to set himself at their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had difcovcred himself
to be so unworthy. Rouzed by this danger, the King quitted his
retirement, took the field, and cncountrcd them near Bannockburn ;
lbut the valour of the borderers, of whom the army of the male-

'* Frrcrius, -98.
II 2 contents

BOOK I. contents was chiefly composed, soon put his troops to flight, and
--. --'he himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immo-

derate attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole condut; but the character of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to him by our hifto-
rians. His negleA of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken them;
and their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two brothers,
and their unnatural confederacies with England, were sufficient to
have disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to have rendered
a Prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank expressed against

the conduct of the conspirators, together with the terror of the fen-
tence of excommunication which the Pope pronounced agaihft them,
obliged them to use their victory with great moderation and huma-
nity. And being conscious how deteflable the crime of imbruing
their hands in the blood' of their Sovereign appeared, they endea-
voured to regain the good opinion of their country, and to at-
tone for their treatment of the father, by their loyalty and duty to-
jaimes I. wards the son. They placed him instantly on the throne; and the

whole kingdom soon united in acknowledging his autlority.

JAMES IV: was naturally generous and Brave; he felt, in an

high degree, all the pafions which animate a young and noble mind:
He loved'magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity
between 1he king and nobles seems almost to have entirely ceased.
He envied not their splendor, because it contributed to the ornament
of his court; nor did he dread their power, which he confidered as
the security of his kingdom, not as an objct of terror to himtn

seif.

self. This confidence, on his part, met with the proper return of BOOK I.
duty and affection, on theirs; and in his war with England, he '-
experienced how much a King, beloved by his nobles, is able to
perform. Though the ardour of his courage, and the spirit of chi-
valry, rather than the prospect of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his fubjeds for
the King's glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army, as
ever any of his ancestors had led upon English ground. But tho'
James himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimental to the
aristocracy, his reign was diffinguifhed by an event, extremely fatal
to it; and one accidental blow humbled it more than all the pre-
meditated attacks of preceding Kings. In the rash and unfortu-
nate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chose rather to die, than
to desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five
eldest sons of noblemen, and an incredible number of barons fell
with the King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and fenli-
bly, felt this disaster; and if a prince of full age had then ascended
the throne, their consternation and feebleness would have afforded
him advantages, which no former monarch ever possessed.

BuT James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant of a year V.

old; and though the office of regent was conferred on the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power of the King was al-
ready great; though he made many bold attempts to extend the
royal authority; though he put to death Lord Home, and banished
the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in the
kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under his adlniniflration.

* Aber. ii. 5fp.

A ftra-.

BOK I. A i'rangcr to the manners, thle lws, and the language of tlh

^-~- people whom he was called to rule, he afted, on some occasions,

rather like a Viceroy of the French King, than the governor of
Sconland but the nobles aiertcd their own privileges, and conten-
ded for the intere¢c of lheir country, with a oldness, vwhich con-
vinced hi- of thei; i ndpc dence, a.nd

of" tlhe impotence of his own

authority. After fcvc-rl unfucceisful n ruggics, he voluntarily re-
tired to France, and the King, being then in his thirtecnth year,
the nobcls agreed that he fihould afiilme the government, and that
eight pci-rons ilould be appointed to attend him by turns, and to
cl-ife and a.iift him in the administration of public affairs. The
Earl cf Angus, who was ione of that 1number, did not long remain
satisfied with finch divided power. He gained some of his col-
icagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft. When the
term oi his atitndance expired, he till retained authority, to which
all werc ob!liged to fulbmit, becatul none of them was in a condition
to difiute it. The aficdtion of the youn g King was the only thino
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his lower:. But an ative and high-
fpiiited Prince filtnbitted, with great impatience, to the refraint,
in vhlich he was kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be
conlfi;cd as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated with
no rcefncdl-; and to be deprived of all power. lie could not, on
,1oni occasions, conceal his indignation and rcfeintmcnt. Angus fore-
L1w that lie had much to dread fiom thclc, and as he could not
gain the King's hcart, lie resolvcd to make sure of his person.
James was continually surroundcd by the Earl's spics and confi-
dents ; many eyes watched all his motions, and observed cvery ftep
he took. But the King's cagcrncs to obtain liberty eluded all their
vigilance. le clcfapcd from Falkland, and fled to the catlle of
Stirling, the rclidence of the Qlccn his mother, and the only place

of

of strength in the kingdom which was not in the hand of the Dou- BOOK I.
glafes. The nobles, of whom some were influenced by their ha- "
tred to Angus, and oth-ers by their refped for the King, crowded to
Stirling, and his court was soon filled with persons of the greatest
dirfinCion. The Earl, though aftonifled at tils unexpeced revo-
lution, resolved, at first, to make one bold puflr for recovering his
authority, by marching to Stirling at the head of his followers; but
he wanted either courage, or strength to cxecute this resolution. In
a parliament held soon after, he and his adherents were attainted,
and after cfcaping from many dangers, and enduring much misery,
he was at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though extremely

young, the full authority of a King. H-e was inferior to no Prince
of that age in gracefulness of perion, or in vigour of mind. I-s un-
derftanding was good, and his heart warm ; the formecr capable of
.great improvement, and the latter fufccptible of the best impref-
sions. But according to the usual fate of Princes who are called to
the throne in their infancy, his education had been ncglectd. His
private preceptors were more ready to flattcr, than to infnrul him.
It was the intercft of those who governed the kingdom, to prevent
him from knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in order
to divert him froml bufines, gave him an caily tafle for fitch plca-
lurcs, as aftcrwards occupied and cngroiltd him more than be-.
came a King. Accordingly, we diicover in James all the features
of a grcat, but uncultivated spirit. On tlhe one hand, violent pas-
sions, implacable rcfentmcnt, an immloderate defirc of power, and
the utmott rage at difappoilntmicnt. On the other, love to his peo-
plc, zeal for the punillument of private opprclors, conidlencc.in his

fa-

BooK I. favourites, and the most engaging openness and affability of be-

t~.-rj haviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power of the

nobles led him early to imitate his predeceflors, in their attempts to
'humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose was more pro-
found, more systematic, and purifed with greater conitancy and
fteddinefs, than that of any of his ancestors. And the influence of
.the events in his reign upon those of the subsequent period, render
.it necessary to explain his conduct, at greater length, and to enter
into a more minute detail of his actions. He had penetration
enough to discover those defects in the schemes, adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The example of James I.
had taught him, that wife laws operate slowly on a rude people,
and that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by these alone. The effects of the violent measures of James II.
convinced him, that the oppression of one great family, is apt either
to excite the suspicion and resentment of the other nobles, or to en-
,ich with its spoils some new family, which would soon adopt the
fame sentiments, and become equally formidable to the crown.
He saw, from the fatal end of James III. that neglect was still
more intolerable to the nobles than oppression, and that the ministry
of new men and favourites was both diflonourable, and dangerous
to a Prince. At the fame time he felt that the authority of the
crown was not sufficient to counterbalance the power of the arifto-
cracy, and that without some new accefiion of flrength, he could
expect no better success in the struggle than his anceflors. In this
extremity, he applied himself to the clergy, hoping that they would
both relifli his plan, and concur with all their influence, in cna-

7 1liing

blinghiim to put it in execution. Under the feudal government, the BeoK I.
church being reckoned a third estate, had its representatives in par- .'
liament; the number of these was considerable, and they poflefed
:great influence in that aflembly. The superstition of former kings,
and the zeal of an ignorant age, had bestowed upon ecclesiastics, a
great proportion of the national wealth, and the authority they
acquired by the reverence of the people, was superior even to that
which they derived from their riches. This powerful body how-
ever, depended entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithftand-
ing their attention to extend their usurpations, had neglected Scot-
land as a distant and poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exer-
icife powers, which they disputed with more considerable princes.
The Scottish monarchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant
bifhopricks and abbeys *; and James naturally concluded, that men
who expected preferment from his favour, would be willing to me-
rit it, by promoting his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had
not yet recovered the blow which fell on their order at Flowden, and
if we may judge either from their conduct, or from the character
given of them by Sir Ralph Sadler the Englilh envoy in Scotland,
they were men of little genius, of no experience in business, and in-
capable of acting either with unanimity, or with vigour. Many of
the clergy, on the other hand, were diftinguiflhed by their great
abilities, and no less by their ambition. Various caufcs of diguttir
had arisen between them and the nobles, who despised their charac-
ter, and envied their power, or their wealkh. By acting in concert:
with the King, they not only gratified him, but avenged themnfelvcs,
and hoped to aggrandize their own order, by deprefAing those, who
were their sole rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrcnc", James

* Epill. Reg. Scot. i. 197, &c. At. 125. P. 540.
' VOL. I. I xn-

Booc, I. ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the firfl heat of resent-
"-' '-'ment, he had driven the Earl of Angus out of the kingdom; and

sensible that a person so far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles, which would retard, or render ineffec-
tual all his schemes, he solemnly swore, that he would never permit
him to return into Scotland, and notwithstanding the repeated soli-
citations of the King of England, he adhered to his vow with unrelen-
ting obstinacy. He then proceeded to repair the fortifications of
Edinburgh, Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his magazines with
arms and ammunition. Having taken these precautions by way of
defence, he began to treat the nobility with the utmost coldness and
reserve. Those offices, which they were apt, from long possession, to
confider as appropriated to their order, were now bestowed on ec-
clefiaflics, who alone poffeifed the King's ear, and together with a
few gentlemen of inferior rank, to whom he had communicated his
schemes, were entrusted with the management of all public affairs.
These ministers were chosen with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun.,
who soon became the most eminent among them, was a man of fu-
perior genius. They served the King with fidelity, they carried on
his measures with vigour, with reputation, and with success. James
no longer concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered no op-
portunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences were ag-
gravated into real crimes, and punished with fcverity. Every accu-
fation against persons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal
to those who were accused: the banilshing Hepburn Earl of Both-
well, for reasons extremely frivolous, the beheading the Master of
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt, and the condemning
Lady Glamis, sifter of the Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime
of witchcraft, of which even that credulous age believed her inno-

3 celt,

cent, are monuments both of the King's hatred of the nobility, of BOOK I.
the severity of his government, and of the stretches he made to-
wards absolute power. By there acts of authority, he tried the fpi-
rit of the nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their
patience increased his contempt for them, and added to the ardour
and boldness with which he pursued his plan. Meanwhile they
observed the tendency of his schemes with concern, and with resent-
ment; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers, and
the want of a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert any mea-
fures for their defence, and impossible to aCt with becoming vigour.
James and his counsellors, by a false flep which they took, presented
to them, at length, an advantage which they did not fail to improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIII.

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the revenues of the re-
gular clergy. His system of Reformation satisfied none of his sub-
jects. Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far, others
murmured because he proceeded no farther; and by his imperious
temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots for Popery, and
the converts to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formidable
to both. Henry was afraid that this general dilThtisfaLion of his
people might encourage his enemies on the continent to invade his
kingdom. IHe knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted the
friendflip of the King of Scots, and endeavoured to engage him in
an alliance against England. lIe resolvcd therefore to disappoint
the effeCts of their negociations by entering into a clofir union with
his nephew, and for that purpole sent Amibafladors into Scotland, to
propofca personal interview with him at York. It was plainly James's
interefl to accept this invitation; the afliilance of to powerful anl
ally, the high honours which were promised him, and the liberal

I 2 fuib-

B.OOK I. subsidies he might have obtained, would have added no little

'- - dignity to his domeflic government, and must have greatly fa-

cilitated the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand,
a war with England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he re-
jected Henry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with all his
views. This would bring him to depend on his barons; an army
could not be raised without their assistance: to call. nobles incensed
against their Prince into the field, was to unite his enemies, to make
them sensible of their own strength, and to. afford them an oppor-
tunity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ignorant
that all these consequences might follow a breach with England,
listened at first to Henry's-propofal, and contented to the interview
at York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which must have been.
eftabliihed on the ruins of the church. Henry had taken great pains
to infuse into his nephew his own sentiments concerning religion,
and had frequently follicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the
usurped dominion of the Pope, which was no less diihonourable to
Princes, than grievous to their.fubjeCts. The clergy had hitherto,
with great addrets, diverted the King from regarding these follici-.
tations. But in an amicable conference, Henry expected, and they
feared that James would yield to his entreaties, or be convinced by
his arguments. They knew that the revenues of the church were
an alluring ob jea to a Prince, who wanted money, annd who loved
it; that the pride and ambition of ecclesiastics raised the indignation
of the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence to the people;
that the Proteflantopinions were spreading fast throughout the nation;
and that an universal defetion from the established church, would
be the consequence of giving the fmnalleft degree of encouragement
to these principles. For these reasons, they employed all their cre-
dit with the: King, and had recourse to every artifice and infinuatioi,

xa,

in order to divert him from ajourney, which must have been so fatal BOOK I..
to their interest They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by
magnifying the danger to which he would expose his person, by
venturing so far into England, without any security but the word
of a Prince, who having violated every thing venerable and sacred
in religion, was no longer to be trusted; and by way of compenfa-
tion for the fums which he might have received from Henry, they
offered an annual donative of 50,000 crowns; they promised to
contribute liberally towards carrying on a war with England, and
flattered him with the profpea of immense riches, arising from
the forfeiture of persons, who were to be tried and condemned as
heretics.. Influenced by these considerations, James broke his agree-
ment with Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had alrea-
dy come to York; and that haughty and impatient Monarch resent-
ed the affront, by declaring war against Scotland. His army was
soon ready to invade the kingdom. James was obliged to have re-
course to the nobles, for the defence of his dominions. At his com-
mand, they assembled their followers; but with the fame difpofiti-
ons, which had animated their ancestors in the reign of James IIIl
and with a full resolution of imitating their example, by punishing
those to whom they. imputed the grievances, of which they had rea,
son to complain; and if the King's Ministers had not been men of
abilities superior to those of James III. and of considerable interefl
even with their enemies, who could not agree among themselves
what victims to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as re-
markable as that of Lawder, for the daring encroachments of the
nobility on the prerogative of the Prince. But though his minis-
ters were saved by this accident, the nobles had. soon another oppor-
tunity of difcovcring to the King, their diffatisfadtion with his go-
vernmcnt, and their.contempt of his authority. Scarcity of provi-

sions,..

BOOK I. sions, and the rigour of the season having obliged the Englifl army

-' ~which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined that he

could attack them, with great advantage, in their retreat; but
the principal barons, with an obstinacy and disdain, which greatly
aggravated their disobedience, refused to advance a ftep beyond the
limits of their own country. Provoked by this insult to himself, and
suspicious of a new conspiracy againfl his ministers, the King instant-
ly disbanded an army, which paid so little regard to his orders, and
returned abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Prince could not brook such a

mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rafl, and his
despair upon a disappointment was excessive. He felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead of yield-
ing him the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had begun with
such circumflances, as encouraged the insolence of his subjects, and
exposed him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain and
ineffectual all his projecs to humble the nobles had been, and
that, though in times of peace a Prince may endeavour to depress
them, they will rife, during war, to their former importance and
dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation, filled hisbofom by
turns. The violence of these paflions altered his temper, and per-
haps, impaired his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and retired.
He seemed, through the day, to be swallowed up in profound
meditation, and through the night, he was dilturbed with those
visionary terrors, which make impression upon a weak underfiand-
ing only, or a disordered fancy. In order to revive the King's
spirits, an inroad on the western borders was concerted by his
ministers, who prevailed upon the Barons in the neighbouring
provinces, to raise as many troops as were thought necessary,

and

and to enter the enemy's country. But nothing could remove BOOK I.
the King's aversion to his nobility, or diminish his jealousy of ;~
their power. He would not even entrust them with the com-
mand of the forces which they had aflembled; that was reserved
for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take
possession of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five hundred
English, who happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and contempt of their
General produced an effect, to which there is no parallel in hifto-
ry. They overcame the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far inferior, without
firiking a tingle blow. No man was desirous of vitory, which.
would have been acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the English had the
choice of what prisoners they pleated to take; and almost every
person of diftintion, who was engaged in the expedition, remained.
in their hands. This astonishing event was a new proof to the
King of the general difaffetion of the nobility, and a new disco-
very of his own weakness, and want of authority. Incapable of
bearing there repeated insults, he found himself unable to revenge
them. The deepest melancholy and despair fuccecded to the fu-
rious transports of rage, which the firit account of the rout of his
army occasioned. All the violent pafions, which are the enemies.
of life, preyed upon his mind, and wafted and contimed a youth-
ful and vigorous conltitution. Some authors of that age im-
pute his untimely death to poison; but the difeales of the mind,
when they rife to an height, arc often mortal; and the known.
cffects of difappuintment, anger, and rcfentment upon a sanguine
and impetuous temper, fufllicicntly account for his unhappy fate.

"' Hi

BOOK I. -' His death (fays Drummond) proveth his mind to have been
'--"- raised to an high itrain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but

could not digest a disaster." Had James survived this misfortune
one of two things must have happened: either the violence of
his temper would have engaged him openly to attack the no-
bles, who would have found in Henry a willing and powerful pro-
tector, and have derived the fame aliftance from him, which the
malecontents, in the succeeding reign, did from his daughter Eliza-
beth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been the
certain consequence. Or, perhaps, neceflity might have obliged
him to accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled to his nobility,
In that event, the church would have fallen a sacrifice to their
union, a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have been efta-
blifhed by law, a great part of the temporalities of the church would
have been seized, and the friendship of the King and Barons would
have been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SucH were the efforts of our Kings, towards reducing the ex-

orbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended with fuc-
cess, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they were not
conduAed with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have com-
bined against the Crown. Accidental events concurred with politi-
cal causes, in rendering the best concerted measures abortive. The
assassination of one King, the sudden death of another, and the fa-
tal despair of a third, contributed no less than its own natural
strength, to prcferve the aristocracy from ruin.

AMIDST these firuggles, the influence which our Kings possessed

in their parliaments, is a circumflance seemingly incxplicable, and
which merits particular attention. As these assemblies were com-

posed

posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to imagine, must have BOOK I.
dicated all their decisions; but, instead of this, every King foundThe extraor-
them obsequious to his will, and obtained such laws, as he eiteem- ncerof the
ed neceflary for extending his authority. All things were conduct- incpttriameng
ed there with dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of our hifto-
rians, do we find an inflance of any opposition formed againit the
court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying through
the measures which were agreeable to the King. In order to ac-
count for this singular fads, it is necessary to enquire into the origin
and conititution of Parliament.

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its opera- The reasons

tions, produced the fame effecs in small as in great Societies; and
the territory of a Baron was, in miniature, the model of a king-
dom. He possessed the right of jurifdidion, but those, who de-
pended on him, being freemen, and not slaves, could be tried by
their Peers only; and, therefore, his vassals were bound to attend
his courts, and to assist both in passing and executing his sentences.
When assembled, on these occasions, they eftablilhed, by mutual
content, such regulations, as tended to the welfare of their small
focicty; and often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Supe-
rior, as his neceflities required. Change now a tingle name: in
place of Baron, fubititute King, and we behold a Parliament in
its firif rudiments, and observe the firit exertions of those powers,
which its members now poflefs as Judges, as Legislators, and as dif-
penfers of the public revenues. Suitable to this idea, are the
appellations of the King's Court *, and of the King's Great
Council, by which, Parliaments were anciently diftinguifled; and
suitable to this, likewise, were the conflituent members of which

* Du Cange, Voc. Curia.
VOL. I. K it

BOOK I. it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held of

-. -- the King in chief were bound, by the condition of their tenure, to

attend and to affiif in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a privilege,
but a service. It was exated likewise of Bishops, Abbots, and the
greater ecclesiastics, who holding vast possessions of the Crown,
were deemed subjea to the fame burden. Parliaments did not con-
tinue long in this fiate. Cities gradually acquired wealth, aconfi-
derable flare of the public taxes were levied on them, the inhabi-
tants grew into estimation, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign,
a place in Parliament was the consequence of their liberty, and of
their importance. But as it would have been absurd to confer such a
privilege, or to impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough was permitted to chute one or two of its citizens to ap-
pear in the name of the corporation; and the idea of reprefenta-
tion was first introduced in this manner. An innovation, flill more
important, naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful; but as it is
impossible to render property fixed and permanent, many of their
possessions came, gradually, and by various methods of alienation,
to be split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence arose the
diftintion between the Greater and the Le.ser Barons. The for-
mer were those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the lat-
ter were the new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both were
bound, however, to perform all feudal services, and of consequence,
to give attendance in Parliament. To the lesser Barons, who formed
no inconsiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance. Barons
Sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs renounced their right of
electing, charters were obtained, containing an exemption from at-
tendance; and the anxiety, with which our ancestors endeavoured
to get free from the obligation of fitting in Parliament is surpassed

I by

by that only, with which their posterity solicit to be admitted there. BOOK I.
In order to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to secure to
the King a sufficient number of members in his great council, and
to save his vassals from an unnecessary burden, an easy expedient
was found out. The obligation to personal attendance was conti-
nued upon the Greater Barons, from which the Lesser Barons were
exempted, on condition of their elecing, in each county, a certain
number of Representatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became compleat in all its members, and was composed of
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the Shires, and of
Burgesses. As many causes contributed to bring government earlier
to perfeaion in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour of the
feudal institutions abated sooner; and its defecs were supplied with
greater facility in the one kingdom than in the other; England
led the way in all these changes, and Burgesses, and Knights of
the ihire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation, before they
were heard of in ours. Burgesses were first admitted into the Scot-
tifh Parliaments by Robert Bruce *; and in the preamble to the A. D. ,,6.
laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the constituent members
of that assembly. The lesser Barons were indebted to James I. for a 427
statute exempting them from personal attendance, and permitting
them to elect representatives; the exemption was eagerly laid hold
on, but the privilege was so little valued, that, except one or two
inftanccs, it lay neglected during I60 years; and James VI. first
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to Parliament t.

A SCOTTIsH Parliament, then, consisted ancientlyofGreat Ba-

rons, of Ecclesiastics, and a few representatives of burroughs. Nor

* Abercromby, i. 635.
'tj Effayson Brit. Antiq. EfI. II. Dalrymp. Hilt. of Feud. Prop ch. 8.

K 2 were

BOOK I. were these divided, as in England, into two houses, but composed

C- " one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided *. And, in

rude ages, when the science of government was extremely imperfect,
among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace, ftran-
gers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and despising them,
Parliaments were not held in the fame estimation as at present; nor
did haughty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared, with
such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments were often hastily
assembled, and it was, probably, in the King's power, by the man-
ner in which he issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averse from his measures. At a time when: deeds of
violence were common, and the restraints of law and decency were
little regarded, no man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The great Barons, or Lords of Parliament,
were extremely few; even so late as the beginning of the reign of
James VI. t- they amounted only to fifty three. The Ecclesiastics
equalled them in number, and being devoted implicitly to the Crown,
for reasons which have been already explained, rendered all hopes
of victory in any firuggle desperate. Nor were the nobles them-

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have met in separate houses;

and James I. who was fond of imitating the Englilh in all their customs, had pro.
bably an intention of introducing some considerable diftintion between the Greater
and Lesser Barons in Scotland; at least he determined that their consultations should
not be carried on under the dircAion of the fame President; for by his law, A. D.
1327. it is provided, " that out of the Commiifloners of all the lhires shall be cho-
fen a wife and expert man, called the Common Speaker of the Parliament, who
shall propose all and sundry needs and causes pertaining to the Commons in the
Parliament or general counciL" No such Speaker, it would seem, was ever cho.
fen; and by a fabfequent law the Chancellor was declared perpetual President of
Parliament.

t And. Coll. v. i. pref. 40.
2 selves

selves so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent arts of parlia- BOOK I.
ment favourable to the royal prerogative; conscious of their own
strength, and of the King's inability to carry these ads into execu-
tion without their concurrence, they trusted either to elude or to
contemn them; and the flatute revoking the King's property, and
annexing alienated jurifdidions to the crown, repeated in every
reign, and violated and despised as often, is a flanding proof of the
impotence of laws, when opposed to power. So many concurring
causes are sufficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which
our Kings acquired in Parliament. But without having recourse
to any of these, a single circumfiance, peculiar to the constitution
of the Scottish Parliament, the mentioning of which we have hi-.
therto avoided, will abundantly explain this fact, seemingly so re-
pugnant to all our reasonings concerning the weakness of the King,
and the power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the constitution of

our Parliaments, we find a committee, distinguished by the name
of Lords of Articles. It was their business to prepare, and to di-
gest all matters which were to be laid before the Parliament;
every motion for a new law was first made there, and approved or
rejeded by them at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they rejeded could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extraordi-
nary powers veiled in it, to the military genius of the ancient nobles;
too impatient to submit to the drudgery of civil business, too impe-
tuous to observe the forms, or to enter into the details neccffary in
conducting it, they were glad to lay that burden upon a finall
number, while they themfelveshad no other labour than limply
togive, or to refuse their fandion to the bills, which were pre-
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only directed

the

BOOK I. the whole proceedings of Parliament, but possessed a negative be-
L--" -'so re debate. That committee was chosen and constituted in such

a manner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's hands.
It is extremely probable, that the King once had the sole right of
nominating the Lords of Articles *. They came afterwards to be
eleced by the Parliament, and consisted of an equal number out of
each estate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and eight Spiri-
tual Lords, of eight representatives of burroughs, and of the eight
great officers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics,
together with the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce possible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgesses as would unite in opposition to his
measures. Capable either of influencing their election, or of gain-
ing them when eleted, the King commonly found the Lords of Ar-

* IT appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was appointed to be held

March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of Articles were chosen and met on the 7th,
five days before the assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly elected
To long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the Prince
alone polfeffed the right of electing them. There are two different accounts of the
manner of their election at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the Arch-
bilhop of Glasgow, " We, accompanied with our nobility fur the time, past to
"the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament on the 7th day of
" this inflant, and elected the Lords Articulars." If we explain there words, accor-
ding to flrict Grammar, we must conclude that the Queen herself elected them.
It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then pre-
sent with her, viz. her privy counfdllors, and others, elected the Lords of Articles.
Keith's -lilt. of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who ex-
prefly affirms that the Queen herfclf eleCted them. Kcith's Append. 126. Whether
we embrace the one or the other of there opinions, is of no consequence. If the
privy counfcllors and nobles attending the court had a right to elet the Lords of
Articles, it was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had had the
Cole nomination of them.

tides

tides no less obsequious to his will, than his own privy council, and BOOK I.
by means of his authority with them, he could put a negative -
upon his Parliament before debate, as well as after it; and what may
seem altogether incredible, the most limited Prince in Europe ac-
tually possessed, in one instance, a prerogative which the most ab-
solute could never attain *.

To this account of the internal constitution of Scotland, it wills a'e of Eu-

rope at the he-
not be improper to add a view of the political IRate of Europe atgiinning of the

that 16h century.

* HAVING deduced the hiflory of the committee of Lords of Articles, as low as

the fubjeEt of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some
of my readers, to know the subsequent variations in this singular inflitution, and the
political use which our Kings made of these. When Parliaments.became more nu-
merous, and more considerable by the admiflion of the representatives of the Lesser
Barons, the preserving their influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise,
an objet of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence, that the Lords
of Articles could not find leisure to confider the great multitude of affairs laid be-
fore them, obtained an aft, appointing four persons to be named out of each efiate,
who flould meet twenty days before the commencement of Parliament t, to receive
all supplications, &c. and rejecting what they thought frivolous, should engross in
a book what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords of Articles. No pro-
vision is made in the A& for the choice of this select body, and the King would,
of course, have claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I. was beginning
to introduce these innovations, which gave so much offence to the nation, he dread-
ed the opposition of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that, an artifice was
made use of to secure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The Temporal
Peers wcre appointed to chufe eight Bilhops, and the Btlops eight Peers, there
fxtccn met together, and cleced eight Knights of the Ihire, and eight Bur-
geffes, and to these the crown officers were added as usual. If we can only ftip-
pose eight persons of so numerous a body, as the peers of Scotland were become
by that time, attached to the court, these, it is obvious, would be the men whom
the Biflops would chufe, and of confcquence, the whole Lords of Articles were

f ACt. 222. P. 1594.

the

BoOK I. that period, where the following hiftorycommences. A thorough

'" "- knowledge of that general system, of which every kingdom in Eu-

rope forms a part, is not less requisite towards understanding the
history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend domestic
occurrences and revolutions, but without the former, foreign tranf-
acions must be altogether mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark palsages in our history may be placed in a
clear light; and where the bulk of historians have seen only the es-
fe&, we may be able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in France and its de-

clenfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political slate of Europe. Kingdoms which were
inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles, ac-
quired firmness and strength, by being united into a regular mo-
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and im-
portance. They meditated fchemesof conquest, and engaged in
wars at a distance. Numerous armies were railed, and great taxes
imposed for their fubfiftience. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in constant pay; that service grew to be honourable; and ca-
valry, in which the strength of European armies had hitherto con-

the tools and creatures of the King. This pra&ice, so inconsistent with liberty, was
nbolifhed during the civil war; and the statute of James VI. was repealed. After
the Restoration, Parliaments became more servile than ever. What was only a tern
porary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then, converted into a handing law.
" For my part, fays the author from whom I have borrowed many of these parti-
' culars, I (hould have thought it less criminal in our Restoration Parliamcnt, to have

p openly befowed upon the King a negative before debate, than, in fnch an un-

, derhand artificial rmanner, to betray their conflituents, and the nation." Essays
on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil
10 Aug. 1560, printed in the Appendix, that this Parliament had some appearance
of ancient precedent to jutify their unworthy condult.

sifted,

filed, though proper enough for the short and voluntary excur- BOOK I.
sions of barons who served at their own expence, were found to
be unfit either for making, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany first appeared to make a trial of their new strength.
The division of that country into so many small Rates, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms, invited their
more martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accustomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrels
by innocent and bloodless victories, were aftoniihed at the fight of
real war; and as they could not resist the torrent, they suffered it
to take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want of strength; and necessity and felf-prefervation led
that ingenious people to the great secret of modern politics, by
teaching them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this happy device,
the liberty of Italy was long preserved. The fcalcs were poised by
very skillful hands; the smallest variations were attended to, and
no Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be dan-
gerous.

A SYSTEM of conduc, pursued with so much success in Italy,

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it so ne-
ccflary, that it soon became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every fetp any Prince took was observed by al] his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable spies, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, residcd almost con;lantly at every

VOL. I. L dif-

Booi I. different court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-

----'gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented with more

ease. Confederacies were formed to humble any power which
rose above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no
longer the only causes of hostility, it became common to take arms
out of policy; and war, both in its commencement, and in its
operations, was more an exercise of the judgement, than of the
pafiions of men. Almost every war in Europe became general,
and the most inconsiderable flates acquired importance, because they
could add weight to either scale.

FRANCISI. who mounted the throne of France in the year 1515,

and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial crown in the year 15I9,
divided between them the strength and affections of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to personal jealousy,
or to the caprice of private passion, but was founded so much in na-
ture and true policy, that it subsisted between their posterity for fe-
veral ages; and, notwithstanding their present accidental and un-
natural union, mufl again revive. Charles succeeded to all the domi-
nions of the house of Austria. No family had ever gained so much
by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind the
Austrian Princes rose, in a flhort time, from obscure Counts of Hapf-
bourg, to be Archdukes of Austria and Kings of Bohemia, and
were in pofleffion of the imperial dignity by a fort of hereditary
right. Besides these territories in Germany, Charles was heir
to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which belonged to
the House of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of Europe; and he
drew from them, on many occasions, those immcnfe fums, which
no people without trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain:

6 furnished

furnihed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whole discipline he BooK I.
was indebted for all his conquests. And at the fame time, by the
discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth was opened to him,
which all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust. These
'advantages rendered Charles the firit Prince in Europe; but he
wished to be more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His
genius was of that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up, without obefrvation, to an unexpected height
and vigour. He poffefted, in an eminent degree, the charateriftic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom he was allied.
In forming his schemes, he discovered all the subtlety and pene-
tration of Ferdinand his grandfather; he pursued them with that
obstinate and inflexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Austrian blood; and in executing them, lie could employ
the magnanimity and boldness of his Burgundian ancestors. His
abilities were equal to his power, and neither of them would have
been inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity to man-
kind, and in order to preserve them from the worst of all evils,
Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis I. to defend the liberty of
Europe. His dominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His fubjeaEs were numerous, active and warlike,
lovers of glory, and lovers of their King. To Charles power was
the only object of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and elegance with
his ambition, and though he neglected tome advantages, which a
more phlegmatic or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
adive and intrepid courage supplied all his defects, and checked or
defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of there mighty
rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one tide, the Italians saw

L 2 the

BOOK I. the danger which threatened Christendom, and in order to avert

-v "it, had recourse to the expedient, which they had often employed

with success. They endeavoured to divide the power of the two
contending Monarchs into equal scales, and by the union of feve-
ral fmiall states, to counterpoise him, whose power became too great.
But, what they concerted with much wisdom, they were able to
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences againfc the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the balance

with less delicacy, but with a stronger hand. He was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in power; and the advantageous
situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquility, his immense
wealth, and absolute authority, rendered him the natural guardian
of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him with
emulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the ballance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining entirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practice; he was go-
verned by caprice more than by principle; and the passions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the King. Vanity and
resentment were the great springs of all his undertakings, and his
neighbours easily found the way, by touching these, to force him
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. His reign was a per-
petual series of blunders in politics, and while he esteemed himself
the wisest prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to those% who
found it necessary, and could fubiit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto waft-

ed her strength in the quarrels between France and England,
emerged from her obscurity, took her flation in the system, and

2. began

began to have some influence upon the fate of distant nations. Her Booi I.
assistance was, frequently, of consequence to the contending parties, '
and the balance was often so nicely adjusted, that it was in her pow-
er to make it lean to either fide. The part assigned her, at this junc-
ture, was to divert Henry from carrying his arms into the continent.
That Prince, having routed the French at Guinegat, and invested
Terouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging
James IV. in that unhappy expedition which ended with his life.
For the fame reason, Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Al- .
bany, to ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in the
interest of England, and would willingly have perfwaded the Scots to
revenge the death of their King, and to enter into a new war with
that kingdom. Henry and Francis having united not long after
against the Emperor, it was the interest of both Kings, that the
Scots should continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the effect
of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and to embar-
rafs Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For this end, he made
great advances to James V. flattering the vanity of the young Mo-
narch, by eleding him a Knight of the Golden Fleece, and by
offering him a match in the imperial family; while, in return for
these empty honours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war against England. But James, who
had much to lose, and who could gain little by embracing the Em-
peror's proposals, rejected them with decency, and keeping firm to
his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to act upon the continent
with his whole ftrcngthl

1HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating the example of

his anccftors with regard to Scotland. He held its power in such ex-
treme contempt, that lie was at no pains to gain its fricnidfnip; but

on

BOOK I. on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving the an-

L- tiquated pretensions of the crown of England to the sovereignty

over Scotland. But his own. experience, and the example of his
enemies, gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was impof-
fible to defend an open and extensive frontier, against the incur-
:sions of an aaive and martial people. During any war on the con-
,tinent this obliged him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necefiary to maintain a kind of army of observation in the
north of England; and after all precautions, the Scottish borderers,
.who were superior to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and Spread terror and desolation over
many counties. He fell, at last, upon the true secret of policy,
with respect to Scotland, which his predecessors had too little pene-
tration to discover, or too much pride to employ. The situation
of the country, and the bravery of the people, made the conquest
of Scotland impoflible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faction, rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to govern it. He
abandoned, therefore, the former design, and resolved to employ
the utmofl address in executing the latter. It had not yet become
honourable for one Prince to receive pay from another under the
more decent name of a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame ar-
guments have been good in courts, and of weight with ministers,
·facious leaders, and favourites. What were the arguments, by
which Henry brought over so many to his interest during the mino-
rity of James V. we know by the original warrants still extant *,
for remitting considerable fums into Scotland. By a proper diftri-
bution of these, many persons of note were gained to his party,
.and a faction which held secret correspondence with England,
and received all its directions from thence, appears hencefor-

* Burn. Hist. Ref. v. i. p. 7.

ward

ward in all our domestic contests. In the sequel of the history, BOOK I.
we shall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland. --, '
His successors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The
affairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their interelts
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention almost equal-
ly between them, and the authority, which she inherited in the
one, was not greater than that, which ihe acquired in the other..

T HE

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK II.

A R Y Queen of Scots was born a few days before the,,, I
death of her Father James V. The situation in which he 'y

left the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men, with the profpe& of a DBirthofM,4
turbulent and disastrous reign. A war against England had been tad klatg o
undertaken without necessity, and carried on without success. Ma-
ny persons of the first rank had fallen into the hands of the English,
in the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were still pri-
foners at London. Among the rel of the nobles there was little
union, either in their views, or in their affedions; and the religious
disputes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing eve-
ry day more violent, added to the rage of those factions which arc
natural to a form of government nearly ariftocratical.

VOL. I. M TIE

BOOK II. THE government of a Queen was unknown in Scotland, and did

not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial people. The
government of an infant Queen was fill more destitute of real au-
thority; and the profpe& of a long and feeble minority invited to
faction by the hope of impunity. James had not even provided
the confmon remedy against the disorders of a minority, by com-
mitting to proper persons the care of his daughter's education, and
the administration of affairs in her name. Though he saw the
clouds gathering, and foretold that they would quickly burfl into a
florm, he was so little able to disperse them, or to defend his
daughter and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that, in
mere despair, he abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune,
and left open to every pretender, the office of Regent, which he
could not fix to his own fatisfation.

Pretensions of CARDINAL Beatoun, whohad for many yearsbeen confidered as
Cardinal Bea. prime miniser, was the first who claimed that high dignity ; and
toun to the re px -lS
gency. in support of his pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he

himself had forged in the name of the late King; and without any
other right, instantly assumed the title of Regent. He hoped by
the affiltance of the clergy, the countenance of France, the con-
nivance of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the whole Po-
pilh faction, to hold by force, what he had seized on by fraud.
But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the
nation. Those among the nobles who wished for a Reformation
in religion dreaded his severity, and others confidered the eleva-
tion of a Churchman to the highest office in the kingdom as a de-
pression of themselves. At their infligation, James Hamilton Earl

* Sadler' Let. 161.

of

of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed himself from his BOOK II.
inaaivity, and was prevailed on to aspire to that Rfation, to which
proximity of blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who Earl of Arran

chosen Re-

were assembled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on him gent.
the office of regent; and the public voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and charac- Charaaer of

Beatoun.

ter, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal
was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence grew upon him from
continual success. His high station in the church placed him in
the way of great employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
eft of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be above his merit.
As his own eminence was founded upon the power of the church
of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that superstition, and for
the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the Reformers.
Political motives alone determined him to support the one, or to op-
pose the other. His early application to public buiinefs kept him
unacquainted with the learning and controversies of the age; he gave
judgment, however, upon all the points in dispute, with a precipi-
tancy, violence, and rigour, which cotcmporary hitforians mention
with indignation.

THE charater of the Earl of Arran was, in almost every thing, Of Arran.

the reverse of Beatoun's. He was neither infeCted with ambition,
nor inclined to cruelty: The love of cafe extinguiflced the former,
the softness of his temper preserved him from the latter. Timidity
and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one occasioned
by his natural constitution, and the other arising from a conscious-

M ncts

BOOK II. ness that his abilities were not equal to his station. With these. ds.-

positions he might have enjoyed and adorned private life;. but his
public condu.ct was without courage, or dignity, or consistence,
The perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by consequence, the
perpetual tool of those, who found their advantage in praftifing
upon them. But as no other person could be set in opposition to the
Cardinal, with any probability of success, the nation declared in his
favour with so general a consent, that the artifices of his rival could
not withstand its united strength,

Henrymes o THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poieffion of his new dig-
with regard to ity, when a negociation was opened with England, which gave

birth to events of the most fatal consequence: to. himself, and to
the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was no longer
afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs againi France;
and immediately conceived hopes of rendering this security perpe-
tual by the marriage of Edward his only son with the young Queen
of Scots. He communicated his intention to. the prisoners taken
at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it, by the promise of
liberty, as the reward of the success. In the mean time, he
permitted them to return into Scotland, that by their presence in
the Parliament which the regent had called, they might be the
better able to perfwade their countrymen to fall in with his propo-
fals. A cause, eatrufted to. such able and zealous advocates, could
not well miss of coming to an happy issue All those who feared
the Cardinal, or who desired a change. in religion, were fond of
an alliance, which afforded protetion to the docrine which they
had embraced, as well as to their own persons, against the rage of
that powerful and haughty Prelate.

BU-T

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of im- BOOK II.

proving this favourable conjuncture. Address and delicacy in ma- m conduaed
naging the fears, and follies, and interefis of men, were arts with by himself.
which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had formed
upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he had propo-
fed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise, or to conceal
them. Instead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would soon have enabled him to recover,
he, at once alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by demanding
that the Queen's person ihould be immediately committed to his
custody, and that the government of the kingdom ihould be put in
his hands during her minority.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions

Odious to the
to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were reje&ed, with Scots, though

in pa t accept.

indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with Eng- ed by them..
land at the price of their own liberty. The parliament of Scot-
land, however, influenced by the nobles who returned from Eng-March ,.
land, desirous of peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the '543-
Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from any oppo-
fition to which he might have given rife; consented to a treaty of
marriage and of union, but upon somewhat a more equal foot-
ing. And after some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by which his.
ambassad'or endeavoured to carry off the young Queen and Cardinal
Beatoun into England, Henry was obliged to give up lis own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented that the
Queen should continue to reside in Scotland, and himself remain
excluded from any share in the government of the kingdom. On
the other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign into
England as soon as (le attained the full age of ten years, and in-

ftantly

BooK II. flantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to be kept as hosta-

--- ~ges by Henry till the Queen's arrival at his court.
Favoured by THE treaty was fiill so manifestly of advantage to England, that

the Regent loft much of the public confidence by consenting to it.
The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate
Opposed by and improve this to the utmost. He complained loudly, that the

Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies,
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the
extintion of true catholic religion, under the tyranny of an excom-
municated heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient
kingdom consenting to its own slavery, descending into the igno-
minious fiation of a dependent province; and, in one hour, the
weakness or treachery of a tingle man Surrendering every thing, for
which the Scottish nation had itruggled and fought during so many
ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal were not without effect.
They were addressed to prejudices and paflions which are deeply
rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient ene-
mies of their country, the fame jealousy of national honour, and
pride of independence, which at the beginning of the present cen-
tury, went near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at that time,
induce the whole nation to declare against the alliance which had
been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years of
peace between the two nations, the habit of being fuljecdcd to the
fame King, and governed by the f£ime maxims, had considerably
abated old animositics, and prepalred both people for incorporating.
In the other, injuries were still firch, the wounds on both fides were
open, und, in the warmth of rcfcntmcnt, it was natural to lick re-

venge,

venge, and to be averse from reconcilement. At the Union in BooK II.
1707, the wisdom of parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in 1543, the complaints
of the nation were better grounded, and urged with a zeal and una-
nimity, which it is neither just nor safe to disregard. The rage
of the people rose to such an height, that the Englifl ambaflador
could hardly be protected from their insults. The clergy contribu-
ted a great rum towards preserving the church from the dominion
of a Prince, whole system of Reformation was so fatal to their power.
The nobles, after having mortified the Cardinal, so lately, in such
a cruel manner, were, now, ready to applaud and to second him,
as the defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

ARGY1L, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful Barons decla-He excites at-
Ted openly against the Alliance with England, By their afmiftance, mo"0'thewhole

nation againlt

the Cardinal seized on the persons of the young Queen and her mo- the English.
ther, and added to his party the splendor and authority of the royal
name *. He received, at the fame time, a more real accession to
his strength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox,
-whose return from France he had earnestly follicited. This young
nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the h1ouse of Hamilton. IIe
had many claims upon the regent, and pretended a right to exclude
him, not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to deprive him of
the pofeffion of his private fortune. The Cardinal flattered his va-
nity, with the profpc&t of marring the Queen Dowager, and as-
feded to treat him with so much rcfpect, that the Regent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

Ti-ls suspicion was artfully heightened by the Abbot of Paiflcy,
who returned into Scotland romne time before the Earl of Lcnnox,

Keith's I-Iift of Scotl. 30.

I aind

BOOK II. and a&ed in concert with the Cardinal. He Was a natural brother

~'~ of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a warm partizan of

France, and a zealous defender of the eftablilhed Religion. He
took hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his sentiments, by working upon his fears.
The desertion of the nobility, the difaTffeion of the clergy, and
the rage of the people; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all represented with
aggravation, and with their most threatening aspet.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratification of the treaty

with England, and the delivery of the hostages approached, and the
Regent was still undetermined in his own mind. He acted to the
last with thatirrefolution and inconsistence, which is peculiar to weak
men, when they are so unfortunate as to have the chief part in the
con lua of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he ratified the
treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the Cardinal, who still continu-
ed to oppose it, an enemy to his country. On the 3d of September,

Obliges te he secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the Cardinal at
Regent to re Callender, renounced the friendship of England, and declared for
nounce the
fiiendihip the interests of France *.
with England.

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not spared the most

magnificent promises. He had offered to give the princess Eliza-
beth in marriage to his eldest son, and to constitute him King of
that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth. But
upon finding his interest in the Kingdom to be less considerable
than he had imagined, the Englifl monarch began to treat him

Sadler, 339, 356.

with

with little refpe&t. The young Queen was now in the custody of BOOK II.
his enemies, who grew every day more numerous and more po-
pular. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to
elect another Regent. The French King was ready to affiod Lhem
his protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the Engliih, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the Regent could
not retain his authority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve
the appearances of good faith with England, he was obliged to
throw himself into the arms of the party, which adhered to
France.

SOON after this sudden revolution in his political principles, the Andto perie-

Regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The spirit off,,cri Re
controversy was then new and warm; books of that kind were eager-
ly read by men of every rank; the love of novelty, or the conviction
of truth, had led the Regent to express great esteem for the writings
of the Reformers; and having been powerfully supported by thofb
who had embraced their opinions, he, in order to gratify them, en-
tertained, in his own family, two of the most noted preachers of
the Protestant doctrine, and, in his first parliament, consented to an
act, by which the laity were permitted to read the fcripturcs in a lan-
guage which they underclood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to
be an over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long imposed
on the ignorance and credulity of mankind, were detected and expo-
fed to public ridicule; and under the countenance of the Regent, the
Reformation made great advances. The Cardinal obfirved its pro-
grcfs with concern, and ivas at the utmioft pains to obflrud it. lie
reprefcnted to the regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
ment to opinions, so favourable to Lennox's prctenfions; that his

VOL. 1. N owI

Boo II. own legitimacy depended upon the validity of a sentence of divorce,

.--,-J founded on the Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to be cal-

led in question, he weakened his own title to the fuccefiion, and
furnished his rival with the only argument, by which it could be
rendered doubtful *'. These insinuations made a deep impression on
the Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpeet of such imagina-
ry dangers, was as much startled as the Cardinal could have wished;
and his zeal for the Protestant religion was not long proof against
his fear. He publickly abjured the doctrine of the reformers in the
Franciscan church at Stirling, and declared not only for the politi-
cal, but the religious opinions of his new confidents.

THE Proteflant doctrine did not susser much by his apoftacy. It

had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that no discourage-
ment or severity could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought necessary for
the preservation of the established religion. The Reformers
were persecuted with all the cruelty, which fuperfition inspires into
a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that dreadful death,
which the church has appointed for the punishment of its enemies;
but they suffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the patience and
fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more were converted, than
terrified by such fpeeacles.

T-lHE pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the succession were thus founded:.

Mary, the daughter of James II. was married to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth,
a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and the
present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likcwife the grandson of the Prin-
cess Mary. But his father having married Janet Bcaton the Regent's mother, after
he had obtained a divorce from Elizabeth Ilotne his former wife, Lennox pretended
that the fetcence of divorce was unjust, and that the Regent being born while Eliza-
beth -lome was still alive, ought to be confidercd as illegitimatc. Crawf. Peer. 192.

2 TISl

THE Cardinal, however, was now in possession of every thing BOOK II.

his ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a Re- Beatou en-
gent, without the envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from gh°efrethon
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconflancy forfeited the°ofafairs
public esteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were
the only thing which remained to embarrass him. He had very
successfully made use of that nobleman to work upon the Regent's
jealousy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of such an
instrument, he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to fufpe&t his intention; promises, flattery, and
refpeat were the only returns he had hitherto received for fubftan-
tial services; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be
concealed, and Lennox, inflead of attaining power and dignity
himself, saw that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and difapppointed ambition pushed him on
to seek revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his
interest, had so ungencroufly purchased the Earl of Arran's
friendship. He withdrew, for that reason, fiom court, and de-
clared for the party at cnmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert, who added bo much lustre to their
cause.

T'HE two factions which divided the kingdom were flill the fame,

without any alterations in their views or principles ; but, by one of
those strange revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they had,
in the course of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The Regcnt
was at the head of the partizans of France and the defenders of
Popery, and Lennox in the fame flation with the advocates for the
Englihl alliance, and a reformation in religion. The one laboured

N 2, to

BOOK II. to pull down his own work, which the other upheld with the fame
'"-"'--hand, that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start of the Cardinal's

activity. He surprised both him and the Regent by a sudden march
to Edinburgh with a numerous army; and might easily have crush-
ed them, before they could prepare for their defence. But he was
weak enough to liften to proposals for an accommodation; and the
Cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to such a
length, that the greater part of the Earl's troops, who served, as
is usual wherever the feudal institutions prevail, at their own ex-
pence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace, instead of giving
the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to retrieve
his affairs ended yet more unfortunately. One body of his troops
was cut to pieces, and the rerc dispersed; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he muff either have submitted to the conqueror;
or have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach of an English ar-
my had not brought him a short relief.

Henry in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, with
vandesScot which he had been treated, both by the Regent and parliament of

Scotland, who, at the time when they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and ftrictcr confederacy with
France. The rigour of the season retarded for some time the exe-
cution of his vengeance. But, in the spring, a considerable body
of infantry which was destined for France, received orders to fail
for Scotiand, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed to join
it by land. The Regent and Cardinal little expecded such a visit.
They had trufecd that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces; and from an unaccountable fccurity, were

wholly

wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of BOOK II.
Hartford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this
army, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles above Leith. May 3, 1544-
He was quickly master of that place; and marching directly to
Edinburgh, entered it:with the, fame ease. After plundering the,
adjacent country, the richest, and most open in Scotland, he set on,
fire both these towns; and upon the approach of some troops ga-
thered together by the Regent, put his booty on board the fleet, and
with his land forces retired safely to the Englifll borders, delivering
the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an invasion, con-
certed with little policy, carried on at great expence, and attended.
with no advantage. If Hlnry aimed at the conquest of Scotlandy
he gained nothing by this expedition ; if the marriage he had pro-
posed, was still in his view, he loft a great deal. Such a rough
courtship, as the Earl of Huntly humorously called it, disgusted thec
whole nation; their averlion for the match grew into abhorrence;
and exasperated by so many indignities, the Scots were never, at
any period, more attached to France, or more alienated from;
England.

THIE Earl of Lennox alone, in split to the Regent and French

King, continued a corrcfpondence with England, whicll ruined llis
own intercft, without promoting -lenry's. Many of his own vas-
fals preferring their duty to their country before their aiflCtion to
him, refuscd to concur in any design to favour tlhc )tlllic cincimv-
And after a few feeble anid unsuccessful attempts to dilfurb the Re-
gent's adminill-trtion, he was obliged to fiy for ialhcty to the court
of England, where lenry rewarded ferviccs which he had the ii-
clination, but not the power to perform, by giving him in mair-
riage his niece the Lady Mdrgaret Douglas. This unhalppy exilc,

however,

Book II. however was destined to be the father of a race of Kings. He saw
>- '-' his son Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpe-

tual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin. And,
from that time, his posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the other
received as a fugitive.
A C COn- IE L A N while hostilities were continued by both nations, but with

little vigour on either fide. The historians of that age relate mi-
nutely the circumstances of several skirmishes and inroads, which
as they did not produce any considerable effect, at this distance of
time, deserve no remembrance *. At last an end was put to this

languid

* THOUGHI this war was distinguished by no important or decisive atlion, it was,

however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There fIill remain two original papers,
which give us some idea of the miseries, to which the most fertile counties in the
kingdom were exposed by the sudden and dcftruftive incursions of the borderers.
The firfl seems to be the report made to Henry by the Englifl wardens of the
marches, for the year 1544, and contains their exploits from the 2d of July, to
the 17th of November. The account it gives of the different inroads, or Forrays,
as they arc called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the fum total of mischief they
did is thus computed:
Towns, towers, fiedcs, barnekyns, paryfle-churches, baftel-houfcs call

down or burnt

Scots slain - 403
Prisoners taken - - 816
Nolt, i. c. horned cattle, taken - - o, 386
Sheep - - - 12, 492
Nags and geldings - - , 296
Goats - - 200
Bolls of corn - - - 8o5
Inaight-gear, i. c. houflold furniture, not reckoned.

Ilaynle'sflati papers, 43

The

languid and inactive war, by a peace, in which England, France, and BOOK IT.
Scotland were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude thnetJ6
Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that
vengeance which his attention to the affairs of the continent had
hitherto delayed. But although a peace with England was of the
last consequence to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing to
attack with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and he chore rather to purchase
Henry's friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to leave them
exposed to danger. By yielding some things to the interest, and
more to the vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission, flattery,
and address, he, at length, prevailed to have the Scots included in
the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before the conclusion of The murder

this peace, rendered it more acceptable to the whole nation. Car- of Bct"LI"1,
dinal Beatoun had not used his power with moderation, equal to
the prudence by which he attained it. Notwithstanding his great

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of Hartford, between the

8th and 23d of September, 1545; the narrative is more general, but it appears that
he had burnt, razed, and destroycd in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh only,

Monasterics and Friar-houfcs - - -
Cafiles, towers, and piles - -
Markct towns - - 5

Villages - - 2. 3
Milns - . - 3
Hospitals. -

All there were ca[R down or burnt. Ilaynes 5?.. As the Scots were no less fkilfil in
the pracice of irregular war, we may conclude th;it the damage which they did in
England was not inconfidcrablel and that their raids were no lds waftcful, tlan tli:
forrays of the Englilh.

abilities,

BOOK II. abilities, 'he had too many of the pafirons and prejudices of an an-
'-"---' gry leader of a faaion, to govern a divided people with temper.

-His resentment agairit one party of the nobility, his insolence
towards the reft, his severity to the Reformers, and, above all,
the barbarous and illegal execution of the famous George Wi-
ihart, a man of honourable birth, and of primitive fandcity,
wore out the patience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold
hand was wanting to gratify the public with by his deftrucion.
Private revenge, inflamed and fantified by a false zeal for re-
ligion, quickly supplied this want. Norman Lefly, the eldest
son of the Earl of Rothcs, had been treated by the Cardinal
with injuflice and contempt. It was not the temper of the
nman, or the spirit of the times, quietly to digest an affront. And
as the profefion of his adversary screened him from the effects of
what is called an honourable resentment, he resolved to take that
iatisfadion, which he could not demand. This resolution de-
fervcs as nuch censure, as the singular courage and conduc with
which .le put it ;in execution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at
that time, resided in the castle of Saint Andrew's, which he had
fortificd at great expence, and in the opinion of the age had
rendered it impregnable. His retinue was numerous, the town at
his devotion, and the neighbouring country full of his dependents.
in this iituation, sixteen persons undertook to furprize his catle,
and to afaffinate himself; and their success was equal to the bold-
May 29,1546. nets of the attempt. Early in the morning they seized on the gate

of the castle, which was set open to the workmen who were em-
ployed in finifling the fortifications; and having placed sentries at
the door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous
'domcflies one by one, and turning them out of the cafile, they
without noise, or tumult, or violence to any other person, delivcred

their

their country, though by a most unjullifiable action, from an am- BOOK II.
bitious man, whose pride was inlupportable to the nobles, as his
cruelty and cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and to the French The Regent

attempts in
intercrf in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued among a vain to fe

te incmurdere;

gre'at party in the nation, but when deprived of the genius and au-
thority of 1b fIilful a leader, was offinall consequence. Nothi;ng
can equal the consternation which a blow so unexpected occasioned
among his adherents; while the Regent secretly enjoyed an event,
which removed out of his way a rival, wlho had not only eclipscd
his greatness, but almost extinguiflhed his power. Decency, how-
ever, the honour of the church, the importunity of the Queen
Dowager and her faction, his engagements with France, and,
above all these, the desire of recovering his eldcft son, whom the
Cairli'n'l had detained for some time at St. Andrew's in pledge of
his f.ielity, and who, together with the cafle, had fallen into
the hla;nds of the conspirators, induced him to take arms, in or-
der to revenge the death of a man he hated.

7'.E threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute it. One
:-' of military fcicnce, the art of a.tacking fortified places, was
L .'1 unknownll in Scotland. The weapons, the dilciplinc, and im-
. tuofity of the Scots, rendered their armics as unfit for ileges,
a, they were ative in the field. An hundred and fifty men, which
was the greatest number tile conspirators ever aflembled, reficted
all the efforts of the Regent bor five months %, in a place, which
a tingle battalion, with a few battering cannon, would now rc-

* Epift. Reg. Scot. 2. 379.
VOL. I. () (duc

BooIK II. dice in a few hours. This tedious siege was concluded by a truce..
-'"~" Tlhe Regent undertook to procure for the conspirators an abfolu-

tion fiom the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament; and upon. obtain-
ini thelf, they engaged to ilrrender the caflle, and to set. his fore
at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this treaty..

On both fides, they fought only to amuse, and to gain time. The
Regent had applied to France for assistance, and expeAced soon to,
have the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if Lefly and.
his associates were not at first incited by Henry to murder the Car-
dinal, they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported by him.
Notwithitanding the silence of cotemporary historians, there are-
violent presumptions of the former;, of the latter there is un-
doubted certainty *. During the siege, the conspirators had re-
ceived from England supplies both of money and provisions; and.
as Henry was preparing to renew his proposals concerning the mar-
riage and the union he had projected, and, to second his negocia-
tions with a numerous army, they hoped, by concurring with him,
to be in a situation, in which they would no longer need a par-
don, but might claim a reward.

[nnuary z, TIHE death of Henry blaflcd all these hopes. It happened in
,'1.7 the beginning of next year, aftcr a reign of greater fplcndor than

true glory; bufiling, though not adtivc; opprcflivc in domcftic go-
vcrnment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the vices
of this Prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the virtues of
others. IHis rapaciouficfs, his profusion, and even his tyranny, by
dcpreffing the ancent nobility, and by adding new property and

Kvitli, 6o0

power

powar to the Commons, laid the foundat ens of the Britinh liber- BOOK II.
ty. His other paflions contributed no lels towards the downifal cf
Popery, and the eftablifhlment of religious freedom in the nation.
His refetrment ledl him to abolish the power, and his covetoufileis
to fcize the wealth of the church ; and by withdrawing these sup-
ports, made it easy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole
fabric of fupeli.ition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who had bccn alter-

nately his rival and his friend; but his fuccelTor Henry II. was not
neg!letful of the French interest in Scotland. le sent a confider- Troop; ar.ive
able body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi, to therom France'
Regent's affiflance. By their long experience in the Italian and
German wars, the French had become as dextrous in the conduc
of sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the boldness and de-
fpair of the conspirators could not defend them against their superior
art, they, after a short resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who en-Force the
gaged, in the name of the King his maifer, for the security of their Andrews to
lives; and as his prisoners transported them into France. Thefurrender.
cafile itself, the monument of Beatoun's power and vanity, was
demolished, in obedience to the canon law, which, with admirable
policy, denounces its anathemas even againit the houses in which
the sacred blood of a Cardinal happcns to be fled, and ordains
them to be laid in ruins *.

TIIE archblifllopic of St. Andrew's was bectowed by the Re-
cent upon his natural brother, John Itamilton Abbot of Paiflcv.

* Bur. Ilift. Rcf. I. 338.

0 2 T ;

BOOK II. Tiiu delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators.
,_ .

_a` Thole Miniiflers of Henry VIII. who had the chief direcion of as-
with n;1l.lnd. fairs durli:g the minority of his son Edw;ard VI. condu&ted them-

flves, with regard to Scotiand, by the maxims of their late master,
and reiolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which they had
not abilitics or addrcfs to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their inva-

sion of Scotland occasioned, we flall stop to take notice of a cir-
cumflance unobserved by cotemporary hiflorians, but extremely re-
markable for the discovery it makes of the fentinents and spirit,
which then prevailed among the Scots. The conspirators against
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's elders son in the castle of St.
Andrew's; and as they needed the protection of the English, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase it, by deliver-
ing to them this important prize. The presumptive heir to the
Crown, in the hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was
a dreadful profpe&t. And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell
upon a very extraordinary expedient. By an ad made of purlpof<,
they excluded " the Regent's eldest son from all right of fuccefion,
"public or private, so long as he should be detained a prifbner,

and fubflituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their
seniority, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs to

" the Regent *." Succceflon by hcreditary right is an idca so ob-
vious and so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to make a breach
in it, but in cafes of extreme ncccflity. Suchl a lcccl'itv did the
Parliament discover in the present situation. IIatrcd to England,
tounded on the memory of pafl hoflilities, and heightened by the
finart of recent injuries, was the national paflion. This ditdated

* Epilt. Reg, Scot. 2. 359.

that

that uncommon statute, by which the order of lineal fuccefllon was BOOK II.
so remar-kably broken. The modern theories, which represent this -
right as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to be violated
upon any consideration whatsoever, seem to have been then altoge-
tller unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Iartford, now Duke Scotland in-

of Somerset, and Protetor of England, entered Scotland at the head Engli'th
of 8, coo men; and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 (Lips ap-
peared on the coafs, to second his land forces. The Scots had
for tome tine observed this storm gathering, and were prepared
for it. Their army was almost double to that of the enemy, and
poited to the greatefl advantage on a rising ground, above Mufel-
burgh, not far from the banks of the river Efle. Both these circum-
Itances alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who saw his danger, and
would willingly have extricated hiimfelf out of it, by a new over-
ture of peace on conditions extremely reasonable. Eut this mode-
ration being imputed to fear, his proposals were rejectcd with that
formn, which the confidence of ficccrs inspires; and if the condu&t
of the Regent, who commanded the Scottish army, had been in
any degree equal to his confidence, the dcflruction of the Englill
murl have been inevitable. 'l'hey were in a litnation, preciclv
finilar to that of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in the
following century. The Scots had cholen thcir ground so well,
that it was illmpofTiblc to force them to give battle; a fcw days ]had
exhaul-cd the forage arnd provision of a narrow countrly; the flect
could only frnitil a scanty and precarious libfliflence; a retreat
thcrefore was neccllhry.; but digracc, and perhaps ruin were the
co'llfeq(lclccs of retreating.

()x

PooIK II. ON both theie ocafions, the national heat and impetuosity of the
'-"' Scors saved the English, and precipitated their own country into the
P.:::s.-. f utmodn uda'ger. The undisciplined courage of the private men be-
.1:'".. came imp, tient at the fight of an enemy. The General was

afraidl of nothing, hut tlhat the Engli-fl would escape from him by
filgt; and leaving his i-ongl camn, he attal -d thl DuLe of So-
) .:.:,.:cri o, nMer set near Pinkey, with no better fucccfs than his rashness deserved.

The Prote,-or had drawn up his troops on a gentle einencce,
and had now the advantage of ground on his fide. The Sco'-
tilh army confilced almo!- intirely of infantry, whose chief vwea-
pon was a long fipear, and for that reason their Iilcs were very deep,
and their ranls close. They advanced towards the enemy in three
great bodies, and as they palii;d the river, were considerably ex-
posed to the fire of the English fleet which lay in the bay of Muf-
felburgh, a'id h'-d drawn near the flore. The English cavalry,
Ilufhed witli an advantage which they had gained in a fdirmifh
ftbnC days before, began the attack with more impetuosity, than
good condu&t. A body so firm and compact as the Scots, easily re-
filetd the impression of cavalry, broke them, and drove them off
the field. The English infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots
were at once cxpofed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank from
400 forcign Fuzileers who served the enemy, and to their cannon
which were planted behind the infantry, on the highest part of the
eminence. The depth and closeness of their order making it impofli-
ble for the Scots to stand long in this situation; the Earl of Angus,
who commanded the vanguard, endeavoured to change his ground,
and to retire towards the main body. But his friends unhappily mif-
took this motion for a flight, and fell into confusion. At that very
infiant, the broken cavalry having rallied, returned to the charge;
the foot pursued the advantage they had gained; the profped of

3 victory

victory redoubled the ardour of both; andin a moment the rout ofBoOK II.
the Scottish army became universal, and irretrievable. The en-
counter in the field was not long, nor bloody; but, in the pursuit,
the Englifl discovered all the rage and fierceness, which national
antipathy, kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal
injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great distance. All the three roads by which the Scots
fled, were firewed with spears and swords, and targets, and covered
with the bodies of the slain. Above o,ooo men fell on this day,
ene of the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken
prisoners, and among these some persons of diftindion. And the
Proteaor had it now in his power to become matrer of a kingdom,
out of which, not many hours before, he was almost obliged to re-
tire with infamy *.

BUT

* The following pafrage in a curious and rare journal of the Protcctor's expedi-

tion into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined in commission with Cccil
as- Judge Marshal of the army, and printed in 1543, dcfervcs our notice; as it gives
a just idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time. " But what afterI
learned, fpccially touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well of
going to ofendl, as of 11anding to defend, I have thought necef:iry here to utter.
llackbuttcrs have they few or none, and appoint their fight modl commonly always
a-foot. lThey come to the field well furni(lhd all with jack and tlitii, dagger and
bnciJier, anld 'words all broad and thin, of excecdin'i good temper, and universally
so made to Ilice, that as I never saw none so good, so think I it hard to devise the
better. lereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice or thlice
about his neck, not for cold but for cutting. fn their array towards joining with
the enemy, they cling anlll thilln so near to the ',.re lrank, (lholder and fllouIldlr to
gether, with their pikes i botih their hands liIciglh afore them, and their followc, s
in tlat order so hard at their backL, layinj; li'ilr pikiis over their ,orI't'oclIs (hiiil-
dcls, that if they dlo ahlil undircoveredl, inI force call well willliflad l ein. Stand.
ing at defence they thuilt Ihoulders likewilif ft nilgh together, th.. lore ranks swell

niglg

BOOK II. BUT this vi&tory, however great, was of no real utility, for
Thcir vEory want of fiill or of leisure, to imlprove it. Every new ilnjury ren-
otlit'e r-neiit dered the .Scots more averse from an union with England ; and the
to t' o E , h'-

Protretor negleCted the only mr1eafre, which would have made it
necciarv for them to have given their conflnt to it. Ie amused
hiinielfin wafting the open country, and in taking or building
ievcral petty caftlcs; whereas by fortilfing a fewv places wich were
accciFlie bl y sea, he would have laid the kingdom open to the Eng-
lit1l, and, in a Ihort time, the Scots mull either have accepted of
lhis terms, or have submitted to his power. Ey Inch an improve-
ment of it, his victory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the command of
Scotland. Th1e battle of Pinkey had no other ei:edt but to precipi-
tate the Scots into new engagements with France. The situation
of the Englilh court, may indeed, be pleaded in excuse for the Duke
of Somerset's condu&t. That cabal of his enemies which occa-
sioned his tragical end, was already formed ; and while lie triumphed
in Scotland, they fecretlv undermined his power and credit at home.
Sclf-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to prefer his fafcty before
his fmec, and to return without reaping the fruits of his victory. At
this time, however, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by which

nighl to kneeling, sloop low before, thlir fellows behind holding their pikes with
both ihalds, and therewith in their left their bicklers, tlic one endl of the pike agailill
thliir lil'ii fcot, and the other againfl the enemy brealt-high; their followers cror-
sing their pike points with tlitm forward ; and thus with each other so nigh as
fiacc and place will uffir, through the whole ward, so thick, that as cafily fiall
a bare finger pierce through the ntin of an angry Ih.li;chog, as any encounter thc
fi.,iit of their pikes." Other curious particulars are fuund in this jnurnal, fromi
which Sir John 1iayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

Lilf of Edwalrd VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scots pike or fpcar was appointed by AcA ó1. P 1,17 1. to be
fix ells; i. . cightcen feet fix inches.

he

he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and his presence suspended BOOK II.
its effect for some time. The supreme power fRill remaining in his
hands, he employed it to recover the opportunity, which he had loll.
A body of troops, by his command, seized and fortified Hadding-
toun, a place, which, on account of its distance from the sea, and April, x59.
from any English garrison, could not be defended without great ex-
pence and danger.

MEAN while the French gained more by the defeat of their al- Forces the

lies, than the Englifl did by their victory. After the death of Car- clorr unio
dinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con- with Fra"ce.
fiderable flare in the direction of affairs. She was warmly attached
by blood, and by inclination, to the French interest; and, in order
to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event which oc-
curred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were broken at Pinkev;
and in an ai'cmblv of nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon
the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France,
no prolpect of safety appearing but in afnlilance fiom thence. But
Henry II. being then at peace with England, the Queen reprefcnt-
ed that they could not expec him to take part in their quarrcl, but
upon views of pcrfonal advantage; and that without extraorldinary
conccflions in his favour, no affrifance in proportion to their prc-
sent exigencies could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully ieconded thefc representations of the Qucen. What often
happens to individuals took place among the nobles in this conven-
tion; they were swayed entirely by their paflions, and in order to
gratify them, they desertcd their former principles, and disregarded
their true intcrcet. In the violence of relcntmient, they forgot that
zeal for the independence of Scotland, which had prompted them
to rejcL the proposals of Hcn. VIII. and by offering, voluntarily,

VoL, I. P their

Boo K II.' their young Queen in marriage to the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II.
And to offer and which was still more, by proposing to fend her immediately
in marriage 1 into France to be educated at his court, they granted, from a thirst
tie laupthi. of vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon any confi-

de'ration of their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom as
Scotland, was a matter of no finall consequence to France. Hen-
ry, without hesitation, accepted the offers of the Scottifll ambaffa-
dors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition.
Six thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of Mcnfieur
Defli, affilted by tome of the befl officers, who were formed in the
long wars of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They served two cam-
paigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But
their exploits were not considerable. The Scots soon became jea-
lous of their designs, and neglected to support them with proper
vigour; and the caution of the Englifl, in acing wholly upon the
defeniive, prevented them from attempting any enterprize of con-
sequence; and obliged them exhaust their strength in tedious sieges,.
undertaken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, however,.
were not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling the Eng-
lifh to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender several small forts,.
which they possesed in different parts of the kingdom..

Bu T the consequences of these operations of his troops were still

of greater importance to the French King. The diversion which
they occasioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the English; and the influence of his army in Scotland obtained:
the concurrence of Parliament with the overtures made to him, by
the affcmbly of nobles at Stirling, concerning the Quecn's marriage
with the Dauphin, and her education at the court of France. In
vain did a few patriots remonstrate againit such extravagant con-

ceflions,

cefilons, by which Scotland was redtced to be a province of Bool II.
France; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the king-The treaty for
dom; by which, the friendship of France became more fatal than tht purpose
the enmity of England; and every thing Was fondly given up to
the one, that had been bravely defended against the other. A point June 5, 154q.
of so much consequence was hastily decided in a Parliament, as-
fembled in the camp before Haddingtoun: the intrigues of the
Queen Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and resentment againfi
England, had prepared a great party in the nation for such a flep;
the French General and Ambassador, by their liberality and promi-
fes, gained over many more. The Regent himself was weak enough
to stoop to the offer of a x:n'ion from France, together with the
title of Duke of Chatell.jra.. t in that kingdom. A considerable
majority declared son- the treaty, and the interest of a fadion was
preferred before the 1honoir of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rafn and fatal resolution, the MI;Tly sent t

source of many calamities to themfclvcs, and to their Sovereign, the i1 llancc,"
French allowed them no time for reflection or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was dRill in Scotland,
and without delay, convoyed the Queen. into France. iMary was
then fix ycars old, and by her education in tlihat court, one of the
politfcl, but most corrupted in Europe, she acquired every ac-
colmpliflinient that could add to her charms as a woman, and con-
traced many of tlhol prejudices, which occasioned her misiortuncs
as a Qucen.

FRMol, the time that Mary was put into their hands, it was the

interfil of the Irench to fuftlcr the war in Scotland to linguili.
Thle recovering of the Boulonnois was the objedt Hcnry had molt at

P 2 heart;

BOOK II. heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide the

" attention and strength of the English, whose domeflic facions de-

prived both their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour.
The government of England had undergone a great revolution. The
Duke of Somerfet'spower had been acquired with too much violence,-
and was exercised with too little moderation, to be of long conti-
nuance. Many good qualities, added to great love of his country,
could not attone for his ambition in usurping the sole direction of
affairs. Many of the most eminent courtiers combined against him;
and the Earl of Warwick their leader, no less ambitious, but more
artful than Somerset, conducted his measures with so much dexte-
rity, as to raise himself upon the ruins of his rival. Without the in-
vidious name of Protetor, he succeeded to all the power and influ-
ence, of which Somerset was deprived, and he quickly found peace
to be necessary for the establishment of his new authority, and the
execution of the vast designs he had conceived.

Peace con- HENRY was no itranger to Warwick's situation, and improved
cluded. his knowledge of it to good purpose, in conducting the negociations

for a general peace. He prescribed what terms he pleated to the
Englifl Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advantage-
MaIch 24, ous to that Monarch and his allies. England consented to restore

*s° Boulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all preten-

sions to a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the
conqucfl of her country. A few small forts, of which the Eng-
lifh troops had hitherto kept pofihfsion, were razed; and peace be-
tween the two kingdoms was eflablifhcd on its ancient foundation.

BOTH the Britifli nations loft power, as well as reputation, by
this unhappy quarrel. It was on both fides a war of emulation and

resent-

resentment, rather than of interest; and was carried on, under the BOOK II.
influence of national animofities, which were blind to all advan-
tages. The French, who entered into it with greater coolness,
conducted it with more skill; and by dexterously availing themselves,
of every circumstance which occurred, recovered possession of an im-
port.nit territory which they had loft, and added to their monarchy
a new kingdom. The ambition of the English Minister betray-
ed to them'. the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots againtf
their aicien.t enemies betfowed on them the latter; their own ad-
dress and good policy merited both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, the French rne Scots be-

come jealous

forces left Scotland, as much to their own satisfaCtion, as to thatoftheFrench
of the nation. The Scots soon found, that the calling to their as-
fiftance a people more powerful than themselves, was a danger-
ous expedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience, those
who had come over to protect the kingdom, taking upon them to
command in it; and on many occasions they repented the rash in-
vitation they had given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
yoke, before they had well begun to feel it. The French were,
in that age what they are in the present, one of the most polifled
nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expeditions
into foreign countries, whether towards the south or north, that
their manners have been remarkably incompatible with the Inanners
of every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own cuf-
toms, becaufc they want knowledge and tafle to difcovcr the reason-
ablcncfs and propriety of cuflomes which differ from them. Na-
tions, which hold the first rank i l politeness, arc fiequently no lcfi;
tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient world;

and.

BOOK II. and the French are the fame in the modern. Full of themselves;

c"r flattered by the imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed to

confider their own modes as the flandards of elegance; they scorn to
disguise, or to lay aside the diftinguifliing manners of their own na-
tion, or to make any allowance for what may differ from them among
others. For this reason, the behaviour of their armies has, on every
occasion, been insupportable to strangers, and has always exposed
them to hatred, and often to deftrudtion. In that age, they over-
ran Italy four several times, by their valour, and loft it, as often, by
their insolence. The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited
people, and who, of all nations, can least bear the most distant in-
finuation of contempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pre-
tensions offuch assuming guefls. The symptoms of alienation were
fbon visible; they seconded the military operations of the French
troops with the utmost coldness, and their dilgufi grew inlinfibly
to a degree of indignation that could hardly be restrained; and on
occasion of a very flight accident, broke out with fatal violence. A
private French soldier engaging in an idle quarrcl with a citizen of
Edinburgh, both nations took arms, with equal rage, in defence of
their countrymen. The Provost of Edinburgh, his Con, and several
citizens of distinCtion were killed in the fray; and the French were
obliged to avoid the fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out of the
city. Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of France and Scotland,
and the long intercourse of good offices between the two nations, an
avcrfion for the French took its rife at this time, among the Scots,
the effcts whereof were deeply felt, and operated powerfully
through the subsequent period.

Prorefofthie F'R OM the death of CardinalBeatoun, nothing has been said of
Reformation. the slate of religion. While the war with England continued, the

clergy

clergy had no leisure to molest the Protestants; and they were not BooK IT,
yet considerable enough to expec any thing more than connivance
and impunity. The new docrines were still in their infancy; but,
during this short interval of tranquillity, they acquired firength,
and advanced, by large and firm feps, towards a full eflablifh-
ment in the kingdom. The first preachers against Popery in Scot-
land, of whom several had appeared during the reign of James V.
were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation was partial,
and at fecc:-it hand; tome ui them had been educated in England;
all of them had borrowed their notions from the books publifled
there; and, in the first dawn of the new light, they did not ven-
ture far before their leaders. But, in a short time, the doctrines
and writings of the foreign Reformers became generally known;
the inquisitive genius of the age pressed forward in quect of truth;
the discovery of one error opened the way to others; the downfal
of one imposture drew many after it; the whole fabric, which ig-
norance and fuperlition had ercctcd in times of darkness, began:
to totter; and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but a dar-
ing and active leader to direct the attack. Such was the famous
John Knox, who, with better qualifications of learning, and more
cxtenfive views than any of his predccefsors in Scotland, posseed a
natural intrepidity of mind, which let him above fear. He be-
gan his public ministry at St. Andrew's in the year i547, with
that success, which always accompanies a bold and popular elo-
quence. Inftcad of amnuiing himlelf with lopping the branches,.
he struck directly at the root of Popery, and attacked both the doc-
trine and discipline of the ellablifhed church, with a vehemence
peculiar to himself, but admirably suited to the temper and wifles
of the age. 3

AN,

BOOK II. AN adversary so formidable as Knox, would not have easily

L'~ escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and

progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. But, at first,
he retired for safety into the cafile of St. Andrew's, and while the
conspirators kept possession of it, preached publickly under their
protection. The great revolution in England, which followed
upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal
of Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in Scotland.
Henry had loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of Popery.
The Ministers of his son Edward VI. cast them off altogether,
and eftabliihed the Protestant religion upon almost the fame footing,
whereon it now stands in that kingdom. Th. influence of this ex-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy effects of ecclefiafical Ii-
bcrty, in the one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of
recovering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been cb!i-d to con-
dut themselves with the utmof.i caution, anl f1ld,,li ventured to
preach, but in private horses, and at a difatan:: from court; they
gained credit, as happens on the firfI publication oi' c;ecry new reli-
gion, chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of life.
But several noblemen of the greatef: ifliinflion, having, about this
time, openly espouscd their principles, they were no longer under
the neccflity of ading with the fanel rcferve; and with more fecuri-
ty and encouragement, they had likewise greater success. The
means of acquiring and fprcading knowledge became more common,
and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew every
day bolder and more universal.

IAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was flill under some

rcflraint. It had not yet attained firmness and vigour, fuflicient to
overturn a system, founded on the deepest policy, and supported

by

by the moll formidable power. Under the present circumlitances, 1ooK3 II.
any attempt towards action mutl have been fatal to the Protestant '-
doltrines; and it is no fimall proof of the authority, as well as pe-
netration of the heads of the party, that they were able to restrain
the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that critical and ma-
ture juncture, when every ftep they took was decisive and successful.

MEANWIIIILE their cause received reinforcement from two dif-

ferent quarters, whence they never could have expeted it. The
ambition of the house of Guile, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
land hastened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scotland; and
by a singular disposition of Providence, the persons who opposed
the Reformation in every other part of Europe with the fiercell zeal,
were made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

MARY of Guise possesscd the fame bold and aspiring spirit, which Th.l Qeen

diftinguifiled her family. But in her it was softened by the female pires to the
charater, and accompanied with greater temper and address. Her gefnt
brothers, in order to attain the high objeds at which they aimed,
ventured upon such daring measures, as suited their great courage.
Her designs upon the fiipreme power were concealed with the ut-
most care, and advanced by address and refinements more natural
to her sex. By a dexterous application of those talents, lie had ac-
quired a considerable influence on the councils of a nation, hither-
to unacquainted with the government of women ; and without the
fimallcft right to any flarc in the adminifllation of affairs, had en-
gropfed the chief diredion of them into her own hands. But tli
did not long reft satisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious
power, which the fickleness of the regent, or the ambition of those
who governed him, might so easily disturb; and lihe began to fct
VOL. I. Q on

BooK II. on foot new intrigues, with a design of undermining him, and of

opening to herself a way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her
brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and supported it with
all their credit at the court of France. The French King willing-
ly concurred in a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland
entirely under management, and in any future broil with England,
to turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

In order to arrive at the desired elevation, the Queen Dowager

had only one of two ways to chufe; either violently to wrest the
power out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his con-
sent. Under a minority, and among a warlike and faicious people,
the former was a very uncertain and dangerous experiment. The
latter appeared to be no less impracticable. To persuade a man vo-
luntarily to abdicate the supreme power ; to defceld to a level with
those, above whom le was raised; and to be content with the fe-
cond place wher e

he ath held the first, may well pass for a wild and

chimerical project. This, however, the QLcen attempted; and the
prudence of the attempt was ufficiently justified by its filccefs.

TI P.: Rercnt's inconflliancy and irrefoluition, together wvili the

c.dlaruities which had bfacllen the kingdom under his adminlr ia-
tion, railtd the prejudices boih of the nobles and of the people a-ainfl
him, to a great height; and the Qiccn P:crctly fomented thcf
wit mnuch indlutry. All who wishcd for a change met with a
,Iracious reception in her cou t, and their fpJ iit of di si

idtio ion w:.: s

nourilied by fich hopes and promitsl , a;:, in cvery :'g, i!'nopc
on) il-c crcdul iiy of the fatitious. The favourcr:; (if tl ltci cfdrln.a-

I .:',:; tii.cn .cing

til.e 1moil numldlrous and Ifcading body o,' t(ie r
.C Ct'l;

cenemies, she applied to them, with a particular attention; and the

7 g ntie-

gentleness of her disposition, and seeming indifference to the re- BooK II.
ligious points in dispute, made-all her promises of protection and in-
dulgence pass upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of the
nation willing to fall in with her measures, the Queen set out for
France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and took along
with her those noblemen, who pofleffed the greaterf power and
c-edit among their countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of an ele-
gant court, flattered by the civilities of the French King, and the
careles of the house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal promise of many more,
they were brought to approve of all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE ihe advanced by these flow but fiue ileps, the Regent

either did not foresee the danger which threatened him, or ne-
glected to provide against it. The first discovery of the train which
was laid came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie of Kin-
naird, and Panter Bilihop of RoGs, whom the Queen had gained
over to her intercft, and then employed as the most proper infiru-
ments for obtaining his consent. The overture was made to him
in the name of the French King, cnforced by proper threaten-
ings, in order to work upon his natural timidity, and fwcetencd
by every promifi: that could reconcile him to a propoidal t dillgrc-
able. On the one hand, the confirmation of his French title,
together with a confiderablc pcnfion, the parliamentary acknow-
ledgment of his right of fihccefllon to the Crown, and a public ra-
tification of his conduclt during his regency, were offered him. On
the other hand, the diipleafcure of the French King, the cpowcr
and popularity of tle QLeeni Dowager, the difafitccion of the
nobles, with the danger of an after-reckoning, were reprclclltcd i
tlhe tironlgefl colours.

Q02 Trr

BOOK II. IT was not poflible to agree to a proposal so extraordinary and

^"- unexpected, without some previous struggle; and had the Arch-

bishop of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and pas-
five spirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have reje6ted
it with disdain. Happily for the Queen, the sagacity and ambi-
tion of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obftruaion to her
views. He was lying at the point of death, and in his absence,
the influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible temper counterbal-
lanced several of the strongest paflions in the human mind, and ob-
tained his content to a voluntary Surrender of the supreme power.
Dec. 1551. AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with so much ease,

the Queen returned into Scotland, in full expectation of taking
immediate possession of her new dignity. But, by this time, the
Archbilhop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that distemper, which
the ignorance of the Scottish physicians had pronounced to be in-
curable. This he owed to the assistance of the famous Cardan,
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold genius led him to
some useful discoveries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in those chimerical fci-
ences, which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries. As a pre-
tender to astrology and magic, he was revered and consulted by all
Europe; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he was but little
known. The archbiflop, it is probable, confidered him as a power-
ful magician, when he applied to him for relief; but it was his know-
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to cure his disease *.

* Cardan himself was more desirous of being confidered as an Alhrologer than a

Philosopher; in his book De Genituris, we find a calculation of the Archbishop's
nativity, from which he pretends both to have predicted his disease, and to have
effected his cure. He received, from the Archbishop, a reward of 18co crowns.
A great fum in that age. De iltafita, p. 32.

TOGE-

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop recovered the en- BOOK II.

tire government of the Regent, and quickly persuaded him to re-
cal that dishonourable promise, which he had been reduced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. However great her furprize and
indignation were, at this fresh instance of his inconstancy, she was
obliged to dissemble, that she might have leisure to renew her in-
trigues with all parties; with the Protestants, whom ihe favoured
and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to whom she ren-
dered herself agreeable by various arts; and with the Regent him-
self, in order to gain whom, the employed every argument. But
whatever impressions her emissaries might have made on the Re-
gent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the Arch-
bishop. Under his management, the negociations were spun out
to a great length, and his brother maintained his flation with that
address and firmness, which its importance so well merited. The
universal defection of the nobility, the growing power of the Pro-
teftants, who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated so-
licitations of the French King, and, above all, the interposition of
the young Queen, who was now entering the twelfth year of her
age, and claimed a right of nominating whom fl-e pleated to be
Regent, obliged him, at last, to resign that high office, which he P

Prevaile on.
had held many years. He obtained, however, the fame advanta- the Regent to

rcfign his of-
geous terms for himself, which had been formerly stipulated. fice.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the i oth of April, 1554, she obtains

that the Earl of Arran executed this extraordinary resignation; and thc gen1cy-
at the fame time Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been so long the object of her wifles. Thus, with their own
approbation, a woman, and a sfranger, was advanced to the supreme
authority over a fierce and turbulent people, who seldom fi:,b.nit-

ted,

Booic I. ted, without relii(ance, to; the legal and ancient government of
'-^ J~ their native Monarchs.

Reformation WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contributed so much
continues to
mnake glreat towards the progress of'the Reformation, by the protection which
progress file afforded it, from motives of ambition; the English Queen,

by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons active in
July 6, 1553. promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended the throne of England,

on the death of her brother Edward, and soon after married Philip II.
of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish fuperflition,
and the fierceness of that age, the added the private resentment of
her own, and of her mother's sufferings, with which ihe loaded
the Reformed Religion; and the peevishness and severity of her na-
tural temper carried the acrimony of all these passions to the utmost
extreme. The cruelty of her persecution equalled the deeds of those
tyrants, who have been the greatest reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace with the impe-
tuofity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting Philip was obliged, on
tome occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Many
among the most eminent Reformers suffered for the doArines which
they had taught; others fled from the florm. To the greater part
of these, Switzerland and Germany opened a secure asylum; and
not a few, out of choice or necessity, fled into Scotland. What
they had seen and felt in England, did not abate the warmth and
zeal of their indignation against popery. Their attacks were bold-
er and more successful than ever; and their doctrines made a rapid
progress among all ranks of men.

TIIl SE doctrines, calculated to rectify the opinions, and to reform
.the manners of mankind, had hitherto produced no other eftfeds;

but

but they soon began to operate with greater violence, and proved the BOOK II.
occasion, not only of subverting the established religion, but of Avieofthe
shaking the throne, and endangering the kingdom. The causes p,0itca'ca"nut

0 o o & which contri-

which facilitated the introduction of these new opinions into Scot- buted towards
hand, and which disseminated them so fast through the nation, me-
rit, on that account, a particular and carefil inquiry. The Refor-
mation is one of the greatest events in the history of mankind, and
in whatever point of light we view it, is instructive and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the i th and i6th centuries rouzed

the world from that lethargy, in which it had been funk for many
ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters
of authority by which it had been so long restrained, and ventur-
ing to move in a larger sphere, pufled its inquiries into every sub-
jeEt, with great boldness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercising their

reason, than religion was one of the firit objects which drew their
attention. Long before Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had laid open, to
many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of the eftabliflled
superstition. That subtle and refining people, satisfied with en-
joying those discoveries in secret, were little disposed to assume the
dangerous character of Reformers, and concluded the knowledge
of truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar minds
must be overawed and govcrned by popular crrors. But, animated
with a more noble and dilintcrcf:cd zcalb the German Theologian
boldly crcted the flandard of truth, and upheld it with an un-
conquerable intrepidity, which merits the admiration.and gratitude
of all fuccccding n1(c ;.

T t, G;

BOOK II. THE occasion of Luther's being first disgusted with the tenets of

--J the Romish church, and how, from a small rupture, the quarrel

widened into an irreparable breach, is known to every one who has-
been the least conversant in history. From the heart of Germany,
his opinions spread, with astonishing rapidity, all over Europe; and
wherever they came, endangered or overturned the ancient, but ill-
founded system. The vigilance and address of the court of Rome,
and the power and bigotry of the Austrian family, suppressed these
notions on their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of Eu-
rope. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated by multiplied
impositions, could neither be mollified by the fame arts, nor sub-
dued by the fame force; and encouraged by tome Princes from
piety, and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble
opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE superstition of Popery seems to have grown to the most ex-

travagant height, in those countries which are situated towards the
different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and
sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern climates,
rendered them susceptible of the deepest imprefflons of fuperfti-
tious terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less
favourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among the northern
nations. They knew little, and were disposed to believe every
thing. The mofl glaring absurdities did not fock their gross
understandings, and the most improbable ficions were received
with implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-

land, was of the molt bigotted and illiberal kind. Those doctrines
which are most apt to shock the human understanding, and those

legends

legends which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the people BOOK II.
without any attempt to palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever
call in question the reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the
other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grefs of superstition; for it is the nature of that spirit to observe no
bounds in its refped and liberality towards those, whose character
it esteems sacred. The Scottifll Kings early demonstrated how much
they were under its influence, by their vast additions to the immu-
nities and riches of the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, transferred almost the
whole crown-lands, which were at that time of great extent, into
the hands of Ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his successors. The spirit spread among all orders of
men, who daily loaded the priesthood with new possessions. The
riches of the church all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
was one of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded the
just proportion. The Scottish clergy paid one half of every tax im-
posed on land; and as there is no reason to think that, in that age,
they would be loaded with any unequal (hare of the burden, we
may conclude, that, by the time of the reformation, little less than
one half of the property in the nation had fallen into the hands of
a society, which is always acquiring, and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a considerable part of their property exten-

ded the influence of the clergy. Many estates, throughout the
kingdom, held of the church ; church-lands were let in lease at an
easy rent, and were possessed by the younger sons, and descendants

VOL I. R of

B1OK II. of the best families*. The connexion betweenfuperior and vaQhz;
L-1/- between landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave rife

to an union of great advantage to the church; and in estimating
the influence of the popish ecclesiastics over the nation, these, as
well as the real amount of their revenues, must be attended to, and
taken into the account.

TISIs extraordinary Share in the national property was accompa-

nied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the king-
dom. At a time, when the number of temporal Peers was ex-
tremely small, and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclesiastics formed a
considerable body there. And it appears from the ancient rolls of
Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court must have been, in a great
measure, under their direction n.

THE reverence due to their sacred character, which was often

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
piih clergy are remarkable, both as causes and effects of that domi-.
nion, which they had acquired over the reft of mankind. They
were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
they were neither subject to the fame laws, nor tried by the fame
judges. Every guard, that religion could supply, was placed around
their power, their pofieflions, and their persons; and endeavours
were used, not withoct success, to represent them all as equally fa-
cred.

* Keith, 521. Not. (b). 1' Spots, -Hilt. of thc Ch. of Scot. 449.

TH,E5

THE reputation for learning, which, however inconfiderable,BooK II.

was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to the reverence which '"
they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy,
and of a jut taste, were altogether unknown; in place of these, were
;substituted studies, barbarous and uninftrutive; but as the eccle-
fiaftics alone were conversant in them, this procured them esteem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude ages, which
knew nothing. War was the sole profession of the nobles, and
hunting their chief amusement; they divided their time between
these; unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by'fcience,
they disdained any employment foreign from military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and address, than bodily vigour.
Wherever the former were necessary, the clergy were entrusted;
because they alone were properly qualified for the trust. Almost all
the high offices in civil government devolved, on this account, into
their hands. The Lord Chancellor was the first subjea in the
kingdom, both in dignity and power. From the earliest ages
of the monarchy, to the death of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty four per-
sons had held that high office; and of these, forty three had been
ecclesiastics *. The Lords of Session were supreme Judges in all
matters of civil right; and by its original conflitution, the President
and one half of the Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being separated from the

reft of mankind by the law of celibacy; and undiftracted by those
cares, and unincumbered with those burdens which occupy and op-
press other men, the intcreft of their order became their only ob-
jeA, and they were at full leisure to pursue it.

* Crawf. Oflic. of State.

R 2 THE

BOOKs II, THE nature of their function gave them access to all persons, and
'- '
- Xat all seasons. They could employ all the motives of fear, and of

hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate most powerfully
on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the credulous;
they besieged the beds of the sick and of the dying. They suffered
few to go out of the world without leaving marks of their liberality
to the church; and taught them to compound with the Almighty
for their fins, by bellowing riches upon those, who called them-
selves his servants.

WHEN their own industry, or the superstition of mankind failed

of producing this effec, the Ecclesiastics had influence enough to
call in the aid of law. Whoever died inteflate, was presumed to
have destined his moveables to pious uses. The church took pof-
session of them. The children, the wife, the creditors of the per-
son deceased were often excluded from any share in what was esteem-
ed a sacred property *. As men are apt to trust to the continuance
of life with foolish confidence, and childif.ly shun every thing, that
forces them to think of their mortality, many die without set-
tling their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the Clergy in
this cafe, of which there are frequent vestiges in our laws, though
none in our historians, may be reckoned among the most plentiful
sources of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time no matrimonial or testamentary cause could

be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by laws which the clergy
themselves had framed. The penalty, too, by which the decisions
of there courts were enforced, added to their authority. A. fcntence

* Essays on Brit. Antiq. 174.

7 of

of excommunication was no less formidable, than a sentence of out- BoOK II.
lawry. It was pronounced on many occasions, and againf various
crimes: and besides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from
Christian privileges, it deprived them of all their rights as men, or
as citizens ; and the aid of the secular .power concurred with the fu-
perifition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of the church no
less deftrutive than terrible.

To these general causes, may be attributed the immense growth

both of the wealth, and power of the popish church; and without
entering into any more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftruaure so stupendous was erected.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their own superstition

and profuseness, to raise the clergy from poverty and obscurity to
riches and eminence, they began, by degrees, to feel and to mur-
mur at their incroachments. No wonder haughty and martial Ba-
rons should view the power and possessions of the church with envy;
and regard the lazy and inactive character of churchmen with the
utmost contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent and li-
centious lives of the clergy gave great and just offence to the people,
and considerably abated the veneration, which they were accustom-
ed to yield to that order of men.

IM MENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and, above

all, the severe injunction of celibacy, had concurred to introduce
this corruption of morals among the clergy; who presuming too
much upon the fubmiflion of the people, were at no pains either
to conceal, or to disguise their own vices. According to the accounts
of the Reformers, confirmed by several Popish writers, the molt

op en.

BooK II.opcn and scandalous dissolution. of manners prevailed among the
v -'J SScottifll clergy '. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame public pomp,

which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son -; and, if we may
believe Knox, he publickly continued to the end of his days a cri-
minal correspondence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more regular and exem-
plary than their Primate [I.

MEN of such charaaers ought, in reason, to have been alarmed

at the first clamours raised against their own morals, and the doc-
trines of the church, by the Protestant preachers; but the Popiflh
ecclefialcics, either out of pride or ignorance, neglected the proper
methods for silencing them. Instead of reforming their lives, or
disguising their vices, they affected to despise the censures of the
people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and au-
fterities, endeavoured to resemble the first propagators of Chriftia-
nity, the Popish clergy were compared to all those persons, who

* Winzet. ap. Keith Append. 202, 205. Lefl. deReb. Gef. Scot. 232.

-' The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in which he calls her my
daughter, are full extant. Keith, p. 42.

11 A remarkable proof of the difTolute manners of the clergy is found in the pub-

lic records. A greater number of letters of legitimation was granted durirg the
first thirty years after the Reformation, than during the whole period that has
elapscd since that time. There were obtained by the fonsof the Popiah clergy.
The ecclefiaflics, who were allowed to retain their benefices, alienated them to
their children; who, when they acquired wealth, were desirous that the slain of
illegitimacy might no longer remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue of the
Scottih Bi/J)ops, we find fevcral instances of fich alienations of church lands, by the
Popifl incumbents, to their natural children.

are

are most infamous in history,- for the enormity and scandal of their BOOK II..
crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the absurdity of the established doctrines; instead of at-
tempting to found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to:
reason; they left them without any other support or recommenda-
tion than the authority of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the
merits of the faints, were the topics, on which they insisted in their
discourses to the people; and the duty of preatching being left wholly
to Monks of the lowest and molt illiterate orders, their compositions
were fill more wretched and contemptible, than the fubjeas on
which they insisted. While the Reformers were attended by crowd-
ed and admiring audiences, the Popish preachers were either univer-
sally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order to recover their

declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith of the people,
was equally imprudent and unsuccessful. As many dotrines of
their church had derived their credit, at first, from the authority of
false miracles, they now endeavoured to call in these to their aid *.
But those lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpicious ad-
miration, or heard with implicit faith, in times of darkness and of
ignorance, met with a very different reception, in a more enlighten-
ed period. The vigilance of the Reformers dctccdd these impof-
tures, and exposed not only them, but the caufc, which needed the
aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

* SpotfwooJ, 69.

6

BOSoK II. As the Popish ecclesiastics became more and more the objecs of

---" hatred and of contempt, the discourses of the Reformers wereliften-

ed to as so many calls to liberty; and besides the pious indignation
which they excited against those corrupt doctrines, which had
perverted the nature of true Christianity; besides the zeal, which
they inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of religion;
-they gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to other views and
paflions. They hoped to shake offtheyoke ofecclefiaftical domi-
nion, which they had long felt to be oppressive, and which they
now discovered to be unchristian. They expected to recover pof-
feifion of the church revenues, which they were now taught to con-
fider as alienations made by their ancestors, with a profusion no
less undifcerning, than unbounded. They flattered themselves that
a check would be given to the pride and luxury of the clergy, who
would be obliged, henceforward, to confine themselves within the
sphere, peculiar to their sacred character. An aversion for the efta-
bliihed church, which flowed from so many concurring causes, which
was raised by considerations of religion, and heightened by motives
of policy, spread fast through the nation, and excited a spirit, that
burst out, at last, with irresistible violence.

RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were sufficient to have rouzed

this spirit. The points in controversy with the church of Rome
were of so much importance to the happiness of mankind, and
so eflential to Chriitianity, that they merited all the zeal with
which the Reformers contended in order to establish them. But
the Reformation having been represented as the effect of some wild
and enthufiaitic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt to ac-
count for the eagerness and zeal with which our ancestors em-
braced and propagated the Protestant dotrines, by taking a view of

the

the political motives, alone, which influenced them, and by shew- BOOK II.
ing how naturally these prompted them to ad with so much ardor,
will not, perhaps, be esteemed an unnecessary digression. We now
return to the course of our history.

THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent seems to have 15s4.

transported her, at first, beyond the known prudence, and mode-
ration of her characer. She began her adminifiration, by con-
ferring upon foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a ftep, The Queen
which both from the inability of firangers to discharge these offices Regent be-

gins heradmi-
with vigour, and from the envy which their preferment excites nifration with

rome unpopu-

among the natives, is never attended with good consequences. Vil- lar measures.
mort was made Comptroller, and entrusted with the management of
the public revenues; Bonot was appointed Governor of Orkney;
and Rubay honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and the
title of Vice Chancellor *. It was with the highest indignation, that
the Scots beheld offices of the greatest eminence and authority,
dealt out among itrangers. By these promotions they conceived the
Queen to have offered an insult both to their understandings, and to
their courage; to the former, by supposing them unfit for those
stations, which their ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to
the latter, by imagining that they were tame enough not to com-
plain of an affront, which, in no former age, would have been to-
lerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an incident happen-

ed which inflamed their aversion from French councils to the highest
degree. Ever since the famous contest between the houses of Va-

# Lely, dcRcb. Gelt, Scot. 189.
VOL. I. S lois

BOOK II. lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accustomed to embarrass

L-y<-' the Engliih, and to divide their strength by the sudden and formi-

dable incursions of their allies, the Scots. But, as these inroads
were seldom attended with any real advantage to Scotland, and ex-
posed it to the dangerous resentment of a powerful neighbour, the
Scots began to grow less tracable than formerly, and scrupled, any
longer, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their own quiet
and security. The change, too, which was daily introducing into
the art of war) rendered the assistance of the Scottish forces of less
importance to the French Monarch. For there reasons, Henry
having resolved upon a war with Philip II. and foreseeing that the
Queen of England would take part in her husband's quarrel, was
extremely solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the assistance of some
troops, which would be more at his'command than an undisciplined
army, led by chieftains who were almost independent. In profecu-
tion of this design, but under pretence of relieving the nobles from
the expence and danger of defending the borders, the Queen Re-
5s55 gent proposed, in Parliament, to register the value of lands through-

out the kingdom, to impose on them a small tax, and to apply that
revenue towards maintaining a body of regular troops, in constant
pay. A fixed tax upon land, which the growing expence of go-
vernment hath introduced into almost every part of Europe, was un-
known at that time, and seemed altogether inconfiffent with the
free and independent spirit of the feudal government. Nothing
could be more flocking to a generous and brave nobility, than the
entrusting, to mercenary hands, the defence of those territories which
had been acquired, or preserved by the blood of their anceflors.
They received this proposal with the utmost indignation. About
300 of the lesser Barons repaired in a body to the Qcen Regent,
and represented their sense of the intended innovation, with that

manly

manly and'determined boldness, which is natural to a free people, BOOK II.
ill a martial age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in so firm
a tone, and supported by such formidable numbers, the Queen pru-
dently abandoned a scheme, which she found to be universally odi-
ous. As the Queen herself was known perfectly to underPfand the
circumstances and temper of the nation, this measure was imputed
wholly to the suggestions of her foreign counsellors; and the
Scots were ready to proceed to the most violent extremities againfl
them.

THE French, instead of extinguishing, added fuel to the flame. Attempts to

They had now commenced hostilities against Spain, and Philip had kngde th
prevailed on the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with a a Earwi
considerable body of her troops. In order to deprive him of this
aid, Henry had recourse, as he projeced, to the Scots; and at-
tempted to excite them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's character, who, far
from any ambitious scheme of disturbing her neighbours, was wholly
occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fubjeds; the no-
bles, who were assembled by the Queen Regent at Newbottle,
listened to the solicitations of the French Monarch with extreme
coldness, and prudently declined engaging the kingdom in an en-
terprize so dangerous and unnecessary. What fle could not obtain
by persuasion, the Q.een Regent brought about by a stratagem.
Notwithstanding the peace which subsisted between the two king-
doms, fle commanded her French soldiers to rebuild a finall fort
near Berwick, which was appointed, by the last treaty, to be razed.
The garrison of Berwick sallied out; interrupted the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult rouzed the fiery spirit of
the Scots, and their promptness to revenge the least appearance of

S 2 national

BoOK II. national injury dissipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refolu-
'-L"- tions which they had so lately formed. War was determined, and

orders instantly given for raising a numerous army. But before their
forces could assemble, the ardor of their indignation had time to cool,
and the English having discovered no intention to push the war with
vigour, the nobles resumed their pacific system, and resolved to
,556. Rand altogether upon the defensive. They marched to the banks of

the Tweed, they prevented the incursions of the enemy, and having
done what they thought sufficient for the safety and honour of their
country, the Queen could not induce them,, either by her intrea-
ties, or her artifices, to advance another ftep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inactivity, D'Oyfel the Com-

mander of the French troops, who possessed entirely the confidence
of the Queen Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en-
gage the two nations inioftilities. Contrary to the orders of the
Scottish General, he rarched over the Tweed with his own soldiers,
and inverted Werk, a garrison of the English. The Scots, instead
of seconding his attempt, were enraged at his presumption. The
Queen's partiality towards France had long been fufpedted; but it
was now visible that she wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety of
Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally. Under
the feudal governments, it was in camps, that subje&s were accuf-
tomed to address the boldest remonstrances to their Sovereigns.
While arms were in their hands, they felt their own strength; and
at that time all their representations of grievances carried the autho-
rity of commands. On this occasion, the indignation of the nobles
broke out with such violence, that the Queen perceiving all attempts
to engage them in acion to be vain, abruptly dismissed her army,
and retired with the utmolt shame and difgutR; having discovered

the

the impotence of her own authority, without effecling any thing BOOK II.
which could be of advantage to France.

IT is observable, that this first instance of contempt for the Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the Qeen's pretensions to the
Regency had been principally supported by those who favoured the
Reformation, and as she still needed them for a counterpoise to the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of the house of
Hamilton; they were now treated by her with great respect, and
even admitted to no inconsiderable share in her favour and confi-
dence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving conspirators
against Cardinal Beatoun were, about this time, recalled by her
from banishment; and, through her connivance, the Protestant
preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of great
advantage to their cause. Soothed by these instances of the Queen's
moderation and humanity, the Protestants left to others the office
of remonfirating; and the leaders of the opposite faction set them
the firit example of disputing the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and precarious her autho-iThe Queen's

rity was, while it depended on the poise of these contrary facions, the Dauphin..
fle endeavoured to establish it on a broader and more secure foun-
dation, by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's marriage with
the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of Scots then was, in the
bloom of youth; and considerable as the territories were, which
she would have added to the French monarchy; reasons were not
wanting to dissuade Henry from compleating his first plan of mar-
rying her to his son. The Constable Mlontmorency had employed
all his interest to defeat an alliance which refleded so much luflrc

on,

BOOK II. on the Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the impossibility
l-"" of maintaining order and tranquillity among a turbulent people, dur-

ing the absence of their Sovereign; and for that reason, had ad-
vised Henry to bestow the young Queen upon one of the Princes of
the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might preserve that king-
dom an useful ally to France, which, by a nearer union to the Crown,
would become a mutinous and ungovernable province *. But at this
time, the Constable was a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards,
and the Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their glory; and
their influence, seconded by the charms of the young Queen, tri-
umphed over the prudent, but envious remonstrances of their rival.

THE French King accordingly applied to the Parliament of Scot-
1,57. land, which appointed eight of its members f to represent the

whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the Queen. Among
the persons, on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
character, were some of the most avowed and zealous advocates
for the Reformation; by which, may be estimated the degree of
respect and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kingdom. The inftruaions of the Parliament to those commis-
fioners flill remain +, and do honour to the wisdom and integrity
of that assembly. At the fame time that they manifested, with re-
sped to the articles of marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity
and interest of their Sovereign, they employed every precaution
which prudence could dilate, for preserving the liberty and inde-

* Mclv. Mem, 15.
1I Viz The Archbiflop of Glasgow, the Bishop of Ross, the Biflop of Orkney,

the Earls of Rothcs and Caffils, Lord Fleeming, Lord Seton, the Prior of St. An-
drew's, and John Erfiine of Dun.

:1 Keith, Append. 13.

pendcncc

pendence of the nation, and for securing the succession of the Crown BOOK II.
in the House of Hamilton.

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtained whatever fai-

tisfadion their fear or jealousy could demand. The young Queen,
the Dauphin, and the King of France ratified every article, with
the most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form, un-
der their hands and feals. But on the part of France, all this
was one continued scene of studied and elaborate deceit. Previous
to there public tranfadions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
been persuaded to subscribe privately three deeds, equally unjust, and
invalid; by which, failing the heirs of her own body, fie conferred
the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or succession
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of France, declar-
ing all promises to the contrary, which the necessity of her affairs
and the follicitations of her fubjedts had extorted, or might extort,
from her, to be void and of no obligation *. As it gives us a pro-
per idea of the charadcer of the French court under Henry II. we
may observe that the King himself, the Keeper of the Great Seals,
the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons
engaged in conducting this perfidious and difionourable projet.
The Queen of Scots was the only innocent actor in that scene of
iniquity. IHer youth, her inexperience, her education in a foreign
country, and her deference to her uncle's will, must vindicate her,
in the judgment of every impartial person, from any imputation of
blame on that account.

THIS grant, by which Mary bestowed the inheritance of her
kingdom upon strangers, was concaled with the utmost care from

* Corps Diplomat. tom. v, 21. Kcith, 73.

her

BOOK II. her fubjeas. They seem, however, not to have been unacquaint-
'-,, --w ed with the intention of the French to overturn the settlement of

the fuccefion in favour of the duke of Chatelherault. The zeal,
with which the Archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all the mea-
fures of the Queen Regent, evidently proceeded from the fears and
suspicions of that prudent prelate, on this head *.
April 1, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; and

the French, who had hitherto asseted to draw a veil over their de-
signs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions without
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed
that the Dauphin Ihould assume the name of King of Scotland.
This they confidered only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They in-
sifted that the Dauphin's title should be publickly recognized; that
the Crown Matrimonial fiould be conferred upon him; and that
all the rights pertaining to the huiband of a Queen should be vetted
in his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who married an
heiress kept possession of her estate during his own life, if he hap-
pened to survive her, and the children born of the marriage t. This
was called the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at ap-
plying this rule, which takes place in private inheritances, to the
succession of the kingdom; and that seems to be implied in
their demand of the Crown Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the
Scottish historians, and which they have neglected to explain.
As the French had reason to expea difficulties in carrying through

* About this time, the French seem to have had some design of reviving the Earl

of Lennox's pretensions to the Succfflion, in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke
of Chatelherault. Haynes, 215, 219. Sorbes Collcft. vol .
i. 189.

t Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 58.

4 this

this measure, they began with founding the deputies who were BooK IT.
then at Paris. The English, in the marriage articles between their '
Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an exarple to the age, of that
prudent jealousy and reserve, with which a foreigner ihould be ad-
mitted so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottish de-
puties had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin, exprefied
themselves with remarkable caution *. Their answer was in the
fame spirit, refpeaful, but firm; and discovered a fixed resolution
of consenting to nothing, that tended to introduce any alteration in
the order of fucceflion to the Crown.

Fou R of the deputies t happening to die before they returned

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the effects
of poison, which was supposed to have been given them by the
emissaries of the house of Guise. The hiflorians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refped to flories of this kind,
which are so well calculated to please the malignity of some men, and
to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all, that, in
every age, they have been swallowed without examination, and be-
lieved contrary to reason. No wonder the Scots should easily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such firong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and from the known
character of the Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
justice of the ends which they pursued, or of the means which
they employed. For the honour of human nature, it must, how-
ever, be observed, that as we can discover no motive, which could
induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there appears no
evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Scots of that
age, influenced by national animofities and prejudices, were inca-

* Keith, Append. 20.
I1 The Bifiop of Orkncy, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of Caffils, and Lord
Fleming.

VOL. I. T pable

BOOK II. pable of examining the circumstances of the cafe with calmness, or
-^--' of judging concerning them with candour. All parties agreed in

believing the French to have been guilty of this deteitable acion;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase the aversion for
them which was growing among all ranks of men.

TheRegent NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which their proposal
prevails on the
Parliament to concerning the Crown Matrimonial met with from the Scottish de-
grant it.
Novgra 29. puties, the French ventured to move it in Parliament. The par-

tizans of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their designs upon
the fuccefflon, opposed it with great zeal. But a party, which the
feeble and unsteady conduct of their leader had brought under much
difreputation, was little able to withstand the influence of France,
and the address of the Qieen Regent, seconded, on this occasion,
by all the numerous adherents of the Reformation. Besides, that
artful Princess dressed out the French demands in a less offensive
garb, and threw in so many limitations as seemed to render them
of small consequence. These either deceived the Scots, or removed
their scruples; and in compliance to the Queen, they palled an ac,
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin; and with the
fondest credulity, trufled to the frail security of words and Ratutes,
against the dangerous encroachments of power .

Coitinues to TiE concurrence of the Protestants, with the Qeen Regent,
court the 1'ro-
telants, in promoting a measure so acceptable to France, while the Popish

clergy under the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, op-
posed it with so much violence f, is one of those singular circum-

* The Aft of Parliament is worded with the utmost care, with a view to guard

against any breach of the order of fucceflion. But the Duke, not relying on this
alone, entered a solemn protestation to secure his own right, Kcith, 76. It is plain,
that he fufpeced the French of having some intention to set aside his right of fucccf-
sion; and, indeed, if they had no dcfign of that kind, the cagerncfs with which
they urged their demand was childiLh. 1t Melv. 47.

fiances,

stances, in the conduct of parties, for which this period is so re- BooK II.
markable. It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dextrous '
management of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The protestants were, by this
time, almost equal to the Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own strength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which the ancient
laws armed the ecclefialtics against them. They longed to be ex-
empted from this oppressive jurisdiction, and publicly to enjoy the
liberty of professing those opinions, and of exercising that worship,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and to be acceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which the
whole weight of priestly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence must extort it from the
reluctant hand of their Sovereign, or by prudent compliances, they
might expet it from her favour, or her gratitude. The former
is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which no nation
has recourse suddenly; and fubjets seldom venture upon resistance,
which is their last remedy, but in cafes of extreme neceflity. On
this occasion the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Qieen's designs, they hoped to me-
rit her protection. This disposition the Queen encouraged to the
utmost, and amused them so artfully with many promises, and some
concessions, that, by their assistance, she surmounted in Parliament
the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jealousy, which
would, othcrvife, have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTH 1E R circumftancc contributed somewhat to acquire the Re-

gent such considerable influence in this Parliament. In Scotland, all
the bioflprics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
Parliament, were in the gift of the crown *. From the time of her

* See Book I.

T 2 acceflion

BOOK II. accession to the regency, the Queen had kept in her own hands almofi
^-Y "' ,all those which became vacant, except such as were, to the great dif-

gust of the nation, bellowed upon foreigners. Among there, her
brother the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo
and Melrofs, two of the most wealthy foundations in the kingdom *.
By this condut, she thinned the ecclesiastical bench -, which was
entirely under the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and
which, by its numbers and authority, usually had great weight in
the house, so as to render any opposition it could give, at that time,
of little consequence. -

THE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior of St. Andrew's,

one of the moll powerful, and the other the mofi popular leader of
the Protestants, were appointed to carry the crown and other en-
signs of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they were diverted
by the part they were called to at, in a more interesting scene,
which now begins to open.

Elizabethfuc- BEFORE we turn towards this, it is neceflary to observe, that,
ceeds to the
Crown of on the I7th of November, Mary of England finished her short,
England. and inglorious reign. Her fifler Elizabeth took possession of the

throne without opposition; and the Protestant religion was, once
more, established by law in England. The accession of a Queen,
who, under very difficult circumstances, had given strong indica-
tions of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered her
reign so illustrious, attraced the eyes of all Europe. Among the
Scots both parties observed her first motions with the utmost con-
cern, as they easily foresaw that the would not remain long an in-
different fpedator of their tranfadions.

* Lefy, 202.
t It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, which Lcfly calls a very full one,
that only seven Biflops and sixteen Abbots were present.

UNDEP

UNDER many discouragements and much oppreflion, the Re- BOOK II.

formation advanced towards a full establishment in Scotland. All
the low country, the most populous, and, at that time, the most
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tindured with the Pro-
teftant opinions; and if the fame impreflions were not made in the
more distant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame difpo-
fitions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, whose most
indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity of those, who desired
their instructions. Among a people bred to arms, and so prone to
mutiny as the Scots; and in an age, when religious passions had
taken such strong possession of the human mind, and moved and
agitated it with so much violence; the peaceable and regular demea-
nour of so numerous a party is truly astonishing. From the death
of Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the first who suffered in Scotland for the
Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed, and during so long a
period, no violation of public order or tranquillity had proceeded
from that feet *; and though rouzed and irritated by the most cruel
excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in no instance, transgress
thofebounds of duty which the law prescribes to subje&s. Besides the
prudence of their own leaders, and the protetion which the Queen
Regent, from political motives, afforded them, the moderation of
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition.
That prelate, whole private life cotemporary writers tax with great
irregularities +, governed the church, for some years, with a tem-
per and prudence of which there are few examples in that age.
But some time before the meeting of last Parliament, the Archl-

* The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private revenge, and be-

ing contrived and executed by fixtcen persons only, cannot, with juflicc, be imputed
to the whole Proteflant party.

*t Knox, Buchanan, Keith, 208.

bifflop

BOOK II. bishop departed from those humane maxims, by which he had hi-

L'>v' therto regulated his conduct; and whether, in spite to the Queen,

who had entered into so close an union with the Protestants, or in
compliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the
rage of persecution against the Reformed; sentenced to the flames
an aged priest, who had been conviced of embracing the Protefant
opinions; and summoned several others, fuipecded of the fame crime,
to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which was soon to convene
at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protestants at this unex-

pected and barbarous execution, but the zeal, with which they
espoused the defence of a cause, that now seemed devoted to de-
ftrution. They had immediate recourse to the Qeen Regent;
and as her success in the Parliament, which was then about to meet,
depended on their concurrence, she not only sheltered them from
the impending storm, but permitted them the exercise of their re-
ligion, with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unfa-
tisfied with this precarious tenure, by which they held their reli-
gious liberty, the Protestants laboured to render their possession of
it more secure and independent. With this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for some legal protection, against the ex-
orbitant and oppreffivejurifdiction of the ecclesiastical courts, which,
by their arbitrary method of proceeding, founded in the canon law,
were led to sentences the most ihocking to humanity, by maxims
the most repugnant to justice. But the Queen, who dreaded the
effects of a debate on this delicate subje6t, which could not fail of
exciting high and dangerous passions, prevailed on the leaders of
the party, by new and more solemn promises of her protection, to
desist from any application to Parliament, where their numbers

and

and influence would, in all probability, have procured them, if BOOK II.
not the entire redress, at least, some mitigation of their griev-
ances.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convocation of the Po-

pish clergy, but with the fame ill success, which hath always at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, addressed to that order of
men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error,
are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions,
offered to truth; but from any society of men, no such effort can
be expected. The corruptions of a society, recommended by com-
mon utility, andjuftified by universal practice, are viewed, by its
members, without shame, or horror; and Reformation never pro-
ceeds from themselves, but is always forced upon them by some
foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
the behaviour of the convocation in the present conjunture. All
the demands of the Protetfants were rejeced with contempt; and
the Popish clergy, far from endeavouring, by any prudent concef-
sions, to tooth and to reconcile such a numerous body, asserted
the doctrines of their church, concerning some of the most ex-
ceptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new of-
fence. *.

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Protestants first be-

gan to fufpeA some change in the Regent's disposition towards them.
Though joined with them for many years, by interest, and united,
as they conceived, by the firongeft tics of affection and of grati-
tude, the discovered, on this occaiion, evident symptoms, not only
of coldness, but of a growing disgust and aversion. In order to ac-

* Keith, 8r.

count
4

BOOK II. count for this, our historians do little more than produce the trite

559~- observations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter the cha-

ra&er, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they, .having
reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no longer
preserved her accustomed moderation, but, with an insolence usual
to the fortunate, looked down upon those, by whose assistance ihe
had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity
of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the Qeen's difpo-
fition, that we must search for the motives of her present condu6t.
These were derived from another, and a more remote source, which,
in order to clear the subsequent tranfations, we shall endeavour
to open with some care.

Ambitious THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc-
views of the
Princes of cefsful, than daring; but all their schemes were distinguished by

ai being vast and unbounded, Though strangers at the court of France,

their eminent qualities had raised them, in a short time, to an height
of power, superior to that of all other fubjeds, and had placed them
on a level even with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their direcion. No-
thing but the royal dignity remained unattained, and they were ele-
vated to a near alliance with it, by the marriage of the Qeen of
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity, and
to render their niece more worthy the heir of France, they set on
foot her claim to the Crown of England, which was founded on
pretences not unplaufible.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are known

to all the world. Moved by the caprices of his love, or of his
resentment, that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or

beheaded

beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he married. In order to BOOK II.
gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by 559.
At of Parliament; and yet, with that fantastic inconsistence which
distinguishes his character, he, in his last will, whereby he was im-
powered to fettle the order of succession, called both of them to
the throne, upon the death of their brother Edward; and, at the
fame time, passing by the posterity of his eldest sifter Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of succession to con-
tinue in the descendants of his younger filter, the Duchess of Sus-
folk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity whereof was ad-

mitted' by the English, but never recognized by foreigners, Mary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her accession
to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her fifler Eliza-
beth, and rendered her pofleffion of it precarious and insecure. Rome
trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Proteflant Queen of such
eminent abilities. The fame superstitious fears alarmed the court
of Spain. And France beheld, with indignation, a throne, to which
the Queen of Scots could form so many pretensions, occupied by a
rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Catholics, excluded
her from any legal right of fucceflion. The impotent hatred of
the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have
produced no sudden or formidable effect. The ardent and impetu-
ous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, go-
verned the court of France, was more decisive, and more to be dread-
ed. Instigated by them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary, per- Th yperfila
fuaded his daughter-in-law and her husband, to aflume the title of Mary to ;f-

ftuiinllec the title
King and Queen of England. They affected to publish this to of yQceei of

VoL. I. U al ng;iad.

BOOK I. iall fiEurpe; They uied that ftyre. a ppellhith in 'publie tpets,

.- -- -.foime of which still emaii *. Thti armis of ESnglanid were ern-

9 graved on their coin and plate, and: born by them on all occaons.,

No preparations; h6wever, were made to support this impolitic
and premature clain. Elizabeth was already feated on her throne;
she possessed all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts of policy,
which were necessary for maintaining that station.. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The marine of France
had been utterly negle&ed; and Scotland remained the only avenue,

Reolve to in- by which the territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It
vade England. was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined.

to make their attack t; and, by using the name and pretensions of
the Scottihh Queen, they hoped to rouze the English Catholics, for-
midable at that time by their zeal and numbers, and exasperated
to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account. of the change which.
the had made in the national religion.

In order to IT was vainrto-exped the afllflance of the Scottish Protestants to
this, necessary dethrone a Queen, whom all Europe esteemed the guardian and de-
to check the
Reformation fender of the Reformed.faith. To break the power and reputa-
in Scotland.

tion of that party in Scotland, became,. for this reason, a neceflary
ftep towards the invasion of England.. With this, the Princes of
Lorrain resolved to open their scheme;. And as perfecutioh was
the only method'for: suppressing religious opinions, known in that
age, or ditated by the despotic and sanguinary spirit of the Romilfh
fuperftitioni. this, in its utmost violence, they determined to em-
ploy. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other

* Anderson's Diplom. Scot. No. 68 .&. I64.
1 F.orbcs Collet. i. 253, 277

3 leaders

leaders' f the party, were marked out by them for immediate de- BOOK II.
Srudion *; and they hoped, by punifhinrg them, to intimidate ."-

Ix559.

their followers. Instructions for this purpose were sent from
France to the Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious Prin-
cess condemned a measure, which was equally violent and im-
politic. By long residence in Scotland, she had become acquaint-
ed with the eager and impatient temper of the nation; ihe well
knew the power, the number, and popularity of the Prote-
ftant leaders; and had been a witness to the intrepid and uncon-
*querable resolution which religious fervour could inspire. What,
then, could be gained by rouzing this dangerous spirit, which,
hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to restrain ? If
it once broke loose, the authority of a Regent would be little ca-
pable to subdue, or.even to moderate its rage. And if, in order
'to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm
,to the whole nation, irritated already at the excessive power which
,the French poffefled in the kingdom, and suspicious of all their
designs. Amidst the shock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the Protestant doctrine, it would be well if
the whole fabric of the established church were not shaken, and
perhaps overturned from the foundation. These prudent remon-
ftrances made no impression on her brothers; precipitant, but in-
flexible in all their resolutions, they insisted on the full and rigorous
execution of their plan. Mary, passionately devoted to the inte-
refts of France, and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her
own opinions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe-
cute their commands, with implicit submission t; and, contrary

* Sorbes, i. 152.
i Mel, 48. Mcm, de Caftelnau. ap. Jebb. vol. ii. 446.

'U 2 to

BoOK II. to her own judgment, and to all the rules of found policy, she

5 became the initrument of exciting civil commotions in Scotland,

which ended with the ruin of the French power, and of the Po-
pish religion in that kingdom.

The Regent FROM the time of the Queen's competition for the Regency
akers her con-

wd: \vith re-with the Duke of Chatelherault, the Popish clergy, under the di-
oAitnt'the refion of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, had. set themselves in

opposition to all her measures. Her first ftep towards the execu-
tion of her new scheme was to regain their favour. Nor was
this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The Popith ecclefiaitics,
separated from the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldest and most successful invention of human policy; and com-
bined among themselves in the closest and moit sacred union; have
been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice all private and particu-
lar passions to the dignity and interest of their order. Delighted,
on this occasion, with the profpeta of triumphing over a faction,
whose encroachments they had long dreaded; and animated with
the hopes of re-establishing their declining grandeur on a firmer
basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory of pat injuries, and
engaged to second the Queen in all her attempts to check the pro-
grefs of the Reformation. The Queen, being secure of their aflift-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the convocation, by which
the principles of the Reformers were condemned; and at the fame
time, fhle issued a Proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the Romish ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake the Qeen's intentions,

the Protestants, who saw the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of

Loudon,

Loudon, to expostulate with her, concerning this change towards BOOK II.
severity, which their former services had so little merited, and 55
which her reiterated promises gave them no reason to expect. She,
without disguise or apology, avowed to them her resolution of ex-
tirpating the Reformed religion out of the kingdom. And, upon
their urging her former engagements, with an uncourtly, but ho-
nest boldness, she so far forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a
sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition may
be to entertain it, prudence /hould teach them to conceal as much
as possible. " The promises of Princes, fays the, ought not to be
" too carefully remembered, nor the performance of them exated,
c unless it suits their own conveniency."
THE indignation which betrayed the Queen into this rash ex- Summons

theirpreachers

pression, was nothing in comparison of that, with which she was to appear be-
animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the Reformed fre her.
religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once, (he
threw off the mask, and commanded all the Protestant preachers in
the kingdom to be summoned to a court of justice, which was to
be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Protestants, who,
from their union, began, about this time, to be diftinguithed by
the name of the CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not intimi-
dated by this danger; and instantly resolved not to abandon the men,
to whom they were indebted for the most valuable of all bleflings,
the knowledge of truth. At that time there prevailed in Scotland,
with respect to criminal trials, a cultom, introduced, at first, by
the institutions of valfalage and clanfllip, and tolerated, afterwards,
under a feeble government; any person accuscd of a crime was ac-
companied to the place of trial, by a retinue of his friends and ad-
herents, aflembled for that purpose, from every corner of the king-

1 dom.

BOOK II. dom. Authorized by thIs ancient pracice, the Reformed convened,

in great numbers, to attend their pastors to Stirling. The Queen
dreaded their approach with a train so numerous, though unarmed,
and in order to prevent them from advancing, /he empowered John
Erskine of Dun, a person of eminent authority with the party, to
promise, in her name, that ihe would put a stop to the intended
trial, on condition, the preachers and their retinue advanced no near-
er to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced himself of the Queen's
iincerity, served her with the utmost zeal. And the Proteflants,
averse from proceeding to 'any aa of violence, listened with plea-
sure to so pacific a proposition. The preachers, with a few leaders
of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had ga-
thered from different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and retired
to their own habitations.

Breaks a pro- BUT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Queen, on the
mile on which
tlhy had re- tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been

lid. summoned, and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of justice

took place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconsistent with
that integrity which should prevail in all tranfations between Sove-
reigns and their fubjedts, the Queen forfeited the esteem and con-
fidence of the whole nation. The Proteflants, shocked no less at
the indecency, with which the violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been made the inftru-
ment for deceiving his party, inflantly abandoned Stirling, and re-
pairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his associates, by his repre-
fentations of the Queen's inflexible resolution to suppress 'their re-
ligion.

TlHE

THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his re-BooK II.

presentations: He having been carried a prisoner into France, 559
together with the other persons taken in the caitle of St. An-Thisoicafions

an infurredion

drew's, soon made his escape out of that country;. and residing at Perth.
sometimes in England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at last, been
driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of the Popish cler-
gy,. and was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was
called by the leaders of the Protestants in Scotland; and, in
compliance with their felicitations,. he set out for his native
country, where he arrived a few days before the trial appoint-
ed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to Perth, to share with
his brethren in the common danger, or to assist them in pro-
moting the common cause. While their minds were in that'
ferment, which the Queen's perfidiousness and their own danger
occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue
against idolatry, inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage. The.
indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox's sermon, was
preparing to celebrate mass, and began to decorate the altar for
that purpose, precipitated them into immediate acion.. With tu-
multuary, but irresistible violence, they fell upon the churches in:
thatcity, overturned the altars, defaced the pictures, broke in pieces
the images; and proceeding next to the monasteries, they in a
few hours, laid those sumptuous fabrics almost level with the ground.
This riotous infurredion was not the effect of any concert or pre-
vious deliberation: censured by the reformed preachers, and pub-
lickly condemned by the persons of most power and credit with
the party, it must be regarded merely as an accidental. eruption
of popular rage *.

* Knox, HIifl. 127, 128.

BUTn.

BooK II. BUT to the Queen herself, there proceedings appeared in a very
'-'t -- different light. Besides their manifest contempt for her authority,

'559.
The Regent the Protestants had violated every thing in religion, which she
marches a-
gain them. esteemed venerable or holy; and, on both there accounts, she de-

termined to inflict the severest vengeance on the whole party. She
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottish forces she could levy of a sudden, She marched
directly to Perth, in hopes of surprising the Proteflant leaders, be-
fore they could assemble their followers, whom out of confidence in
her disingenuous promises they had been rashly induced to dismiss.
Intelligence of there preparations and menaces was soon conveyed
to Perth. The Protestants would, gladly, have toothed the Queen,
by addresses both to herself, and to the persons of greatest credit in
her court; but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took measures for their own defence. Their adherents, animated
with zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so good a
cause, flocked, in such numbers, to Perth, that they not only fe-
cured the town from danger, but, within a few days, were in a con-
dition to take the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced with
an army 7000 strong.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to engage. The

Queen dreaded the event of a battle with men, whom the ser-
vour of religion raised above the sense of fear, or of danger. The
Protestants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior of
St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons of their party, flill
adhering to the Queen; and destitute of their aid and counsel, de-
clined hazarding an acion, the ill success of which might have
proved the ruin of her cause. The profpea of an accommoda-
tion was for there reasons highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll

and

andthe Prior, who were the Queen's commissioners for condudc- BOOK II.
ing the negociation, teem to have been sincerely desirous ofrecon- 5
ciling the contending factions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriving
unexpectedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congregation,
augmented the Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord- A treaty con-
ingly concluded, in which it was stipulated, that both armies should cluded.
be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to the Queen; that
indemnity should be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late infurredtion; that no French garri-
son should be left in Perth, and no French soldiers Ihould approach
within three miles of that place; and that a Parliament should im-
mediately be held, in order to compose whatever differences might
still remain *.

THE leaders of the Congregation, distrustful of the Queen's fin- May 2t.

cerity, and sensible that concessions, flowing not from inclination,
but extorted by the necessity of her affairs, could not long remain
in force, entered into a new aflbciation, by which they bound them-
selves, on the first infringement of the present treaty, or on the
least appearance of danger to their religion, to reassemble their fol-
lowers, and to take arms in defence of what they efleemed the
cause of God and of their country t.

THE Queen, by her conduct, demonitrated these precautions to Broken by the

be the result of no groundless or unnecessary fear. No sooner were Regent.
the Protestant forces dismissed, than ilhe broke every article in the
treaty. She introduced French troops into Perth, fined some of
the inhabitants, banifllcd others, removed the Magistrates out of
office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, flhe left behind her a garrison

* Keith, 89. f Knox, 138.
VOL. I. X of

BOOK II. of 600 men, with orders to allow the exercise of no other religion

L'
- ' than the Roman Catholic. The situation of Perth, a place at that

time of some firength, and a town the most proper of any in the
kingdom for the itation of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach of public faith;
which she endeavoured to colour, by alledging that the body of men
left at Perth was entirely composed of native Scots, though kept in
pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the Religion, but the Liberties of the king-
dom were threatened; and that the French troops were to be em-
ployed as instruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then was,
the poverty of their country made it impossible to keep their armies
long assembled; and even a very finall body of regular troops might
have proved formidable to the nation, though confifing wholly of
soldiers. B.t what number of French forces were then in Scot-
land, at what times, andc under what pretexts they returned, after
having left the kingdom in the year 55Q, we cannot, with any
certainty determine. Cotemporary historians often fele&, with
little judgment, the circumstances which they transmit to pofRerity;
and, with refpet to matters of the greatest curiosity and import-
ance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the dark. We may con-
jeaure however, from some passages in Buchanan, that the French
and Scots in French pay, amounted at least to 3000oo men, under
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the house of Guise;
and- they were soon augmented to a much more formidable num-
ber.

. THTHE

THE Queen, encouraged by having so considerable a body ds well Book IL

disciplined troops at her command, and instigated by the violent 55
counsels of D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to violate
the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash action, once more threw the
nation into the most dangerous convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and The Protef -
Prior of St. Andrew's instantly deserted a court, where faith and ho- take arnag
nour seemed to them to be no longer regarded. The Barons from
the neighbouring counties repaired to them, the preachers rouzed
the people to arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent ope-
rations, which accident had occasioned at Perth, were now encou-
raged out of policy. The enraged multitude was let loose, and
churches and monasteries, the monuments of ecclefiafiic pride and
luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, without losing a mo-

ment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congregation
got the fart, once more, of her vigilance and activity. In that
warlike age, when -all men were accustomed to arms,and on the
least profpeet of danger were ready to run to them, the leaders of
the Protestants found no difficulty to raise an army. Though they
set out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an hundred horse,
crowds flocked to their ltandards from every corner of the country
through which they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet the Queen
with superior force *.

THIE Queen furp rized at the approach of so formidable a body,

which was drawn up by its leaders in such a manner, as added
greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again rccourfe to nego-

'J Knox, 11 .

X ? ciation.

BOOK II. ciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the Pro-
L- -T.. teftant religion, their zeal for which had at first rouzed the leaders

of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they had

They aim at now in view. They were animated with the warmest love of civil
redressing ci-
vil as well as liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger, from the
religious grievances. attempts of the French forces; and these two passions mingling,

added reciprocally to each other's itrength. Together with more
enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled the human mind
with more liberal and generous sentiments concerning civil govern-
ment. The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the power
of Princes. The implicit submission to all her decrees, which is
exacted by the Romish Church, prepares and breaks the mind for
political servitude; and the do&rines of the Reformers, by overturn-
ing the eitablifhed system of fuperllition, weakened the firmest foun-
dations of civil tyranny. That bold spirit of enquiry, which led
men to reject theological errors, accompanied them in other sciences,
and discovered every where the fame nianly zeal for truth. A new
fludy introduced at the fame time, added greater force to the spirit of
liberty. Men became acquainted with the Greek and Roman au-
thors, who described exquisite models of free government, far fu-
perior to the inaccurate and oppressive system established by the
feudal law; and produced such illustrious examples of public vir-
tue as wonderfully suited both the circumflances, and spirit of that
age. Many among the most eminent reformers, were themselves
considerable maflers in ancient learning; and all of them eagerly
adopted the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard to go-
vernment *-. The most ardent love of liberty accompanied the Pro-

tcelant

*The cxceffive admiration of ancient policy was the occasion of Knox's famous
book concerning the Govertment of Ionomen, wherein, conformnable to the maxims

of

teftant religion, throughout all its progress; and wherever it was BOOK II.
embraced, it rouzed an independent spirit, which rendered men at- I-'.'
tentive to their privileges as subjects, and jealous of the incroach-
ments of their Sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers of the
Reformation, infused generous sentiments concerning government
into the minds of their hearers, and the Scottish Barons, naturally
free and bold, were prompted to assert their rights with more free-
dom and boldness than ever. Instead of obeying the Queen Re-
gent, who had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they de-
manded not only the redress of their religious grievances, but as
a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and securing its liberties,
required the immediate expulsion of the French troops out of Scot-
land. It was not in the Queen's power to make so important a
concession, without the concurrence of the French Monarch; and
as some time was requisite in order to obtain that, (he hoped, dur-
ing this interval, to receive such reinforcements from France, as
would insure the accomplishment of that design, which she had
twice attempted with unequal strength. Mean while, ihe agreed
to a cessation of arms for eight days, and, before the expiration June i
of these, engaged to transport the French troops to the South fide
of the Forth; and to fend commissioners to St. Andrew's, who
ihould labour to bring all differences to accommodation. As she
hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe the Protestants
in the southern counties, the former article in the treaty was

of the ancient legislators, which modern experience has proved to be ill-founded, he
pronounces the elevation of women to the supreme authority, to be utterly destructive
of good government. His principles, authorities, and examples were all drawn from
ancient writers. I he fame observation may be made with regard to Buchanan's
Dialogue, De '/ re Regni spud Scotos. It is founded not on the maxims of feudal, but
of ancient government.

7 punctually

BOOK II. punctually executed; the latter, having been inserted merely to
1.y -- amuse the Congregation, was no longer remembered.
x$59.

A second trea- BY these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the Queen
ty violated. loft all credit with her adversaries; and no safety appearing in any

other course, they again took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the
French forces had laid open to them all the country situated be-
tween Forth and Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjeded to the insolence and exactions of the garrison, which the
Queen had left there, implored the assistance of the Congregation
for their relief. Thither they marched, and having, without effet,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The Queen employed
the Earl of Huntly and Lord Erskine to divert them from this en-
terprize. But her wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated so
often, they could deceive no longer; and without listening to her
offers, the Protestants continued the siege, and soon obliged the
garrison to capitulate.

Rapid march AFT ER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to seize Stirling,
and fuccef of
the Protest- a place of some strength,. and, from its. command of the only bridge

nts. over the Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the Con-

gregation, having intelligence of her design, prevented the execu-
tion of it, by a hasty march thither, with part of their forces. The
inhabitants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to them the
gates of their town. Thence they advanced, with the fame rapi-
dity, towards Edinburgh, which the Queen, on their approach, a-
bandonedwith precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

TIE

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread the BOOK It.

ardour of Reformation, and the utmost excesses of violence were 1
committed upon churches and monafseries. The former were
spoiled of every decoration, which was then esteemed sacred, the
latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at this distance of time, to
condemn the furious zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the over-
throw of so many stately fabrics, the monuments of our ancestors
magnificence, and among the noblest ornaments of the kingdom.
But, amidst the violence of a Reformation, carried on in oppofi-
tion to legal authority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more proper to allure
and interest the multitude, or more fatal to the grandeur of the
established church. However absurd and ill-founded the fpecula-
tive errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and attention are requi-
site towards difSovering them. The abuses and' corruptions, which
had crept into the public worship of that church, lay more open
to observation, and by itriking the senses, excited more universal
disgust. Under the long reign of Heathenifin, superstition seems
to have exhauftied its' talent of invention, so that when' a fuperfti-
tious spirit seized Christians, they were obliged to imitate the Hea-
thens in the pomp and: magnificence of their ceremonies, and to bbor-
row from.them the ornaments; and decorations of their tempfes. To
thepure: and simple worship of the primitive Chriffians, there fuc-
ceeded; a species of splendid: idolatry, nearly resemblings those pagan
originals; whence it had been copied. The contrariety of such ob-
fervances, to' te: spirit of Christianity, was-almot the first thing,
in the Romish system, which awakened the indignation of the Re-
fonners;. who applying tolthefe, the denunciations in- the Old Testa-
ment against ido'lhtry, imagined that they colu'd' not endeavour at
suppressing them, with too much zeal. No task could be more

acceptable

BooK II. aceptable to the multitude, than to overturn those feats of fuperfti-

-'~'-~ tion; they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was the.
559. man whose hand was most adventrous and successful in executing a

work esteemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain this
impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular and violent as its'-allies
were, they tended directly to that end which they had in view;
for by demolishing the monasteries throughout the kingdom, and
setting at liberty their wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
it impossible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-assemble the other.

BUT amidst there irregular proceedings, a circumstance, which

does honour to the conduct and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage of
their followers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics were exposed to any personal in-
fult, and not a single man suffered death .

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with which these

great revolutions were effected, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than 300
men marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior of
St. Andrew's t; with this inconsiderable force they advanced. But
wherever they came, the people joined them in a body; their army
was seldom less numerous than 5000 men; the gates of every town
were thrown open to receive them; and, without firiking a single
June 29. blow, they took pofeflion of the capital of the kingdom.

TH I rapid and aftoniflhing success seems to have encouraged the
Reformers to extend their views, and to rife in their demands.

Lefly, 231. t Keith, 94.

Not

.Not satisfied with their first claim of toleration for their relic oll, BooK II.
they now, openly, aimed at eftablithing the Protestant doctrine
on the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix
their residence at Edinburgh; and, by their appointment, Knox
and some other preachers taking possession of the pulpits, which
had been abandoned by the affrightened clergy, declaimed againrc
the errors of Popery, with fuich fervent zeal, as could not fail of
gaining many proselytes.

IN the mean time, the Qeen, who had prudentiy given way

to a torrent which fle could not refill, observed, with pieaiure,
that it now began to subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the cxpences of a cam-
paign, protracted so long beyond the usual time of service in that
age, had exhausted all the money, which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to be already done, re-
tired to their own habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous
or wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh.
As intclligence is procured in civil wars with little difficulty, lwhat-
ever was tranfaated at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar.
And the Queen, regulating her own condua by the situation of
her adversaries, artfully amused them with the profpeEt of an im-
mediate accommodation; while, at the fame time, fle, by fludied
delays, spun out the negociations for that purpose, to such a length,
that, in the end, the party dwindled to an inconfidcrable number,
nnd as if peace had been already rc-eftablifilcd, became carclefs of
military discipline. The Queen, who watched for such an oppor-
tunity, advanced, unexpectedly, by a sudden march in the night
with all her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city

VO.L I. Y with

BOOK II. with the utmost consternation. The Protestants, weakened by the

_- -55- imprudent dispersion of their followers, durst not encounter the-

French troops in the open field; and were even unable to defend an
ill-fortified town against their assaults. Unwilling, however, to
abandon the citizens to the Qu en's mercy, they endeavoured, by
facing the enemies army, to gain time for collecting their own as-
fociates. But, the Queen, in spite of all their refiilance, would
have easily forced her way into the town, if the seasonable con-
clufion of a truce had not procured her admission, without the es-
fusion of blood.
A third treaty. THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the Congregation to

liften to any overtures of peace; and as the Queen was looking
daily for the arrival. of a strong reinforcement from France, and ex-
peted great advantages from a cessation of arms, flie also agreed
to it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a suspension of
hostilities, from the 24th of July to the Io.th of January, it was fli-
pulated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protestants
flould open the gates of Edinburgh next morning to the Qeen
Regent; remain in dutiful fubjedion to her government; abstain
from all future violation of religious houses; and give no interrup-
tion to the established clergy, either in the discharge of their func-
tions, or in the enjoyment of their benefices. On the other hand,
the Queen agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or profef-
fors of the Protestant religion; to allow no other form of worship
in Edinburgh but the Reformed; and to permit the free and pub-
lick exercise of it all over the kingdom. The Queen, by there
liberal concessions in behalf of their religion, hoped to tooth the
Protestants, and expeced, firom indulging their favourite passion,
to render them more compliant with refpea to other articles,

particu-

particularly the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland. BooK II
The anxiety which the Queen expressed for retaining this body '-~"--
of men, rendered them, more and more, the objets of national
jealousy and aversion. The immediate expulsion of them was
therefore demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but the
QLeen, taking advantage of the distress of the adverse party,
eluded the request, and would consent to nothing more, than that
a French garrison should not be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate itate of their affairs, imposed on the Congrega-

tion the necessity of agreeing to this article, which, however,
was very far from giving them fatisfaaion. Whatever apprehen-
sions the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces
in the kingdom, were abundantly justified during the late com-
motions. A fmnall body of those troops, maintained in conflant
pay, and rendered formidable by regular discipline, had checked
the progress of a martial people, though animated with zeal both
for religion and liberty. The smallest addition to their number,
and a considerable one was daily expected, might prove fatal to
public liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the danger of be-
ing reduced from an independent kingdom, to the mean con-
dition of a province, annexed to the empire of its powerful
ally.

IN order to provide againit this imminent calamity, the Duke

of Chatelherault, and Earl of IIuntly, immcdiately after conclud-
ing the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs of the Con-
gregation. These two noblemen, the moist potent, at that time, in
Scotland, were the leaders of the party, which adhered to the
eflabliflhcd church. They had followed the Q. een, during the

Y 3 ,late

BOOK II. late commotions, and having access 'to observe more narrowly the
'L"-'"-' dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke

which was preparing for their country, surmounted all other con-
fiderations, and determined them rather to endanger the religion:
which they professed, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and promised
to Argvll, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who were ap-
pointed to meet with them, that if the Qeen should, with her-
usual insincerity, violate any article in the treaty of truce, or refuse
to gratify the wishes of the whole nation, by dismissing her French
troops, they would, then, instantly join with their countrymen, in'
compelling her to a measure, which the public safety, and the
preservation of their liberties rendered necessary *.
July 8. ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; just when he had'

adopted a system,' with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
would, in all probability, have retfored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom -. Towards the close of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in favour, and the Constable
Montmorency, by the affliftance of the Duchess of Valentinois,.
recovered that ascendant over the spirit of his master, which his
great experience, and his faithful, though often unfortunate ser-
vices, seemed justly to merit. That prudent minister imputed the
insurrections in Scotland wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardi-
nal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could not
fail of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men, whofd
minds were possessed with that jealousy, which is inseparable from
the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour which ac-

Knox, 154. t. Mclv. 49.

companies

companies religious zeal: And, in order to convince Henry, that BOOK II..
he did not load his rivals with any groundless accusation, he pre- 5
vailed to have Melvil $, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
patched into his native country, with inftruaions to observe the
motions both of the Regent, and of her adversaries; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by Mel-
vil's report.

DID history indulge herself in. such speculations, it would be

amusing to enquire what a different direcion might have been gi--
ven by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a diffe-
rentiffue, Melvil's report, which would have set the conduct of
the malecontents in the most favourable light, might have condut-
ed the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment, and artful:
policy, the progress of the Reformation might have been checked,.
and Scotland. brought to depend upon France. Perhaps, by gain-
ing possession of this avenue, the French might have made their
way into England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's title to
the Crown, they might have re-eftabliflled the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, and destroyed the liberties of that kingdom. But, into this'
boundless field of fancy and conjecture, the historian muit make
no cxcurfions; to relate real. occurrences, and to explain their real
causes and effects, is his peculiar and only province.

TI!E tragical and untimely death of the French Monarch putAccefion of

F lrancis I1. to

an end to all moderate and pacific measures, with regard to Scot- tlCrow tn ot
land. The Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon l"ranc
the accession of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and without.

* The Author of the Memoirs.

experience,

BOOK II. experience, assumed the chiefdirection of French affairs. Allied

559-d rfo nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the Qteen

of Scots with the young King, they now wanted but little of re-
gal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not long
remain inactive in their hands. The fame vait schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the former reign, were
again resumed; and they were enabled, by possesing such ample
authority, to pursue them with more vigour, and greater probabi-
lity of success. They beheld, with infinite regret, the progress of
the Protestant religion in Scotland; and sensible what an unfur-
rrountable obstacle it would prove to their designs, they bent all
their strength to check its growth, before it rose to any greater
height. For this purpose, they carried on their preparations with
all possible expedition, and encouraged the Queen their sifter, to
expect, in a short time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as the
zeal of their adversaries, however desperate, would not venture to
oppose.

NoRR were the Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of those

violent counsels, which prevailed in the court of France, since the
death of Henry, or careless of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of their cause, as
well as their personal safety, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigour of their own resolutions, they endeavoured to guard
ngainft division, and to cement together more closely, by entering
into a ftrifer bond of confederacy and mutual defence. Two per-
font; concurred in this new aflbciation, who brought a great ac-
ceflion both of reputation and of power to the Party. These were
the Duke of Chatclherault, and his eldest son the Earl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having rcfided some years in France, where

8 1he

he commanded the Scottish Guards, had imbibed the Protestant BooK II.
opinions concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of youth, .c559
and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments, with refpe:t
to the points in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that juncture, on the extinction of the
Protestant religion; in order to accomplifhl which, the greatest ex-
cefles of violence were committed. The church was suffered to
wreak its utmost fury upon all who were suspected of heresy. Courts
were erected, in different parts of France, to take cognizance of this
crime, and by their sentences, several persons of dillind-ion were
condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror, the Princes of

Lorrain resolved to felet, for a sacrifice, some person, whose fall
might convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth,
nor eminence in station, could exempt from punishment, those
who should be guilty of this unpardonable tranfgreifion. The
Earl of Arran was the person destined to be the unhappy victim ".
As he was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir to an-
other; as he possessed the first rank in his own country, and enjoy-
ed an honourable station in France; his condemnation could not fail:
of making the desired impression on the whole kingdom. But the
Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some expreflions, which raised'
Arran's fiufpicibns of the design, he escaped the intended blow
by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompted
him to seek revenge upon these persecutors of himfelfand of the
religion which he profeizcd; and as he passcd through England,
on his return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes and

Thuan. lib. xxiv, p. 462. Edit. Francof.

pro-

BOOK II. promises, inflamed those passions, and sent him back into Scotland,

1559. animated with the fame implacable aversion to France, which pof-
Earl of Arran sessed a great part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated
joins the Pro-
rtelants. triefe sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatelherault, who was

already extremely disgusted with the measures carrying on in Scotland;
and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in every in-
fiance, by those about him, he now suffered himself to be drawn
from the Queen Regent; and having joined the Congregation, was
confidered, from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpeEt to him, this diftin-ion was merely nominal,

James Stewart, Prior of St. Andrew's, was the person who moved
and actuated the whole body of the Protestants, among whom, he
possessed that unbounded confidence, which his firenuous adherence
to their interest, and his great abilities, so justly merited. He was
the natural son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine; and
as that amorous Monarch, had left several others a burden upon
the Crown, they were all destined for the church, where they
could be placed in stations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, }the Priory of St. Andrew's had been conferred
upon James: but, during so busy a period, he soon became dif-
gulted with the indolence and retirement of a monastic life; and
his enterprising genius called him forth, to aEt a principal part on a
more public and conspicuous theatre. The scene, in which he
appeared, required talents of different kinds: military virtue and
political discernment, were equally neceflary in order to render
him illufrious. These he posses'ed in an eminent degree. To the
most unquestionable personal bravery, he added great flill in the
art of war, and in every enterprize his arms were crowned with
Jtlcccls. His sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled him,

amnidL'

amnidft the reeling and turbulence of factions, to hold a prosperous BOOK II.
course. While his boldness in defence of the Reformation, toge- 559
ther with the decency, and even severity of his manners, secured
him the reputation of being sincerely attached to religion, without
which, it was impossible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over
mankind.

IT was not without reason that the Queen dreaded the enmity

of a man, so capable to obitruac her deGgns. And as flhe could
not, with all her address, make the least imprefiion on his
fidelity to his associates, ihe endeavoured to lessen his influence,
and to scatter among them the feeds of jealousy and difirufi, by
insinuating that the ambition of the Prior aspired beyond the con-
dition of a subjet, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown it-
self.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little credit. What-

ever thoughts of this kind, the presumption of unexpected fuc-
cess, and his elevation to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may
be alledged to have inspired, at any subsequent period, it is certain
that, at this juncture, he could form no such vait design. To de-
throne a Queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
who had been guilty of no action, by which fle could forfeit the
esteem and affection of her fubjees; who could employ in de-
fence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom, much more power-
ful than her own; and to substitute, in her place, a person, whom
the illegitimacy of his birth, by the practice of all civilized nations,
rendered incapable of any inheritance, either public or private ; was
a project so chimerical, as the most extravagant ambition would
scarce entertain, and could never conceive to be pracicablc. The

VOL. I. Z promise,

BooK II. promise, too, which the Prior made to Melvil, of residing con-

S-S9c' tfantly in France, on condition the public grievances were redref-

fed *; the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of Chatelherault
and his son, the presumptive heirs to the Crown; and the con-
currence of almost the whole Scottish nobles, in promoting the
measures, by which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and criminal designs, with
the imputation of which the Queen endeavoured, at that time, to
load him.

Troops arrive TIE arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in some
from France,
and fortify degree, for the loss which the Queen sustained by the defection of
Leith. the Duke of Chatelherault. These were, immediately, commanded

to fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its commodious
harbour, and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and
in a plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the head quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular measure, by the man-
ner of executing it, was rendered still more unpopular. In order
to bring the town entirely under their command, the French turn-
ed out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and taking possession
of the houses, which they had obliged them to abandon, present-
cd, to the view of the Scots, two objects equally irritating
and offensive; on the one hand, a number of their countrymen
expelled their habitations by violence, and wandering without any
certain abode; on the other, a colony of foreigners, fettling, with
their wives and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing into
'trength by daily reinforcements, and openly preparing a yoke, to
which, without some timely exertion of national spirit, the whole
kingdom mufft, of necessity, submit.

* Mclvil, 54.

IT

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the Congregation BOOK II.

beheld this bold and decisive ftep, taken by the Queen Regent: "-55
nor did they hesitate, a moment, whether they should employ The lPrte-

ftants remon-

their whole strength, in one generous effort, to rescue their reli- rirte againIt
gion and liberty from impending deftrucion. But, in order toth3'
justify their own conduEt, and to throw the blame entirely on their
adversaries, they resolved to preserve the appearances of decency and
refpedt towards their superiors, and to have no recourse to arms,
without the most urgent and apparent necessity. They joined, Sept. z,.
with this view, in an address to the Regent, representing, in the
strongest terms, their diffatisfacion with the measures she was pur-
suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jealousies of the
nation, by deffting from fortifying Leith. The Qeen, conscious of
her present advantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of
frefl succours, was in no disposition for listening to demands utterly
inconsistent with her views, and urged with that bold importunity,
which is so little acceptable to Princes.

THE suggestions of her French Counsellors contributed, with- The Regent
out doubt, to alienate her frill farther from any scheme of accom-n d arer on-

their remon-

modation. As the Queen was ready, on all occasions, to discover trances.
an extraordinary deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the violent
measures they were driving on, took care to place near her such
persons as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many actions,
which her own unbiaffedjudgment would have highly condemned.
And as their success in the present juncture, when all things were
hastening towards a crisis, depended entirely on the Queen's firm-
ness, the Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the influence of
their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the greater weight to

Z 2 their

BooK II. their councils, they called in aid the Ministers of religion ; and, by
-"-' the authority of their sacred character, they hoped effectually to

reconlmmend to their ifler, that system of severity which they had
espoused '*. With this view, but under pretence of confounding
the Protestants by the skill of such able mailers in controversy,
they appointed several French divines to reside in Scotland. At
the head of there, and with the character of legate from the Pope,
was Pelleve Biflop of Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and
Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot -[, servilely devoted to the house of
Guise, and a proper inifrument for recommending or executing the
mofl outrageous measures.

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these Doctors

had little opportunity to display their address in the use of their
theological weapons. But they gave no finall offence to the na-
tion by one of their ations. They persuaded the Queen to
seize the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had re-
mained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of the Prote-
slants; and having, by a new and solemn consecration, purified
the fabric from the pollution, with which they supposed the
profane minifirations of the Protestants to have defiled it, they,
in direc contradiction to one article in the late treaty, re-efta-
bliflhed there the rites of the Romish church. This, added to
the indifference, and even contempt, with which the Queen re-
ceived their remonstrances, convinced the Lords of the Con-
gregation, that it was not only vain to expect any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely neceflary to take arms in
their own defence.

Lefly, 215. Cafclnaxl, ap, Jcbb, vol. ii, 446. 473. I- Davila, Brantomc.

'1' Davila ,
rnte.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every BOOK II.

consideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold ftep 5
without delay. It was but a small part of the French auxiliaries They take

arms in their

which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith, though ad- own defence.
vancing fast, were frill far from being compleat. Under these cir-
cumftances of disadvantage, they conceived it possible to furprize
the Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive blow, to pre-
vent all future bloodshed and contention. Full of these expeCta-
tions, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous Otober 6.
army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary so vigi-
lant and attentive as the Qu±een Regent. With her usual sagacity,
ale both foresaw the danger, and took the only proper course to
avoid it. Instead of keeping the field against enemies, superior in
number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the ardour of their
courage, flle retired into Leith, and determined patiently to wait
the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinifed as the
fortifications of that town then were, fle did not dread the es-
forts of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon, nor with
military stores, and utterly ignorant of the method of attacking
any place fortified with more art than those antient towers, erect-
ed all over the kingdom, in defence of private property against
the incursions of banditti.

NoR did the Queen, meanwhile, ncglecd to have recourse to

those arts, which file had often employed, to weaken or divide her
adversaries. By private follicitations and promiics, (ie shook the
fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By open reproach and ac-
cufation, fle blaflcd the reputation, and diminiflled the authority
of others. Her emissaries were every where at work, and, notwith-
flanding the zeal for religion and liberty, which then animated the

nation,

BOOK II. nation, they seem to have laboured not without success. We find

T'-^' Knox, about this period, abounding in complaints of the luke-
1559.

warm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread among his
party *. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a mo-
mentary intermiflion, it soon blazed up with fresh vigour, and rose
to a greater height than ever.

Renew their THE Queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply which the
remonitran- made to a new remonfirance from the Lords of the Congregation.
ces.

Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more represented to
her the dangers arising from the increase of the French troops, the
fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which they conceiv-
ed to be deftruAive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom; and
in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and avowed, more
openly than ever, their resolution of proceeding to the utmost ex-
tremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous encroachments.
To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so much bold-
nets, the Qecen replied in terms no less vigorous and explicit.
She pretended that she was not accountable to the confederate Lords
for any part of her conduwt; and upon no representation of theirs,
would she either abandon measures, which she deemed necessary;
or difinifs forces, which she found useful; or demolifhl a fortifica-

But witlout tion, which might prove of advantage. At the fame time, she re-
success. quired them, on pain of treason, to disband the forces which they

had assembled.

THIs haughty and imperious flile founded harlhly to Scottish
nobles, impatient, from their national charater, of the slightest ap-

* Knox, I80.

pearance

pearance of injury; accuitomed, even from their own Monarchs, BOOK II.
to the most refpedful treatment; and poffefling, under an ariftocra-
tical form of government, such a share of power as equalled, at all
times, and often controlled that of the Sovereign. They were
sensible, at once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and alarm-
ed with this plain declaration of the Queen's intentions; and as
there now remained but one ftep to take, they wanted neither pub-
lic spirit nor resolution to take it.

BUT, that they inight not seem to depart from the eftabliflaed Deliberate
forms of the conltitution, for which, even amidit their most vio- Concerning

the course
lent operations, men always retain the greatest reverence, they as- which they

ought to take.

fembled the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of burroughs
who adhered to their party. These formed a convention, which OEtober z2.
exceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of
parliament. The leaders of the Congregation laid before them the
declaration which the Queen had given in anfver to their remon-
firance; represented the unavoidable ruin, which the ineafures, she
therein avowed and justified, would bring upon the kingdom; and
requiring their diretion with regard to the obedience due to an ad-
ministration so unjust and oppreflive, they submitted to their deci-
sion, a question, one of the most delicate and interefling that can
possibly fall under the confidration of subjects.

Tiis assembly proceeded to decide, with no less dilpjatch than

unanimity. Strangers to thokf forms, which protradc business; un-
acquainted with the arts, which make a figure in debate; and much
more fitted for action, than difcourle; a warlike people always haften
to a conclusion, and bring their deliberations to the flhortcft iffie.
It was the work but of one day, to examine and to resolve this

n ice
6

BOOK II. nice problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjeds towards a ruler

-' I who abuses his power. But, however abrupt their proceedings may
1559.

appeal, they were not destitute of solemnity. As the determina-
tion of the point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the office
of divines, than of laymen, the former were called to assist with
their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the whole order,
and pronounced, without hesitation, both from the precepts and
examples in Scripture, that it was lawful for fubjeds not only to
resist tyrannical Princes, but to deprive them of that authority,
which, in their hands, becomes an instrument for destroying those,
whom the Almighty ordained them to protect. The decision of
persons, revered so highly for their facrSd charater, but more for
their zeal and their piety, had great weight with the whole assem-
bly. Not satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of fig-
nifying content, every person present was called in his turn to

They deprive declare his sentiments, and riling up in order, all gave their fuffra-
tlhe oecen of ges, without one dissenting voice, for depriving the Queen of the
Regel.t. office of Regent, which Ihe had exercised so much to the detri-

ment of the kingdom *.
The rights of THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less to the love of li-

eircnu berty, than to zeal for religion. In the ad of deprivation, religi-

ous grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Queen upon the civil conflitution are produced, by
the Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove their conduct to
have been not only just, but neceflary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the seizing and
fortifying towns in different parts of the country; the promoting
grangers to offices of great power and dignity; the debating the

Knox, 184.

current

current coin*; the subverting the ancient laws; the imposing ofBooKII.
new and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to subdue the king- '
dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated ads of vio- 559
lence, are enumerated at a great length, and placed in the strongest
light. On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors by birth-right to their monarchs, and the
guardians and defenders of the constitution, had a right to interpose;
and therefore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the King
and Queen, and with many expreflions of duty and submission to-
wards them, they deprived the Queen Regent of her office, and or-
dained, that, for the future, no obedience ihould be given to her
commands t.

VIOLENT as this aAion may appear, there wanted not principles

in the constitution, nor precedents in the history of Scotland, to
justify and to authorize it. Under the ariftocratical form of go-
vernment established among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign

* The standard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the 16th of

James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold, when coined, produced o18 pounds
of current money. But under the Queen Regent's administration, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably encreafed,
produced 144 pounds current money. In 1529, a pound weight of silver, when
coined, produced 91.2s.; but in 1556, it produced 131. current money. Rud-
dim. Praefat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotie, p. 8o, 81. from which, it appears that
this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether destitute
of foundation.

t- M. Caflelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the Princes of Lor-

rain with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his usual candour,
that the Scots declared war againll the Queen Regent, rather from a desire of vindi-
cating their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mcm, 446.

VOL. . A a w;is

BOOK II. was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were them-

5 selves petty Princes, pofleffing extensive jurifdifions, almost inde-

pendent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in
every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to the
King. Hence the many instances of the impotence of regal autho-
rity, which are to be found in the Scottish history. In every age,
the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of controuling
the King. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take the field
in defence of them, every error in administration was observed,
every encroachment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indig-
nation, and no Prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries
which the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting re-
fiftance, which ihook, or overturned his throne. Encouraged by
the spirit of the constitution, and countenanced by the example of
their ancestors, the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this juncture, to inquire into the mal-adminiftra-
tion of the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country from being
enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of the power to execute
such a pernicious scheme *.

* The at of deprivation, and a Letter from the Lords of the Congregation to the

Queen Regent, are fill extant, Knox, 184. They discover not only, that masculine
and undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are re-
markable for a precision, and vigour of expreflion, which we are furprized to meet
with in an age so unpolifhed. The fame observation may be made with refpet to the
other public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad tafle of an age may
render the compositions of authors by profession obscure, or affeced, or absurd-;
but the language of bufincfs is nearly the fame at all ilIes; and wherever men think
clearly, and are thoroughly interested, they express themselves with perspicuity and
force.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK III.
T H E Lords of the Congregation soon found that their zeal BooKIlI.

had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond --'

1559.

their utmost ability to accomplish. The French garrison, The Congre-

despising their numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender gdaioini-
Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were they fuffici- ties.
ently ikilful in the art of war to reduce the place by force, or
possessed of the artillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose;
and their followers, though of undaunted courage, yet being accuf-
tomed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were firangers to the
fatigues of a long campaign, and soon became impatient of the
revere and constant duty which a siege requires. The Queen's
emiflaries, who found it easy to mingle with their countrymen,
were at the utmost pains to heighten their disgust, which difcovcr..
ed itself at firfl in murmurs and complaints, but on occasion of the
want of money for paying the army, broke out into open mutiny.

A a 2 The

BooKIII. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure from the unbridled

1559' insolence of the soldiers; while some of inferior rank, interposing

too rashly in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage.
Discord, consternation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the
Reformers. The Duke, their General, funk, with his usual ti-
midity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered
manifest symptoms of repentance for his rashness, in espousing such
a desperate cause.

Apply to Eli- IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recourse
zabeth for as-
,filance. to Elizabeth, from whose protection they could derive their only

reasonable hopes of success. Some of their more sagacious lead-
ers, having foreseen that the party might probably be involved in
great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource in any such
exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with the court
of England *. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which
the Princes of Lorrain had formed against her Crown, was early
sensible of how much importance it would be, not only to check
the progress of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own in-
fluence in that kingdom t; and perceiving how effetually the pre-
sent infurreaions would contribute to retard or defeat the schemes
formed against England, she listened with pleasure to these applica-
tions of the malecontents, and gave them private aflurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph 5, an agent extremely
proper for conducting any dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scot-
land, and residing secretly among the Lords of the Congrega-
tion, observed and quickened their motions. Money ieemed to
be the only thing they wanted at thai time; and it was owing to

* Burn. Hilt. Ref. 3. Append, 278. Keith, Append. 2r.
1 Sec Append. No I. 1 Keith, Append. 29.

a season-

a seasonable remittance from England *, that the Scottish noblesBooKIII.
had been enabled to take the field, and to advance towards Leith. "

x559.

But as Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and studious to
preserve appearances with France, her subsidies were bestowed at
first with extreme frugality. The fubfiitence of an army, and the
expences of a siege, soon exhausted this penurious supply, to which
the Lords of the Congregation could make little addition from
their own funds; and the ruin and dieperfion of the party must have
instantly followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton was sent, with She fends

the utmoit expedition, to the governors of the town and cafile ofnfummofa nle
Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatest
importance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir
James Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were employed to
command there, and were entrurted with a discretionary power of
supplying the Scottish malecontents, according to the exigency of
their affairs. From them Cockburn received 4000 crowns, but
little to the advantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwell, by wvhc' is in-
the Queen's instigation, lay in wait for him on his return, difper- terceted.
fed his followers, wounded him, and carried off the money.

THIS unexpected disappointment proved fatal to the party. In

mere despair some of the more zealous attempted to assault Leith,
but the French beat them back with disgrace, seized their can-
non, and pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the
point of entering along with them. All the terror and confusion,
which the profpel of pillage or of massacre can excite in a place

*Knox, 214. Kcith, Append. 44.

taken

BooK'IlI. taken by storm, filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants
t.-- fled from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forces of the Con-

gregation were irresolute and dismayed; and the Queen's partizans
in the town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the nobles ven-
tured to face the enemy, who, after plundering some houses in the
suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city from this
dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of provisions which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marched in
all haste with a considerable body of their troops, and falling upon
the enemy between Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry than
good conduc, were almost surrounded by a second party of French,
who advanced in order to support their own men. In this fitua-
tion, a retreat was the only thing which could save the Scots; but
a retreat over marshy ground, and in the face of an enemy superior

They retire in number, could not long be conducted with order. A small bo-
from Leith
in confu son. dy of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell into the

utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing to the caution of the
French, that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the Congregation

funk altogether. They did not think themselves secure, even
within the walls of Edinburgh, but instantly determined to retire
to some place at a greater distance from the enemy. In vain did
the Prior of St. Andrew's and a few others oppose this cowardly
and ignominious flight. The dread of the present danger prevailed
over both the sense of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-

night,

night, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confusion, and march-BooK III.
ed without hating till they arrived at Stirling.

559.

November 6.

DURING this lass insurrection, the great body of the Scottish

nobility joined the Congregation. The Lords Seaton and Borth-
wick were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen,
and assisted her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favoured
her cause, but resided at his own house. The Earl of Huntly,
conformable to the crafty policy which diftinguifles his character,
amused the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to
assist, with many fair promises, but never joined them with a single
man +. The Earl of Morton, a Member of the Congregation,
fluctuated in a fiate of irresolution, and did not at heartily for
the common cause. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edinburgh
cafle, though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality, which he
esteemed becoming the dignity of his office; and having been en-
trusted by Parliament with the command of the principal fortress
in the kingdom, he resolved that neither faction hould get it in-
to their hands.

A FEW days before the retreat of the Congregation, the QueenMaitland re-

suffered an irreparable loss by the defeaion of her principal Secre-Qe froDm

, the

tary, William Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for the Reform-ger.
ed religion, together with his warm remonstrances against the vio-
lent measures which the Queen was carrying on, exposed him so
much to her resentment, and to that of her French Counsellors, that
he, fufpedting his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly from Leith,
and fled to the Lords of the Congregation $ ; and they, with open
arms, received a convert, whose abilities added both strength and
* Keith, Append. 31. + Ibid. Append. 33. Knox, 222. 1 Knox, 192.

reputa-

BooKIII. reputation to their cause. Maitland had early applied to public

'.' business admirable natural talents, improved by an acquaintance

with the liberal arts; and, at a time of life, when his country-
men of the fame quality were following the pleasures of the chace,
or serving as adventurers in the armies of France, he was admit-
ted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and put upon a level with
persons of the moil consummate experience in the management of
affairs. He possessed, in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit,
which delights in pursuing bold designs, and, was no less master
of that political art and dexterity which is necefary for carrying
them on with success. But there qualities were deeply tinctur-
ed with the neighbouring vices. His address sometimes degene-
rated into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon excess of subtle-
ty and refinement; his invention, over fertile, suggested to him,
on some occasions, chimerical systems of policy, little suitable to
the genius of the age; and his enterprising spirit engaged him in
projects vast and splendid, but beyond his utmost power to exe-
cute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever faction they be-
long, mention him with an admiration, which nothing could
have excited but the greatest superiority of penetration and abi-
lities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to such

a degree, the terror and conflfion which had seized them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, however, flill re-
mained undaunted and erect, and having mounted the pulpit, he
addressed to his desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of this discourse are

6 inserted

inserted in his history *, and afford a striking example of the BoOKIII.
boldness and freedom of reproof assumed by the first Reformers, '-5 '
as well as a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics most
fitted to influence and rouze his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to confider what The Lords of
course they should hold, now that their own resources were all ex- gation apply

again to Eapl

haufted, and their deftrution appeared to be unavoidable, with- zabeti
out foreign aid; they turned their eyes once more to England,
and resolved to implore the afliftance of Elizabeth towards finishing
an enterprize, in which they had so fatally experienced their own
weakness, and the strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as the
most able negociator of the party, was employed in this embaffv.
In his absence, and during the inacive feafoii of the year, it was
agreed to dismiss their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a
campaign, which had so far exceeded the usual time of fervicc.
But, in order to preserve the counties most devoted to their interest,
the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of the leaders, retired into
Fife. The Duke of Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his refi-
dence at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's address
or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his country under her
protecion. She observed the prevalence of the French counsels,
and the progress of their arms in Scotland, with great concern;
and as she well foresaw the dangerous tendency of their schemes
in that kingdom, fihe had already come to a rcfolution with re-
gard to the part flie herself would at, if their power there
ihould grow still more formidable.

* Knox, 193.
VoI.. I. 3 Ib

Bool III. IN order to give the Qwen and her Privy Council a full and dif-

- tina view of any important matter, which might come before them,

I559.

Motiveswhich it seems to have been the practice of Elizabeth's Ministers to pre-
determined
her to airs pare memorials, in which they clearly tfated the point under de-

liberation, laid down the grounds of the conduct, which they held
to be most reasonable, and proposed a method for carrying their
plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir Wil-
liam Cecil with his own hand, still remain *; they are intitled,
" A short discussion of the weighty matter of Scotland," and do ho-
nour to the industry and penetration of that great Minister. The
motives, which determined the Queen to espouse so warmly the
defence of the Congregation, are represented with perspicuity and
force; and the consequences of suffering the French to establish
themselves in Scotland, are predicted with great accuracy and dif-
cernment,

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both of

God and of nature, that every society hath a right to defend itself,
not only from present dangers, but from such as may probably en-
sue; to which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every Prince
to defend himself by the fame means, which his adversaries employ
to distress him. Upon there grounds, he establishes the right of
England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquest of that kingdom, at which the French openly aimed. The
French, he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of Eng-
land. Hostilities hlad subsisted between the two nations for many
centuries. No treaty of peace, into which they entered, had ever
been cordial or sincere. No good effect was therefore to be ex-

' Busai vol. iii. Append. 283. Keith, Append. 24.

pe&ed

peeted from the peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted BooKIII.
by present necessity, would be negligently observed, and broken '5

'559.

on the slightest pretences. In a very short time, France would re-
cover its former opulence; and though now drained of men and Ino-
ney by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be in a
condition for acting, and the refflefs and martial genius of the peo-
ple would render action necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who
at that time had the entire direcion of French affairs, were ani-
mated with the most virulent hatred against the English nation.
They openly called in question the legitimacy of the Queen's birth,
and by advancing the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen
of Scotland, studied to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With
this view, they had laboured to exclude the Englifl from the trea-
ty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a fepa-
rate peace with Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit his
daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of Queen of England;
and even since the conclusion of the peace, they had follicited at
Rome, and obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be ille-
gitimate. And though the wisdom and moderation of the Con-
flable Montmorency had, for some time, checked their career,
yet there restraints being now removed by the death of Henry II.
and the disgrace of his Minister, the utmofl excefles of violence
were to be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed with so-
vereign power. Scotland is the quarter, whence they can attack
England with most advantage. A war on the borders of that coun-
try exposes France to no danger, but one unfucccfsful acion there
may hazard the Crown, and overturn the government of England'.
In political conduct, it is childish to wait till the designs of an
enemy be ripe for execution. The Scottish nobles, after their ut-
most efforts, have been obliged to quit the field; and far from cx-

B b 2 pclling

BooK III. pelling the invaders of their liberties, they behold the French

.---"-' power daily increasing, and must at last cease from firuggling ani

longer in a contest so unequal. The invading of England will im-
mediately follow the reduction of the Scottish malecontents, by
the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the French, Elizabeth
will open a way for her enemies into the heart of her own king-
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and the danger of con-
quest. 'Nothing therefore remained but to meet the enemy while
yet at a distance from England, and by supporting the Congrega-
tion with a powerful army, to render Scotland the theatre of the
war, to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain in their infan-
cy, and, by such an early and unexpected effort, to expel the French
out of Britain, before their power had time to take root, and grow
up to any formidable height. But as the matter was of as much
importance, as any which could fall under the consideration of an
English Monarch, wisdom and mature counsel were neceifary in
the first place, and afterwards vigour and expedition in conduct;
the danger was urgent, and, by losing a tingle moment, might be-
come unavoidable *.

THESE arguments produced their full effect upon Elizabeth, who

was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her Crown,
and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of her
subjects. From these motives flte had acted, in granting the Con-
gregation an early supply of money ; and from the fame principles
fhle determined, in their present exigency, to afford them more effec-
tual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was inflantly dispatched into
Scotland with the firongeft assurances of her protecion, and the

* The arguments which the Scots employed, in order to obtain Elizabeth's afflf..
ance, are urged with great force, in a paper of Maitland's. See Appendix, N". II.

~~~~~~~x ~~Lords.

Lords of the Congregation were desired to fend commissioners intoBoo III.
England, to conclude a treaty, and to fettle the operations of the L5 '
campaign, with the Duke of Norfolk *.559

MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom no motion of The Queen

Dowager

the Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the success of mean while
this negotiation with the court of England, and foresaw how little ftentch troops
fle would be able to resist the united effort of the two kingdoms. againRf them.
For this reason flie determined, if possible, to get the start of Eli-
zabeth; and by venturing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontents in their present dispersed
and helpless situation, she hoped to put an end to the war, before
the arrival of their English allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces, who were aug-

mented, about this time, by the arrival of the Count de Martigues,
with a thousand veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth, they pro-
ceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying and plundering, with ex-
ceffive outrage, the houses and lands of those whom they etfeemed
their enemies. Fife was the molt populous and powerful county
in the kingdom, and most devoted to the Congregation, who had
hitherto drawn from thence their most considerable supplies, both
of men and provisions; and therefore, beiides punifliing the difaf-
section of the inhabitants, by pillaging the country, the French
proposed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a gar-
rifon fuifficient to bridle the mutinous spirit of the province, and to
keep pofleffion of a port situatcd on the main ocean.

* Keith, 114.

BUT

BoK.III. BUT on this occasion, thePriorof St. Andrew's, Lord Ruth-

y ven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of the most active leaders of the
Congregation, performed, by their bravery and good conduet, a
service of the utmost importance to their party. Having assembled
fix hundred horse, they infested the French with continual incur-
lions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys of provisions,
cut off their straggling parties, and so harraffed them with perpetual
alarms, that they prevented them for more than three weeks from
advancing "
156o. AT last the Prior, with his feeble party, was constrained to re-

tire, and the French set out from Kirkaldy, and began to move a-
long the coast towards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a few
miles, when from an eminence they descried a powerful fleet steer-
Janulary 23.

ing its course up the Firth of Forth. As they knew that the Marquis
D'Elbeufwas, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland with a nu-
merous army, they hastily concluded that these ships belonged to
him, and gave way to the most immoderate transports of joy, on
the profped of this long-expeced succour. Their great guns were
already fired to welcome their friends, and to spread the tidings and
terror of their arrival among their enemies, when a small boat from
the opposite coast landed, and blasted their premature and short-
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was the fleet of England

The English which was in fight, intended for the aid of the Congregation, and
fleet arrives to
their aflill- was soon to be followed by a formidable land army t.
ance.

TIIROUCG, OUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was cautious, but de-
cifive; and by her promptitude in executing her resolutions, joined

K* nox, 202. 's Knox, 203.

to

to the deliberation with which (he formed them, her administration BooK III.
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for its wisdom. No -56.
sooner did (he determine to afford her protection to the Lords of
the Congregation, than they experienced the activity, as well as
the extent of her power. The season of the year would not per-
mit her land army to take the field; but left the French should, in
the mean time, receive new reinforcements, (he inflantly ordered a
flrong squadron to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems, by her
instruCtions to Winter her Admiral, to have been desirous of pre-
serving the appearances of friendship towards the French %. But
these were only appearances; if any French fleet hould attempt to
land, he was commanded to prevent it, by every a& of hostility and
violence. It was the fight of this squadron, which occasioned at
firit so much joy among the French, but which soon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the effects of their vengeance.
Apprehensive of being cut off from their companions on the oppo-
site hore, they retreated towards Stirling with the utmost precipi-
tation, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads almofi impaf-
fable, arrived at Leith, harraffed and exhausted with fatigue t.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of Leith, and conti-

nuing in that station till the conclusion of peace, both prevented
the garrison of Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and
considerably facilitated the operations of their own forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the English squadron, the Commission-

They con-

ers of the Congregation repaired to Bcrwick, and concluded with clitde pence
the Duke of Norfolk, a treaty, the bond of that union with Eliza- Iblaly .l-.l'

* Keith, Appendix 45. ' 1 Knox, 203.

beth,

BooKIII. beth, which was of so great advantage to the cause. To give a

5"60J check to the dangerous and rapid progress of the French arms in

Scotland, was the profefled design of the contradcing parties. In
order to this, the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union of
their country with France; and to defend themselves to the utter-
most against all attempts of conquest; and for their afiftance, Eli-
zabeth promised to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no place in Scot-
land was to remain in the hands of the English; whatever should
be taken from the enemy was either to be razed, or kept by the
Scots, at their choice; if any invasion should be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with part of their
forces; and to ascertain their faithful observance of the treaty, they
bound themselves to deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march
of her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots made many
protestations of obedience and loyalty towards their own Queen, in
every thing not inconsistent with their religion, and the liberties of
their country *.

The En.linTi THE English army, consisting of fix thousand foot, and two
army lays
fiegeto Leith. thousand horse, under the command of Lord Grey of Wilton, en-
April z. tered Scotland early in the spring. The members of the Congrega-

tion aflembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their new al-
lies; and having joined them with great multitudes of their follow-
ers, they advanced together towards Leith. The French were little
able to keep the field against an enemy so much superior in number.
A firong body of troops, destined for their relief, had been scat-
tered by a violent florm, and had either perished on the coast

* Knox, 217.

us

of France, or with difficulty had recovered the ports of thatBooiIII.
kingdom *. But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till '-

x56o'

the Princes of Lorrain should make good the magnificent promises
of assistance, with which they daily encouraged them; or till scar-
city of provisions should constrain the English to retire into their
own country. In order to haften this latter event, they did not ne-
gle& the usual, though barbarous precaution for distressing an invad-
ing enemy, by burning and laying waste all the adjacent country -.
The zeal, however, of the nation frustrated their intentions; eager
to contribute towards removing their oppressors, the people produ-
ced their hidden stores to support their friends; the neighbouring
counties supplied every thing necessary; and far from wanting sub-
fiftence, the Engliih found, in their camp, all forts of provisions,
at a cheaper rate, than had for some time been known in that part
of the kingdom +.

ON the approach of the English army, the Queen Regent re-

tired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her health was now in a declin-
ing state, and her mind broken and deprefled by the misfortunes
of her administration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of a siege,
(he committed herself to the protection of Lord Erskine. This
nobleman still preserved his neutrality, and by his integrity and love
of his country, merited equally the esteem of both parties. He re-
ceived the Queen herself with the utmost honour and refpea, but
took care to admit no such retinue, as might endanger his command
of the castle l.

* Mem. de Callel. 450. 1 Knox, 225.
:1: Knox, ibid. 1I ForbesCollet. vol. i, 503. Keith, 122,

VOL. I. C C A FEW

BooxI[ll. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the English irvefted'

--gó gLeith. The garrison, shut up within the town, was almost half
April 6. as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by an ob-

flinate defence protracted the siege to a great length. The circum-
frances of this siege, related by cotemporary historians, men without
knowledge or experience in the art of war, are often obscure and
imperfect, and at this distance of time are not considerable enough
to be entertaining.

AT first the French endeavoured to keep possession of the

Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far diitant from the town, but were
April 15. beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of

the Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French had their full
revenge; having sallied out with a strong body, they entered the
Englith trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon,
and killed at least double the number they had loft in the former ikir-
mifh. Nor were the English more fortunate in an attempt which
they made to take the place by aflault; they were met with
May 7.

equal courage, and repulsed with considerable loss. From the
detail of these circumstances by the writers of that age, it is
easy to observe the different charaters of the French and Eng-
lifh troops. The former, trained to war, under the active
reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. defended themselves not on-
ly with the bravery, but with the kill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accustomed to peace, flill preserved the intre-
pid and desperate valour peculiar to the nation, but discovered few
marks of military genius,, or of experience in the practice of war.
Every misfortune or disappointment during the siege must be im-
puted to manifest errors in conduct. The success of the besieged
in their sally was owing entirely to the security and. negligence
of the Engliih; many of their officers were absent; their soldiers

had

had left their itations; and the trenches were almost without a BooKIII.
guard. The ladders, which had been provided for the aflault,want~ ^ g-'

I56o.

ed a great deal of the neceflary length; and the troops employed
in that service were ill supported. The trenches were opened, at
first, in an improper place; and as it was found expedient to
change the ground, both time and labour were loft. The weak-
ness of their own Generals, no less than the strength of the French
garrison, rendered the progress of the Englilll wonderfully flow.
The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part of their
magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to extreme
distress, which the profped of relief made them bear with admi-
rable fortitude.

WHILE the hopes and courage of the French protracted the

siege so far beyond expectation, the leaders of the Congregation
were not idle. Bynew associations and confederacies, they laboured
more perfectly to unite their party. By publicly ratifying the
treaty concluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the alli-
ance with England firm and indissoluble. Among the subscribers
of these papers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others who
.had not hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of their
measures *. Several of there Lords, particularly the Earl of I-Iunt-
ly, still adhered to the Popifl church; but on this occasion, neither
their religious sentiments, nor their former cautious maxims, were
regarded; the torrent of national refentmcnt and indignation against
the Fiench hurried them on -.

Tll:

* Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 22 r.

t The dread of the French power did, on many occasions, surmount the z.lI,
which the Catholic nobles had fur their rcligion. Bcfides the prcfumiptive clidtlee

C c 2 for

BoOKIII. THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than the cause of
1 6-. involving Scotland in those calamities, under which it groaned at
Death and that time, died during the heat of the siege. No Princess ever pof-
charaneli of
the Qgecn sessed qualities more capable of rendering her administration illu-
°jc^o. ftrious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no less

address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle and hu-
mane, without weakness; zealous for her religion, without bigotry;
a lover of jufiice, without rigour. One circumstance however, and
that, too, the excess of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all
these great qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate, and
her name odious. Devoted to the interest of France, her native
country, and attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with
mofft passionate fondness; she departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her own wisdom or humanity would
have approved. She outlived, in a great measure, that reputation
and popularity, which had smoothed her way to the highest station
in the kingdom; and many examples of falsehood, and some of fe-
verity, in the latter part of her administration, totally alienated from
her the affe&ions of a people, who had once placed in her an un-
bounded confidence. But, even by her enemies, there unjustifiable
actions were imputed to the facility, not to the malignity of her na-
ture; and while they taxed her brothers, and French counsellors,
with rashness and cruelty; they still allowed her the praise of pru-

,for this, arising from the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hist. of the Reformation,
vol. iii. 281, and published by him, Append, p. 278 ; the inftruftions of Elizabeth to
Randolph her agent, put it beyond all doubt, that many zealous Papilts thought the
alliance with England to be necelary for preserving the liberty and independence of
the Kingdom. Keith, 158. Huntly himself began a correspondence with Elizabeth's
Minilters, before the march of the Englilh army into Scotland. Haynes State Papers,
2.6x, 2d3. See Append N°. III.

dence

dence and of lenity *. A few days before her death, Ihe desired an BOOK III.
interview with the Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, and 56
other chiefs of the Congregation. To them she lamented the fa-
tal issue of those violent councils, which fle had been obliged to fol-
low; and, with the candour natural to a generous mind, confessed
the errors of her own administration, and begged forgiveness of
those, to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time, she
warned them, amidst their struggles for liberty, and the flhock of
arms, not to lose fight of the loyalty and fubjed-ion, which was due
to their Sovereign --. The remainder of her time, she employed
in religious meditations and exercises. She even invited the atten-
dance of Willox; one of the most eminent among the Reformed
preachers, listened to his intfruCtions with reverence and atten-
tion +, and prepared for the approach of death with a decent for-
titude.

NOTHING could now save the French troops, shut up in Leith, Motivesofthe

French tocon-

but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrival of a- power- cludea peace.
ful army from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused their
party in Scotland, with continual expecations of the latter, and
had thereby kept alive their hopes and their courage. But at lait,
the situation of France, rather than the terror of the Englith arms,
or the remonstrances of the Scottifl malecontents, confirained them,
though with reluctance, to turn their thoughts towards pacific
councils. The Protestants in France were, at that time, a party
formidable by their number, and more by the valour and enter-
prifing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had treated them with
extreme rigour, and difcovcred, by every ftep he took, a fettled
resolution to extirpate their religion, and to ruin those who professed

Buchan. 324. 1 Lefly, de Rebus Gest. Scot. 222. . Knox, 228.

it.

BooK III.it. At the profpet of this danger to themselves, and to their cause,

C-ó- the Protestants were alarmed, but not terrified. Animated with

56o zeal, and inflamed with resentment, they not only prepared for their

own defence, .but resolved, by some bold ation, to anticipate the
schemes of their enemies; and as the Princes of Lorrain were e-
ileemed the authors of all the King's violent measures, they marked
them out, to be the first victims of their indignation. Hence, and
not from any disloyalty to the King, proceeded the famous confpi-
racy of Amboise; and though the vigilance and good fortune of the
March ;. Princes of Lorrain discovered and disappointed that design, it was

easy to observe new forms gathering in every province of the king-
dom, and ready to burfl out with all the fury and outrage of civil
war. In this situation, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was
called off from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to defend the
honour and dignity of the French Crown; and instead of fending
new reinforcements into Scotland, it became necessary to withdraw
the veteran troops already employed in that kingdom *.

', no,;?- IN order to conduct an affair of so much importance and delicacy,
tinlli that the Princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc Bifhop'ofValence,
purpo lc.

and of the Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the former,
were reckoned inferior to no persons of that age, in address and po-
litical refinement; Elizabeth opposed to them Ambassadors of equal
abilities; Cecil her prime Minister, a man perhaps of the greatetf
capacity who had ever held that office; and Wotton Dean of Can-
.terbury, grown old in the art of negociating under three successive
Monarchs. The interests of the French and English courts were
loon adjusted by men of so great dexterity in bufinels; and as France
ealily consented to withdraw those forces, which had been the

.Lclly, 224.

chief

chief occasion of the war; the other points in dispute; between BooKlII.
that kingdom and England, were not matters of tedious, or of' 56.
difficult discussion.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon,

their own Sovereigns for redress, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many
open attempts, carried on by command of the King and Queen,
in order to overturn the ancient conflitution, and to suppress the
religion:which they had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not
think themselves secure, without fixing some new barrier against
the future encroachments of regal power. But the legal steps to-
wards accomplishing this. were not so obvious. The French am-
baffadors confidered the entering into any treaty with fubjeds, and
with rebels, as a condescension, unworthy the dignity of a Sove-
reign; and their scruples on this head might have put an end to
the treaty, if the impatience of both parties for peace had not fug-
gested an expedients which seemed to provide for the fecurity.of
the subjet, without derogating from the honour of the Prince.
The Scottili nobles agreed, on this occasion, to pass from the Articlces o.io
point of right and privileges and to accept the redress of their retcy..
grievances, as a matter of favour. Whatever additional security
their anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for public liberty,
prompted them to demand; was granted them in the name of
Francis and Mary, as ats of their royal favour and indulgence.
And left concessions of this kind should seem precarious, and liable
to be retraded by the fame power, which had made them, the
French ambassador agreed to insert them in the treaty with Eliza-
beth, and thereby to bind the King and Queen inviolably to ob-
serve them *.

* Kcith, 134, &c.

IN.

BOOKIII. IN relating this tranfation, cotemporary historians have con-

i6o' founded the concessions of Francis and Mary to their Scottish sub-

jedts, with the treaty between France and England; the latter, be-
fides the ratification of former treaties between the two kingdoms,
and stipulations with regard to the time and manner of removing
both armies out of Scotland, contained an article, to which, as
the source of many important events, we Shall often have occasion
to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is, thereby, ac-
knowledged in the strongest terms ; and Francis and Mary solemn-
ly engage, neither to assume the title, nor to bear the arms of King
and Queen of England, in any time to come.

HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the con-

ditions fle obtained for her allies the Scots were no less advantage-
July 6. ous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in the name of Fran-

cis and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland ihould instantly
be sent back into their own country, and no foreign troops be here-
after introduced into the kingdom, without the knowledge and
content of Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and Dun-
bar ihould immediately be razed, and no new fort be erected with-
out the permiflion of Parliament; that a Parliament flould be held
on the first day of August, and that assembly be deemed as valid,
in all refpets, as if it had been called by the express command-
ment of the King and Queen; that, conformable to the ancient
laws and cuffoms of the country, the King and Qeen should
not declare war, or conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliament; that, during the Queen's absence, the adminifiration
of government should be vested in a council of twelve persons, to
be chosen out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of which
council to be elected by the Q~een, and five by the Parliament;

6 that,

that hereafter, the King and Queen should not advance foreigners BooKIII.
to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices X.
of Treasurer or Comptroller of the revenues upon any ecclesiastic;
that an ac of oblivion, aboliihing the guilt and memory of all of-
fences, committed since the 6th of March, 1558, fiould be passed
in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified by the King and Queen;-
that the King and Queen should not, under colour of punishing any
violation of their authority during that period, seek to deprive any of
their fubjeds of the offices, benefices, or estates which they now
held; that the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries which they
had sustained during the late infurretions, should be left entirely to
the cognizance of Parliament. With regard to religious controver-
fies, the Ambassadors declared that they would not presume to de-
cide, but permitted the Parliament, at their firif meeting, to exa-
mine the points in difference, and to represent their sense of them
to the King and Queen *.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the Congrega- The effeas of

tion, by their courage and perseverance, conduc an enterprize
which, at first, promised a very different issue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by degrees
to great power; and being favoured by many fortunate incidents,
baffled all the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the forces of
amore considerable kingdom. The sovereign authority was, by this
treaty, transferred wholly into the hands of the Congregation; that
limited prerogative, which the Crown had hitherto pofieffed, was
almost entirely annihilated; and the ariflocratical power, which al-
ways predominated in the Scottish government, became supreme

Keith, 137, &c.
VOL. I. D d lnd

BOOK III. and incontroulable. By this treaty, too, the influence of France,

5ó0\ c which had long been of much weight in the affairs of Scotland,

was greatly diminished; and not only were the ptefent incroachments
of that ambitious ally restrained, but, by confederating with Eng.
land, protecion was provided against any future attempt from the
fame quarter. At the fame time, the controversies in religion being
left to the consideration of Parliament, the Protefl-ants might reckon
upon obtaining whatever decision was most favourable to the opi-
nions which they profefled.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French

and Englifl armies quitted Scotland.
A Parliament THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned towards

held the approaching parliament. A meeting, summoned in a manner

so extraordinary, at such a critical jundure, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected with the utmost
anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the ariftocratical genius of

the government, was properly an anfembly of the nobles. It was
composed of Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners of
burroughs, who met all together in one house. The Leser Barons,
though poffieled of a right to be present, either in person, or by
their representatives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attending,
according to the faflion of the times, with a numerous train of
vassals and dependants; the inattention of the age, to any legal or
regular system of government; but, above all, the exorbitant autho-
rity of the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole power into
their own hands, made this privilege of so little value, as to be almost

neglected.

negled.ed. It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times of Boo KII.
tranquillity, few commissioners of burroughs, and almost none of the -- ""
Lefler Barons appeared in Parliament. The ordinary adminiftra-
tion of government was abandoned without scruple or jealousy, to
the King and to the greater Barons. 'But in extraordinary;conjunc-
tures, when the firuggle for liberty was violent, and the spirit of op-
position to the Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and Lesser
Barons were rouzed from their inactivity, and flood forth to vindi-
cate the rights of their country. The turbulent reign of James III.
affords examples in proof of this observation *. The public indig-
nation against the rash designs of that weak and ill-advifed Prince,
brought into Parliament, besides the Greater nobles and prelates, a
considerable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the first of August. The
universal passion for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
the nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned fpetators
of ,n assembly, whose acs were likely to prove decisive with refped
*to both. From all corners of the kingdom men flocked in, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause which they had defended with their swords in the field.
Besides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there
appeared the representatives of almost all the burroughs, and above
an hundred Barons, who though of the lesser order, were Gentle-
men of the first rank and fortune in the nation -.

TIE Parliament was ready to enter on business with the utmost
zeal, when a difficulty was started concerning the lawfulness of the

* Keith, 147. t Ibid. 146.
4 D d 2 meeting.

BooKIII. meeting. No Commisioner appeared in the name of' the King

'
. *--? ; and Queen, and no signification of their content and approbation

was yet received. These were deemed, by many, essential to the
very being of a Parliament. But, in opposition to this sentiment,
the express words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by which
this assembly was declared to be as valid, in all refpets, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express command- of the King
and Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldest Ieaders, and those of most approved zeal, were chosen to be
Lords of the Articles, who formed a committee-of ancientrufe,
and of great importance in the Scottish Parliament. The delibera-
tions of the Lords of the Articles were carried on with the most
unanimous and active zeal. The aa of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons,, out of whom the council, entrusted; with
supreme authority, was to be eleted; and' every other thing pre-
fcribed by the late treaty, or which seemed' necessary to render it
effectual, passed without dispute or delay. The article of religion

.ts proced- employed longer time, and was attended with greater difficulty. It
ings-with re-
gard toreli- was brought into Parliament, by a petition from those who had

gon. adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many doctrines of the

Popish church were a contradiction to reason, and a disgrace to re-
ligion; its discipline had become corrupt and oppreflive; and its
revenues were both exorbitant and ill applied. Againf all' these,
the Protestants remonstrated with the utmost severity of file, which
indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their pernicious ten-
dency could inspire; and encouraged, by the number and zeal of
their friends, to improve such a favourable juncture, they aimed
the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and besought the Parlia-

ment

ment to'interpofe their authority for rectifying these multiplied BooKIII.
abuses*. -5
.

SEVERAL: prelates, zealously attached to the ancient superstition,,

were present in this Parliament. But during these vigorous proceed--
ings of the Protestants, they flood confounded, and: at a gaze, and
persevered in a silence which was fatal to their cause. They efteerm-
ed it impossible to resist or divert that' torrent of' religious zeal,.
which was fill in its full strength; they dreaded that their opposition
would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new acs of vio-
lence; they hoped that the King and Queen would soon be.at
leisure to put a flop to the career of their insolent subje&s, and
that, after the rage and havock of the present' form, the former
tranquillity and order would bereftored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps; to sacrifice the dotrine, and even
the power of the Church, in order to ensure the safety of their own
persons, and to preserve the possession of those revenues, which were
still in their hands; From whatever motives they a&ed, their silence,
which was. imputed to the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded'
matter of great triumph to the Protestants, and encouraged them
to proceed with more boldness and alacrity t-..

THE Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines mentioned in the petition of the Protestants; they, moreover,
gave the fandion of their. approbation. to. a Confeflion of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed teachers $, and composed, as
might be expected from such a performance at that juncture, on
purpose to expose the absurd tenets and practices of the Romish,

* Knox, 237. + Ibid. 253. : Id. ibid.

churchl .

BooK III. church. By another at, the jurifdi&ion of the ecclefiaflical courts
' 56o' Twas abolished, and the causes, which formerly came under their

cognizance, were transferred to the decision of civil judges *. By a
third statute, the exercise of religious worthip, according to the
rites of the Romiih church, was prohibited. The manner in which
the Parliament inforced the observation of this law discovers the zeal
of that assembly; the first tranfgrefflon fubjeded the offender to the
forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punishment, at the dif-
cretion of the judge; banishment was the penalty of a second vio-
lation of the law; and a third at of disobedience was declared to
be capital -[. Such strangers were men, at that time, to the fpi-
rit of toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and with such in-
decent haste did the very persons, who had just escaped the rigour
of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of fe-
verity, of which they themselves had so justly complained.

With regard THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, in a few days,
to the reve-
nues of the the ancient system of religion, which had been established so many
church.

ages. In reforming the doctrine and discipline of the church, the
nobles kept pace with.the ardor and expectations even of Knox him-
self. But their proceedings, with refped to these, were not more
rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory when they
entered on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues. Among the
lay-members, some were already enriched with the spoils of the
church, and others devoured in expectation the wealthy benefices
which still remained untouched. The alteration in religion had as-
forded many of the dignified ecclesiastics themselves, an opportuni-
ty of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demolition of the mo-

Keith, 1SZ. ' Knox, 254.

nafteries,

fteries, having set the Monks at liberty from their confinement, BooKIII.
they instantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and commonly be- x56o
took themselves to some secular employment. The Abbot, if he
had been so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the Reforma-
tion from convition, or so cunning as to espouse them out of po-
licy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, except
what he allowed for the subsistence of a few superannuated Monks*,
applied them entirely to his own use. The proposal, made by the
Reformed teachers for applying these revenues towards the main-
tenance of Ministers, the education of youth, and the support of
the poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They
opposed it with the utmost warmth, and by their numbers and au-
thority, easily prevailed on the Parliamenlt to give no ear to such a
disagreeable demand t. Zealous as the first Reformers were, and
animated with a spirit superior to the low considerations of interest,
they beheld these early symptoms of felfifhnefs and avarice among
their adherents, with indignation; and we find Knox exprefling
the utmost sensibility of that contempt, with which they were
treated by many, from whom he expeded a more generous con-
cern for the success of religion, and the honour of its Ministers +.

A DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard to the ads OfThe validity

this Parliament, concerning religion. This difficulty, frivolous in of this Pa,'
itself, and at this distance of time of no importance, is founded on quelion.
the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Parliament
was permitted to take into consideration the Ifate of religion, and
to signify their sentiments of it to the King and Qeen. But, in-
stead of presenting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the humble
* Keith, 496. Append. 19o, 191. See Append. N° IV, :1: Knox, 239, 256.

forni

BooK III. form of a Tupplication 'or address, the Parliament converted them

L"k-- into so many ads; which, although they never received the royal

assent, obtained all over:the kingdom, the weight and authority of
lws. In compliance with their injuntions, the eftablifled system
of religion was every where overthrown, and that recommended by
the Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality and zeal of
the people overlooked or supplied any defect in the form of there
a&s of Parliament, and rendered the observance of them more uni-
veral than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the most regular
or constitutional assembly. By those proceedings, it muff, however,
be confessed, that the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the
last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the powers
which belong to fubjets. But when once men have been accuflom-
ed to break through the common boundaries of fubjetion; and
*heir minds are inflamed with the passions which civil war inspire;
it is mere pedantry or ignorance to measure their conduct by those
rules, which can be applied, only where government is in a RLate of
order and tranquillity. A nation when obliged to employ such ex-
traordinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every
thing which can promote this great end; and the necessity of the
cafe, and the importance of the object, juffify any departure from
the common and established forms of the constitution.

,Abafhdors IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by the
efnt by the ordinary forms of business, it became necessary to lay the proceed-
Parlaament to
France. ings of Parliament before the King and Queen. For this purpose,

Sir James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was appointed to
repair to the Court of France. After holding a course so irregu-
lar, the nobles had no reason to flatter themselves that Francis and
Mary would ever approve their conduct, or confirm it, by their

3 royal

royal assent. The reception of their Ambassador was no other than BOOK III.
they might have expeced. He was treated by the King and Queen 560
with the utmost coldness, and dismissed without obtaining the rati-
fication of the Parliament's proceedings. From the Princes of Lor-
rain and their partizans, he endured all the scorn and insult, which
it was natural for them to pour upon the party he represent-
ed .

THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland of Le- And to Elia-

thington, the Ambassadors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their Pro- beth.
teatrefs, met with a very different reception; they were not more
successful in one part of the negociation intrusted to their care.
The Scots, sensible of the security which they derived from their
union with England, were desirous of rendering it indissoluble.
With this view, they impowered these eminent leaders of their
party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable
and effectual aid which she had afforded them, and at the fame
time, to beseech her to render the friendihip between the nations
perpetual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran, who,
though a subjet, was nearly allied to the royal family of Scot-
land, and, after Mary, the undoubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commission Elizabeth lifened with

the utmost fatisfation, and encouraged the Scots, in any future
exigency, to hope for the continuance of her good offices; with
regard to the latter, flie discovered those sentiments to which ihe
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from marriage, as
some pretend through choice, but more probably out of policy, that

* Knox, 255. Buch. 327.
VOL. I. E e ambiti-

Boo III. ambitious Princess would never admit any partner to the throne;
^--560 but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled exercise of power,

1 he sacrificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of transmitting
her Crown to her own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of
Arran could not be attended with any such extraordinary advantage,
as to shake this resolution; she declined it, therefore, but with
many expressions of good-will towards the Scottish nation, and of
refpe& for Arran himself *.
The death of TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, distinguished by so many

remarkable events, there happened one of great importance. On
the 4th of December died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble confli-
tution, and of a mean understanding. As he did not leave any if-
sue by the Qeen, no incident could have been more fortunate to
those, who, during the late commotions in Scotland, had taken
part with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of her beauty,
had acquired an entire ascendant over her husband; and as she tranf-
ferred all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Fran-
cis followed them implicitly in whatever tract they were pleated to
lead him. The power of France, under such direction, alarmed
the Scottish malecontents, with apprehensions of danger, no less
formidable, than well founded. The intestine disorders which rag-
ed in France, and the seasonable interposition of England in be-
half of the Congregation, had hitherto prevented the Princes of
Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scotland into execution.
But under their vigorous and decisive administration, it was impof-
fible that the commotions in France could be of long continuance,
and many things might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for

Burn 3, Append. 308. Kcith, 154, &c.

X~~I ~the

the future, from the affairs of Scotland. In either of there events BooK III.
the Scots would stand exposed to all the vengeance, which the I 56o
resentment of the French court could inflit. The blow, how-
ever long suspended, was unavoidable, and must fall at last with
redoubled weight. From this profpeat and expedation of dan-
ger, the Scots were delivered by the death of Francis; the an-
cient confederacy of the two kingdoms had already been broken,
and by this event, the only bond of union which remained was
dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who during the minority of
Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the entire direction of the
French councils, was far from any thoughts of vindicating the
Scottish Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been rivals
in power during the reign of Francis II. and had contended for
the government of that weak and unexperienced Prince; but as the
charms of the wife easily triumphed over the authority of the mo-
ther, Catherine could never forgive such a disappointment in her
favourite passion, and beheld now, with secret pleasure, the diffi-
cult and perplexing scene, on which her daughter-in-law was about
to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow which so fad a Mary retires
reverse of fortune could occasion, flighted by the Queen-mother *; from the cort
and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun-
shine of prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there, in solitude, in-
dulged her grief, or hid her indignation. Even the Princes of
Lorrain were obliged to contra&c their views; to turn them from
foreign to domestic objects; and instead of forming vast projects with
regard to Britain, found it necessary to think of acquiring, and
eitablifhing an interest with the new administration.

* Henaut, 340. Cafceln, 454,

E e2 IT

BOOK III. IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on all
'5-60 these accounts, the death of the French Monarchexcited among

the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give
firmness and. fability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced-; and it is no wonder cotemporary his-
torians should ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence,
which, by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and hap-
piness of kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence
and invention would utterly despair *.

Enablifhment ABOUT this time, the Protestant church in Scotland began to
of Prefbyteri-
an church- assume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fan&ion of
government. public authority, and some fixed external policy became necessary

for the government and preservation of the infant society. The
model introduced by the Reformers, differed extremely from that,
which had been so long established. The motives, which induced
them to depart so far from the ancient system, deserve to be ex-
plained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at firit, excited the indignation

of mankind, and rouzed that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fa-
tal to the whole Popish system: as this disgust at the vices of ec-
clefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons, and shifting from
them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed; the effects of the Reformation would naturally have
extended not only to the doctrine, but to the government of the
Popish church; and the fame spirit which abolished the former,
would have overturned the latter. But, in a great part of Ger-

* Knox, 259.

many,

many, in England, and in the northern kingdoms, its operations BooK III.
were checked by the power and policy of their princes; and the 56o'
ancient Episcopal jurifdition, under a few limitations, was still
continued in those churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to
be more conformable to the pratice of the church, since Chriftia-
nity became the eftablifled religion of the Rrnan empire. The
ecclesiastical government was, at that time, plainly copied from the
civil; the first not only borrowed its form, but derived its autho-
rity from the latter; and the dioceses and jurifdiaions of Patri-
archs, Archbiflops, and Bishops, corresponded with the division
and conflitution of the empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-coun-
tries, the nature of the government allowing full scope to the ge-
nius of the Reformation, all pre-eminence of order in the church
was destroyed, and an equality eftabliihed more suitable to the fpi-
rit of republican policy. The situation of the primitive church
suggested the idea, and furnished the model of the latter system,
which has since been called PreJbyterian. The first Christians,
oppressed by continual persecutions, and obliged to hold their re-
ligious assemblies by stealth, and in corners, were contented with
a form of government extremely simple. The influence of reli-
gion, concurred with the sense of danger in extinguishing among
them, the spirit of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank,
the effect of their sufferings, and the cause of many of their vir-
tues. Calvin, whose decisions were received, among the Prote-
ftants of that age, with incredible submission, was the patron and
restorer of this scheme of ecclesiastical policy. The church of
Geneva, formed under his eye, and by his direction, was esteem-
ed the most perfect model of this government; and Knox, who,
during his residence in that city, had studied and admired it, warm-
ly recommended it to the imitation of his countrymen.

AMONG

BOOK III. AMONG the Scottish nobility, some hated the persons, and others

coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abolishing that
order of men, the former indulged their resentment, and the latter
hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed with the most
violent aversion to Popery, and approving of every scheme that de-
parted farthest from the pracice of the Romish church, were de-
lighted with a system, so admirably suited to their predominant
passion. While the friends of civil liberty beheld, with pleasure,
the Protestant clergy pulling down, with their own hands, that fa-
bric of ecclesiastical power, which their predeceflbrs had reared
with so much art and induflry; and flattered themselves, that by
lending their aid to strip churchmen of their dignity and wealth,
they might entirely deliver the nation from their exorbitant and
oppressive jurifdition. The new mode of government easily made
its way among men, thus prepared, by their various interests and
pafiions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduction of his system, Knox did not deem

it expedient to depart altogether from' the ancient form *. Instead
of Bishops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Superinten-
dants in different parts of the kingdom. These, as the name im-
plies, were impowered to infpet the life and docrine of the other
clergy. They presided in the inferior judicatories of the church,
and performed several other parts of the Episcopal function. Their
jurifdition, however, extended to sacred things only; they claim-
ed no feat in Parliament, and pretended no right to the dignity,
or revenues of the former Bishops.

* Spotfwood, I58.

THE

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochial BOOK III.

duty could be committed, was still extremely small; they had em- 6
braced the principles of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the different provinces of the
kingdom; and, in a few places only, were formed into regular
classes or societies. The first General Assembly of the church, Decemberzo.
which was held this year, bears all the marks of an infant and
unformed society. The members were but few in number, and
of no considerable rank; no uniform or consistent rule seems to
have been observed in electing them. From a great part of the
kingdom no representatives appeared. In the name of some entire
counties, but one person was present; while, in other places, a
single town or church sent several members. A convention, so
feeble and irregular, could possess no great authority; and confci-
ous of their own weakness, the members put an end to their de-
bates, without venturing upon an;- decision of much importance *.

IN order to give greater strength and confidence to the Pref- i56r.

byterian plan, Knox, with the afliftance of his brethren, composed
the first book of discipline, which contains the model or platform
of the intended policy '. They presented it to a convention of
estates, which was held in the beginning of this year. What- January r5.
ever regulations were proposed with regard to ecclesiastic discipline
and jurifdiaion, would have easily obtained the fantion of that as-
fembly; but a design to recover the patrimony of the church, which
is there insinuated, met with a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages which would accrue
to the public, by a proper application of ecclesiastical revenues.

* Kcith, 1498. Spotfwood, 152.

In

BOOK III. In vain did they propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,
'56s"- to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and to support the

poor. In vain did they even intermingle threatnings of the divine
displeasure, against the unjust detainers of what was appropriated
to a sacred use. The nobles held fall the prey, which they had
seized; and bestowing upon the proposal, the name of a devout ima-
gination, they affected to confider it, as a project altogether visionary,
and treated it with the utmost scorn *.

TheQueenin- THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. Andrew's to repair
vited to return
into Scotland. to the Queen, and to invite her to return into her native count3r,

and to assume the reins of government, which had been too long
committed to other hands. And though some of her fubjeas
,dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous consequences
with which it might be attended t, the bulk of them desired it
with so much ardour, that the invitation was given with the great-
.eft appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman Catho-
lics got the ifart of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and Lefly,
afterwards Bishop of Ross, who was commissioned by them, ar-
rived before him, at the place of her residence :. Lelly endeavour-
ed to infuse into the Queen's mind suspicions of her Proteflant sub-
jets, and to persuade her to throw herself entirely into the arms
of those who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he
insistcd that she should land at Aberdeen; and as the Protestant doc-
trines had made no considerable progress in that part of the king-
dom, he gave her assurance of being joined, in a few days, by 20,000
men; and flattered her, that with such an army, encouraged by her
pretence and authority, flie might easily overturn the Reformed
Church, before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

* Knox, 256. t See Append. N9 V. $ Lefy, 227.

BUT

BUT at this junCture, the Princes of Lorrain were not disposed BooKIII.

to liften to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on de- 56'
fending themselves against Catherine of Medicis, whose insidious
policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power, they
had no leisure to attend to the affairs,.of Scotland, and wished their
niece to take poffeflion of her kingdom, with as little disturbance
as possible. The French officers, too, who had served in Scotland,
dissuaded Mary from all violent measures; and by representing the
power and number of the Protestants to be irresistible, determined
her to court them by every art; and rather to employ the leading men
of that party as her Ministers, than to provoke them, by a fruit-
less opposition, to become her enemies "*. Hence proceeded the
confidence and affection, with which the Prior of St. Andrew's was
received by the Queen. His representation of the state of the king-
dom gained great credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Estates was held in May. The arri-

val of an Ambassador from France, seems to have been the occa-
sion of this meeting. He was instructed to follicit the Scots to re-
new their ancient alliance with France, to break their new confe-
deracy with England, and to restore the Popish ecclesiastics to the
possession of their revenues, and the exercise of their functions. It is
no easy matter to form any conjecture concerning the intentions of
the French court, in making there extraordinary and ill-timed pro-
positions. They were rejected with that scorn, which might well
have been expected from the temper of the nation -.

* Mclv. .

6. 1 Knox, 269, 273.
VOL. I. Fs N

BOOK III. IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not obtain a more

C' X^-ó ' favourable audience than formerly, and their profpeat of recovering

the Patrimony of the church fill remained as distant and uncertain
as ever. But with regard to another point, they found the zeal of
the nobles in no degree abated. The book of discipline seemed
to require, that the monuments of Popery, which fill remained
in the kingdom, fould be demolished *; and, though neither
the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage of the.
people, remained tojuftify or excuse this barbarous havock, the Con-
tention, confidering every religious fabric as a reliEt of idolatry,
passed sentence upon them by an act in form;. and persons, the most
remarkable for the activity of their zeal, were appointed to put it
in execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, and
even the sepulchres of the dead, perished in one common ruin.
The first storm of popular insurrection, though impetuous and irre-
fiftible, had extended only to a few counties, and soon spent its.
rage; but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleated the devaf-
tation of every thing venerable and magnificent, which had escaped
its violence ..

Mary begins IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Scot--
for'ptar land. Accustomed to the elegance, splendor, and gaiety of a po-

lite court, she frill fondly lingered in France, the scene of all there
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarism of her
ownl country, and the turbulence of her fuljets, which presented her
with a very different face of things. The impatience, however,
of her people, the perfwafions of her uncles, but above all, the
studied and mortifying neglect, with which (he was treated by the

* Spotfwood, 153. Ibid. 174

3 Queeni

Queen Mother, forced her to think of beginning this disagreeable BoOK III.
voyage*. But while she was preparing for it, there were sown
between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal jealousy and
discord, which imbittered the life, and lhortened the days of the
Scottish Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh was the immediate Origin of the

dJfcord be-

occasion of this fatal animosity; the true causes of it lay much deeper. t vcn her an
Almost every article, in that treaty, had been executed by both par- Elizabth'
ties, with a scrupulous exaCnefs. The fortifications of Leith were
demoliflled, and the armies of France and England withdrawn with-
in the appointed time. The grievances of the Scottish malecontents
were redressed, and they had obtained whatever they could demand
for their future security. With regard to all these, Mary could have
little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the ratification of the
treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of contest and diffi-

culty. No Minister ever entered more deeply into the schemes of
his Soveriegn, or pursued them with more dexterity and success
than Cecil. In the condut of the negociation at Edinburgh, the
found understanding of this able politician had proved greatly an
overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had artfully
induced the French ambassadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right belong to Eliza-
beth alone, but also to promite, that in all times to come, Mary
flould abstain from using the titles, or bearing the arms of those
kingdoms.

* Brantomc, Jebb, vol. ii. 482.

F f, '

BooK II. TIIE ratification of this article would have been of the most fa-

tal consequence to Mary. The Crown of England was an objec
worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her title
was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the Engliflh
themselves, the Roman Catholics, who formed, at that time, a nu-
merous and active party, openly espoused this opinion; and even the
Protestants, who supported Elizabeth's throne, could not deny the
Qteen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to
avail herself of all these advantages, could not, in the course. of
things, be far distant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring
this opportunity nearer than was expected. In these circumstances,
Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute, would have loft that rank
which (he had hitherto held among neighbouring Princes; the zeal
of her adherents must have gradually cooled; and (he might have
renounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the Eng-
lifh Crown.

NONE of these bencficial confequencesefcaped the penetrating eye

of Elizabeth, who, for this reason, had recourse to every thing,
by which {he could hope either to soothe or frighten the Scottish
Queen into a compliance with her demands; and if that Prin-
cetis had been so unadvised as to ratify the rafli conceflions of her
Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad-
vantage, which, under her management, must have turned to great
account. By such a renunciation, the qucftion, with regard to
the right of fucceflion would have been left altogether open and
undccidcd, and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either have
kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by the au-
thority of her Parliament, she might have broken in upon the order

of

of lineal succession, and transferred the Crown to some other de- BooK III.
feendant of the royal blood. The former conduct she observed to- 561.
wards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, she held in per-
petual fear and fubjetion. The latter, and more rigorous method
of proceeding, would, in all probability, have been employed
against Mary, whom, for many reasons, ihe both envied and hat:d-

NOR was this ftep beyond her power, unprecedented in the his-

tory, or inconsistent with the constitution of England. Though
fuccefiion by hereditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been eftablifled almost in every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable instances of deviations from that
rule. The Crown of that kingdom having once been seized by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprising in
every age to imitate such an illustrious example of fortunate am-
bition. From the time of William the Norman, the regular course
of descent had seldom continued through three successive reigns.
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to them a way to
the throne, called in the authority of the great council of the nation
to confirm their dubious titles. Hence, parliamentary and heredi-
tary right became in England of equal consideration. That great
assembly claimed and actually poffefled a power of altering the or-
der of regal fucceflion; and even so late as Henry VIII. an act of
Parliament had authorized that capricious Monarch to fettle the
order of succession at his pleafurc. The English, jealous of their
religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of firangers, would
have eagerly adopted the passions of their Sovereign, and might
have been easily induced to exclude the Scottifl line from the right
of fuccceding to the Crown. These seem to have been the views

of

BooK III. of both Queens, and there were the difficulties which retarded
j"-"--rt the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.
I56I.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no higher

than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words of it, might
have brought the present question to an amicable issue. The inde-
finite and ambiguous exprefion, which Cecil had inserted into the
treaty, might have been changed into one more limited, but more
precise; and Mary, instead of promising to abstain from bearing the
title of Qeen of England in all times to come, might have enga-
ged not to aflume that title, during the life of Elizabeth, or the
lives of her lawful posterity.

SucH an amendment, however, did not suit the views of either

Qeen. Though Mary had been obliged to suspend, for some
time, the prosecution of her title to the Englifl Crown, fihe had
not, however, relinquished it. She determined to revive her claim,
on the first profpet of success, and was unwilling to bind herself,
by a positive engagement, not to take advantage of any such fortu-
nate occurrence. Nor would the alteration have been more accep-
table to Elizabeth, who by agreeing to it, would have tacitly re-
cognized the right of her rival to ascend the throne after her decease.
But neither the Scottish nor English Queen durit avow there secret
sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to
dilturb the tranquillity of England, or to wrest the sceptre out of
Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any fufpi-
cion of a design to alter the order of succession, and to set aside the
claim of the Scottish Queen, would have exposed Elizabeth to much
and deserved cenfurc, and have raised up againfl her many and dan-
gerous enemies. These, however carefully concealed, or artfully

disguised,

disguised, were, in all probability, the real motives which deter- BOOK III.
mined the one Queen to follicit, and the other to refuse the ratifi- ' '
cation of the treaty, in its original form; while neither had re-
course to that explication of it, which, to an heart unwarped by
political interest, and sincerely desirous of union and concord, would
have appeared so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occasioned this rup-

ture between the British Queens, rivalfhip of another kind con-
tributed to widen the breach, and female jealousy increased the vio-
lence of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those extra-
ordinary qualities, by which fle equalled or surpassed such of her
sex, as have merited the greatest renown, discovered an admira-
tion of her own person, to a degree, which women of ordinary
understandings either do not entertain, or prudently endeavour to.
conceal. Her attention to dress, her solicitude to display her
charms, her love of flattery, were all excessive. Nor were these
weaknesses confined to that period of life, when they are more
pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the wisest woman of
that, or perhaps of any other age, wore the garb, and affected the
manners of a girl *. Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to
Mary, in beauty, and gracefulness of person, as fie excelled her in
political abilities, and in the arts of government, file was weak
enough to compare herself with the Scottish Queen t-; and as it
was impossible fie could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
gained by the comparison, fle envied and hated her as a rival, by
whom the was eclipsed. In judging of the condut of Princes, we
are apt to ascribe too much to political motives, and too little to

* Johnston Iilt. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, voliii. 699. Catalogue of Royal
and Noble Authors. Article Effjx.

t Mclvil, 98.

the

BOOK III. the pafiions which they feel in common with the reft of mankind.

In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as her subsequent
conduct towards Mary, we muff not always confider her as a Qieeni,
we mufft ometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties with re-

sped to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applications,
to ratify it *. Mary, under various pretences, still contrived to gain
time, and to elude the requefi. But while the one Queen folli-
cited with persevering importunity, and the other evaded with art-
ful delay, they both studied an extreme politeness of behaviour,
and loaded each other with professions of sisterly love, with recipro-
cal declarations of unchangeable esteem and amity.

Elizabeth re- IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among Prin-
sts condY ces, there expressions of friendlhip are commonly far distant from

the heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the course lies along
the English coast. In order to be safe from the insults of the Eng-
lifl fleet, or in cafe of tempestuous weather, to secure a retreat in
the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand
of Elizabeth a safe conduct during her voyage. This request,
which decency alone obliged one Prince to grant to another, Eli-
zabeth rejected, in such a manner, as gave rife to no flight fufpi-
cion of a design, either to obstruct the passage, or to intercept the
person of the Scottish Queen t.

THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled Mary with indig-
nation, but did not retard her departure from France. She was

* Keith, 157, 160, &c. - Ibid. 171. Camden. Sce Append. N. VI.

accom-

accompanied to Calais, the place where the embarked, in a man- BooK ILI
ner suitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful king- I6
doms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the most
eminent among the French nobles, were in her retinue. Cathe-
rine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with every
circumstance of magnificence and respect. After bidding adieu to
her mourning attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bathed in
tears, Mary left that kingdom, the ihort, but only scene of her
life, in which fortune smiled upon her. While the French coast
continued in fight, the intently gazed upon it, and musing, in a
thoughtful posture, on that height of fortune whence the had fallen,
and presaging, perbhps, the disasters and calamities which imbittered
the remainder of her days, She sighed often, and cried out, " Fare-

wel France! Farewel beloved country, which I /hall never more

, behold !" Even when the darkness of the night had hid the land
from her view, she would neither retire to the cabin, nor taste food,
but commanding a couch to be placed on the deck, Ihe there
waited the return of day, with the utmost impatience. Fortune
soothed her on this occasion; the galley made little way during the
night. In the morning, the coast of France was flill within fight,
and she continued to feed her melancholy with the prospect; and
as long as her eyes could distinguish it, to utter the fame tender
expressions of regret *. At last a brifl gale arose, by the favour of
which for some days, and afterward under the covert of a thick
fog, Mary escaped the English fleet, which lay in wait to intex-
cept her -; and on the 19th of August, after an absence of nearAr, j,, i,
thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in her native kingdom. Sotland.

* Brantome, 483. He himself was in the fame galley with the Qieen.
+ Goodal, vol i. 175. Cafleln. 455.

VOL. I. G g MARY

BOOK Ilr., MARY was received by her fubjets with shouts and acclama-

.561 tionsofjoy, and with every demonstration of welcome and, regard.

But as her arrival was unexpected, and no suitable preparation
had been made for it, they could not, with all their efforts; hide
from her the poverty of the country, and were obliged to conduct
her to the palace of Holy-rood-houfe with little pomp. The
Queen, accustomed from her infancy to iplendor and magnificence,
and fond of them, as was natural at her age, could not help ob-
serving the change in her situation, and seemed to be deeply affected

~* with it *.

State of the NEVER did any Prince ascend the- throne at a Juniture which
kingdom at
hfat timct called for more wifdom-in-council, or more courage and fleadinefs

in aAion. The rage of religious controversy was still unabated. The
memory of past oppression exasperated the Protestants; the smart
of recent injuries rendered the Papists desperate; both were zealous,
fierce and irrecon'cileable. The absence of their Sovereign had ac-
customed the nobles to independence; and, during the late com-
motions, they had acquired such an increase of wealth, as threw
great weight into the scale of the ariffocracy, which flood not in need
of any accefflon of power. The kingdom had long been under the
government of Regents, who exercised a delegated jurifdiation, at-
tended with little authority, and which inspired no reverence. A
state of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last years; without
a. Regent; without a supreme council, without the power, or even
the form of a regular government -. A licentious spirit; unac-
quainted with subordination, and disdaining the, restraints of law
and justice, had fpread,among all ranks of men, The influence of
Erance, the antient ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn or despised.

' B.Iant. 484, - Keith, Append. 92.

The

The English, of enemies become confederates, had grown into Boo IIIL
confidence with the nation, and had gained an ascendant over all "
its councils. The Scottish Monarchs did not derive more splendor
or power from the friendflhip of the former, than they had reason
to dread injury and diminution from the interposition of the latter.
Every consideration, whether of interest, or of felf-prefervation,
obliged Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and
to create the Prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the fpiiit
of difaffetion among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the admini-

ftration fell into the hands of a young Q&een, not nineteen years
of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws of her country,
a stranger to her fubjeas, without experience, without allies, and
almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find some circum-

itances, which, though they did not balance these disadvantages,
contributed, however, to alleviate them; and, with skillful ma-
nagement, might have produced great effecs. Her fubjets, unac-
cutfomed so long to the residence of their Prince, were not only
dazzled by the novelty and splendor of the royal pretence, but in-
spired with awe and reverence. Besides the places of power and
profit beltowed by the favour of a Prince, his protection, his fami-
liarity, and even his smiles, confer honour, and win the hearts of
men. From all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to
testify their duty and affection to their Sovereign, and studied, by
every art, to wipe out the memory of past mifcondua, and to lay
in a stock of future merit. The amusements and gaiety of her
court, which was filled with the most accomplilhed of the French.

G g 2 nobility,

BooK III. nobility, who had attended her, began to soften and to polish the rude

L^5ór1 manners of the nation. Mary herself poffefeed many of these quali-

fications, which raise affetion, and procure esteem. The beauty and
gracefulness of her person drew universal admiration, the elegance
and politeness of her manners commanded general refpedc. To all
the charms of her own sex, she added many of the accomplishments
of the other. The progress the had made in all the Arts and Sci-
ences, which were then esteemed necessary or ornamental,. was far
beyond what is commonly attained by Princes; and all her other,
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courteous affability,
which, without lessening the dignity of a Prince, tfeals on the- hearts
of fubjeas with a bewitching insinuation;

FROM these circumstances, notwithifanding the threatening as-

pet of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithstanding the.
clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer would
have predicted a very different issue of her reign; and whatever
sudden gusts of' fadion he might have expeted', he would never
have dreaded the deftru&cive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all' parties were contending who liould discover the most

dutiful attachment to the Queen, the zealous and impatient spirit
of the age broke out in a remarkable instance. On the Sunday as-
ter her arrival, the Q.een commanded mass to be celebrated in the
chapel of her palace. The first rumour of this occasioned a secret
murmuring among the Protestants who attended the court.; comn-
plaints and threatenings loon followed; the servants belonging to,
the. chapel' were insulted and abused; and, if the Prior of St. An-
drew's had not seasonably interposed, the rioters might.have pro,
weeded to the utmost excefies *.

*, Knox,. 841:.

I.r is impofible, at this distance of time, and under circumftan- BOOK III..

ces so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal againfi 15ó'7
Popery, which then possessed the nation. Every instance of con--
descension. to the Papiits was esteemed an. at of apoftacy, and the
toleration of a single mass pronounced to be more formidable to the
nation than the invasion of ten thousand armed men *. Under the
influence of these opinions, many Protestants would have ventured.
to go dangerous lengths; and, without attempting to convince their
Sovereign by argument,. or to reclaim her by indulgence, would
have abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in. that:
manner, which alone she thought acceptable to him. But the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, not only restrained
this impetuous spirit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for the Queen and
her domestics the undisturbed exercise of the Catholic religion.
Near an hundred years, after this period, when the violence of reli-
gious animofities. had begun to subside, when time and the progress
of learning had enlarged the views of the human mind, an Eng-
lifh house of Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sove-
reign in the private use of the mass. The Protestant leaders de-
serve, on. this occasion, the praise both of wifdor and of modera-
tion for conduct so different. But, at the fame time, whoever re-
fleets upon the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will be
far from. treating the fears and caution of the more zealous Refor-
mers as altogether imaginary, and destitute of any real foundation..

THE Protestants, however, by this compliance with the Qeen's
prejudices, obtained a. proclamation highly favourable to their reli-

* Knox, 287..

gion..

BooK III. gion. The Reformed doctrine, though established all over the king-

56 X dom, had never' received the countenance or fAndion of royal autho-
I56I.
Augut zs. rity. On this occasion, the Queen declared any attempt towards:

an alteration or subversion of it, to be a capital crime *.

She emplnys TIIE Qieen, conformable to the plan which had been concerted
otly Prote-; in France, committed the administration of affairs entirely to Prote-
dminiftra- ftants. Her council was filled with the most eminent persons of
tion.

that party; not a tingle Papist was admitted into any degree of con-
fidence -. The Prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of Lething-
ton ieemed to hold the first place in the Queen's affection, and pof-'
felled all the power and reputation of favourite Miniflers. Her choice
could not have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her people;
and, by their prudent advice, Mary conduted herfelfwith so much
moderation, and deference to the sentiments of the nation, as could
not fail of gaining the affection of her subje&s +, the firmest foun-
dation of a Prince's power, and the only genuine source of his
happiness and glory.

Attempts to A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was another objec of
gain liza- great importance to Mary; and though she seems to have had it
beth's favour.

much at heart, in the beginning of her administration, to accom-
plifh such a defireable conjunction, yet many events occurred to
widen, rather than to close the breach. The formal offices offriend-
lhlip, however, are seldom neglected among Princes, and Elizabeth,
who had attempted so openly to obftruac the Queen's voyage into
Scotland, did not fail, a few days after her arrival, to command
Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, that ihe might

* Keith, 504. + Knox, 285. :1: Lefy, 235.

be

be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court, BooKIII.
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for Elizabeth *. Both ' 561.
the Ambafladors were received with the utmost civility; and, on
each fide, the professions of kindness, as they were made with little
sincerity, were listened to with proportional credit.

BOTH were intrusted, however, with something more than mere

matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, with fresh importu-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory conduct of his
Mistress with regard to that point. The multiplicity of public as-
fairs since her arrival in Scotland, the importance of the question
in dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with whom she was
obliged in decency to consult, were the pretences offered in excuse
for her condut; the real causes of it were those, which have already
been mentioned. But in order to extricate herself out of these
difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary
was brought to yield a point, which formerly ihe seemed determined
never to give up. She inftruded Maitland to signify her willing-
ness to disclaim any right to the Crown of England, during the
life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity; if, in failure of,
there,. she were declared next heir by aa of parliament -..

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to Mary, who there-

by precluded herself from disturbing Elizabeth's poffeflion of the
throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's inter-
eft, or more contradictory to a paflion, which predominated in the
character of that.Princefs. Notwithfianding all the great qualities

* Keith, 181, &c. -* Camden, 387. Buchan. 329..

7 whljik i

BooK III. which threw such lustre on her reign, we may observe, that she was

X56 I. tinctured with a jealousy of her right to the Crown, which often

betrayed her into mean and ungenerous actions. The peculiarity
of her situation heightened, no doubt, and increased, but did not
infuse this paflion. It descended to her from Henry VII. her grand-
father, whom, in several features of his character, the nearly refem-
bled. Like him (he suffered the title by which she held the Crown
to remain ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit it to par-
liamentary discussion, or derive any addition to her right, from
such authority. Like him, she observed every pretender to the
fuccefion, not only with that attention, which prudence prescribes;
but with that aversion which suspicion inspires. The present un-
certainty with regard to the right of succession, operated for Eliza-
beth's advantage, both on her fubjedcs, and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded her life as the great
security of the national tranquillity; and chore rather to acknow-
ledge a title which was dubious, than to search for one that was
unknown. The latter, while nothing was decided, were held in
dependence, and obliged to court her. The manner in which the
received this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no other
than might have been expected. She rejected it in a peremptory
tone, with many expressions of a resolution never to permit a point
of so much delicacy to be touched.
e&ptember i. ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public entry into Edin-

burgh with great pomp. Nothing was neglected, which could
express the duty and affection of the citizens towards their Sove-
reign. But amidst these demonstrations of regard, the genius and
sentiments of the nation discovered themselves, in a circumstance,
which, though inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As it

was

,was the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at every public BooKIIL.
solemnity; most of there, on this occasion, were contrived to be re- 56.
*presentations of the vengeance which the Almighty hath inflicted
upon idolaters %. Even while they ftudied'to amuse and to flatter
the Queen, her fubjeCs could not refrain from testifying their ab-
horrence of that religion which flhe professed.

To restore the regular administration of julfice, and to reform Rertrains the

licence of the

the internal police of the country, became the next objet of the borderers.
Queen's care. The laws enacted for preservation of public or-
.der, and the security of private property, were nearly the fame
in Scotland, as in every other civilized country. But the nature of
the Scottish constitution, the impotence of regal authority, the ex-
orbitan.t power of the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce
manners of the people, rendered the execution of these laws feeble,
irregular, and partial. In the counties which border on England,
this defec was most apparent; and the consequences of it most fen-
sibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to industry, averse from la-
bour, and unacquainted with the arts of peace, subsisted intirely
by spoil and pillage, and being confederated in septs or clans, com-
mitted there excesses not only with impunity, but even with ho-
nour. During the unsettled state of the kingdom from the death
of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual height;
and the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were become no
less intolerable to their own countrymen, than to the English.
To restrain and punish these outrages, was an action equally
popular in both kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was
the person chosen for this important service, and extraordinary

* Keith, 189;
VOL. I, H h powers,

BOOK III. powers, together with the title of the Queen's lieutenant, were
~-" ' veiled in him for this purpose.

NOTHING can be more surprising to men, accustomed to regu-

lar government, than the preparations made on this occasion. They
were such as might be expeted in the rudest and most imperfed
state of society. The freeholders of eleven several counties, with
all their followers completely armed, were summoned to assist the
Lieutenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing resembled
a military expedition, rather than the progress of a court ofjuftice *.
The Prior executed his commiflion with such vigour and prudence,
as acquired him a great increase of reputation and popularity among
his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti suffered the punishment
due to their crimes; and, by the impartial and rigorous adminifira-
tion of justice, order and tranquillity were restored to that part of
the kingdom.

The Papilts DURING the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's, the leaders
attempt, in
vain, to get of the Popish faaion seem to have taken some steps towards infi-

i vh ihr. nuating themselves into the Queen's favour and confidence A-. But

the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable person in the
party for abilities and political address, was received with little favour
at court; and whatever secret partiality the QEeen might have to-
wards those who professed the fame religion with herself, ihe dif-
covered no inclination, at that time, to take the administration of
affairs out of the hands, to which fle had already committed it.

THE cold reception of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's was owing
to his connecion with the house of Hamilton; from which the

* Keith, 198. , Ibid. 203.

3 QQueen

Queen was much alienated. The Duke of Guile and the Cardinal BoOK III
could never forgive the zeal, with which the Duke of Chatelhe- 156i.
rault and his son the Earl of Arran had espoused the cause of the
Congregation. Princes seldom view their successors without jealousy
and distrust. -The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the
Duke as a rival in power. All these causes concurred in infusing
into the Queen's mind an aversion for that family. The Duke,
indulging his love of retirement, lived at a distance from court,
without \taking pains to insinuate himself into favour; and
though the Earl of Arran openly aspired to marry the Qeen, he,
by a most unpardonable adt of imprudence, was the only noble-
man of distinction who opposed Mary's enjoying the exercise of
her religion; and by rahly entering a public protestation against it,
entirely forfeited her favour *. At the fame time, the fordid parsi-
mony of his father obliged him either to hide himself in tome re-
tirement, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as first
Prince of the blood, or his high pretensions as suitor to the Queen -.
Iis love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impatience, exafpe-
rated by neglect, preyed gradually on his reason, and, after many
extravagancies, broke out at last in ungovernable frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of Eftatcs was held D.cen,. c.

chiefly on account of ecclefiaflical affairs. The aflembly of the
church, which fat at the fame time, prefcnted a petition, contain-
ing many demands with respect to the fiuppreffing of Popery, the
encouraging the Protestant religion, and the providing for the main-
tenance of the clergy T. The lafi was a matter of great impor-
tance, and the fleps taken towards it deserve to be traced.

* Keith, 201, 204. Knox, 286. 1. Keith, 196. .: Ibid 210.

H h 2 TIlOUn

BooK III. THouGH the number of Protestant preachers was now confi-
1'56' derably increased, many more were still wanted, in every corner of
A new regu- the kingdom.. No legal: provision having been made for them,
lation con-
cerning the they had hitherto drawn a feanty and precarious subsistence from
revenues of
the church. the benevolence of' their people. To susser the ministers of an

eftablithed church to continue in this state of indigence and.depen-
dence, was an.indecency equally repugnant to the principles of reli--
gion, and to the maxims of found. policy; and would, have jufti--
fled all the imputations of avarice,, with. which the Reformation
was then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the Popish
church were the only fund, which. could be' employed for their
relief; butduring the three. last years, the Rate of these was great--
ly altered. A. great majority of Abbots, Priors, and other heads
of religious houses, had, either, from a sense of duty, or from views
of interest, renounced the errors of Popery.; and,. notwithstanding
this change in their sentiments, they retained their ancient revenues.
Almost the whole order of Bishops, and feveral.of the other dignita-
ries, still adhered to the Romish superstition: and though debarred
from every spiritual function, continued to enjoy the temporalities
of their benefices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
active in promoting the Reformation, had, under various pretences,.
and.amidft the licence of civil, wars, got into their hands poifeflions,.
which. belonged to the church. And thus before any part of the.
ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be applied towards the main-
tenance of 'he Protestant Ministers, many different interefis were
to be adjusted; many claims to be examined; and the prejudices
and passions of the. two.contending parties required the application
of a delicate.hand. After much contention, the following plan was
approved by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in even by the Po-
pilh clergy themselves.. An. exad account of the value of ecclc--

7' fiafticl

fiaftical benefices throughout the kingdom was appointed to be BOOKIII.
taken. The present incumbents, to\whatever party they adhered, 5
were allowed to keep pofeffion: two thirds of their whole reve-
nue were reserved for their own use, 'the remainder was annexed to
the Crown; and out of that, the Queen undertook to assign a sus-
ficient maintenance for the Protestant clergy *..

As most of the Bishops and several of the other dignitaries were

fiill firmly attached to the Popish religion, the extirpation of the
whole order, rather than an aa of such extraordinary indulgence,
might have been expected from the zeal of the preachers, and from.
the spirit which had hitherto animated the nation. But, on this
occasion, other principles obstructed the operation of such as were
purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth, two
passions extremely opposite, concurred in determining the Pro-
teftant.leaders to fall in with this plan, which deviated so manifest--
ly from the maxims, by which they had hitherto regulated their.
eondut.

IF the Reformers had been allowed to aat without controul,

and to level all diftinAtions in the church, the immense revenues-
annexed. to ecclesiastical dignities could not, with any colour of.
justice, have been retained by those in whose hands they now were;
but must either have been distributed among the Protestant clergy,
who performed all religious offices, or muff have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater part of them was.
originally derived. The former scheme, however suitable to the re--
ligious spirit of many among the people, was attended with ,anai,.

*'Keitb, Append. 175. Knox, 194,.

fcl .:

'BOOK II.fold danger. The Popish ecclesiastics had acquired a {hare in the

56 T-1 national property, which far exceeded the proportion that was con- ]

filfent with the happiness of the kingdom; and the nobles were de-
,termined to guard against this evil, by preventing the return of those
vaR poffeffons into the hands of the church. Nor was the latter,
which'expofed the constitution to more imminent hazard, to be
avoided with less care. Even that circumscribed prerogative, which
-the Seottiih Kings possessed, was the object ofjealoufy to the nobles.
If they had allowed the Crown to seize the fpoils-of the church,
ifuch an increase of power must have followed that accession of pro-
perty, as would have raised the royal authority above countroul,
and have rendered the most limited Prince in Europe the noft ab-
solute and independent. The reign of Henry VIII. presented a
recent and alarming example of this nature. The wealth which
flowed in upon that Prince, from the suppression of the monafte-
ries, not only changed the maxims of his government, but the
temper of his mind; and he who had formerly submitted to his
" Parliaments, and courted his people, dictated, from that time,

to the former, with intolerable insolence; and tyrannized over the
latter with unprecedented severity: and if his policy had not been
extremely fiort-fighted, if he had not squandered what he ac-
quired, with a profusion equal to his rapaciousness, and which de-
feated his ambition, he might have eftabliflled despotism in Eng-
land, on a basis so broad and strong, as all the efforts of the sub-
jects would never have been able to flake. In Scotland, where
the riches of the clergy bore as great a proportion to the wealth
of the kingdom, the acquisition of church-lands would have been
of no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal to the arif-
:tocracy. The nobles, for this reason, guarded against such an in-

crease

crease of the.royal power, and thereby secured their own inde- BOOKIII..
pendence. I 56I.,

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for the interest of

their order. The re-uniting the poffeflions of the church to the
Crown, or the bestowing them on the Protestant clergy, would
have been a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fraud or
violence, seized part of there revenues, and to those Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced their ecclesiastical characer. But
as the plan, which was proposed, gave some fantion to their ufur-
pations, they promoted it with their utmost influence. The popish:
ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a third of their revenues was
by no means agreeable to them, consented, under their present cir-
cumitances, to sacrifice a part of their poffefiions, in order to pur-
chafe the secure enjoyment of the remainder; and after deeming-
the whole irrecoverably loft, they confidered whatever they could"
retrieve as so much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were
men of noble birth; and as they no longer entertained hopes of
restoring the Popish religion, they wished their own relations, ra-
ther than the Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched with'
the spoils of the church. They connived, for this reason, at the
encroachments of the nobles; they even aided their avarice and vio-
lence; they dealt out the patrimony of the church among their own:
relations, and by granting fJeus and perpetual leafes of lands and'
tithes, gave, to the utmost of their power, some colour of legal'
poffeflion, to what was formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges
of such alienations still remain *. The nobles, with the concur-
rence of the incumbents, daily extended their encroachments, and
gradually stripped the ecclcfitfi:ics. of their richest and molt'valu- -

* Keilh, 507. Cpotf. 175.

able

;BooK II. able poffeflions, Even that third part, which was given up in or-
^'" ^T" der to silence the clamours of the Protestant clergy, and to be some

equivalent to the Crown for its claims, amounted to no confider-
able fum. The thirds due by the more powerful nobles, especially
by such as had embraced the Reformation, were almost universally
remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent rentals; by estimating
.the corn, and other payments in kind, at an under value; and by
the connivance of collectors; greatly diminished the charge against
themselves *: and the nobles had much reason to be satisfied with
a device which, at so small expence, secured to them such vast
possessions.

T'he Prute- NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable gainers by this new
itanc clergy regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal,
no gainers by

t- g than to extinguish avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they

had swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to all their re-
monstrances. The Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, the
Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the most zealous leaders of the
Congregation, were appointed to assign, or, as it was called, to
modify their stipends. An hundred merks Scottish was the allowance
which their liberality afforded to the generality of Ministers. To a
few three hundred merks were granted -F. About twenty-four
thousand pounds Scottish appears to have been the whole fum al-
lotted for the maintenance of a national church established by law,
and esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church of God $.
Even this fum was paid with little exatnefs, and the Ministers were
kept in the fame poverty and dependance as formerly.

* Keith, Append. z88. Spotfwood, 183. t Knox, 30o. ; Keith, Append 1 88.

THE

THE gentleness of the Queen's adminifsration, and the elegance BOOK III.

of her court, had mitigated, in ofme degree, the ferocity of the ,1562-.
.nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildness and humanity; Diin;fiEons

aong the

while, at the fame time, her presence and authority were a check nobles.
'to their fatious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a itate of order
and tranquillity was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance; and this year became remarkable for
the most violent eruptions of intelfine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a Mo-

narch could possess little authority, and exercise no extensive or ri-
gorous jurifdidion. The interfering of interest, the unsettled Rtate
of property, the frequency of public commotions, and the fierce-
ness of their own manners, sowed, among the great families, the
feeds of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we have already
observed, were decided not bylaw, but by violence. The offend-
ed Baron, without having recourse to the Monarch, or acknowledg-
ing his superior authority, assembled his own followers, and in-
vaded the lands of his rival in an hostile manner. Together with
his estate and honours, every nobleman traninitted some heredi-
tary feud to his posterity, who were bound in honour to adopt and
to prosecute it with the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a diflention had fubrinfted between the house of Hamilton

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
during the late commotions *. Both the Earl of Arran and Both-
.well happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their followers

O Keith, 21z.'
VOL. I. I i quar-l

BooK IIT..quarrelled frequently in the streets of Edinburgh, and excited

562' dangerous tumults in that city. At last, the mediation of their
'1562. b
Febr,.ary. friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement, but

an unfortunate one to both these noblemen *.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and with the utmost ter-

ror and confusion, confessed firit to him, and then to the Prior of
St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole direction of as-
fairs, Bothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had conspired to
murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the Queen.
The Duke of Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had
supplanted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled that place at
the helm, which he imagined to be due to himself, as firif Prince
of the blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries which
he had received from the Prior during the late commotions, was no
less exasperated against him. But whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in the fran-
tic arid disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is impossible,
amidst the contradiction of hiflorians, and the defetivenefs of re-
cords, positively to determine. Among men inflamed with resent-
ment, and impatient for revenge, rash expressions might be uttered,
and violent and criminal expedients proposed; and on that founda-
tion, Arran's distempered fancy might rear the whole fuperfiruc-
ture of a conspiracy. All the persons accused, denied their guilt
with the utmost confidence. But the known charaters of the men,
and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the probability
of the accusation, and abundantly justify the conduct of the Queen's

t' Knox, 305.

Mini-

Ministers, who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of thering- BooKIII.
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender the 1562.
strong castle of Dunbarton, which he had held ever since the time
of his resigning the office of Regent *.

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the Prior of St. An- The Earl of

lluntlv's tn-
drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more rity to the

QIeen's Mi-

tragical events. George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one (tei i
of the nobles who conspired against James III. and who raised his
son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great flare in the confi-
dence of that generous Prince t. By his bounty, great accefflions
of wealth and power were added to a family, already opulent and
powerful. On the death of that Monarch, Alexander the next
Earl, being appointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties beyond
Forth, left the other nobles to contend for offices at court; and
retiring to the north, where his estate and influence lay, resided
there, in a kind of princely independence. The Chieftains in that
part of the kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dan-
gerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent his encroachments.
Some of his rivals he secretly undermined, others he subdued by
open force. His estate far exceeded that of any other subjed, and
hisfuperiorities and jurisdictions extended over many of the nor-
thern counties. With power and poffefiions so immense, un-
der two long and feeble minorities, and amidst the flock of civil
commotions, the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the most
elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, an active and enter-
prifing spirit was not the characteristic of that family, and whatever
object their ambition might have in view, they chose rather to ac-
quire it by political address, than to seize it openly, and by force
of arms.

* Knox, 30, 308. Kcith, 202, 1 Crawf. Officer. e,s State, 56.

I i2 Tir

BooKIII. TiH conduct of George the present Earl, during the late com-

-"62- motions, had been perfecly suitable to the charater of the family,

in that age; dubious, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he affiited the Queen
Regent in her attempts to crush them. When their affairs put on
a better aspet, he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by each of the con-
tending parties; both connived at his encroachments in the north;
and, by artifice and force, which he well knew how to employ al-
ternately, and in their proper places, he added every day to the
exorbitant power and wealth which he poifeffed.

HE observed the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the greateftjealoufy and concern, and confi-
dered him as a rival who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish religion seemed
to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increased the:
mifunderflanding occasioned. by rivalfhip in power.. The Queen
having determined to reward the services of the Prior of St. An-
drew's, by creating him an Earl, (he made choice of Mar,. as, the
place whence he flhould take his title; and,. that he might be bet-
ter able to support. his new honour, bestowed upon him, at the
February lo. fame time, the lands of that. name. These were part of the royal

demesnes C, but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for fevc-
ral years, to keep pofleffion of them -. On this occasion, the Earl
not only complained, with some reason, of the loss which he fui-
tained, but had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a for-
midable neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might bo

Crawf. Peer. 297, Buch. 334.

ablo

OF SCOTLAND. 245

able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed vassals to shake off BoOK III.
his yoke.. 6

1.562.

AN incident, which happened soon after, encreafed and confirm- June -

ed Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and Lord
Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an estate. This dif-
pute. became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfortunately to
meet in the streets of Edinburgh, and being both attended with
armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in. which Lord- Ogilvie was dan-
geroufly wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates seized both the
offenders, and the Queen commanded them to be ftritly confined.
Under any regular government, such a breach.of public peace and
order would expose the person offending, to certain punishment..
At this time, some severity was necessary, in order to vindicate the
Queen's authority from an insult, the most heinous which had been
offered to it, since her return into Scotland. But in an age accuf-
tomed to licence and anarchy, even this moderate exertion of her
power in, ordering them to be kept in cuflody, was deemed an act
of intolerable rigour; and the friends of each party began to con-
vene their vaflals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to fruf-
trate the decisions of justice *. Mean while, Gordon made his
escape out of prison, and flying into Aberdeenfliire, complained
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated; and as
all the Queen's actions were, at this juncture, imputed to the
Earl of Mar, this added not a little to the resfntment, which Hunt-
ly had conceived againfl that nobleman.

AT the very time when these paflions fermented, with the ut- ugtla .
most violence, in the minds of the Earl of Huntly and his family,.

Keith, 223.

the

Boo s IIl. the Q een happened to set out on a progress into the northern parte

ó- z
/ of the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar and Mor-

ton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The presence of
the Queen, in a country where no name greater than the Earl of
Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior to his had been
exercised, for many years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the Queen was en-
tirely under the direction of Mar, all her acions were more apt to
be misrepresented, and construed into injuries; and a thousand cir-
cumftances could not but occur to awaken Huntly'sjealoufy, to of-
fend his pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidit the agitations
of so many violent passions, fonie eruption was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a

woman capable of executing the commifllon with abundance of dex-
terity, to sooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he should again deliver
himnelf into the hands ofjuftice, and rely on her clemency. Gor-
don was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined by the Queen to
enter himself prisoner in the cafile of Stirling, he promised likewise
to obey that command. Lord Erfline, Mar's uncle, was, at that
time, Governor of this fort. The Queen's severity, and the place
in which fle appointed Gordon to be confined, were interpreted to
ba new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented the hatred of the
Gordons against him.
SClptnmber i. MEAN time, Sir John Gordon set out towards Stirling; but in-

ftcad of performing his promise to the Queen, made his efcapc
from his guards, and returned to take the command of his follow-
Crs, who were rising in arms, all over the north. Theie were de-

fl-itlcd

ftiied to second and improve the blow, by which his father pro- BOOK II.
posed, secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait- -5

1562.

land, his principal adversaries. The time and place for perpetrat-
ing this horrid deed were frequently appointed ; but the executing
of it was wonderfully prevented, by some of those unforeseen acci-
dents, which ib often occur to difconce:t the schemes, and to in-
timidate the hearts of afaflins *. His own houfs at Strathbogie was
the last and most convenient scene, appointed for committing the
intended violence. But, on her journey thither, the Queen heard
of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and refuting, in the first
transports of her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by
that fortunate expreffiin of her resentment, saved her Ministers
from unavoidable deftrudion -.

THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipitated Takes arm

Huntly into open rebellion. As the Queen was entirely under the agzsIl the
direction of his rivals, it was impoflible to work their ruin, with-
out violating the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign. On her
arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer in the castle, by Hunt-
ly's order, shut the gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge
in the town, which was open and defencelcfs; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers $. The
utmost consternation seized the Queen, who was attended by a
very flerider train. She every moment expected the approach of the
rebels, and some ships were already ordered into the river to fe-
cure her escape. The loyalty of the Monroes, Frazers, Mackin-
toshes, and some neighbouring clans, who took arms in her de-
fence, saved her from this danger. By their assistance, fie even

* Keith, 230. 1 Knox, 318. t Crawf. Officers of State, 87, 88.

forced

BooK III. forced the castle to surrender, and infliced on the Governor the

562-. punishment which his insolence deserved.

THIS open aft of disobedience was the occasion of a mea-

sure more galling to Huntly than any the Queen had hither-
to taken. Lord Erskine having pretended a right to the earl-
dom of Mar, Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame
time Mary conferred upon him the Title of Earl of Murray,
with the estate annexed to that dignity, which had been in the pof-
feflion of the Earl of Huntly since the year 1548 *. From
this he concluded that his family was devoted to deftrution;
and dreading to be itripped, gradually, of those possessions,
which, in reward of their services, the gratitude of the Crown
had bellowed on himself, or his anceflors, he no longer dif-
guised his intentions, but, in defiance of the Queen's procla-
mation, openly took arms. Inflead of yielding those places
of firength, which Mary required him to surrender, his fol-
lowers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties which the dispatched
to take poffeflion of them t-; and he himself, advancing with a con-
fiderable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place the
Q.een was now returned, filled her small court with conlter-
nation. Murray had only a handful of men in whom he could
confide +. In order to form the appearance of an army, he
was obliged to call in the assistance of the neighbouring Ba-
rons; but as most of there either favoured Huntly's dcfigns,
or flood in awe of his power, from them no cordial or cffcc-
tual service could be expeced.

' Crawf. Peer. 359. ')1 Knox, 319. : Keith, 230.

8 WIr it

WITH these troops, however, Murray, -who could gain nothing BooK III.

by delay, marched briikly towards the enemy. He found them at Is62z
Corrichie, posted to great advantage; he commanded his northern Oaober 28.
associates instantly to begin the attack; but on the sirs motion of
the enemy, they treacherously turned their backs; and Huntlys
followers, throwing aside their spears, and breaking their ranks,
drew their swords, and rushed forward to the pursuit. It was
then, that Murray gave proof both of teady courage, and of pru- He is defe ted
dent conduct. He flood immoveable, on a rising ground, with Murray.
the small, but trusty body of his adherents, who presenting their
spears to the enemy, received them with a determined resolution,
which they little expected. The Highland broad sword is not a
weapon fit to encounter the Scottish spear. In every civil commo-
tion, the superiority of the latter has been evident, and has always
decided the contest. On this occasion, the irregular attack of Hunt-
ly's troops was easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion. Before
they recovered from the confusion occasioned by this unforeseen re-
fiftance, those who had begun the flight, willing to regain their
credit with the vitorious party, fell upon them, and compleated
the rout. Huntly himself, who was extremely corpulent, was trod-
den to death in the pursuit. His sons, Sir John and Adam, were
taken, and Murray returned in triumph to Aberdeen with his pri-
foners.

THE trial of men taken in actual rebellion against their Sove-

reign was extremely short. Three days after the battle, Sir John
Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam was par-
doned on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been
privy to his father's designs, was seized in the south, and upon
trial found guilty of treason ; but, through the Queen's clemency,
the punimnnent was remitted. The first Parliament proceeded against

VOL. I. K k this

BooKIII. this great family, with the utmofl rigourof law, and5 reduied their

v-- power and fortune to thelowef ebb*..

As

* This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is, one of the mofl ihtricate and myf-

teriou's passages in the Scottish history. As it was a tranfa6ion purely domestic, and
in which the English were little interested, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Collection, the great tforehoufe. of evidence and information
with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this time, of deflroying

Murray, and of employing, the power of the Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But
his account of this whole tranfaftion appears-to be so void of truth, and even of
probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time, Marywanted power,
and seems to have ad no inclination to commit any aft of violence upon her bro-
ther.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this matter, but
they appear to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Qaeen's journey to the north was a
echeme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the Earl of Huntly. I. Huntly had
resided at court almost ever since the Queen's return. Keith, 198. Append. 175,
&c. This was the proper place in which to have seized him. To attack him in
Aberdeen(hire, the feat of his power, and in the midst of his vassals, was a pro-
ie:& equally abfuid and hazardous. 2. The (ueen was not accompanied with a
body of troops, capable of attempting any thing against Huntly by violence; her train
was not more numerous, than was usual in times of grcateft tranquillity, Keith,
230. 3. There remain two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one
from Randolph the English Resident, and another from Maitland, both dircetcd
to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as notoiiounly treasonable. Randolph
mentions his repeated attempts to assassinate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any
previous rcfolution, formed by Mary's Miniliers, to ruin H-untly and his family.
Had any such design ever cxiftcd, it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it;
nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it. from the English secretary. Keith,
329, 232.

It. To

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the mofl important event'BooKIII.

*of this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narra- 562
tive, by taking notice of lesser tranfadions, which may now be
related with equal propriety.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was desirous of en- An interview

between Eli-

tering into more intimate correspondence and familiarity with zabeth and
Elizabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal interview with y pa.
her, somewhere in the north of England. As this proposal could
not be rejected with decency, the time, the place, and the cir-
cumftances of the meeting were instantly agreed upon. But Eli-
zabeth was prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a ri-
val, who outshone herself, so far, in beauty, and gracefulness of
person; and who excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of infinua-

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing the Queen,

and her Ministers, seems to be no less improbable. I. On the Queen's arrival in
the north, he laboured, in good earnest, to gain her favour, and to obtain a par-
don for his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, first at Aberdeen, and then
at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to come, had he harboured
any such treasonable resolution. Knox, 318. 3. His conduA was irresolute and
wavering, like that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one
executing a concerted plan. 4. The most considerable persons of his Clan sub-
mitted to the Queen, and found surety to obey her commands. Keith 226. Had
the Earl been previously determined to rife in arms againit the Queen, or to seize
her Ministers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal followers,
nor would they have deserted him in this manner.

For these reasons we have, on the one hand, vindicated the Earl of Murray

from any deliberate intention of ruining the family of Gordon; and on the other
hand, we have imputed the violent conduct of the Earl of Huntly, to a sudden
start of regentment, without charging him with any premeditated purpose of re-
bellion.

K k 2 tion

B.OK Ill. tion and address. Under pretence of being confined to London, by

i56z' the attention which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in

France, she put off the interview for that season *, and prevented
her fubjets from feeing the Scottish Queen, the charms of whose
appearance, and behaviour, she envied, andhad tome reason to dread.

Puzne z. Dv RIN G this year, the Assembly of the church met twice. In
December zar.

both these meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the pover-
ty and dependence of the church; and many murmurs against the
negligence or avarice of those, who had been appointed to colle&,
and to distribute the small fund, appropriated for the maintenance
of preachers *t. A petition, craving redress of their grievances,
was prefentedc to the Queen; but without any effect. There was
no reason to expec that Mary would discover any forwardness to
grant the requests offuch supplicants. And as her Ministers, though
all most zealous Protestants, were themfe'ves growing rich on the
inheritance of the church, they were equally regardless of the indi-
gence and demands of their brethren.

1563. MARY had. now continued above two years in. a state of widow-

Negociations hood. Her gentle- administration had fecuredc the hearts of her sub-
with regard to
the Q"een's jects, who were impatient for her marriage, and wished the Crown
ijarnagc. to descend in the right line from their ancient Monarchs. She her-

self was the most. amiable woman of the age, and the fame of her
accomplishments, together with. the favourable circumstance of
her having one kingdom already in her poffeflion, and the pro-
fpeat of mounting the throne of another; prompted many dif-
ferent Princes to solicit an alliance so illustrious. Scotland, by
its situation,, threw so much weight and power into whatever

Keith, 216. t, Knox, 311, 323.

scale

scale it fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's de- BooKIII.
termination; and no event in that age excited stronger political 5'63
fears and jealousies; none interested more deeply the passions of fe-
veral Princes, or gave rife to more contradictory intrigues, than the.
marriage of the Scottish Queen.

THE Princes of the house of AuRria remembered what. vaftsheis folici,

ted by differ--

projets the French had founded on their former alliance with the ent Princes.
Queen of Scots; and though the unexpected death, first of Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered these from taking effet, yet if
Mary should again make choice of a husband among, the French
Princes, the fame designs might be revived, and prosecuted with. bet-
ter success.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into a negocia- By the Arch-

tion with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had. proposed to marry the due Carle3
Scottish Queen to the Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son.
The matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil, who, at that
time, attended the Elecor Palatine, was commanded to inquire
into the character and situation of the Archduke *.

PHILIP II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's falling once By Don Car-

more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdinand thelos of Spain.
acquisition of so important a prize, and as his own insatiable am-
bition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his am-
baffador at the French court, to solicit the Princos of Lorrain in be-
half of his son Don Carlos, at that time, the heir of all the extensive
dominions, which belonged to the Spanilh monarchy f..

* Melv. 63, 65. Keith, 2.39. See Append. NO VII;
+ Cafteln. 461. Addit. ad Labor. 501, 503.

eAT H R IN)1:

BOOK Ir. CATHERIN-E'of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the mar-
~'-"- riage of the Scottish Queen with any of the Austrian Princes, which

1563.

would have added so much to the power and pretensions of that

By the Duke
.of Anjou. ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of Lorrain rendered

her no less averse from an alliance, which by securing them the
protection of the Emperor or King of Spain, would give new bold-
ness to their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set the power
of the Crown, which they already rivalled, at open defiance: And
as she was afraid that these splendid proposals of the Austrian fa-
mily would dazzle the young Queen, she instantly dispatched Caf-
telnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the Duke of Anjou,
the brother of her former husband, who soon after mounted the
throne of France *.

Mary's deli- MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so many rivals.
bcrationscon-
cerning it. The Archduke had little to recommend him, but his high birth.

The example of Henry VIII. was a warning against contracting a
marriage with the brother of her former husband; nor could she
bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior to that
which ihe had formerly held in that kingdom. She listened, there-
fore, with partiality, to the Spanish propositions, and the profpecd
of such vail power and dominions flattered the ambition of a young
and aspiring Princess.

THREE several circumstances however concurred to divert Mary
from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

THE first of there was the murder of her uncle the Duke of
Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had involved

* Caftclnau, 461.

his

his country in a civil war; which was conducted with furious ani- BooKIII.
mofity, and various success. At last the Duke laid siege to Orleans, 563
the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and he had reduced that city
to the last extremity, when he was assassinated by the frantic zeal
of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the Qeen of Scots. The
young Duke was a minor; and the Cardinal of Lorrain, though
subtle and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and enterprising cou-
rage, which rendered the ambition of his brother so formidable.
Catherine, inltead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering the
pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took pleasure in mortifying
the one, and in disappointing the other. In this situation, and
without such a protector, it became necessary for Mary to contract
her views, and to proceed with caution; and whatever prospect of
advantage might allure her, she could venture upon no dangerous or
doubtful measure.

THE second circumstance, which weighed with Mary, was the The views of.

opinion of the Queen of England. The marriage of the Scottish Elzath.
Queen interested Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince;
and flhe observed all her deliberations concerning it with the most
anxious attention. She herself seems early to have formed a refo-
lution of living unmarried, and fie discovered no finall inclination
to impose the fame law on the Qeen of Scots. She had already
experienced what use might be made of Mary's power and preten-
sions, to invade her dominions, and to disturb her poficfion of the
Crown. The death of Francis II. had happily delivered her from
this danger, which hle determined to guard against for the future,
with the utmost care. As the rcftlefs ambition of the Austrian
Princes, the avowed and bigottcd patrons of the Catholic fuperfti-
tion, made her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbourhood,

7 flie

BooK III. ihe inftruaed Randolph, to remonstrate, in the itrongeft terms,
L"56 ' against any alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary, that as she

herself would confider such a match to be a breach of the personal
friendship, in which they were so happily united; so the English
nation would regard it, as the dissolution of that confederacy which
now subsisted between the two kingdoms: That, In order to pre-
serve their own religion and liberties, they would, in all probabi-
lity, take some itep prejudicial to her right of succession, which, as
the well knew, they neither wanted power nor pretences to invali-
date, and set aside. This threatening was accompanied with a
promise, but expressed in very ambiguous terms, that if Ma-
ry's choice of a hutband should prove agreeable to the English
nation, Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to examine her title
to the fuccefiion, and, if well founded, command it to be publickly
recognized. She observed, however, a mysterious silence concern-
ing the person, on whom the wished the choice of the Scottish
Queen to fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved for some
future negociation. Mean while she threw out some obscure hints,
that a native of Britain, or one not of princely rank, would be her
safest and most inoffensive choice *. An advice offered with such
an air of superiority and command, mortified, no doubt, the pride
of the Scottish Queen. But, under her present circumstances, she
was obliged to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign assistance,
and intent upon the English succession, the great objec of her
wiflhes and ambition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom,
without manifest imprudence, she could not venture to offend.

The senti- TIlE inclination of her own subjects was another, and not the
,Ientscbjae' least considerable circumstance, which called for Mary's attention

* Keith, 242, 245.

at

at'this conjuncture. They had been taught, by the fatal experi- BOOK Ill
nent of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great 56
Prince, whose power might be employed to oppress their religion
and liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crown Should be strengthened by new domi-
nions, or alliances, they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be stretched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-.
ness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them her aid, to-
wards obftrucing a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas easy
for them to seize the person of the Sovereign. By the assistance of
the English fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign Prince
to land in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an inconsiderable
party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl of Hunt-
ly, could give no obftruaion to their designs. To what violent ex-
tremes, the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke might have been
carried is manifest from the tranfastions both previous, and fubfe-
quent to the present period.

FOR there reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time, all thoughts of

a foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambition,
in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the
fears of her own fubjeds.

THE Parliament met this year, for the firfl time, since the A parli.rclt

Queen's return into Scotland. Mary's adminifiration had hitherto held, lX:>, i
been extremely popular. Her Ministers possessed the confidence
of the nation; and, by consequence, the proceedings of that aflcnm-
bly were conducted with perfect unanimity. The grant of the earl-
dom of Murray to the Prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed: the

VOL. I. I 1 Ear

BOOKII. Earl of Huntly, and several of his vassals and dependants were atr

tainted: the attainder against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of his.
accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, was reversed* :
the ad of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received
the royal fantion. But Mary, who had determined never to ratify
that treaty,. took care that this fantion fihould not be deemed any
acknowledgment of its validity; ihe granted her consent merely in
eondefcenfion to the Lords 'n Parliament, who, on their knees, be-
fought her to allay the jealousies and. apprehensions of her fubjeds,.
by such, a. gracious law -..

Nothing de. No-attempt was made, in, this Parliament; to procure the Queen's
termined with
regard to re- afient to the laws establishing the Protestant religion. Her Mini-
ligion.

igil. fters, though zealous Protestants themselves, were :aware that this

could not be urged without manifest, danger and imprudence. She
had contented, through their influence, to tolerate and protet the
reformed doctrine. They had even, prevailed on her to imprison
and prosecute the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, and Priorof Whit-
horn, for celebrating mass contrary to her proclamation $.. Mary,
however, was still passionately devoted to the Romifl superstition;
and though, from political motives, she had granted a temporary
protedion. to opinions, which she disapproved, there were no
grounds to hope that fie would agree to establish them for perpe-
tuity.. The moderation of those who professed it, was the best me-
thod for reconciling the Queen to the Protestant religion. Time
might abate her bigotry. Her- prejudices might wear off gradually,
and at last she might yield to the wiihes of her people, what their
importunity or their violence could never have extorted.. Many

* Knox, 330o. i, Spotfw. 88.. : Keith, 239.

7 laws.

laws of importance were to be proposed in Parliament; and-to de-BOoKIIL
feat all thkeIe, by such a fruitless and ill-timed application to the 63

1563.

Queen,, would have been equally injurious to individuals, and de-
trimental to the public.

THE zeal of the Protestant clergy was deaf to all these coni- Which offends

derations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked no delav: fe- thelergy.
vere and inflexible, it would condescend to no compliances. The
leading men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of establish-
ing religion by law, was not to be neglected. They pronounced
the moderation of the courtiers, apoftacy; and their endeavours to
gain the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox solemn-
ly renounced the friendship of the Earl of Murray, as a man de-
voted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as to be-
come regardless of those objets which he had hitherto esteemed
moit sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of Murray's
sincere attachment to the Queen at that period, continued above
a year and an half .

THE preachers being disappointed by the men in whom they

placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their pulpits. These ecchoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations against idolatry; with difmalprefages concerning the Queen's
marriage with a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches against those,
who, from interested motives, had deserted that cause, which they
once reckoned it their honour to support. The people, inflamedAndcc,

And occariono
by such vehement declamations, which were dictated by a zeal a turnolt :-

Rong the
more sincere than prudent, proceeded to rafli and unjustifiable acds people.

* Knox, 331.

L 1 . of

BooK lT. of violence, During the Qu~en's absence, on -a progress into the
' ' ' weft, mass continued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holy-rood-
'r563.
Arguft. house. The multitude of those who openly resorted thither, gave

great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from
the restraint which the royal pretence imposed,. assembled in a riot-
ous manner, interrupted the service, and filled such as were present,.
with the utmost conflernation. Two of the ringleaders in this tu-
mult. were seized, and a day appointed for their triaL *

Knox tried on KNOX, who. eftecmed the zeal of these persons laud'able, and'their
that account,.
but acquitted. conduc meritorious, confidered them as sufferers in a good' cause;
Osober 8. and in order to screen them from danger, le iifued circular letters,

requiring all who profefied the true religion, or were concerned for
the preservation of it, to aflemble at Edinburgh on the day of trial,
that by their pretence, they might comfort and affit' their diftreded
brethren t. One of these letters fell into the Queen's hands. To
assemble the fubjeds without the authority of the Sovereign, was
construed to be treason, and; a resolution was taken to prosecute
Deemnber,5. Knox for that crime,, before the Privy Council. Happily for him,

his judges were not only zealous Protestants, but the very men, who,
during the late commotions,. had openly, resifted, and'let at defiance
the Queen's authority. It was under precedents,. drawn from their
own conduct, that Knox endeavoured' to fielter himelf.' Nor
would it have been an easy matter for thiee Counsellors to have
found out a diftinftion, by which they could censure him, without
condemning. themselves. After a long hearing, he was unanimous-
1l acquitted.. Sinclair. Biffop of'Rofs, and. President of the Court
of Seflion, a zealous Papist,, heartily concurred with the other Counr

* Knox, 335, . Ibid..

fllhor;

ellors in this decifiot *; a remarkable fa&, which shows the un-BooIIL.
fettled slate of government in that age ; the. low condition to which .563
regal authority was then funk; and the impunity with which sub-
je'ts might invade those rights of the Crown, which are now held
sacred.

THE marriage of the Scottish Qeen continued still to be the ob- 564..

jest of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even while (he Nelrciatiodr-
wifled to dire&t Mary, treated her with a difguffful reserve; though the Queei's
she kept her without neceflity, in a state of fufpence; and hinted
often at the person, whom she destined to be her huSband, without
diretly mentioning his name; yet Mary- framed all her actions to
express such a prudent refpe& for the English Queen, that foreign
Princes began, to imagine (he had given herself up implicitly to her
diredion t. The profpet of this union alarmed Catherine of Me-
dicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all along, in doing
ill offices-to- the Queen of Scots-; though soon after the Duke of
Guise's death, (he had put upon her a most mortifying indignity,
by flopping the payment of her dowry, by depriving her fubjeat
the Duke of Chatelherault of his pension, and by bellowing the'
command of the Scottish Guards on a Frenchman ; mhe resolved,,
however; to prevent this dangerous conjunction, of the British.
Queens.. For this purpose, she now employed all her art, to ap--
pease Mary 1I, to whom she had. given so many causes of offence.
The arrears of her dowry were instantly paid; more puntual re,--
mittances- were promised. for the future; and. offers- made,, not. only'
to restore, but to, extend the privileges of the Scottish nation in
France. It was easy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of this
sudden change; she well knew. the character of her mother-in--
* Ktnox, 343. 1 Kcith, 248. . Id. 244. l. See.Apppndix, NO VIII

law,,

3ooK TII.'law, and laid little firess upon professions of frinndffiip, which came
t 564. from a Princess of such a false and unfeeling heart.

THE negociation with England, relative to the marriage, suffered

*no interruption from this application of the French Queen. As
Mary, in compliance to her subjects, and pressed by the ifrongeft
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was

March. obliged to break that unaccountable silence, which Ihe had hither-

Elizabeth re-
commends to asseted. The secret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Ro-
Leicester to bert Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was declared to be the
her for a hus-
band. happy man, whom lhe had chosen to be the husband of a Queen,

courted by so many Princes *.

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were remarkable in the

choice of her Ministers; in distinguishing her favourites, those great
qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their capacity for
business, their knowledge, their prudence, were the talents to which
alone she attended, in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty and
gracefulness of person, poliffed manners; and courtly address, were
the accomplishments on which Ihe bestowed her favour. She aded
in the one cafe with the wisdom of a. Queen, in the other, she dif-
covered the weakness of a woman. To this Leicester owed his
grandeur. Though remarkable neither for eminence in virtue, nor
fiperiority of abilities, the Queen's partiality distinguished him on
every occasion. She raised him to the highest honours, Ihe be-
stowed on him the most important employments, and manifested
an affection so disproportionate to his merit, that, in the opinion

Keith, 251.

,of

of that age, it could be accounted. for only by the power of plane- BooKIII.
tary influence . I 64%

THE high spirit of the Scottish Queen could not well bear the M.ry ofend-

first overture of a match with a subjed. Her own rank, the fplen- d
dor of her former marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of
so many powerful Princes, crouded into her thoughts, and made
her sensibly feel how humbling and difrefpedful Elizabeth's pro-
pofal was. She dissembled, however, with the English Resident;
and though The declared, in firong terms, what a degradation the
would deem this alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tage that could justify such neglect of her own dignity, she men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full of re-
speCt ..

ELIZABETH, we may piefume, did not wish that the proposal Elizabeth's

view3 in re-

hould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinary commending
marks the had given of her own attachment to Leicester, and while him
he was still in the very height of favour, it is not probable she could
think seriously of bestowing upon him another. 'Twas not her aim
to persuade, but only to amuse Mary :. Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though solicited by her
fubjets, and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe, she had
hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of
Elizabeth. And,, if at this time, the Englilh Queen could have
engaged Mary to liften to her proposal in favour of Leicefler, her
power over this creature of her own would have enabled her to pro-
traat the negociation at pleasure; and by keeping her rival unmar-
ried, she would have rendered the prospect of her fucceflion less ac-
ceptable to the English.

*Camden, 549. 1. * Kith, 252. t. Melv. 104, 1og.

LEICESTE R 'S

BooKIIL. LEICESTER's own situation was extremely delicate, and emba-

r64.. rafging. To gain possession of the most amiable woman of the

-age, to carry away this prize from so many contending Princes, to
'mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a subjec, much more considerable than him. He saw
all there advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full
imprefflon on him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he durst
not venture on the moll distant discovery of his sentiments, or
take any itep towards facilitating his acquisition of objects Co worthy
of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him, which

ihe was at no pains to conceal *, might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illultrious than Scot-
land. Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her resolution
to lead a single life, and his being born her own fubjeft, would have
hindred her from chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often surmounted by love;
and Leicefler might flatter himself, that the violence of her assec-
tion would at length triumph both over the maxims of policy, and
the scruples of pride. These hopes induced him, now and then,
to conclude the proposal of his marriage with the Scottilh Queen to
he a project for his deftrucion; and he imputed it to the malice of
Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of doing him honour, in-
tended to ruin him in the good opinion both of Elizabeth and Maryt.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Q.een, who dreaded
its success; listened to by another, who was secretly determined

Melv, 93, 94. t rIbid. ,*o.

; inl

againit it; and scarce desired by the man himself, whose interest and BOOK III.
reputation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote; could not, 1564.
under so many unfavourable circumstances, be brought to a for-
tunate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to ad
with equal dissimulation. The former, notwithstanding her fears
of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf. The latter,
though the began about this time to catl her eyes upon another sub-
jeC&of England, did not, at once, venture finally to rejet Eliza-
beth's favourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts, Mary enter-
was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldest Ton of the Earl of Lennox. tainis thouglht

sn Searrying

That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re- Lord Daraly.
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had- lived in banishment for
twenty years. His wife, Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most
dangerous rival in her claim upon the English succession. She was
the daughter of Margaret, the eldest sifter of Henry VIII. by the
Earl of Angus, whom that Queen married after the death of her
husband James IV. In that age, the right and order of succession
was not Settled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the decision of almost every cafe that can possibly happen, have
at last introduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is
subjed to all the variety, arising from the caprice of lawyers,
guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady Lennox,
though born of a second marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only
the grandaughter of Margaret. This was not the only advantage
over Mary which Lady Lennox enjoyed. She was born in Eng-
land, and by a maxim of law in that country, with regard to
private inheritances, " whoever is not born in England, or at least

V0L. I. M m of

BooKIII. of parents, who, at the time of 'his birth, were in the obedi-

X564' ence of the King- of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in the

kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, an English lawyer, produced
in a treatise, which he published at this time, and endeavoured to
apply it to the right of fucceflion to the Crown. In a private cause,
these pretexts might have given rife to a long and doubtful litigation;
where a Crown was at stake, such nice disputes and subtleties were
to be avoided with the utmoRt care. If Darnly should happen to
contrad an alliance with any of the powerful families in England,
or fllould publickly profess the Protestant religion, these plausible
and popular topics might be so urged as to prove fatal to the preten-
sions of a foreigner, and of a Papilt.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any dan-

ger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a friendly
correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year i 562 +,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into custody by
hlizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a secret correfpon-
dence with the Scottish Queen.

FliJabpIhd FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties,
cretly pleased
witl this. which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, she entered

into a still closer connexion with the Earl of Lennox $, and invited
him to return into Scotland. This she endeavoured to conceal from
Elizabeth; but a tranfaaion of so much importance did not escape
the notice of that discerning Princess. She observed, but did not
interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly with her views,
concerning Scottish affairs. She was pleated to fee the pride of

* Carte, Hi-t, of Eng. vol. iii. 4,22. { Camd. 389, : Id. 396.

the

the Scottilh Qieen stoop, at lat, to the thoughts of taking a sub- BOoK III.
je& to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite her jealousy, ' 64.'
or her fears. His father's estate lay in England, and by means of
this pledge, the hoped to keep the negociation entirely in her own
hands, and to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which the
had planned out, if her recommendation of Leicester had been more
favourably received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no subjed of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permission of both Sove-
reigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for
her licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together
with it, she gave him letters, warmly recommending his person and
cause to Mary's friendship and protetion *. But, at the fame time,
as it was her manner to involve all her tranfa&ions with regard to
Scotland, in.fome degree of perplexity and contradiction; ihe warn-
ed Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal to her-
self, as his return could not fail of reviving the ancient animosity be-
tween him and the house of Hamilton,

THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her

an angry reply, which occasioned, for some time, a total interrup-
tion of all correspondence between the two Queens -. Mary was
not. a little alarmed at this; fihe both dreaded the effcts of Eliza-
beth's resentment, and felt sensibly the disadvantage of being ex-
cluded from a free intercourse with England, where her ambaffa-
dors had, all along, carried on, with some success, secret negocia-

* Kcith, 255. 268. -1l Ibid. 253. Melv, 83.

M m 2 tions

BooKIII.fions, which increased the number of her partizans, and paved

her way towards the throne. In order to remove the causes of
the present difficulty, Melvil was sent express to the court of
England. He found it no difficult matter to bring about a re-
concilement; and soon re-established the appearance, but not the
confidence of friendship, which was all that had fubfifled, for some
time, between the two Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's professions of love to Mary,

and Melvil's replies in name of his Mistress, were made in the lan-
guage of the warmest and most cordial friendship. But what Mel-
vil truly observes, with refpea to Elizabeth, may be extended
without injustice to both Queens. " There was neither plain
dealing, nor upright meaning, but great dissimulation, envy and
fear *."

Lennox ar- LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence which he had
fives in Scot-
land. obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen, not

only with the relped due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a distinguished familiarity, which
could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru-
mour of his son's marriage to the Queen began to spread over the
kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him, as
the father of their future Matier. The Duke of Chatelherault was
the first to take the alarm. He confidered Lennox, as the ancient
and hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in his gran-
deur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But the Queen in-
terpofed her authority to prevent any violent rupture, and employed

* Melvil, 104.

all

all her influence to bring about an accommodation of their differ BOOK III.
ences * 5

x564,

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re-

turn, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the Qeen, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennox to purchase their friendihip, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop -t-

AFTER there preliminary steps, Mary ventured to call a meeting December.

of Parliament. The ac of forfeiture, passed against Lennox in the
year I545, was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the ho-
nours and estate of his ancestors +..

THE ecclesiastical tranfaations of this year were not considerable.. Jne 2;.

Decem. 25.
In the assemblies of the church, the fame complaints of the increase The Clergy

suspicious of

of idolatry, the fame repreientations concerning the poverty of thethe Queen's
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen made to ory op
these, and her promires of redress, were more satisfying to the Pro-
teftants, than any they had hitherto obtained 11. But, notwith-
flanding her declarations in their favour, they could not help har-
bouring many suspicions concerning Mary's designs againfi their re-
ligion. She had never once consented to hear any preacher of the
reformed dotrine. She had abated nothing of her bigotted at-
tachment to the Romish faith. The genius of that superstition,
averse at all times from toleration, was, in that age, fierce and
unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on the Continent repeat-

* Keith, 259. 't Id. 268. Note (b). $ Sec Appendix, N" IX.

11 Kcith, 533, 539.

ed

BOOK III. ed afTurances of her resolution to re-efRablifh the Catholic church ~.

-ó-' She had industriously avoided every opportunity of ratifying the ads

of Parliament I 560, in favour of the Reformation. Even the pro-
tection, which ever since her return, she had afforded the Protestant
religion, was merely temporary, and declared by her own proclama-
tion to be of force, only " till hle Ihould take some final order in
the matter of religion +." The vigilant zeal of the preachers was
inattentive to none of these circumstances. The coldness of their
principal leaders, who were, at this time, entirely devoted to the
court, added to their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to
the people, in language which they esteemed suitable to the necef-
fity of the times, and which the Queen reckoned difrefpedful, and
infolert. In a meeting of the General Assembly, Maitland pub-
lickly accused Knox of teaching seditious dotrine, concerning the
right offubjeas to resist those Sovereigns, who trespass against the
duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
justify what he had taught. And upon this general dotrine ofre-
fiftance, fojuft in its own nature, but so delicate in its application
to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which admirably dilplays
the talents and characer of both the disputants; the acuteness of
the former, embellished with learning, but prone to subtlety; the
vigorous understanding of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments,
and superior to all fear T.

r565. Two years had already been consumed, in fruitless negociations

Difi;nulation concerning the marriage of the Scottiflh Queen. Mary had full lei-
both of Eliza-
bcth and Ma- sure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza-
r 'iad to c beth's proceedings, with refpea to that affair. But, in order to
irl;rags. set the real intentions of the English Queen in a clear light, and

* Cartc, vol. iii. 415. 1 Kcith, 504, 5Io. 1: Knox, 349.

I to

to bring her to some explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, BooKIII.
at last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition her right of 156

I565.

succession to the Crown of England were publickly acknowledged, Feb: uary 5.
the was ready to yield to the solicitations of his Mifirefs in behalf
of Leicester *. Nothing could be farther than this from the mind
and intention of Elizabeth. The right of fuccefflon was a myfte-
ry, which, during her whole reign, her jealousy preserved un-
touched, and unexplained. She had promised however, when ihe
first began to interest herself in the marriage of the Scottish QOeen,
all that was now demanded. How to retreat with decency, how
to elude her former offer, was, on that account, not a little per-
plexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtained permission to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarrassment. From the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Lennox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth was no
stranger to the ambitious hopes, with which that young nobleman
flattered himself. She had received repeated advices from her Mi-
nifters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour --. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his flirring
out of London. In the present conjuncture, however, nothing
could be of more advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into Scot-
land. She had already brought one actor upon the stage, who,
under her management, had, for a long time, amused the Scottiih
Queen. She hoped, no less absolutely, to dirct the motions of
Darnly, who was likewise her subject; and again to involve Mary
in all the tedious intricacies of negociation. Thiee motives deter-
mined Elizabeth and her Miniflers to yield to the solicitations of
Lady Lennox.

* Keith, 269. f Id, 256, 261, 266.

BUT

BoOK III. BUT this deep laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted. Such

r565' unexpeaed events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at

Darnly ar- some times, really produced by that passion. An affair, which had
rives in Scot-
land. been the objea of so many political intrigues, and had moved and

interested so many Princes, was at last decided by the sudden liking
of two young persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the first
bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and gracefulness of person,
he surpassed all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in such
arts as add ease and elegance to external form, and which enable it

Gains the not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was of an age, and of a
Queen's heart.

temper, to feel the full power of these accomplishments. The im-
pression which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible, from the
l:ebluary 13. time of their firfi interview. The whole business of the court was

to amuse, and entertain this illufirious guest *; and in all those
scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altogether fu-
perficial and /howy, appeared to great advantage. His conquest of
the Queen's heart became conpleat; and inclination now prompted
her to conclude a marriage, the firit thoughts of which had been
fuggefied by considerations merely political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not without design, to

increase the violence of this passion. Soon after Darnly's arrival
in Scotland, she, in return to that message, whereby Mary had fig-
nified her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an answer, in
such terms, as plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trigue -. She promised, if the Scottifl Queen's marriage with Lei-
cefter /hould take place, to advance him to great honours; but
with regard to her title to the English succession, lhe would nei-
ther susser any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permit

* Knox, 369. t Keith, 270. Append. 158.

it

it to be publicly recognized, till she herself Ihould declare her BooK III.
resolution never to marry. Notwithstanding Elizabeth's former 1565
promises, Mary had reason. to expect every thing contained in this
reply; her high spirit, however, could not bear, with patience,
such a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery,
with which, under the veil of friendship, the had been so long
abused. She burst into tears of indignation, and expressed, with
the utmost bitterness, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which
had been employed to deceive her *.

THE natural effec of this indignation was to add to the impe-

tuofity with which she pursued her own scheme. Blinded by re-
fentment, as well as by love, she observed no defecs in the man,
whom she had chosen; and began to take the necessary fleps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impatience, natural
to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen, the canon law

made it necessary to obtain the Pope's dispensation, before the cele-
bration of the marriage. For this purpose, she early set on foot a
negociation with the court of Rome -.

SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the consent of TheFrench

court approve

the French King and his mother. Having communicated her de- of the match.
sign, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caftelnau
the French Ambassador, she employed him, as the most proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among other
arguments to this purpose, Caftelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, which he represented to be so violent and deep-rooted,

* Keith, Appcnd. 159. t Camd. 396.
VOL. I. N n that

BOOK III. that it was no longer in her own power to break off the match ~

5i65c Nor were the French Ministers backward ili encouraging Mary's

passion. Her pride would never stoop to an alliance with a fubje&
of France. By this choice, they were delivered from the appre-
henfion of a match with any of the Austrian Princes, as well as
the danger of too close an union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly
professed the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigotted
schemes which that court had adopted.

Darnly dif- WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a
gufls several
fL thelnobles measure which she had so much at heart; Darnly, and his father,

by their behaviour, were raising up enemies at home, to obftrua
it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, discovered no
great compass of abilities, or political wisdom; and appears to have
been a man of weak understanding, and violent passions. Darnly
was not superior to his father in understanding, and all his passions
were still more impetuous +. To these, he added that insolence,
which the advantage of external form, when accompanied with no
quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the Queen's
favour, he began already to assume the haughtiness of a King, and
to put on that imperious air, which majesty itself can scarce render
tolerable.

particularly IT was by the advice, or at least with the content of Murray, and
Mulr'r'y. his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland ; and yet,

no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he
began to enter into secret cabals with those noblemen, who were
known to be avowed enemies to Murray, and with regard to reli-
gion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery 11. Darnly, frill

X Caldcln. 464. iKeith, 272, 273. :t Knox, 367.Kclth, 274. 1 Id. 272.

more

more imprudent, allowed some rash expressions concerning those BooR III.
favours, which the Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, 6
to escape him *.

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the suspicion
and disgust of the nobles.

THE low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed him The .iCie of

Rizio's fa-

in a station, in which he ought naturally to have remained un- vour.
known to posterity. But what fortune called him to at, and
to susser in Scotland, obliges lliftory to descend from its dignity,
and to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician
in Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmontefe Ambaffa-
dor into Scotland, gained admiflion into the Queen's family, by
his skill in music. His servile condition had taught him suppleness
of spirit, and insinuating manners. He quickly crept into the
Queen's favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at
that time into his own country, was preferred by her to that office.
He now began to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weight and consequence. The whole train of suitors and ex-
pecants, who have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
which lead most directly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were observed to have great influence over the Qeen»
and he grew to be confidered, not only as a favourite, but as a
Minister. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which always
attends such an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune. He
studied, on the contrary, to display the whole extent of his favour.

* Keith, 274.

N n He-

!

BOOK III. He affected to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in pub.

' lie. He equalled the greatest and most opulent fubjecs, in rich-

ness of dress, and in the number of his attendants. He discovered,
in all his behaviour, that assuming insolence, with which unme-
rited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with the utmost
indignation that the nobles beheld the power; it was with the ut-
most difficulty, that they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy
minion. Even in the Qeen's pretence they could not forbear treat-
ing him with marks of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power
alone, which exasperated the Scots. They confidered him, and not
without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protefiant religion,
and fufpeaed that he held, for this purpose, a secret correspondence
with the court of Rome *.

Darnly's con- IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of
netion with
iim. this man, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily gained on his vanity,

and inexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was em-
ployed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, towards
establishing him more firmly in her affections -. But whatever
benefit he might reap from his patronage, it did not counterbalance
the contempt, and even the infamy, to which he was exposed, on
account of his familiarity with such an upstart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the Queen's affections,

ihe conducted herself, however, with such prudent reserve, as to
impose on Randolph the English Resident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this period, that he
entertained not the leaIt suspicion of the intrigue which was carry-

Buchan. 340. Melv, 1o7. t Id. iil.

ing

ing on; and gave his court repeated assurances, that the Scottish BooKIll.
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly *. In the midit of his 565
security, Mary dispatched Maitland to signify her intention to
Elizabeth, and to solicit her consent to the marriage with Darnly.
This emrbaffy was the first thing, which opened the eyes of Ran-
dolph.

ELIZABETH asseted the greatest furprize at this sudden refolu- April 18.

Elizabeth de-

tion of the Scottish Queen, but without reason. The train was Elaesagahirft
laid by herself, and {he had no cause to wonder when it took es- thare Qenw'
fe&. She expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation of the Darnly.
match, in the itrongeft terms; and pretended to foresee many dan-
gers and inconveniencies arising from it, to both kingdoms. But
this, too, was mere affedation. Mary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impossible ihe could make
any choice more inoffensive. The danger of introducing a foreign
interest in Britain, which Elizabeth had so justly dreaded, was en-
tirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns, and pof-
sessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident, from all these circumstances, that Elizabeth's appre-
henfions of danger could not possibly be serious; and that, in all
her violent declarations against Darnly, there was much more of
grimace than of reality A-.

* Keith, 273, and Append. 159.

- Even the Hiflorians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of the Scottish.

Queen with a subjed was far from being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 373;
Buchan. 339. Caftelnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the in-
trigues of both the British courts, aflerts, upon grounds of great probability,
that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work; Calteln. 462. and that she re-
joiced at the accomplilhment of it, appears from the letters of her own Ambaftadors.
Keith, 28a, 288.

TIIERE

BooKIII. 'TiHERE were not wanting, however, political motives of much

weight, to induce that wife Princess to put on the appearance of
great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrud with a weakness
that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the elevation of her
characer. Besides, the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the
great object of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her difatif-
faction with Mary's conduct, she hoped to alarm that party in Scot-
land, which was attached to the Englili interest, and to encourage
fitch of the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openly to op-
pose it. The feeds of discord would, by this means, be scattered
through that kingdom. Intestine commotions might arise. Amidst
these, Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes, to which
the union of her people might have prompted her. Elizabeth
would become the umpire between the Scottish Queen and her
contending fubjedCs. And England might look on, with security,
while a itorm, which ihe had raised, wafted the only kingdom,
which could possibly disturb its peace.
May 1. IN prosecution of this scheme, she laid before her Privy Coun-

cil the message from the Scottish Queen, and consulted them with
regard to the answer ile should return. Their determination, it
is easy to conceive, was perfectly conformable to her secret views.
They drew up a remonstrance against the intended match, full of
the imaginary dangers, with which that event threatened the king-

Sends Throg- dom *. Nor did flle think it enough, to signify her difapproba-
mnorton to ob-
ftruaEit. tion of the measure, either by Maitland, Mary's Ambassador, or

by Randolph, her own Resident in Scotland; in order to add more
dignity to the farce which fce chose to act, flie appointed Sir Ni-

* Kcith, 274. See Append. N° X.

cholas

cholas Throgmorton herAmbaffador Extraordinary. She cor-BoOK 1II.
manded him to declare, in the strongest terms, her difiatisfastion 565
with the ftep which Mary proposed to take ; and, at the fame
time, to produce the determination of the Privy Council, as an
evidence that the sentiments of the nation were not different from
her own. Not long after, she confined Lady Lennox as a prifo-
ner first in her own house, and then sent her to the Tower *.

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival

of the English Ambassador. In the first transports of her indig-
nation, Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measures with Eli-
zabeth; and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmor-
ton, to return instantly to the Englifl court, and, in her name to
declare to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so long to so
little purpose; after having been fooled, and imposed on so grossly
by her artifices; fle was now resolved to gratify her own incli-
nation, and to ask no other content, but that of her own sub-
jecs, in the choice of an husband. Maitland, with his usual saga-
city, foresaw all the effects of such a rashs and angry message, and
ventured rather to incur the displeasure of his Mistress, by dilb-
beying her commands, than to be made the instrument of tearing
asunder, so violently, the few remaining ties, which still linked
together the two Qieens -.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the English Ambaflador with respect; juitified her own conduct with
decency; and though unalterable in her rcfolution, she affected a
wonderful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure; and even
pretended, out of complaifancc towards her, to put off the col--

; Keith, Append. 16x, 1 Id. 16o.

t sIIi Inl;litiult

BOOK III. summation of the marriage for some months *. It is probable,

565 however, that the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the pro-

fpea of gaining the consent of her own subje&s, wore the real mo-
tives of this delay.

THI s consent Mary laboured with the utmost industry to obtain.

Murray's
aversion to The Earl of Murray was the person in the kingdom, whose con-
Darnly.

currence was of the greatest importance; but she had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme difficulty. From the
time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray perceived that the
Queen's affections began gradually to be estranged from him. Darn-
ly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites, combined against him.
His ambitious spirit could not brook this diminution of his power,
which his former services had so little merited. He retired into
the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom he was unable
to contend -. The return of the Earl of Bothwell, his avowed
enemy, who had been accused of a design upon his life, and who
had resided for tome time in foreign countries, obliged him to at-
tend to his own safety. No intreaty of the Queen could persuade
him to a reconcilement with that nobleman. He insisted on having
him brought to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not appear in opposition
to a man, who came to the place of trial, attended by 5ooo of his
followers on horseback. He was once more constrained to leave
the kingdom; but, by the Queen's command, the sentence of out-
lawry, which is incurred by non-appearance, was not pronounced
against him .,

* Kcith, Appendix 278. ]- Id. 272, 274. Append. 159;
$ Id. ibid. 16o.

Bu'r

MARY, sensible at the fame time of how much importance it BooKIII.

was, to gain a subjec so powerful and so popular as the Earl of
Murray, invited him back to court, and received him with many de- May 8.
monftrations of refped and confidence. At last ihe desired him to
set an example to her other subjeCts by fubferibing a paper, contain-
ing a formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Murray
had many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his assent.
Darnly had not only undermined his credit with the Qeen, but
discovered, on every occasion, a rooted aversion to his person. By
consenting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him such
an accession of dignity and power, as no man willingly bestows on
an enemy. The unhappy consequences which might follow upon
a breach with England were, likewise, of considerable weight with
Murray. He had always openly preferred a confederacy with Eng-
land, before the ancient alliance with France. By his means chief-
ly, this change in the system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been established; and he could
not think of sacrificing, to a rash and youthful pafiion, an alliance
of so much utility to the kingdom; and which, he and the other
nobles were bound, by every obligation, to maintain *. Nor was
the interest of religion forgotten on this occasion. Mary, though
surrounded by Protestant Counsellors, had found means to hold a
dangerous correspondence with foreign Catholics. She had even
courted the Pope's protection, who had sent her a subsidy of 8oo0
crowns -. Though Murray had hitherto endeavoured to bridle
the zeal of the Reformed clergy, and to set the Queen's conduct in
the most favourable light, yet her obstinate adherence to her own
religion could not fail of alarming him, and by her resolution to
marry a papist, the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained,

* Keith, 169. t Id. 295. Mclv. 114.
VOL. I. 0 o was

BOOK III. was for ever cut off. Each of there considerations had its influence

on Murray, and all of them determined him to decline complying,
at that time, with the Queen's request.

May 14. THE convention of nobles which was assembled a few days
A Conven-
tionofthe after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the Queen. Many
proes of tle of them, without hesitation, expressed their appprobation of the in-
marriagc. tended match; but as others were ftartled'at the fame dangers which

had alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his example, to refuse
their content, another Convention was appointed at Perth, in order
to deliberate more fully concerning this matter*.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. The opposition ihe had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her inclination,
produced their usual effect on her heart, they confirmed her passion,
and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age imputed an
affection, so excessive, to the influence of witchcraft --. It was ow-
ing, however, to no other charm, than the irresistible power of youth
and beauty, over a young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy
with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen, and the ap-
plause of many among her fubjeds, his natural haughtiness and in-
folence became insupportable, and he could no longer bear advice,
far less contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening to be the first
person who informed him that Mary, in order to tooth Elizabeth,
had delayed, for some time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in
a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to flab him $. It

* Keith, 283. Knox, 373. t Keith, 283. :t Ibid. Append. 16o.

I required

required all Mary's attention to prevent his falling under thatBooKIII.
contempt, to which such behaviour deservedly exposed him. 1565

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address more re- Mary's ad-

markably displayed. Love sharpened her invention, and made her dress in gabin
study every method of gaining her fubjecs. Many of the noblesJetss
she won by her address, and more by her promises. On some
she bestowed lands, to others she gave new titles of honour *. She
even condescended to court the Proteitant clergy; and having in-
vited three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, she declared, in
strong terms, her resolution to protet their religion, expressed her
willingness to be present at a conference upon the points in doc-
trine which were disputed between the Protestants and Papists,
and went so far as to how some desire to hear such of their preach-
ers, as were most remarkable for moderation -t. By there arts,
the Queen gained wonderfully upon the people, who, unless their
jealousy be raised by repeated injuries, are always ready to view the
actions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his afociates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high a strain, of her
displeasure at the intended match; fhe-treated Lady Lennox with
so much rigour; (he wrote to the Scottish Queen in such strong
terms; She recalled the Earl of Lennox and his son in such a pe-
remptory manner, and with such severe denunciations of her ven-
geance, if they should presume to disobey ; that all there expref-
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her sincerity. This belief
fortified their scruples with refped to the match, and encouraged

* Keith, 283. -[ Knox, 373. : Keith, 285, 286.

0 o 2 them

BooKIII. them to oppose it. They began with forming among themselves

- 65 bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they entered into a

secret correspondence with the English Resident, in order to fe-
cure Elizabeth's assistance, when it ihould become needful *;
they endeavoured to fill the nation with such apprehensions of
danger, as might counterbalance the influence of those arts, which
the Queen had employed.

Schemes of BESIDES there intrigues, there were secretly carried on, by both
arnlay and parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit-
gatin each able to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,
o0her.

which he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate to
get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to affaflinate him,
during the meeting of the Convention at Perth. Murray, on his
part, despairing of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and the Earl of Ar-
gyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a
prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this Convention

might have been attended with consequences extremely tragical; but
both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray, being warned
of his danger by some retainers to the court, who still favoured
his interest, avoided the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary,
receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with the ut-
most expedition, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth.
Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with resentment,
.it was impossible they could either forget the violence, which them-

* Kith, 289, 292, 298.

fclves

selves had meditated, or forgive the injuries intended againlt them. BOOK III.
From that moment, all hope of reconcilement was at an end, and ' 65.
their mutual enmity burit out with every symptom of implacable
hatred *.

ON

The reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given occasion to many disputes,

and much contradiction. Some deny that any design was formed against the life
of Murray; others call it queflion the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly. There
seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both; though the zeal and credu-
lity of party-writers have added to each, many exaggerated circumflances. The
following arguments render it probable, that some violence was intended against
Murray.

I. This is positively asserted by Buchanan, 34I. 2. The Engli(h Resident writes

to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly informed that a design was laid to murder him
at Perth, and describes the manner in which this plot was to have been execut-
ed. Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself constantly and publickly affirmed, that such a
design was formed against his life. Keith, Ap. Io8. And though he was called upon
by the Queen to bring legal evidence of his aflertion, and a safe conduct offered
him while he came to court for that purpose. Ibid. Yet whoever confiders Mur-
ray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court at that time, will scarce
deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not chute to risk his person on such fe-
curity. 4. The furious passions of Darnly, the fierceness of his resentment, which
scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age, render the imputation of such a
a crime lets improbable.

II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize Darnly's person appears

with fill greater certainty ; i. From the express testimony of Mclvil, 112. Although
Buchanan, p. 341, and Knox, p. 377, affect, without any reason, to represent this
as an idle rumour. 2. The question was put to Randolph, whether the Governor of
Berwick would receive Lennox and his son, if they were carried pi ifoners to that place ?
This plainly (hews, that some such design was in hand, and Randolph did not dif-
courage it by the answer which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipitation
with which the Queen retired, and the reason (he gave for this sudden flight, are
mOntioned by Randolph, Keith, 291. 4. A great part of the Scottilh nobles, and

among

BOOK III. ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned her vassals by
' ~-T-J proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither in

.i 565.

Mary furn- arms, for the protection. of her person against her foreign and do-
mons her vas-
fais to take meftic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the promptness and
arms againsI
Murray." alacrity, with which fubjecs run to defend a mild and popular ad-

ministration. This popularity, however, she owed in a great mea-

among these the Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the de.
sign, assert the reality of the conspiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All these circumstances leave little room to doubt of the truth of both confpira-

cies. But we may observe how far this proof, though drawn from public records,
falls short, on both fides, of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph,
in their accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in almost every
circumstance. The accounts of the attempt upon Darnly, are not more confident.
Melvil alledges, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner
into England; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph fays,
that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Caitle Camp-
bell. The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have
been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen in Lochleven during
life, and to usurp the government. To believe implicitly, whatever they find in
an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are extremely prone. Antient
papers, however. often contain nothing more than the sanders of a party, and the
lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind;
it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of faction. Many of the
things afterted in it, are evidently false, or exaggerated. Let Murray and his
confederates be as ambitious as we can suppose, they mull have had some preten-
ces, and plausible ones too, before they could venture to imprison their Sovc-
reign for life, and to seize the reins of government; but, at that time, the Queen's
conduft had afforded no colourable excuse for proceeding to such extremities.
It is, likewise, remarkable, that in all the proclamations againfl Murray, of
which so many are published in Keith, Appendix o08, &c. neither the violent
attempt upon Darnly, nor that which he is alledged to have formed against the
Queen herself, are ever once mentioned.

* Keith, 298.

lurl

sure to Murray, who had direted her administration with great BooKIII.
prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obliterated 565
the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient of con-
tradiction, and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as ene-
mies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole weight of
her vengeance. For this purpose mhe summoned him to appear be- luly 1.
fore her upon a short warning, to answer to such things as ihould
be laid to his charge *. At this very time, Murray, and the Lords
who adhered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to deliberate what
course they should hold, in such a difficult conjuncture. But the
current of popular favour ran so strongly against them; and, not-
withstanding some fears and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation
such a general disposition to gratify the Queen, in a matter which so
nearly concerned her, that, without coming to any other conclusion,
than to implore the Queen of England's protetion, they put an
end to their ineffectual consultations, and returned every man to his
own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness of her ene-

mies, the confluence of her fubjeas from all corners of the king-
dom, afforded Mary an agreeable proof of her own strength. While
the Queen was in this prosperous situation, ihe determined to bring
to a period, an affair, which had so long engrofled her heart, and
occupied her attention. On the 29th July, ;he married Lord Darn- Cclbrates her
ly. The ceremony was performed in the Queen's chapel, accord- Diarnely.
ing to the rites of the Romifl church; the Pope's bull, difpen-
sing with their marriage, having been Rrevioufly obtained t. She
issued, at the fame time, proclamations, conferring the title of

* Keith, Append. 1o8. i Id. 307.

King

BOOK III. King of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that henceforth

-5-ó' all writs at law flould run in the joint names of King and Queen*.

55 Nothing can- be a stronger proof of the violence of Mary's love, or

the weakness of her councils, than this last ftep. Whether she had
any right to chufe a huiband, without consent of Parliament, was,
in that age, a matter of some dispute t; that the had no right to
confer upon him, by her private authority, the title and dignity of
King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise her husband to be the
Master of her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Francis II.
indeed, bore the fame title. It was not, however, the gift of the
Qeen, but of the nation; and the content of Parliament was ob-
tained, before he ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as a
subjeC, rendered it still more necessary to have the concurrence of
the supreme Council in his favour. Such a violent and unprece-
dented stretch of prerogative, as the fubifituting a proclamation in
place of an act of Parliament, might have juifly alarmed the na-
tion. But the Queen pof'effed so entirely the confidence of her
fubjeCs, that, notwithstanding all the clamours of the malecon-
tents, no symptoms of general discontent appeared on that ac-
count.

EVEN amidst that scene of joy, which always accompanies fuc-

cefsful love, Mary did not susser the course of her vengeance
against the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days as-
ter the marriage, Murray was again summoned to court, under
the severest penalties, and upon his non-appearance, the rigour of
justice took place, and he was declared an out-law :. At the fame
time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who ever since- his

* Anderson, i. 33. Sec Appendix, No XI. - Buchan. 34T.' t Keith, 309, 310.

father's
*0

father's infurre&tion in the year 1562, had been detained a prisoner; BooKIII.
the recalled the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his con- I
cern in that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and the permitted 55
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The first, and last of these
were among the most powerful fubjeas in the kingdom, and all
of them animated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of their families, and the author of their own
sufferings. This common hatred became the foundation of the
ftriaeft union with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant over
all her councils. Murray himself confidered this confederacy with
his avowed enemies, as a more certain indication than any measure
the had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms *. But the Marches a-

Queen having ordered her subje&s to march against them, they were gaisn Muray
driven to the last extremity. They found themselves unable toafociatcs.
make head against the numerous forces, which Mary had assem-
bled; and fled into Argyllfhire, in expecation of aid from Eliza-
beth, to whom they had secretly dispatched a messenger, in order
to implore her immediate affiiance t.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embarrass Mary, by a Elizabeth in.

new declaration of disgust at her conduct. She blamed both tleiPrao.n

* After their fiuitlefs consultation at Stirling, the Lords retired to their own hou-

res. Keith, 304. Murray was fill at St. And.ew's on July 22. Keith, 306.
By the places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
August 4, it appears that the (Qieen's intention was to march into Fife, the county
in which Murray, Rothes, Kircaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontents resided.
Keith, 310. Their flight into the well, Keith, 312. prevented this expedition, and
the former rendezvous was altered. Keith, 3t0.

f Keith, 312. Knox, 380.
.O.L. L P p her

BOOK III. her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which Ihe

5'ó' had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,
i565·

whom fle still called her subjects, to return into England; and at
the fame time, she warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour She represented to be not only innocent, but laudable.
This mefilge, so mortifying to the pride of the Queen, and so full of
contempt for her husband, was rendered frill more insupportable, by
the petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the person who
delivered it *. Mary vindicated her own conduc with warmth,
but with great strength of reason; and rejected the interceflion in be-
half of Murray, not without signs of resentment at Elizabeth's pre-
tending to intermeddle in the internal government of her king-
dom n-.

SruE did not, on that account, intermit in the least the ardour,

with which she pursued Murray and his adherents +. They now
appeared openly in arms; and having received a small supply
in money from Elizabeth [[, were endeavouring to raise their fol-
lowers in the western counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered
them from assembling in any considerable body. All her military
operations, at .hat time, were concerted with wisdom, executed
with vigour, and attended with success. In order to encourage
her troops, (he herself marched along with them, rode with loaded

, Camd. 358. -t Keith, Append. 99.

j. The most considerable persons who joined Murray, wcre the Duke of Chatcl-

hcrault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn, Rothcs; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the
Lairls of Grainge, Cunninghamhead, Balcomic, Carmylic, Lawcrs, Bar, Drcghori,
Pitarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 332.

| Knox, 380.

pifols,

pistols *, and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for- BooK III.
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible re- 15
solution, which, together with their superiority in number, de-
terred the malecontents from facing them in the field; but hav-
ing artfully passed the Queen's army, they marched with great
rapidity to Edinburgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabi-
tants of that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them to AuguR 31.
remain long unmolefled; and, on her approach, they were forced
to abandon that place, and retire in confusion towards the western
borders -.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout they had taken, They are ob-

liged to retire

Mary employed that interval in providing for the -security of the into England.
counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of
strength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the confider-
able Barons in those hires, which (he most fufpeted, to join in as-
fociations for her defence +. Having thus left all the country be-
hind her in tranquillity, she, with an army 18,ooo Irrong, marched
towards Dumfries, where the rebels then were. During their re-
treat, they had sent letters to the Queen, from almost every place
where they halted, full of fubmiflion, and containing various over-
tures towards an accommodation. But Mary, who determined not
to let flip such a favourable opportunity of crushing the mutinous
spirit of her fubjets, rcjeced them with disdain. As lhe advan-
ced, the malecontents retired: and having received no effectual aid
from Elizabeth I1, they dcfpaired of any other mcans of safety, fled oc ,e, :..
into England, and put thcmfclves under the protetion of the Earl
of Bedford, Warden of the marches.

*Keith, Append. 164. -1, Id. 3 1 . 1 Id. Append. 113.

11 See Appendix, N0 XII, XIII,

P p 2 NO' HINO,

BOOKIII. NOTHING, which Bedford's personal friendship for Murray could

5ó5" supply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable. But Eli-
I/65.

They meet zabeth herself treated them with extreme neglect. She had fully
pew edulx- gained her end, and, by their means, had excited such discord and
peled ill b
treatment jealonfies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long dif-
from Eliza- a np bit
beth. traa and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now, was to save

appearances, and to justify herself to the Ministers of France and
Spain, who accused her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland, by-
her intrigues. The expedient the contrived for her vindication,
strongly displays her own character, and the wretched condition of
exiles, who are. obliged to depend on a foreign Prince. Murray,
and Hamilton, Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other
fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that wel-
come reception which was due to men, who, out of confidence in
her promises, had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not even
obtain the favour of an audience, until they had meanly consented
to acknowledge, in the pretence of the French and Spanish Am-
baffadors, that Elizabeth had given them no encouragement to take
arms. No sooner did they make this declaration, than the astonish-
ed them with this reply, " You have declared the truth; I am
far from setting an example of rebellion to my own firbjees, by
countenancing those who rebel against their lawful Prince. The
treason, of which you have been guilty, is detestable; and as trai-
tors I banish you from my pretence *." Notwithitanding this scene
of farce and of falflood, so dilhonourable to all the persons who
adted a part in it, Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably
to reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly with money,
and renewed her interceflion with the Scottish Qjeen in their fa-
vour r,.
-.. ,u.,u ' "* Mclvil, 112. F Knox, 389.

T'!E

THE advantage the had gained over them did not satisfy Mary; BooK III.

{he resolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, which I. '
the dreaded, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. With 565
this view, she called a meeting of Parliament; and in order that a
sentence of forfeiture might be legally pronounced against the ba-
nifled Lords, the summoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before it *.

THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, ob-December ,.

tained a separate pardon; but not without difficulty, as the King
violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave the king-
dom, and to reside for some time in France -.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, the

vigour with which she ated, and the length of time the kept
them in arms, resemble the efforts of a Prince with revenues much,
more considerable than those which she possessed. But armies
were then levied and maintained by Princes, at finall charge.
The vassal followed his superior, and the superior attended the
Monarch, at his own expence. Six hundred horsemen, however,
and three companies of foot, besides her guards, received regular
pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge, together with
the deburfements occasioncd by her marriage, exhausted a treafu-
ry, which was far from being rich. In this exigency, many de-
vices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines were levied on
the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which were sus-
peaed of favouring the malecontents. An unusual tax was im-
posed on the burroughs throughout the kingdom; and a great
fum was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan.
This unprecedented exacion alarmed the citizens. They had re-

* Keith, 32o. + Knox, 389. .

couris -

BooKIII. course to delays, and started difficulties, in order to avoid it. These
'-5'ó5 Mary construed to be ads of avowed disobedience, and inflantly

committed several of them to prison. But this severity did not sub-
due the undaunted spirit of liberty, which prevailed among the
inhabitants. The Queen was obliged to mortgage to the city,
the superiority of the town of Leith, by which she obtained
a considerable fum of money '. The thirds of ecclesiastical benefi-
ces proved another source, whence the Queen derived some supply.
About this time, we find the Protestant clergy complaining more
bitterly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is probable, ex-
haufled a great part of that fund, which was appropriated for their
maintenance f.

Church as- THE afiemblies of the church were not unconcerned fpedators
fairs.

of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting
June 24, several of the malecontent nobles were present, and seem
to have had great influence on their decisions. The high itrain in
which the Assembly addressed the Queen, can be imputed only to
those fears and jealousies, with regard to religion, which they en-
deavoured to infuse into the nation. The Assembly complained,
with some bitterness, of the stop which had been put to the pro-
grefs of the Reformation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland ; they
required not only the total fupprcflion of the Popish worflip through-
out the kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and be-
fides the legal eftablilhment of the Protestant religion, they dc-
manded that Mary hcrfelf should publicly embrace it. The Queen,
after some deliberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her intercft, would permit her to take such a flep. The former
would for ever reproach her for a change, which proceeded from

* Knox, 383, 386. ' 1 Maid. Hist. of Edinburgh, 27.

110

no inward conviction; the latter would susser by the offence, BoOK III.
which her apoftacy must give to the King of France, and her ""-"
other allies on the continent *.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the Queen's

affairs, during this year, began to work some change in favour
of her religion. The Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly
attended mats; ihe herself afforded the Catholics a more avowed
protection than formerly; and, by her permission, some of the an-
tient Monks ventured to preach publicly to the people t.

1Knox, 37-1, 376. t Id. 389, 390o

T HE

# BOOK IV.

THE
H I ST O R Y

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IV.
BooK IV. A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parliament approached,

i5r66. JA Mary and her Ministers were employed in deliberating

Mary's deli- concerning the course which it was most proper to hold with
berations con-
cering the regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to set no
xiled obles. bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecontents had laboured

to defeat a scheme, which her interest conspired with her pafions
in rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a party, whofc
friendflhip she had been obliged to court, while the held their prin-
ciples in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached to a rival, whom
She had good reason both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty considerations might be

urged. The noblemen, whose fate was in fufpence, were among the
rnoft powerful fubjeas in the kingdom; theirwealth great, their con-
neCions extensive; and their adherents numerous. They were

now

4

now at mercy, the objeas of compafnion, and suing for pardon with BOOK IV.
the most humble fubmiflion. 566.

IN those circumstances, an at of clemency would exalt the
.)ueen's character, and appear no less splendid among foreigners,
than acceptable to her own fubjeEts. Mary herself, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable ; but the King's rage was implacable
and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the fugitives,
from various quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who
had been members of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their
ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-fufferers; nor neglcet-
ful of their safety, which they esteemed of great importance to
the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time poffefTed the Qjeen's con-
fidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray having stooped
so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of fecur-
ing his protection against the King, whose displeasure he had lately
incurred, seconded the intercessions of his other friends, with
the whole of his influence *. The interposition of Sir Nicholas
*Throgmorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in
Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all there,
and attended with more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to
Cecil, had embarked deeply in all the intrigues which were carried
on at the English court, in order to undermine the power and credit
of that Miniser. He espoused, for this reason, the cause of the
Scottish Queen, towards whose title and pretensions the other was
known to bear little favour; and ventured in the present critical
jundure, to write a letter to Mary, containing the most salutary ad-
vices with regard to her condut. He recommended the pardon-

* Melvil, 125.
VOL. I. Qq ing

BooK IV. ing of the Earl of Murray and his associates, as a measure no lets

. 566. prudent than popular. An ation of this nature, 'ays he, the pure

effect of your Majesty's generosity, will .pread the fame of your le-
nity and moderation, and engage the English to look towards your
accession to their throne, not only without prejudice, but with de-
fire. By the fame means, a perfea harmony will be restored
among your own fubjeds, who, if any rupture lhould happen with
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
mency cannot fail of inspiring*.

Sherefolves THESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, to which his
tratth cemen reputation for wisdom, and known attachment to the Queen, added
cy' great authority, made a deep impreflton on her spirit. Her cour-

tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed on her, not-
withlfanding the King's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her own pri-
vate resentment to the intercession of her fubjets, and the wishes
of her friends *. With this view, the Parliament, which had been
called to meet on the 4th of February, was prorogued to the 7th of
April L-; and in the mean time, ihe was busy iri confidering the
manner and form in which (he .hould extend her favour to the
Lords who were under disgrace.

Is diverted THOU CH Mary discovered,, on this occasion, a mind' naturally
from this re-
lolution by prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, ihe wanted, how-
the folicita-
ZiaonFof" ever, firmness to refilf the influence, which was fatally employed to
erace.l sa o disappoint the effe&s of this amiable disposition. About this time,
Popery. and at no great distance from each other, two envoys arrived from
ebruary 3. the Frenoh King, T le former was intrusted with mattersof mere

* Melv. 119. + Id. 125, $ Good. vol. i. 224.

4 ceremony

ceremony alone; he congratulated the Queen on her marriage, BooKIV.
and invested the King with the ensigns of the order of St. Michael. $566.
The instruCtions of the latter related to matters of more importance,
and produced greater effets *.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter the Queen of

Spain had been often proposed; and after many obstacles arising
from the opposition of political interest, was at last appointed at
Bayonne. Catharine of Medicis accompanied her son ; the Duke of
Alva attended his Mistress. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole occupation of both courts,
a scheme was formed, and measures concerted, for exterminating
the Hugonots in France, the Protestants in the low countries, and
for suppressing the Reformation throughout all Europe t. The
ative policy of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so suitable to the
genius of the Romish religion, and so beneficial to their own
order.

IT was an account of this holy league which the second French

envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her, at the fame time, in the
name of the King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to
restore the leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to power and
favour, at the very time when the Catholic Princes were combined
to destroy that fed, in all the countries of Europe +.

POPrRY is a species of false religion, remarkable for the strong

possession it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of deep infight
into the human character, and improved by the experience and

* Keith, 325. Append. 167. + Thuan. lib. 37. 4 Melv. 126.

Qq 2 obfer-

BOOK IV. observation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to a degree of

6 perfe&aioin, which no former system of uperftition had ever attained.
x566. Per

There is no power in the understanding, and no passion in the heart,
to which it does not present objecs, adapted to route, and to inte-
reft them. Neither the love of pleasure, which, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which oc-
cupied the court of Spain, had secured them from the dominion of
bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers, were agitated with that furious
and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as peculiar
to ecclefiaffics; and Kings and Ministers thought themselves bound,
in conscience, to extirpate the Proteflant dotrine. Mary herself
was deeply tintured with all the prejudices of Popery; a paflion-
ate attachment to that fuperflition is visible in every part of her cha-
raaer, and runs through all the scenes of her life: the was de-
voted, too, with the utmost fubmiflion, to the Princes of L'orrain,
her uncles; and had been accustomed, from her infancy, to lifterr
to all their advices, with a filial refpea. The profpe& ofreftoring
the public exercise of her own religion, the pleasure of comply-
ing with her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the French Mo-
narch, whom the present situation of her affairs in Ehgland made
it necessary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confidera-
tions which had formerly weighed with her. She inftantlyjoined
the confederacy, which had been formed for the deftrucion ofthe
Protestants, and altered the whole plan of her condut, with re-
gard to Murray and his adherents ".

To this fital resolution may be imputed all the subsequent ca-

lamities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scotland, for-
tune may be said to have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
an< if her prosperity did not rife to any great height, it had, how-

'S See Appendix,. N° XIV.

ove.r .

ever, fufferedi no considerable interruption. A thick and fettled BooK IV.
cloud of adversity, with few. gleams of hope, and none of real en- 66
joyment, covers the remainder of'her days..

THE effets of the new system, which Mary had adopted; were A Parliament

called to at-

soon visible. The time of prorogation of Parliament was ihort- taint the exi-
ened; and by a new proclamation, the 2th of March:was fixed led nobles.
for its meeting *. Mary resolved, without any further delay, to,
proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the fame time,
determined to take some Reps towards the re-establishment of the
Romish religion in- Scotland t. The Lords of the articles were
chosen, as usual, to prepare the business which was to come before
the Parliament. They were all persons in whom the Queen could
confide, and bent- to promote her designs. The ruin of Murray and'
his party seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the Reformed
Church- imminent, when- an event unexpeEtedly happened, which-

* Keith, 326.

·t' It is not on the authority of Knox.alone, that we charge the Queen with th'e

design of re-establishing the Roman Catholic religion. He, indeed, aflerts that
the altars, which.fhould have been erected in the church of St. Giles, were already
provided, 394. i. Mary herself,. in a letter to the Archbilhop of Glasgow her Am.
ballador in France, acknowledges, " that in that Parliament, she intended to have
done some good, with refpec to refloring the old religion." Keith, 33 . 2. The
Spiritual Lords, i; e. the Popilh ecclefiaflics, had, by her authority, resumed their
ancient place in that assembly, ibid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bayonne,
Keith, Append. 167. 4.- She allowed mass to be celebrated in different parts of.
the Kingdom, ibid. and declared that (he would have mass free for all men who.
would hear it, Good..vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who was furnished by the Arch,
bilhop of Glasgow with materials for writing his Martyre de Marie, affirms that the
Queen iltended to have procured, in this Parliament, if not the re-eliablifbmenr
of the Catholic. religion, at least something for the cafe of Catholics. Jebb, vol. ii.
2D4,

favedl
3'

Bo OK IV. saved both. If we regard either the barbarity of that age, when

566. fiuch ats of violence were common, or the mean condition of the

And prevent- unhappy person who suffered, the event is little remarkable ; but if
ed by the con-
fpiracy againit we reflet upon the circumstances with which it was attended, or
Rizio.

iz'o. upon the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely me-

morable; and the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with
great care.

Darnly loses D A R N L Y'S external accomplishments had excited that sudden and
t'fFcioe'" violent pafron which raised him to the throne. But the qualities

of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a
weak understanding, and without experience, conceited at the famtn
time of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary success en-
tirely to his distinguished merit. All the Queen's favour made no
impression on such a temper. All her gentlenes could not bridle
his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her attention to place
about him persons capable of direcing his condudt, could not pre-
serve him from rash and imprudent actions *. Fond of all the amuse-
ments, and even prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by de-
grees, careless of her person, and a stranger to her company. To
a woman, and a Queen, such behaviour was intolerable. The lower
(fle had (looped, in order to raise him, his behaviour appeared the
more ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion to the strength
of her first affection, was the violence with which her disappointed
passion now operated. A few months after the marriage, their do-
ineftic quarrels began to be observed. The extravagance of Darnly's
ambition gave rife to there. Instead of being satisfied with a share in
the administration of government, or with the title of King, which Ma-
ry, by an unprecedented stretch of power, had conferred on him, he

* Good. vol.i. 122.

demanded

demanded the Crown Matrimonial with most insolent importunity*. BooK IV.
And though Mary alledged that this gift was beyond her power, 1566.
and that the authority of Parliament muit be interposed to bestow
it, he wanted either underitanding to comprehend, or temper to
admit so just a defence; and often renewed and urged his re-
quest.

Rizio, whom the King had at first taken into great confidence, Sufpe&s R.i

did not humour him in these follies. By this, he incurred Henry's aoSeo bej*he
displeasure; and as it was impoflible for Mary to behave towards
her husband with the fame affetion, which distinguished the firit
and happy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to,
his own behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduct confirmed and itrengthen-
ed these suspicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity, and
admitted him to a ihare in her confidence, to which neither his firit
condition, nor the office she had lately betlowed upon him, gave
him any title. He was perpetually in her presence, intermeddled.
in every business, and, together with a few favourites, was the
companion of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit of
Darnly could not bear the intrusion of such an upstart; and im-
patient of any delay, and unrestrained by any scruple, he instantly
resolved to get rid of him by violence.

AT the fame time, another design, which took. its rife from very Rizio hated

different motives, was carrying on againfi the life of Rizio. Mor of the exiled
ton, Ruthven, Lindsay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. nobles.
In all former commotions they had been ftridly united with Mur-

Keith, 329. Knox, 404.

ray,,

BOOK IV. ray, though in the late infurre&ion they had deserted him, for va-

i,566. rious reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the family ofAngus,

and during the minority of the present Earl, acted as Chief of the
name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood. All there had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expected, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management of affairs would
be committed to them. Maitland, with his usual iagacity, fore-
saw that Murray's opposition to the match would prove dangerous
and ineffeaual; but whoever, ruled at court, he hoped by his dex-
terity and talents, to render himself necessary and of importance.
They were all equally disappointed in their expetations. The King's
headstrong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The Queen
could not help distrusting men who had been so long and so inti-
mately connected with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to
such Counsellors as complied with all her. inclinations. The re-
turn of that nobleman and his followers was therefore the only event
which could restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates to their
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For this reason, no-
thing could be more mortifying to them, than the resolution which
Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This they im-
puted to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray with all
his interest, was now the most active instrument in promoting the
measures which were concerted for the ruin of that nobleman.
This officious zeal compleated the disgust which they had conceived
against him, and inspired them with thoughts of vengeance, in
no wife suitable to justice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE

WH LE they were ruminating ,fpon their scheme, the King corn- BooK IV.

municated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, ri66.
and implored his afliftance, and that of his friends, towards the They com-

bine in order
execution of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable to to murder

him.

them than this overture. They saw at once all the advantages they
would reap, by the concurrence of such an associate. Their own
private revenge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an act of
obedience to the King; and they did not despair of obtaining the
reitoration of their banished friends, and security for the Protestant
religion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle, than rash, they hesitated for

some time, and determined to advance no farther, without taking
every possible precaution for their own safety. They did not, in the
mean time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton, who
was inferior to no man of that intriguing age, in all the arts of in-
finuation and address, took the young Prince under his management.
He wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to obtain the Ma-
trimonial Crown. He represented Rizio's credit with the Queen to
be the chief and only obstacle to his success in that demand. This
minion, alone, he said, possessed her confidence; and out of com-
plaifance to him, her fubjeds, her nobility, and even her husband,
were excluded from any participation of her secret councils. Under
the appearance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated, and
the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of quite a different and
of a very criminal nature might be concealed *. Such various and

compli-

* Of all our hiflorians, Bichanan alone avowedly accufcs Mary of a criminal

love for Rizio, 340, 34.. Knox slightly inlinuates that such a suspicion was
entertained, 391. Mclvil, in a conversation with the Quceln, intimates that he
was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mif:conilruifion, lo.

VOL. I. R r The

BooK IV. complicated passions 'raged 'in the King's' bosom, with the utnioft

- fury. He became more impatient than ever of any delay, and even

threatened to strike the intended blow with his own hand. At last,
preliminaries were fettled on both fides, and articles for their mu-
tual security agreed upon. The King engaged to prevent the at-
tainder of the banished Lords, to content to their return into Scot-
land, to obtain for them an ample remifiion of all their crimes, and
to support to the utmost of his power, the religion which was now
established in the kingdom. On their parts, they undertook to
procure the Crown Matrimonial for Henry, to secure his right of
succession, if the Queen should die before him, and to defend that
right to the uttermost, against whatever person mhould presume to
dispute it; and if either Rizio, or any other person, hould happen to
be killed in prosecuting of the design, the King promised to acknow-

The King himself seems, both by Melvil's account, and by his expostulation with
the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to these suspicions, Melv.
127. Keith, Append. 123, 124. That the King's suspicions were firong, is like-
wife evident from the paper published Append. No XV. But, in opposition to these
fupicions, and they are nothing more, we may observe that Raulet the Qeen's French
Secretary was dismissed from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office in Decem-
ber 1564, Keith 268.. It was in consequence of this preferment, that he acquired
his great credit with the Queen, Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two
months after, Keith, 269. The Queen immediately conceived for him a passion,
which had all the symptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this pailion,
and, promoted the marriage with all his interef, Melv. 11i. During some months
after the marriage, the Queen's fondness for Darnly continued. She soon proved
with child. From this enumeration of circumflances, it appears almost impossible that
the Queen, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could
carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph the Eng-
gli6h Resident, a man abundantly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's faults,
and who does not once'infinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing
criminal, is in itself a fuflicient vindication of her innocence.

ledge

ledge himself to be the author of the enterprize, and to protet BOOK IV.
those who were embarked in it*. X 66.

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan of operation, to Perpetrate

that crime in

chufe the aaors, and to assign them their parts in perpetrating this the Queen's
detestable crime. Every circumstance here paints and characte- palace.
rizes the manners and men of that age, and fills us with horror at
both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was the
Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth month
of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been seized
elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching
Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl of
Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
direa an enterprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which
he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who had
been confined to his bed for three months, by a very dangerous
distemper, and who was still so feeble that he could scarce walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, was entrusted with the exe-
cutive part; and while he himself needed to be supported by two
men, he came abroad to commit a murder in the pretence of his
Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the palace

with an hundred and sixty men; and without noise, or meeting with
any resistance, seized all the gates. While the Qtecn was at supper
with the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domestics, the King
suddenly entered the apartment, by a private passage. At his back,
was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that ghastly and

* Good. vol. i. 266.

R r 2 hlorrid

BooKIV. horrid look which long sickness had given him. Three or four

X. . . of his molt trusty accomplices followed him. Such an unusual ap-
i566.

pearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio instantly appre-
hended that he was the victim at whom the blow was aimed; and
in the utmost consternation retired behind the Qeen, of whom he
laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person might
prove some protection to him. The conspirators had proceeded too
far to be restrained by any consideration of that kind. Numbers of
armed men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger,
and with a furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, and which he had occupied too
long. Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threatenings, to
save her favourite. But, notwithstanding all these, he was torn
from her by violence, and before he could be dragged through the
next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his life,
piercing his body with fifty fix wounds *.

ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the Queen

who lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durst not shed the
noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a stranger. Some of
them were dismissed, and others made their escape.

They confine TuE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pofeflion of the pa-
.i.f.een lace, and guarded the Queen with the utmost care. A proclama-

tion was published by the King, prohibiting the parliament to meet
oft the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for pre-

* See Appendix, N° XV.

vent.

venting any tumult in the city *. Murray, Rothes, and their fol- BOOK IV.
lowers being informed of every flep taken against Rizio, arrived `76`
at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received both
by the King and Queen. By the former, on account of the
Articles which had been agreed upon between them; by the
latter, because (he hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their
power the still felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they had
offered to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded
any crime (he could impute to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking
her vengeance on them, fle became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men, who had hazarded their lives on his account, en-
gaged him to labour for their safety. The Queen, who scarce had
the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and
Ruthven into her presence, and to grant them the promise of par-
don in whatever terms they (hould deem necessary for their own
security.

THE King, mean while, flood afftonifhed at the boldness and

success of his own enterprize, and uncertain what course to hold.
The Queen observed his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She But The gains
employed all her art to disengage him from his new associates. His makes her
confcioufiefs of the infilt which he had offered to so illustrious a escape.
benefadcrefs, inspired him with uncommon facility and complaisance.
In spite of all the warnings he received to difiruft the Queen's arti-
sices, ale prevailed on him to dismiss the guards which the confpi-.

* Keith, Append. 126,

4ators

BOOK IV. rators had placed on her person; and that fame night he made his

! 566. escape along with her, attended by three persons only, and retired
March i. to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had been communicated

to Huntly and Bothwell, and they were quickly joined by them,
and several other of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crouded to their Chief, in
such numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to set the power of the
conspirators at defiance.

Is reconciled TI IS sudden flight filled them with inexpressible consternation.
to the exiled
nobllsex They had obtained a promise of pardon; and it now appeared from

the Queen's conduct, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
mise, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They ventured, how-
ever, to demand the accomplishment of it; but their messenger
was detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards Edin-
burgh, at the head of 8000 men, talked in the highest strain of re-
fentment and revenge. She had the address, at the fame time, to
separate Murray and his afociates from the conspirators against
Rizio. Sensible that the union of these parties would form a con-
federacy, which might prove formidable to the crown, She expref-
fed great willingness to receive the former into favour; towards
the latter, fihe declared herself inexorable. Murray and his fol-
lowers were no less willing to accept of pardon, on her own terms.
The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of every resource, and in-

March I.
The confpira- capable of refinfance, fled precipitately to Newcastle, having thus
Rizi ag nltt changed situations with Murray and his party, who left that place
England. a few days before.

No man So remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning, as the
Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate enterprize.

Desertcd

Deserted basely by the King, who now denied his knowledge of the BooKIV.
conspiracy, by public proclamations; and abandoned ungeneroully - 66
by Murray and his party *, he was obliged to fly from his native
country, to resign the highest office, and to part with one of the
most opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed against

those concerned in the murder of Rizio, with the utmost rigour of
law. But, in praise of her clemency, it must be observed, that
only two persons, and there of no considerable rank, suffered for
this crime--.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance, which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confede-
racy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was assassination, the preserving of the Reformed Church is,
nevertheless, one of the most considerable articles; and the fame.
men who were preparing to violate one of the first duties of mora-
lity, affected the highest regard for religion. History relates there
extravagancies of the human mind, without pretending to justify,
or even to account for them; and regulating her own opinions by
the eternal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue, points out
such inconsistencies, as features of the age which the describes, and
records them for the inftrudion of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate afafination which Anaccount of

the frequency

has occurred, and as we shall hereafter meet with many other in- t,,lflfrflia-
stances of the fame crime, the causes which gave rife to a practice ,ge.
so shocking to humanity, dclerve our particular attention. Resent-
ment is, for obvious and wife reasons, one of the strongest pailions
in the human mind. The natural demand of this paTfion is, that

* Mclv. 30. 3 Kcith, Appendix lo,'334.

6 the

BOOK IV. the person who feels the injury should himself inflic the vengeance

' due on that account. The permitting this, however, would have

been deftruAive to society; and punishment would have known
no bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this reason, in
the very infancy of the social state, the sword was taken out of pri-
vate hands, and committed to the Magistrate. But, at firit, while
laws aimed at refraining, they really strengthened the principle of
revenge. The earliest and most simple punifllment for crimes was
retaliation; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person injured, succeeded
to the rigour of the former inflitution. In both these, the gratifica-
tion of private revenge was the objed of law; and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to pursue, to exat,
or to remit the punishment. While laws allowed such full scope to
the revenge of one party, the interests of the other were not
negleced. If the evidence of, his guilt did not amount to a full
proof, or if he reckoned himself to be unjutly accused, the person
to whom a crime was imputed had a right to challenge his adversary
to single combat, and on obtaining the victory, vindicated his own
honour. In almost every considerable cause, whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of the parties. Justice had seldom occasion to use
her balance; the sword alone decided every contest. The passion
of revenge was nourished by all these means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind became habituated
to blood, not only in times of war, but of peace; and from this,
as well as other caufcs, contracted an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made it necessary to dif-
courage the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of compenlh-
tions in criminal cafes; and to think offome milder method of tcr-
minating disputes concerning civil rights. The punishments for

crimes

crimes became more severe, and the regulations concerning pro- BooK0IV.
perty more fixed; but the Princes, whose province it was to in- I$6&-
flies the one, and to enforce the other, pofleffed little power. Great
offenders despised their authority; smaller ones sheltered themselves
under the jurisdiCtion of those, from whose protetion they expected
impunity. The adminiitration ofjuitice was extremely feeble and
dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a Chieftain, or even
of his vassals, often excited rebellions and civil wars. To nobles,
haughty and independent, among whom the causes of discord were
many and unavoidable, who were quick in discerning an injury,
and impatient to revenge it; who esteemed it infamous to submit
to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive him; who conlidered the
right of punishing those who had injured them, as a privilege of
their order, and a mark of independence; such flow proceedings
were extremely unfatisfadtory. The blood of their adversary was,
in their opinion, the only thing which could wash away an affront;
where that was not ihed, their revenge was disappointed, their
courage became fufpeted, and a stain was left on their honour.
That vengeance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate could
not inflit, their own could easily execute; under governments so
feeble, men assumed, as in a state of nature, the right of judging,
and redressing their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a crime
of all others the most deftrudive to society, came not only to be
allowed, but to be deemed honourable.

THE history of Europe, during the I4th and xsthcenturies

abounds with detestable instances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly
among the French' and Scots, between whom there was a close
intercourse at that time, and a surprising resemblance in their na-
tional characters. In 1 407, the only brother of the King of France

VOL. 1. S f was

BOOK IV. was murdered publickly in the fireets of Paris; and, so far was

~Tr'ó'~ this horrible action from meeting with proper punfihment, that an

eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in defence of it before the
Peers of France, and avoedly -t maintain the awfulness of affaffi-
nation. In 1417, it required all the eloquence and authority of the
famous Gerfon, to prevail on the Council Of Conflance to condemn
this proposition, " That there are Come cafes in which aflaflina-
tion is a virtue more meritorious in a Knight than in a Squire, and
more meritorious in a King than i:n a Knight *.. The nurmber of
eminent persons who were murdered in France and Scotland, on ac-
count either of private, or political, or religious quarrels, during
the 5th and 6th centuries, is almost incredible Even. after those
causes, which firfl gave rife to this barbarous practice were re-
moved; after the jurifdiaion of Magistrates, and the authority of
laws were better eftabliihed, and become more universal after the
progress of learning and philosophy had polished the manners, and
humanized the minds of men, this crime continued' ina ome degree.
It was towards the close of the 17th century before it disappeared
in France. The additional vigour, which the royal authority ac-
quired by the acceflon of James VL to the, throne of England,
seems to have put a stop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national eulRom, both on the

understanding and on the heart, and how far it 'may go towards
perverting or extinguishing moral principles of the greatest import-
ance, is remarkable. The a.uthors: of those ages have perkfly im-
bibed the sentiments of their cQtemporaries, with regard to affafli-
iation; and they,, who had, leisure to refleC, and tojudge, appear
to be no more flocked at this crime, than the persons, who com-

* L'Enfant. Hist. Conc. de Conft.

mitted

nitted it during the heat and impetuosity of paflion. Buchanan BooK IVi
relates the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without -ó

1566.

expressing those feelings which are natural to a man, or that in-
dignation which became an historian *. Knox, whose mind was
fiercer, and more unpolifhed, talks of the death of Beatoun, and of
the Duke of Guise, not only without censure, but with the utmoit
exultation Jt. On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross mentions the
assassination of the Earl of Murray, with some degree of applause $,
Blackwood dwells upon it, with the most indecent triumph, and
ascribes it diretly to the hand of God II. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal ator in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it
Come short time before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one expression of regret, or one symptom of com-
pun&ion for a crime no less dishonourable, than barbarous *.
Morton, equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame
Centiments concerning it; and in his last moments, neither he
himself, nor the Ministers who attended him, seem to have con-
fidered it as an ation which called for repentance; even then he
talks of David'sJlaughter as coolly as if it had been an innocent or
commendable deed tf. The vices of another age astonish and
ihock us; the vices of our own become familiar, and excite little
horror. I return from this digression to the course of the history.

THE charm, which had at first attached the Queen to Darnly, The (Queen'

hatred to

and held them for Come time in an happy union, was now entire-Darnly in-
ly dissolved; and love no longer covering his follies and vices withcreafics
its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full dimension and
deformity $$. Though Henry published a declaration, disclaiming

* Buchan. 295, 345S t Knox, 334. t Anders. 3. 84.
( Jebb, 2. 263. ** Keith, Append. 119. t' Crawf. Mem. Append.

:t; See Appendix, NO XVI.

S f 2 any

Bq9KIV. any knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was fully
' ie66 convinced, that he was not only accessory to the contrivance, but

i566.

to the commission of that odious crime *. That very power, which,
with liberal and unfufpicious fondness, {he had conferred upon
him, he had employed to insult her authority, to limit her prero-
gative, and to endanger her person. Such an outrage, it was im-
poflible any woman could bear, or forgive. Cold civilities, - secret
distrust, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports of
affection and confidence. The Queen's favours were no longer con-
veyed through his hands. The crowd of expetants ceased to court
his patronage, which they found to avail so little. Among the
nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others complained' of his
perfidiousness; and all of them despised the weakness of his under-
standing, and the inconstancy of his heart. The people themselves
cbferved some parts of his condu&, which little suited the digni-
ty of a King. Addited to drunkenness, beyond what the man-
ners of that age could bear, and indulging irregular pafilons, t
which even the licentioufiefs of youth could not excuse, he, by
his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the utmost; and
the pafilons which it occasioned, often forced tears from her eyes,
both in public and in private t. Her aversion for him increased
every day, and could be no longer concealed. He was often ab-
sent from court, appeared there with little splendor, and was trust-
ed with no power. Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to
please the Queen, who favoured Morton and his aflociates, or who
adhered to the house of Hamilton; he was left almoR alone in a
neglected and unpitied solitude $.

Thbe rife of ABOUT this time, a new favourite grew into great credit with the
bothweil's fa-
mouW, Queen, and soon gained an ascendant over her heart, which encou-

* Keth, 350. ' Ibid, 329, t Melv. 131, &c.

raged:

raged his enterprising genius to form designs that proved fatal toBboKtIVi
himself, and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfortunes. 566
This was James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient
family, and by his extensive possessions and numerous vassals, one
of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in that
turbulent age, when so many vast projecs were laid open to. an
aspiring mind, and invited it to action, no man's ambition was
more daring than Bothwell's, or. had recourse to bolder or more
singular expedients for obtaining power. When almost every per-
son of diftintion in the kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant,
had joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous encroach-
ments of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though
an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Regent, and a&ed with
vigour on her fide. The success which attended the arms of the
Congregation having obliged him to retire into France, he was
taken into the Queen's service, and continued with her till the
time of her return into Scotland *. From that period, every ftep
of his condu&c towards Mary was remarkably dutiful; and amidlt
all the shiftings of facion, we fiarcely ever find him holding any
course which could be offensive to her. When Murray's proceed-
ings with regard to her marriage gave umbrage to the Queen, she
recalled Bothwell from that banishment into which fle had with
relutance driven him, and confidered his zeal and abilities as the
most powerful supports of her authority. When the conspirators
against Rizio seized her person, he became the chief infirument
of recovering her liberty, and served her, on that occasion, with
so much fidelity and success, as made the deepest impression on
her mind, and greatly increased the confidence which she had hi-
therto placed in him t. Her gratitude loaded him with marks of

* Anderson, i. go. t Ibid. i. 92, 93.

her

BOOK IV. her bounty; The raised him 'to offices of profit and of trust, and
-'"'' tranfadted no matter of importance without his advice *. By com-
i566.

plaifance, and assiduity, he confirmed and fortified there dispositions
of the Queen in his favour, and insensibly paved the way towards
that vait project, which his immoderate ambition had perhaps al-
ready conceived, and which, in spite of many difficulties, and at
the expence of many crimes, he at last accomplished.

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it seemed imprudent
to expose her person, at that time, to the insults the might susser
in a kingdom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny. For this
reason the Privy Council advised the Queen to fix her residence in
the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the kingdom, and
the most proper place for the security of her person -. In order
to render this security more perfect, Mary laboured to extinguish
the domefftic feuds which divided some of the principal nobles.
Murray and Argyll were exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell,
by reciprocal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her authority
and entreaties, effected a reconcilement among them, and drew from
them a promise to bury their discords in everlafling oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that she made it the con-
dition on which she again received Murray into favour $.

Birth of ON the I9th of June, Mary was delivered of her only son James,
James VI. a Prince whose birth was happy for the whole island, and unfortunate

to her alone. His accession to the throne of England united the two

* Melvil, 133. Knox, 396. t Keith, 335.

. Ibid. 336. Appendix, 139.

divided
I

divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy, and established theBooKIV.
power of Great Britain on a firm foundation. While /he, torn 1566.
early from her son by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to
indulge those tender patlions, nor to taste those joys which fill the
heart of a mother.

MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London with an account

of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at first, in a sensible manner;
and the advantage and superiority which her rival had acquired by
the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before Melvil
was admitted to audience, she had so far recovered the command of
herself, as to receive him not only with decency, but with exceflive
cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the invitation which Mary
gave her to fland godmother to her son *.

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, she resolved to cele-

brate the baptism of the young Prince with great pomp; and for
that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to the French King,
and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former husband.

THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her fen- The Qucel

timents with refpet to the King t. The death of Rizio, and the trnat Dainls
countenance he had given to an action so insolent and unjuitifi-_ ith inddit'r.
able, were ifll fresh in her memory. She was frequently pensive glel.
and dejeced t. And though Henry sometimes attended at court,
and accompanied her in her progrefles through different parts of
the kingdom, he met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the greatest reserve, and did not susser him
to possess any authority ||. The breach between them became
* Melv. 38. t Sec Append. N° XVII. Ibid. 141. I IKeith, 350s M.l. 132.

every

BOOK IV. every day more apparent *. Attempts were made toward a recon-

5,66~ cilement, particularly by Caftelnau the French Ambassador; but

after such a violent rupture, it was found no easy matter to bind
the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed on the King and
Queen to pass two nights together t, we may, with great proba-
bility, pronounce this appearance of union, to which Caftelnau
trusted, not to have been sincere; we know with certainty that it
was not lasting.

Her attach- BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime confident.
ment to Both-
well in- Without his participation no business was concluded, and no favour

crea. bestowed. Together with this ascendant over her councils, Both-

well, if we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired no
less sway over her heart. But at what precise time, this ambitious
Lord firfi allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the place of
that duty and refpe& which a subjea owes his Sovereign; or when
Mary, initead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a passion of
another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine.
Such delicate transitions of passion can be discerned only by those,
who are admitted near the persons of the parties, and who can view
the secret workings of the heart with calm and acute observation.
Neither Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble station allowed them only a distant access to the Queen and
her favourite. And the ardor of their zeal, and the violence of
their prejudices, render their opinions rash, precipitate, and inaccu-
rate. It is by the effecs of this reciprocal passion, rather than by
their accounts of it, that subsequent hitforians canjudge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's projec to gain the Queen may ap-
pear, it was formed and carried on under very favourable circum-

* Keith, Append. 169; t Ibid,

stances.

itances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She possessed great BOOK IV.
sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost tenderness "'
of affiefion. She had placed her love on a very unworthy object,
who requited it with ingratitude, and treated her with neglect,
with insolence, and with brutality. All these she felt, and relented.
In this situation the attention and complaisance of a man, vlho
had vindicated her authority, and protected her person; who en-
tered into all her views, who soothed all her passions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his design, and re-
commending his passion ', could scarce fail -of making an impreiliiio
on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and accuf- The K;in

tomed to command, could not bear the contempt under which he toelcaic
had now fallen, and the itate of insignificance to which he fawv hims- "S:c!and
self reduced. But in a country, where he was universally hated or
despised, he could never hope to form a party, which would fe-
cond any attempt he might make to recover power. AHe addref-
fed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France
and Spain, with many professions of his own zeal for the Catho-
lic religion, and with bitter complaints against the Queen for ne-
glecting to promote that interest -: And soon after, he took a
resolution, equally wild and defperatc, of embarking on board a
ship, which he had provided, and of flying into foreign parts. It
is almost impoflible to form any fatisfaEory conjecture concerning
the motives which influence a capricious and irregular mind. He
hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic Princes on
the continent, by his zeal for religion, and that they would cm-
ploy their interest towards reinflating him in the poifeflion of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps, he cxpced nothing more than

I: AndclT. r, 93, 94. I Kiox, 39-,
VoL. I. T t the

BOOK IV. the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now fallen,,

- 66- among tirangers, who had never been witnesses of his former pro-

fperity.

ltis capricicus HE communicated his design to, the French Ambaflador Le Croc,
elavioir, and to his father the Earl of Lennox. They both endeavoured to

dissuade him from it, but without success. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's confidence, and who,
about this time, was seldom at court, instantly communicated the
matter to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accompany
the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was likewise absent from
court. He arrived there, however, on the fame day she received
the account of his intended flight. But he was more than usually way-
ward and peevifll; and scrupling to enter the palace unless certain
Lords who attended the Queen were dismissed, Mary was obliged
to meet him without the gates. At last he suffered her to conduct
him into her own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from him
the reasons of the strange resolution which he had taken, and to di-
vert him from it. In spite, however, of all her arguments and entrea-
ties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the Privy Coun-
cil, by her direction, expoftulated with him on the fame head. He
pcrfifted, notwithstanding, in hisfullennefs andobftinacy; and neither
deigned to explain the motives of his conduc, nor signified any in-
tention of altering it. As he left the apartment, he turned towards
the Queen, and told her that fle should not fee his face again, for
a long time. A few days after lie wrote to Mary, and mentioned
two things as grounds of his difgullf. She herself, he said, no long-
er admitted him into any confidence, and had' deprived him of all
power; and the nobles, after her example, treatcd him with open
neglect, so that he appeared in every place without the dignity and.
iplendor of a King.. 7

.;o T I I N (:

NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary than this intended BOOK IV,
flight of the King's, which would have spread the infamy of their - -

~~~~~~~~~~~b ~~~I566.

domestic quarrel all over Europe. Companion for a Monarch who Mary endca-
would then appear to be forced into exile by her neglect and ill usage, vent hits o
might have disposed mankind to entertain sentiments concerning the tended fliglt.
causes of their discord, little to her advantage. In order, therefore,
to prepossess the minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation
from any censure with which Darnly might endeavour to load it,
the Privy council transmitted a narrative of this whole transaction,
both to the King, and to the Queen Mother of France. It is drawn
with great art, and sets Mary's conduct in the most favourable point
of light *

ABOUT this time, the licence of the borderers called for iedrefs

and Mary resolving to hold a court of justice at Jedburgh, the
inhabitants of several adjacent counties were summoned to attend
their sovereign in arms, according to curom t. Bothwell was,
at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the marches, an office,
among the most important in the kingdom; and though usually di-
vided into three diftint governments, bestowed by the Queen's fa-
vour upon him alone. In order to display his own valour and ac-
tivity in the discharge of this trust, he attempted to seize a gang of
banditti, who lurking among the marches of Liddefdale, infested
the reft of the country. But while he was laying hold of one of
those desperado's, he was wounded by him in several places, so that oaoer ,6.
his followers were obliged to carry him to IIermlitage castle-. Mary
instantly flew thither, with an impatience which firongly marks the
anxiety of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a Queen T. Find-

ing-

Keith, 345, 347. - Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.

I: The diflance between Jcdburgh and Hermitage is 18 Scottish miles, through
a country almost impassable. The ifafon of the year was far advanced. Botllwell

T t 2 fcn;

BOOK IV. ing that Bbthwell was threatened with no dangerous symptom, fhie

óó-7" returned that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a jour-
I566.

ney, added to the anguish of mind. the had suffered on Bothwell's
account, threw her next morning into a violent fever -. Her life
was despaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of her constitution
resifted the malignity of her disease. During the continuance of
the Queen's illness, the King, who resided at Stirling, never came
.ovember 5. near Jedburgh -t; and when he afterwards thought fit to make his

appearance there,. he met with such a cold reception, as did not en-
courage him to make any long flay +. Mary soon recovered firength
enough to return along the eaflern borders to Dunbar.

WHILE (he resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth notwithstanding her promise, and even
proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but, encouraged
Morton and his associates to remain in England 11. Mary, on the o-
ther hand, afforded her protection to several English fugitives.
Each Queen watched the motions of the other with a jealous atten-
tion, and secretly countenanced the practices, which were carrying
on, to diflurb the. administration of her rival...

teems to have been wounded in a scuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man,
rather than in any open infurrecion of the borderers. It does not appear that
the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train. Had any military ope-
--ation been necefary, as is supposed, Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been ca-
trcmcly improper to rifque the Queen's person in an expedition against thieves, So
soon as the Qpeen found Bothwcll to be in no danger, she inflantly returned ; anid
'ifter this we hear no more of the infurrcclion, nor have we any proof that the rioters
took refuge in England No other reason but that which we have produced, fccms
fufficicat to account for the Queen's conduft.

* Keith, 351, 352i. Ibid. Append. 133.
:1: Knox, 400. 1 Cald. vol. ii. )S.

Foiv

FOR this purpose Mary's Ambassador, Robert Melvil, and herBooK IV.

other emissaries, were extremely acive and successful. We may i566
impute, in a good degree, to thzir intrigues, that spirit which The Eng!ifh

b- ~Palial~ ait

appeared in the Parliament of England, and which railed a Iform favours Ma-
that threatened Elizabeth's domeflic tranquillity, more than any fi,^sto te
other event of her reign,. and required all her art and dexterity tofuccefioil
allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, without discovering

the least intention to marry. A violent difl-emper, with which
she had lately been seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profped of all those calamities which are oc-
cafioned by a disputed and dubious fucceflion; a motion was made,
and eagerly listened to in both houses, for addrefling the Queen, to
provide against any such danger in times to come, either by fig-
nifying her own resolution to marry, or by consenting to an ac
eftablifiing the order of succession to the Crown *. Her love to her
fabjeas, her duty to the public, her concern for posterity, it was
pretended, not only called upon, but obliged her to take one of
these steps. The insuperable aversion which flhe had all along dif-
covered for marriage, made it improbable that fle would chufe the
former; and if lhe complied with the latter request, no title to the
Crown could, with any colour ofjuftice, be set in opposition to that
of the Scottish Qeen. Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the
rcinotcft consequences of this motion, and observcd them witlh the
.,reatefl: anxiety. MLry, by resiling so o'te:i to ratify the treaty
of Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a dctign of' embracing the
.:.rt.f proliling opportunity for prof'cciUing her right to the Englill
Crown; and by her fecrct ncgociations, flic had gained many to f.-
v.our her title -t. All the Roman Catholics ardently wifihcd fur her

' D'lEwcs Journ. of Parl. 1lo0 . M clv. i36.

i L.-

BooK IV. fucceflion. Her gentleness and humanity had removed many ofthofe

' apprehensions which the Proteflants entertained on account of her

religion. The court faaion, which envied the power of Cecil, and
endeavoured to wrest the administration out of his hands, advanced
the pretensions of the Scottish Queen in opposition to him. The
union of the two kingdoms was a defireable object to all wife men
in both nations; and the birth of the young Prince was a security
for the continuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its perpe-
tuity.

TIlizabetih's UNDER these circumstances, and while the nation was in such a
iait acculiti . temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title would have been

highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled state of
the fucceflion left much in her power. Her resentment alone might
have gone far towards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto restrained, and over-
awed the ambition of the Scottish. Queen. But if this check llould
be removed by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary would
be at full liberty to pursue her dangerous designs, and to aat with-
out fear or reserve. Her partizans were already meditating schemes
for infurreEtions in different parts of the kingdom *; and an a& of
Parliament, recognizing the rights of that Princess, wlhofe preten-
sions they favoured, would have been nothing less than a signal to
arms; and, notwithstanding Elizabeth's just title to the affeAions
of her fuhjects, might have shaken and endangered her throne.

j.Il;ry endn- WIIIL.i; this matter remained in fufpence in both houses, an ac-
V.)ti:n to ilm-
provc this op- count of it was tranfinittcd to Mary by Mclvil her Ambafiador. As
'";"""I' fllc did not want advocates for her right, even among those who

were near Elizabeth's person, slc cndeavoured to cultivate the dif-

* Mlclv. 147.

polition

position which appeared towards fettling the right of fucceflion in BOOK IV..
her favour, by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England. She II"-
expressed in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendfllip, which fle
ascribes chiefly to their good offices, with their Sovereign, in her
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity witl
England, without urging or pursuing her claim upon the Crownv
any farther than should be agreeable to the Queen. But, at the
fame time, as her right of succession was undoubted, she hoped it
would be examined with candour, and judged of with impartiality.
The nobles who attended her wrote to the Englif;l Privy Council
in the fame strain *. Mary artfully gave there letters the air of be-
ing nothing more than a declaration of her own, and of her sub-
jeats gratitude towards Elizabeth. But as fie could not be igno-
rant of thejealoufy and fear with which Elizabeth observed the pro-
ceedings of Parliament, a ftep so uncommon as this, of one Prince's
entering into public correspondence with the Privy Counsellors of
another, could not be otherwise conisrued than as taken with an in-
tention to encourage the spirit which had already been raised among
the Engliflh. In this light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth
herfelft. But the disposition of her people rendering it necessary
to treat Mary's person with great decency, and her title with much.
regard, (he mentioned it to her only in the softest language.

NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mortification to a .lzabeth
Princess of Elizabeth's charaIter, than the tcnmper which both for"lis and

lgai.s h 'r Par-

houses of Parliamlent difcovcrcd on this occalion. She bent all hceriain'11t.
policy to deiat, or elude the motion. After allowing the firfl:
heat of their zeal to cvaporatc, flne called into her presence a CLr--
tain number of each houti. She toothed and careichd them; lie
threatened and prolmifed; the remitted fubficlies which were due

'" Edth, 354. Appcnd. 136. i Kith, .7.

and.

BOOK IV.and refuied those which were ofered; and in the end prevailed to

ó' - have this formidable motion put off for that feflion. Happily for

. her, the conduc of the- Scottish Qieen, and the misfortunes which
besel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any future Par-
liaLment *.

M/,EAN time, in order to preserve the reputation of impartiali-

ty, and that ale might not drive Mary into any desperate measur-e,
the committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had publilhed
something derogatory to the right of the ScottiLf line -; and fig-
nified her difpleafilre against a member of the house of Commons,
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at Mary +.

An extraorii- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to pro-
nary iep of mote the interest of that religion which lhe profcffed. The re-
Mary's ill fa- b
vour of Pope- eftablithment of the Romith doctrine seems to have been her
y.

favourite passion; and though the design was concealed with
care,. and conducted with caution, fie pursued it with a perse-
vering zeal. At this time, fie ventured to lay aside somewhat
of lecr usual reserve; and the aid which fle expected fiom the
Popifll Princes, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne, en-
couraged her to take a ftep, which, if we confider the temper of
the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having formerly held a
secret correspondence with the court of Rome, the now resolved to
allow a Nuncio from the Pope publicly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time Bihiop of Mondovi, was tile per-
son on whom Pius V. conferred this oflice, and along with him he
sent the Quecn a prefcnt of 20,000 crownS |1. It is not tlhe cha-
ra'er of the Papal court, to open its treaihry upon distant or inagi-

* D'Ewcs Journ. 104- 130. Camrd. 399. Melv, 19. HIayncs, 446.
·J, Cimd. 401. :1' Hayncs, 449. 11 Vita Card. Laur, ap. 3uin, vol. iii 325.

nary

nary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in Scotland could be noBooK IV.
other, than to attempt a reconciliation of the kingdom to the Ro- 6

x566.

mifh fee. Thus Mary herself underifood it; and in her answer to
a letter which the received from the Pope, after exprefling her grate-
ful sense of his paternal care and liberality, the promises that the
would bend her whole strength towards the re-establishment and
propagation of the Catholic faith; that lhe would receive the Nun-
cio with every poflible demonstration of refped, and concur, with
the utmost vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour
of God, and restoring peace to the kingdom; that the would ce-
lebrate the baptism of the Prince, according to the ceremonies which
the Romish ritual prescribes, hoping that her fubjedts would be
taught, by this example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with contempt; and that
file would be careful to instil early into her son the principles of
a sincere love and attachment to the Catholic faith *. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over one of
his attendants with part of the money, the Queen did not think the
jundure proper for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, against the time of the Prince's
baptism, and as it would have been improper to offend her, fle -
wifely contrived, under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
ris -. The convulsions into which the kingdom was thrown soon
after, made it inpoffible for him to pursue his journey any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was fccretly carrying on these ne-

gociations for subverting the Reformed Church, fle did not scruple
publicly to employ her authority towards obtaining for its Mini-
flers a more certain and comfortable subsistence T. During this

* Conai Vita Mariae ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 5 r. f Keith, Append. 135.

:: Kcith, 561, 562. Knox, 401.
VOL. I. U u year,

BOOK IV. year, she issued several proclamations and ats of council for that

6t6 -purpose, and readily approved of every scheme which was propoSed

for the more effecual payment of their tipends. This part of her
condu& does little honour to Mary's integrity; and though justified
by the example of Princes, who often reckon falffood and deceit
among the necessary arts of government, and even authorised by
the pernicious casuistry of the Romish Church, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of duties,
such diflimulation, however, must be numbered among those ble-
mifhes which never stain a truly great and generous charater.

Pecember As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambassadors were yet
Her aversion arrived, the baptism of the Prince was put off from time to time.
for the King
exceflive. Mean while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar *. Such a re-

tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe.
Her aversion for the King grew every day more confirmed, and was
become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy succeeded to that
gaiety of spirit, which was natural to her. The rashness and levity
of her own choice, and the King's ingratitude and obltinacy, filled
her with fliame and with despair. A variety ofpaffions preyed at
once on a mind, all whose sensations were exquisite, and all its
emotions itrong, and often extorted from her, the last with of the
unfortunate, that life itself would come to an end A.

A divorce he- MURRAY and Maitland observed all those workings of pafion
twveen them
p'rFOfcd. in the breast of the Queen, and conceived hopes of turning them to

the advantage of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other
conspirators against Rizio. They were frill in banishment, and the
Quecn's resentment against them continued unabated. Murray and

* Kcith, 355. 1 Ibid. Pc£s. vii.

the

the Secretary flattered themselves, however, that her inclination to BOOK IV.
be separated from Darnly would surmount this deep-rooted aver- 6
sion, and that the hopes of an event so defireable might induce
her to be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to find rea-
sons, in the King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of di-
vorce. This sentence they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In return for this ser-
vice, they proposed to stipulate with the Queen to grant a par-
don to Morton and his followers. The design was first of all
communicated to Argyll, who, as well as Murray, owed his re-
turn into Scotland to the conspiracy againit Rizio. Huntly and
Bothwell, who at that time directed all Mary's councils, were like-
wife admitted into the concert. They joined together in making
the overture to the Queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's elo-
quence *. But Mary, however desirous of obtaining that delive-
rance from Darnly's caprices, with which they endeavoured to al-
lure her, had nevertheless good reasons for rejecting the method,
by which they proposed to accomplish it. The birth of her son
had greatly strengthened her claim upon the English succession, and
encouraged the abbettors of it to appear with greater boldness, and
to at with more vigour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from
her husband, without throwing some imputation on her son. This
might open a new dispute with regard to the fucceflion, and put
it in the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to call in question
the Prince's legitimacy, or at least to subjet it to all the delays and
cavils of a judicial inquiry. The fear of these inconveniences
weighed with Mary, and determined her, rather to endure her
hard fate, than to seek relief, by venturing on such a dangerous
experiment.

'* Andcrf. vol. iv. Part ii. 188.

U u 2z 'rE
0,

BOOK IV. THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the Engliflh
'i66' and French Ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stirling,
x566.

to celebrate the baptism of her son. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought presents from Elizabeth,
suitable to her own dignity, and the refpe& with which she affected,
at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great preparations had
been made by Mary, and the magnificence displayed by her on this
occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scotland.
Decem 17 The ceremony itself was performed according to the rites of the

Romish Church. But neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottish
nobles who profefled the Protestant religion, entered within the gates
of the chapel *. The spirit of that age, firm and uncomplying,
would not, upon any inducement, condescend to witness an action,
which it esteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncure, perfecly discovers the
capricious be-
hapviour at the excess of his caprice, as well as of his folly. He chore to reside
baprinc of the at Stirling, but confined himself to his own apartment; and as the

Queen difirufted every nobleman who ventured to converse with
him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing could be more
singular, or was less expected, than his chufing to appear in a man-
ner, that both published the contempt under which he had fal-
len, and, by exposing the Queen's domestic unhappiness to the
observation of so many foreigners, looked like a flep taken on
purpose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly;
and notwithstanding all her efforts to assume the gaiety which suit-
ed the occasion, and which was necessary for the polite reception of
her guests, file was Sometimes obliged to retire, in order to be at li-
berty to indulge her sorrow, and give vent to her tears -. The King

Keith, 360. t Ibid, Pref. vii.

Rill

.fill persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily BOOK IV.
threatened to put it in execution. k
.c

i566.
THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's baptism was not the sole Elizabeth en-

dearours to
business of Bedford's embafly. His inftrudions contained an over- accommodate

her differences-

ture, which ought to have gone far towards extinguishing those jea- Kith Mary.
loufies which had so long subsisted between the two Queens. The
treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned, was the
principal occasion of there. The spirit however which had risen
to such a height in the late Parliament, the power of the party
which favoured the Scottifl Queen's title, the number and ativity
of her agents in different parts of the kingdom, alarmed Eliza-

* Camden affirms, 401. that Bedford was commanded: by Elizabeth not to give

Darnly the title of King. As this was an indignity; not to be born, either by Mary
or her husband, it hath been aflcrted to be the cause of the King's absence from the
ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, i. No such thing is
to be found among Bedford's inftruEtions, the original of which still remains. Keith
356. 2. Bedford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent with Cam-
den's assertion. Melv. 153. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's infiruc-
tions to Sir Henry Norris, where she affirms that flie commanded Bedford to employ
his bes offices towards reconciling Mary to her hulband, which he had attempted
to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaff. p. 13: A paper publiflled Append NO XVIII.
proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident mentions the King's ab.
fence, but without giving that reason for it, which has been founded on Camden's
words, though, if that had been the real one, he would scarce have failed to mention it;
His account of this matter is that which I have followed. Keith, Pref. vii. 4. I-IH
informs his court, that on account of the difference betwixt the King and the Queent
he had refused to hold any further corrcfpondence with the former, though he
appears, in many instances, to have been his great confident. ibid. 5. As, the
King was not present at the baptism, he seems to have been excluded from any
liare in the ordinary administration of bulinefs. Two acts of l'rivy Council, one on
the 20th, and the other on the 2 lI of December, are found in Keith, 562. They
both run in the Queen's name alone. The King fcems not to have been present.
This could not be owing to Elizabeth's inltru&ions to Bedford.

bctli.

334 T H E H I S T OR Y

BOOK IV. beth, and induced her to forego any advantage, which the ambigu-
i . 66' ous and artful expressions in that treaty might afford her. Nothing

was now demanded of Mary, but to renounce any title to the Crown
of England during Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity;
who, on the other hand, engaged to take no ftep, which might
prove injurious to Mary's claim uponthe fucceflion *.

: MARY could not, with decency, reject a proposition so equi-
table; ihe infiffed, however, that Elizabeth mhould order the right
upon which (he claimed to be legally examined, and publickly re-
cognized, and particularly that the tefRament of Henry VIII. where-
by he had excluded the descendants of his eldest siser the Queen
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of succession,
might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility. Ma-
ry's Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this tesla-
ment, which they so justly conceived to be injurious to their Mif-
trefs, was a mere forgery ; and on different occasions had urged Eli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered considerably by
gaining this point. The original testament is still extant, and not
the least doubt can be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the
title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to
keep the question concerning the succession perplexed and undecided,
and by industriously eluding this request, the did real. service to
Mary's cause -.

A FEW days after the baptism of the Prince, Morton and all

the other conspirators against Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave
to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued inex-
orable to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded at last to the folici-

Keith, 356. ' Ibid. 361, 358. Note (c.) Murdin, 368.

tations

tations of Bothwell *. He could hope for no succeSs in those BooK V.,
bold designs on which his ambition resolved to venture, without V-T
drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his associates, of which they had good reason to despair, he ex-
peaed to secure a band of faithful and determined adherents.

THE King still remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under con-

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarm
given him, by the rumour of a design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison -, was the occasion of his leaving that place
in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow.

Two Assemblies of the Church were held during this year. New Tane 2;.

Decem. 25,

complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the poverty church
and contempt under which the Protestant clergy were suffered to afhirs.
languish. Penurious as the allotment for their subsistence was,
they had not received the least part of what was due for the pre-
ceding year +. Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to
susser every thing for a good cause, could have persuaded men to
adhere to a church, so indigent and so negleded. The extraordi-
nary expences occasioned by the Prince's baptism, had exhaufled
the Queen's treasury, and the fums appropriated for the fubiiftence
of the clergy were diverted into other channels. The Queen was
therefore obliged to prevent the just remonstrances of the assembly
by falling on some new method for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some stretch towards munificence might
have been expected in an assignment which was made with an in-
tention of soothing and silencing the clergy. But both the Queen
and the nobles held falf the riches of the church which they had
seized. A funm, which, at the highest computation, can scarce be

G*ood vol. i.
. 40. Mclv. 154. t Kcith, Pref. viii. TIid. Ik 562.

15 reckonedt

BooK IV. reckoned equal to 9000oo . terling *, was deemed sufficient for tile
ó'"ó - maintenance of a whole national church, by men who had lately

seen. ingle monasteries possessed of revenues far superior in value.

THE ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances which affected

themselves alone, with astonishing patience; but wherever the Re-
formed religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to be
alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their apprehensions
of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given them, a short
time before the meeting of the Assembly. The usurped and op-
preflive jurisdiCtion of the spiritual courts had been abolished by the
Parliament I560, and Commiffaries were appointed to hear and
determine the causes which formerly came under their cognizance-I-.
Among the few ats of that. Parliament, to which Mary had paid
any regard, this was one. She had confirmed the authority of the
Commiffaries, and had given them inftrucions for directing their
proceedings+, which are still of great authority in that court. From
that time these judges had continued in the uninterrupted exercise of
their fundion, when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclamation,
restoring the Archbishop of St. Andrew's to his ancientjurifdidtion,
and depriving the Commiffaries of all authority 11.

A MOTIVE, which cannot bejuftified, rendered the Queen not

unwilling to venture upon this rash adtion. She had been contriving,
for some time, how to re-establish the Popish religion; and the re-
ltoring the ancient ecclefiaflics to their formerjurifdition, seemed to
be a considerable flep towards that end. The motive which prompt-
ed Bothwell, to whose influence over the Queen this aCtion mufl be
chiefly imputed **, was still more criminal. His enterprising ambi-
tion had already formed that bold design, which he soon put in exe-

' Keith, 562. t Id. 1 52. -: Id. 251. .11 Knox, 403. * Id. ibid.

cution,

cution, and the use which we shall hereafter find him making of that BOOK IV.
authority, which the Popish ecclefiaflics regained, discovers the rea- ---

i566.

sons of his present conduct, in contributing to revive their power.
the Protestant clergy were not unconcerned fpeaators of an event,
which threatened their religion with unavoidable deftrudion; but
as they despaired of obtaining the proper remedy from the Queen
herself, they addressed a remonstrance to the whole body of the Pro-
teftant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the dan-
ger to which it was exposed, at that time, seemed to require*. What
effects this vehement exhortation might have produced, we have
no opportunity of judging, the attention of the nation being quickly
turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he The King

lalls tick at

could reach Glasgow, he was seized with a dangerous distemper. Glasgow.
The symptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and in 1567.
that age it was commonly imputed to the effects of poison t. It
is impossible, amidst the contraditions of hiflorians, to decide with
certainty concerning its nature, or its caufeJ. His life was in the

utmost

; Keith, 567. t Melv. 154. Knox, 401.

1: Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been poisoned. They men.

tion the black and putrid pultules which broke out all over his body. Euchanan
adds, that Abernethy the King's physician plainly declared that poison was the
cause of these symptoms, and that the Queen refuscd to allow her own physician to at-
tend him, Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Blackwood Caufin. &c. Jcbb, vol. ii. 24, 59.
affcrt, that the small pox was the difeafc with which the King was seized. He is cal-
led a pockijln man in the Qeen's letter, Good. vol. ii. i5. The reason given by
French Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk of Field, viz. left the young Prince
should catch the infection if he (laid in the palace, fecms to favour this opinion, An-
derf. vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderness to her hnlfband,
that though flie never had the small pox herself, (le ventured to attend him, vol. iii.
446. This, if it had been true, wvoull have affordcd a good pretence for not visiting

VOL. I. X x him

BOOK V' utmoif danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the vigour

"567. of his constitution surmounted the malignity of the disease.
1567.

Neglea2ed by MARY'S neglec of the King, on this occasion, was equal to
Mary. that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jedburgh.

She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affeetion which prompts
to sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices which sooth
and alleviate licknefs and pain. At this juncture, lhe did not even
put on the appearance of this passion. Notwithstanding the King's
danger, lhe amused herself with excursions to different parts of the
country, and suffered near a month to elapse before she visited him
at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was out of all danger.

The breach THE breach between Mary and her huiband was not occasioned
between them
irreparable. by any of those fight disgusts, which interrupt the domeflic union,

without dissolving it altogether. Almost all the passions, which ope-
rate with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive it to the
most dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and fomenting this
unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours she had betlowed,
contempt of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, encroach-
ments on her power, conspiracies against her favourites, jealousy,
insolence, and obstinacy, were the injuries of which Mary had great
reason to complain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility; and,
added to the anguifl of disappointed love, they produced those fymp-
toms of delpair which we have already described. Her resentment
against the King seems not to have abated from the time of his leav-
ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand, to her ambafia-

him sooner; but Mary had the small pox in her infancy, Sadler's Letters. 3. Bilhop
Lefly affirms, that the King's disease was the French pox, Keith, 364. Note (b).
In that age, this disease was esteemed so contagious, that persons inse&ted with it
were removed without the walls of cities.

I dor

-dor in France, just before the set out for Glasgow, no tokens of BooK IV,
sudden reconcilement appear. On the contrary, she mentions, i567
with some bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy withJanuary zo.
which he observed her actions, and the inclination he discovered to
disturb her government, and at the fame time talks of all his at-
tempts with the utmost Scorn *.

AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it was scarce to be Visits he

expected that she would visit the King, or that any thing but gow.
marks of jealousy and distrust should appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe; she not only visited
Henry, but, by all her words and aEtions, endeavoured to express
an uncommon affection for him: And though this made impression
on the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on some
occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to those who are ac-
quainted with the human heart, and who know how seldom and
how slowly such wounds in domestic happiness are healed, this
sudden transition will- appear with a very suspicious air, and will
be confidered by them as the effeat of artifice.

BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged with Her difimula-

dissimulation in this part of her conduct. Two of her famous let- tn
ters to Bothwell were written during her flay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an absolute afcen..
dant over the Queen; and in a situation, such as Mary's, merit not
so conspicuous, services of far inferior importance, and address much
less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be supposed to fleal imper-
ceptibly on a female heart, and entirely to overcome it. Among
those in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to conjugal

* Keith's Pref. viii.

X 2 fidelity

.BoOK IV. fidelity are, unhappily, neither many, nor strong: Nor did the man-

- ners of that court, in which Mary had been educated, contribute to

increase or to fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and
Henry II. the wildness of the military characer in that age, and
the liberty of appearing in all companies, which began to be allow-
ed to women, who had not yet acquired that delicacy of sentiment,
and those polished manners, which alone can render this liberty
innocent, had introduced, among the French, a licentiousness of
morals that rose to an astonishing height. Such examples, which
were familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly fail of dimi-
nishing that horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first approach of forbid-
den sentiments less (hocking; resentment, and disappointed love,
would be apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge, as jufti-
fiable on that account; and so many concurring causes might, al-
most imperceptibly, kindle a new passion. in her heart..

The motives BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and
of i.

progress of this passion, the letters themselves breathe all the ar-
dour and tenderness of love. The affecion which Mary there ex-
presses for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part of her
condut; which, without admitting this circumstance, appears al-
together mysterious, inconfilent, and inexplicable. That recon-
cilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to. be genuine,
it is impossible to give any plausible account, is discovered, by the
Qeen's own confession, to have been mere artifice and deceit.
As her aversion for her husband, and the suspicious attention with
which fle observed his conduat became universally known, her
ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such cafes, with groundless
or aggravated accounts of his ations. By some, ihe was told, that
the King intended to seize the person of the Prince his son, and

in.

in his name to usurp the government; by others she was assured, BooKIV.
that he resolved instantly to leave the kingdom; that a vessel was
hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive 5
him *. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring
into a foreign country muff have been highly dishonourable to the
Queen, and would have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided in Glasgow, at a distance from her, and in that
part of the kingdom where the interest of his family was greatest,
he might, with more facility, accomplish his designs. In order, there-
fore, to prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary
to bring him to some place, where he would be more immediately
under her own eye. For this purpose, she first employed all her Prevails on

him to come

art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to remove him to to Edinburgh.
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that there he
would have easier access to the advice of physicians, and that she
herself could attend him without being absent from her son -. The
King was weak enough to susser hiifelf to be persuaded; and
being f-ill feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in
a litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house, belonging to

the Provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It flood
almost upon the fame spot where the house belonging to the Prin-
cipal of the University now stands. Such a situation, on a rising
ground, and at that time in an open field, had all the advantages
of healthful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand, the so-
litude of the place rendered it extremely proper for the commis-
sion of that crime, with a view to which, it seems manifestly to
have been chosen.

Keith, Pref. viii. f Good. vol. ii. 8.

MARY

Bo OK IV. MARY continued to attend the King with the most assiduous

---ó care. She seldom was absent from him through the day; ihe slept
x567.
He is mur- several nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped
red there. on him o many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in a great

measure, quieted those suspicions which had so long disturbed him.
But while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happiness, he flood on the very brink of deftru&ion. On
Sunday the ninth of February, about eleven at night, the Queen
left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a masque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which the King lay
was blown up with gun-powder. The noise and shock, which
this sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The in-
habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouch-
ed by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.
His charaAer. SUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart Lord Darnly,

in the twenty firfl year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accomplilhments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart of a
woman who doated on him to diftration. His insolence and incon-
flancy alienated from him such of the nobles as had contributed most
zealously towards his elevation. His levity and caprice exposed him
to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as the descendant
of their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a natural death,
his end would have been unlamented, and his memory have been
soon forgotten; but the cruel circumstances of his murder, and
the remissness with which it was afterwards avenged, have made his
name to be remembered with regret, and have rendered him the
object of pity to which he had otherwise no title.

EvR Y

EVE'RY one's imagination was at work to guess who had con- BOOK IV;
trived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion fell, with 156

i567.
almost a general content, on Bothwell *; and some reflections Bothwell-and

the Queen fur-

were thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no stranger to the pe&ed ofthe
crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evidencemurder
that the nature of the acion will admit. The Queen's known
Sentiments with regard to her husband, gave a great appearance of
probability to the imputation with which ihe was loaded --.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was issued by the

Queen, offering a considerable reward to any person who should
discover those who had been guilty of such a horrid and detestable
crime $; and though Bothwell was now one of the greatest sub-
jets in the kingdom, formidable on account of his own power,
and protected by the Queen's favour, it was impossible to suppress
the Sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers were affixed
to the most public places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and naming his accomplices; pictures appeared to the fame pur-
pose, and voices were heard, in the middle of the night, charging
him with that barbarous action. But the authors of these rumours
did not confine their accusations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated
that the Queen herself was accessory to the crime II. This bold ac-
cufation, which so direcly attacked Mary's reputation, drew the
attention of her council; and by engaging them in an inquiry after
the authors of these libels, diverted them from searching for the mur-
derers of the King **. It could scarce be expeted that Mary herself
would be extremely solicitous to difcov er those who had rid her of an
husband, whom she had so violently hated. It was Bothwell's in-

* Melv. 55. Anderf.vol. i. i56.

- Bee Dissertation concerning the murder of Henry Darnly, and the genuilneefs
of Mary's letters to Bothwell. Appendix.

t Anders. vol. i. 36. 11 Id. vol. ii. 156. ** Id. vol. i. 38.

tcreil,

BOOK IV. terest, who had the supreme direcion of this, as well as of all other

5ó7J 'affairs, to stifle and suppress whatever evidence should be offered,

and to cover, if possible, the whole tranfa&ion under the veil of
darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and
some persons called before the council; but the examination was
conduced with the most indecent remissness, and in such a man-
ner, as to let in no light upon that scene of guilt *.

IT was not her own fubjeds alone who fufpe&ed Mary of having

been accessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so difho-
nourable to her character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy
and malice of her factious nobles. The report of the manner and
circumstances bs the King's murder spread quickly over all Europe,
and, even in that age, which was accustomed to deeds of violence,
it excited universal horror. As her unhappy breach with her
husband had long been matter of public discourse, the first con-
Je&ures which were formed with regard to his death, were ex-
tremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apology
to offer for her conduct, called on her to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost diligence, and expected that the rigour of her
proceedings would prove the best and fullefl vindication of her
innocence t.

Lennox ac- LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with in-
cufes Bothwell
of the King's ceffant importunity. This nobleman had shared in his son's dif-
murder.

murdr grace, and being treated by Mary with neglect, usually resided at

a distance from court. Rouzed, however, by an event no less shock-
ng to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his schemes of ambi-
February z. tion, he ventured to write to the Queen, and to offer his advice

* Anders. vol. iv. 167, I68. - Keith, Pref.ix.

with

with respect to the most effectual method for discovering and con- BOOK IV.
vi&ing those who had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of - '

i567.

a huiband. He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty, with
vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared his own
suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who were named as his accom-
plices; he required that, out of regard to decency, and in order to
encourage evidence to appear against them, the persons accused of
such an atrocious crime should be committed to custody, or at least
excluded from her court and pretence A.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither she had retired after the bu-

rial of the King, whose body was deposited among the Monarchs
of Scotland, in a private, but decent manner -. The former part
of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be eluded; and
it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately to trial. But, inflead
of confining him to any prison, Mary admitted him to all her Mary conti-

nues to fa-

councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed the murderervour him.
of her husband, to enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favourite $. The offices which Bothwell already pofleffed,
gave him the command of all the south of Scotland. The caffle
of Edinburgh, however, was a place of too much consequence, not
to wiih it in his own power. The Queen, in order to prevail on
the Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the person of
the young Prince in his hands, and immediately befftowed the March 19.
government of that important fortress upon Bothwell I1. So many
steps in her condut, inconsistent with all the rules of prudence,
and of decency, mufft be imputed to an excess either of folly or
of love. Mary's known characer fully vindicates her from the for-
mer; of the latter, many and firiking proofs soon appeared.

* Keith, 369. -1' Andcrf. vol. i. 23. :!: Id. ibid. 40, &c.
\\ Id. ibid. Pref. 64, Keith, 379.
VOL. . Y y No

BOOK IV. No direCt evidence had yet appeared against Bothwell; but aw

567. time might bring to light the circumstances of a crime, in which
I567.
March '9 so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance-
Hastens on
his trial. to hurry over the trial, while nothing more than general suspicions,

and uncertain. surmises, could be produced by his accusers. For'
this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th of
March, the 2th of April was appointed for the day of trial. And
tho' the law allowed, and the manner in which criminal causes were
carried on in that age required a much longer interval, it appears,
from several circumstances, that this short space was considerably
contracted, and that Lennox had only eleven days warning to prepare
for accusing a person, so. far superior to himself, both in power and
in favour *. No man could be less in a condition to contend with-
an antagonist who was thus supported. Tho' Lennox's paternal
estate had been, restored to him, when he was recalled into Scotland,.
it seems to have been considerably impaired during his banishment.
His vassals, while he resided in England, had. been accustomed to

* The aft of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears date

March the 28th, which happened on a Thursday, Anders. vol i. So. The Queen's
warrant to the nme.engers, impowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is
dated on the 29th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public proclamation?
at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid. ioo. He was summoned at his
dwelling-houfes in Glasgow. and Dunbarton the 3oth of March, the ift and 2d days
of April. Ibid. Iol. He was summoned at Perth, April ift, Ibid. xo2. Though,
Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from Edinburgh, the citation might have been
given him sooner. Such an. unnecelary delay affords some cause for suspicion. 'Tis
true, Mary, in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh the.
ensuing week; this gave him warning some days looner, that she intended to bring
on the trial without delay. But the precise time. could not be legally, or certainly
known to Lennox sooner than i or 12 days, before the day on which he was required
to appear. By the law and praticc of Scotland, at that time, parties were summoned
AH cafes of treason 40.days previous to the trial,

some

come degree of independance, and he had not recovered that ab- BOOKIV.
solute ascendant over them, which a feudal chief usually poffefled. -

z567.

He had no reason to expect the concurrence of any of those fations
into which the nobles were divided. During the short period of
his son's prosperity, he had taken such steps as gave rife to an open
breach with Murray and all his adherents. The partizans of the
house of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to
the disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood alone in a cause, where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to
second him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present, and fat

as a member in that meeting of Privy Council, which gave direc-
tions with regard to the time and manner of his trial; and he
fill enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the Queen's
presence with the fame diftinguiihed familiarity as formerly *.

No THING could be a more cruel disappointment to the withes Lennox

and resentment of a father, than such a premature trial; every Rtep caves a dc
towards which seemed to be taken by directions from the person
who was himself accused of the crime, and calculated on purpose
to conceal rather than to detec his guilt. Lennox forfaw what
would be the issue of this mock inquiry, and with how little safety
to himself, or success to his cause, he could venture to appear oi
the day prefixed. In his former letters, though under expressions
the most refpetful, tome symptoms of his diitruffing the Queen
may be discovered. He spoke out now, in plain language. He
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying on the trial with
such illegal precipitation. He represented once more, the indecen-

* Anders. vol. i. 50, 52.

Yy 2 cy

.... ''''

,., . "
I _ s ' o

BooK IV. cy of allowing Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to
' 7"~^-' retain his former influence over her councils. He again required

her, as she regarded her own honour,. to give some evidence of her
sincerity in prosecuting the murderer, by confining the person who
was, on good grounds, fufpe&ed to be the author of it; and, till
that were done, he signified his own resolution not to be present at
a trial, the manner and circumstances. of which were so irregular,
and unfatisfadtory y..

Applies for HE seems, however, to have expeced little success from this
this purpose
o Elizabeth. application to Mary; and therefore, at the fame time, besought

Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he de-
manded t. Nothing can be a fironger proof, how violently he
fufpeaed the one Queen, than his submitting to implore the aid of
the other, who had treated his son with the utmost contempt, and
himself and family with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote intfantly
to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some time, and urged, in
such strong terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had used, as
might have convinced her to what an unfavourable conftru&ion her
conduc would be liable, if ihe persisted in her present method of
proceeding ::.

The trial pro. NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of Lennox, could'
ceeds.

prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed, Bothwell:
appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would have
been dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punish him. Be-
fides a numerous body of his friends and vassals aflembled, accord-
ing to custom, from different parts of the kingdom, he was attended

* Anders. vol. i. 52. t Good. vol. ii. 352. . Anders. Pref. 60;
Sec Appendix, N° XIX.

by.

iy a band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying colours along BooK IV.
the fireets of Edinburgh *. A court ofjuftice was held, with the 6
accustomed formalities. An indictment was presented against
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good his accufa1-
tion. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his de-
pendants. He excused his Master's absence, on account of the
shortness of the time, which prevented his assembling his friends and
vassals, without whose assistance he could not, with safety, venture
to set himself in opposition to such a powerful antagonist. For this
reason, he desired the court to flop proceeding, and protested, that
any sentence which Should be passed at that time, ought to be
deemed illegal and void. Bothwell,, on the other hand, insisted, that
the court ihould instantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prosecute the murderers
without delay was produced. Cunningham's objections were over-
ruled; and the jury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the firfe
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single witness was ex- Bothwell is

acquitted.

amined, nor any evidence produced against him. The jury, under
these circumstances, could do nothing else but acquit him. Their
verdict, however, was fir from gratifying the withes, or silencing
the murmurs of the people. Every circumflance in the trial gave
grounds for suspicion, and excited indignation; and the judgment
pronounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's innocence, was
efleemed an argument of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were
affixed to different places, exprefling the sentiments of the public
with the utmost virulence of language.

Anders. vol. i. 135

THE.

BooK IrV. THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of the censure, to

5 67 which their proceedings would be exposed; and, at the fame time,

that they returned their verdi& acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of
Caithness protested, in their name, that no crime ihould be imputed
to them on that account, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the inditment. He took notice, likewise,
that the ninth instead of the tenth of February, was mentioned in
the indicment, as the day on which the murder had been commit-
ted. A circumstance, which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of
those who prepared the indictment; and at a time when men were
disposed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of every thing,
this small matter contributed to confirm and to increase their sus-
picions *.

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment which he

had obtained in his favour, as afull vindication of his innocence. Im-
mediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a cuflom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in which he offered to
fight, in single combat, any Gentleman of good fame, who ihould
presume to accuse him of being accessory to the murder of the King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if he had been

cleared by the moit unexceptionable and fatisfafory evidence. The
ascendant he had gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who could not ex-
pect that his own person would be safe in a country where the mur-
derer of his son had been absolved, without regard to justice; and
loaded with honours, in contempt of decency; fled with precipita-
tion towards England t.

* Bothw. Trial. Anders. vol. i. 97, &c. f Keith, 378. Note (d).

Two

-Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the opening BOOKIV.
of which the Qeen distinguished Bothwell, by appointing him to 1 567
carry the scepter before her *. Most of the adts passed in this As- A Parliament
fembly, were calculated on purpose to strengthen his party, and to
promote his designs. He obtained the ratification of all the posses-
sions and honours which the partiality of the Queen had conferred
upon him; and the ad to that effet contained the strongest decla-
rations of his faithful services to the crown, in all times palc. The
surrender of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The
law of attainder againit Huntly was repealed, and he, and his ad-
herents, were restored to the estates and honours of their ancestors.
Several of those who had been on the jury which acquitted him,
obtained ratifications- of the grants made in their favour; and as
pasquinades daily multiplied, a law paiTed, whereby those, into.
whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were commanded inifantly
to destroy it; and if, through their negle&t, it should be allowed to
spread, they were fubjetcd to a capital puniflhrent, in the fame
manner as if they had been the original authors -.

BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had acquired- over Remarkable

law in favour

Mary's mind, appeared in the clearest manner, by an at in favour of the Refor-
of the Protestant religion, to which, at this time, lhe gave her as- mation.
sent. Mary's attachment to the Romifl faith wasuniform and fu-
perftitious; the had never laid aside the design, nor loft the hopes
of restoring it.. She had, of late, come under new engagements to
that purpose, and in consequence of there, had ventured uponr
fbme steps more public and vigorous than any ihe had formerly
taken. But Bothwell was prompted, by powerful motives, to pro-
mote this law. He had been guilty of crimes whichrendered him
the obje& of just and universal detetfation. He was meditating,

*Keith, 378. Note (d.) + Ibid. 280.

others,
'4

BOOK IV. others, which he easily foresaw would heighten the public indigna-

5 67. tion against him. By this popularlaw, he might hope to divert, or

to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered himfclf, that the
obtaining this unexpected and legal security for the Protestant reli-
gion, would atone for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his crimes. The
act itself was so favourable to the doctrine of the Reformers, that
the Parliament, which met next year, under very different leaders,
could substitute nothing itronger or more explicit in its place; and
thought it sufficient to ratify it word for word *. To pass such an
at, was utterly inconsistent with all the maxims which Mary fol-
lowed in every other period of her life; but what could never be
extorted from her by the solicitations of the Assemblies of the
church, or by the intreaties of her people, the more powerful in-
fluence of Bothwell now obtained -.

Bothwell pre- EVERY siep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with
,'.i!s en the
nobles to re- all the success which his most sanguine withes could expect. He
commend him
as an hulband had entirely gained the Queen's heart; the murder of the King had
to the Queen. excited no public commotion; he had been acquitted by his peers

of any share in that crime; and their decision had been, in some

* Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 3 r.

t Buchanan, Hill. 355, not only omits taking any notice of this law, but aflerts,

that the Queen, though she had given promises in favour of the reformed religion,
refused to permit any as to pass in support of it, and even difiifled the deputies of
the church with contempt. Spotfwood, 202. and Caldcrwcod, vol. iii. 41. both as-
firm the fame thing. It would not have been necefflry to observe this inflance of
Buchanan's inaccuracy; but that an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwood,
and one so indufirious as Calderwood, fliould commit such an error, when not only
the original statute was extant in the records of Mary's Parliament, but even when
the printed act of Murray's Parliamnnt was before their eyes, is remarkable. Even
Buchanan himself has taken notice of this a6d, Detetio, p. 8.

fort,

fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the regal BOOK I\V.
authority was so extremely limited, and the power of the nobles so 5ó-
formidable, he durst not venture on the last ation, towards which
all his ambitious projecs tended, without their approbation. In
.order to secure this, he, immediately after the dissolution ofParlia- 'pril 9g.
ment, invited all the nobles who were present to an entertainment.
Having filled the house with hiss friends and dependants, and fur-
-rounded it with armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whole content, he told them, he had
already obtained; and demanded their approbation of this match,
which, he said, was no less acceptable to their Sovereign, than ho-
nourable to himself -. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy to all
Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with the utmost zeal; the
Popish ecclefiafiics, who were absolutely devoted to the Queen, and
ready to sooth all her paflions, instantly declared their fatisfadion
with what he had proposed. The recf, who dreaded the exorbitant
power which Boillwell had acquired, and observed the Qeen's
growing affe6tion towards him in all her actions, were willing to
make a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could neither op-
pose, nor defeat. Some few were confounded and inraged. But,
in the end, Bothwell, partly by promises and flattery, partly by ter-
ror and force, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper,
which leaves a deeper stain than any occurrence in that age, on the
honour and charaCter of the nation.

TTHIs paper contained the firongtef declarations of Bothwell's in-

nocence, and the most ample acknowledgment of his good services
to the kingdom. If any future accusation flould be brought againti
.him, on account of the King's murdcr, the subscribers promised to

* Good. vol. ii 141. .I' Andcrfon, vol i. 94.
VOL. I. Zz it;nd

BOOK IV. sta'nd by him as one man, and to hazard their lives and fortunes in,

ó' ' his defence. They recommended him to the Queen, as the most
1567.

proper person she could chufe for a husband; and if {he should"
condescend to bestow on him that mark of her regard, they under-
took to promote the marriage, and to join him with all their forces,.
in opposing any person who endeavoured to obftructit *. Among
the subscribers of this paper, we find some who were the Queen's
chief confidents, others who were firangers to her counsels, and ob-
noxious to her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to her,,
through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and others who became.
the principal authors of her sufferings; some passionately attached
to the Romish superstition, and others zealous advocates for the
Protestant faith -. No common interest can be supposed to have
united men of such opposite principles and parties, in recommend-
ing to their Sovereign a tfep so injurious to her honour, and so fa-
tal to her peace. This strange coalition was the effedt of much ar-
-;i;,, , ,-,,n,1- ho ,-,,-,~,A~,A ,,or Fl~ n-

^ A, ,1 ,,-,,-,..l~_

stroke of Bothwell's address. It is observable, that amidst all the
altercations and mutual reproaches of the two parties which arose
in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfaation is seldom mentioned.
Conscious on both fides, that in this particular, their conduct could
ill bear examination, and would redound little to their fame, they
always touch upon it unwillingly, and seem desirous that it lhould
remain in darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many per-
sons, who, both at that time, and ever after, pofleied the Queen's
favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion becomes strong, that
Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor
difipproved by her :.

THESE

* Ander. vol. r. 177. t Keith, 382.

$ Of all the different fyflcms with regard to this tranfaftion, that of Camden
seems to be the least accurate, and the worst founded. He supposes that Bothwell

was

'THESE suspicions are confirmed by the moit dired proof. BooKIV.
Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a considerable share in her fa- `"

·765x

vour. He, as well as his brother, kept a secret correspondence
in England, with those who favoured her pretensions to that
Crown. The rumour of her intended marriage with Both-
well having spread early in that kingdom, excited universal in-
dignation; and Melvil received a letter from thence, which re-
presented, in the firongeft terms, what would be the fatal es
secs of such an imprudent fetp. I-e put this letter into the
Queen's hands, and inforced it with the utimofi: warmth. She
not only disregarded these remonI-rances, but communicated the

was hated by Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his afrociates in the murder
of the King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at the fame
time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained by them, out of fear,
that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody fecrct. 404.
But besides the absurdity of supposing, that any man's enemies would contri-
bute towards raising him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of after-
wards depriving him of it; betides the impolfibility of accomplishing such a mar-
riage, if it 'had been either unknown to the Queen, or disagreeable to her;
we may observe that this supposition is deflroyed by the diret teflimony of
the Queen herself, who arcribes the concent of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices,
wh) purchased it by giving them to undrifland that we wcre content therewith.
Anderson, vol. i. 94. It would have been no small advantage to Mary, if ile
could have represented the content of the nobles to have been their own volun-
tary deed. It is llill more surprising to find Lefly ascribing this paper to Mlurray and
his facion. Anderson, vol. i. 26. The Bishop himfelfwas one of the persons who
subscribed it, Keith, 383. The King's commiflioncrs, at the confercnce held at
York 568, pretcnded that none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly, would
subscribe this paper till a warrant fiom the Queen was produced, by which they
were allowed to do so; this warrant they had in thcir cuflody, and exhibited,
Anddrfon, vol. iv. Part ii. 59. This differs from Buchanan's account, who sip-
poses that all the nobles present subscribed the paper, on the i9th, and that, nexl
day, they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way of fecuity
to thcmfclves, 355.

,Z i. z 2i tter

BooKIV. matter to Bothwell; and Melvil, in order to save his life, was obli-

15ó7.' ged to fly from court, whither he durst not return, till the Earl's rage

began to abate *. At the fame time Elizabeth warned Mary of the
danger and infamy to which she would expose herself by such an in-
decent choice; but an advice from her met with till. less regard --.

'nothwellcar- THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary went from
ries the Queen Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her foil. Both-
Dunbar. well had now brought his schemes to full maturity, and every pre-

caution being taken, which could render it safe to venture on the laif
and decisive flep, the natural impetuosity of his spirit did not susser
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an expedition
against the free-booters on the borders, he assembled his followers ;
and marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned
April 2z. suddenly towards Linlithgow, met the Qkeen on her return near

that place, dispersed her slender train without resistance, seized on
her person, and conducted her,. together. with a few of her cour-

* Melv. i56. According to Melvil, Lord Herrcis likewire remonstrated against

the marriage, and conjured the Q3een, on his knees, to lay aside all 'thoughls of
such a dishonourable alliance. 156. But it has been observed thatHerreisis one of
the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19. Keith 38'3. 2. That he is one
of the witneffis to the marriage articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May 14.
Good. vol. ii. 6i. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May r 7. Keith, 386.
But this rcmonftrance of Lord Herreis against the marriage happened before thlce,
made by Melvil himself, 157. Meivil's remonstrance muff have happened some time
before the meeting of Parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired from
court; he allowed his rage time to subside, and had again joined the Queen, wheln the
wva; fcizcd, April 2-. ,8. The time which must have clapfecd, by this account of
the matter, was perhaps fuflicient to have gained -errels, from being an oppofc,; to
become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Mclvil' may have committed fume mif-
take with regard to this lfabr so far as relates to Lord Herreis. He could not well be
I miiltakcn with regard to what hiifelf did.

'1 Andcrf. vol. i. xo6.

i
, utiers,.

tiers, as a prisoner to his castle of Dunbar. She exprefied neit', r BooIr IV.
furprize, nor terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage committed '--" 7

I567.

on her person, andfuch an insult offered to her authority, but seemed
toyield without firuggle or regret '. Melvil was, at that time, one
cf her attendants; and the officer by whom he was seized informed
him, that nothing was done without the Queen's own content -.
If we may rely on the letters published in Mary's name, the scheme
had been communicated to her, and every flep towards it was taken
with her participation and advice I.

BOTH the Queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to em-

ploy this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent excuse
for her conduct; and while £he could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, she hoped that her reputation, among so-
reigners at least, would escape without censure, or be exposed to
less reproach. Bothwell could not help difirufling all the methods
which had hitherto been used, for vindicating him fiom any con-
cern in the murder of the King, Something was still wanting for
his security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was a pardon
under the Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the most heinous
crime must be mentioned by name in a pardon, and then all leffcr
offences are deemed to be included under the general clause, anld all
other crimes whatfoevcr |I. To fcize the person of the Prince, is
high treason; and. Bothwell hoped, that a pardonobtained for this,
would extend to every thing of which he had been accuscd :*.

BOTII WELL, having now got the Quen's person into his hands, rs divorced

f om his own

it would have been unbecoming either a politician or a man of wir.
gallantry to have delayed confummiating his fchlemes. For this

* Keith, 383. 't Mclv. 158. :1: Good. vol. ii. 37.
1 Parl. 6. Jac. IV. c. 62,. * Anders. vol. iv. I'art ii. 6r.

purpose,

BOOK IV. purpose, he instantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain a sentence

'- 7 of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's
x567.
April 29. filter. This process was carried on, at the fame time, both before

Proteflant and Popish judges; before the former, in the court of
Commiffaries; and before the latter, in the spiritual court of the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's, whose jurifdition the Queen had lately
restored. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
lous. But his authority had greater weight than the justice of his
cause; and in both courts, sentence of divorce was pronounced, with
the fame indecent and suspicious precipitancy *.

WHILE this infamous transaction was carrying on, the Queen

resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the great-
May 3. eft refpe&. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his de-

pendants, conducted her to Edinburgh; but inflead of lodging her
in the palace of Holyrood-houfe, he conveyed her to the cafile, of
which he was governor. The discontent of the nation rendered
*this precaution necessary. In an house unfortified, and of easy access,
the Queen might have been rescued without difficulty out of his
hands. In a place of strength, file was secured from all the attempts
.of his enemies.

ONE finall difficulty itill remained to be surmounted. As the

Qeen was kept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a marriage
concluded in that condition might be imputed to force, and be
May 12. held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in the court

offeffion, and in presence of the Chancellor, the other judges, and
several of the nobility, declared that (lhe was now at full liberty;
and though Bothwell's violence in fcizing her person had, at first,
.excited her indignation, yet his rcfpcEiful behaviour since that time

~ And 1. 132.

8 had

had not only appeased her resentment, but determined her to raise BOOK IV.
him to higher honours *. ---

1567.

WHAT these were soon became public. The title of Duke Is married to

of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell; and on the i th of h Queen.
May his marriage with the Queen, which had so long been the
object of his wiflles, and the motive of his crimes, was solemnized.
The ceremony was performed, in public, according to the rites of
the Protestant Church, by Adam Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, one
of the few prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day, was celebrated in private, according to the
forms prescribed by the Popish religion -.. The boldness with
which Craig, the Minister who was commanded to publish the
banns, testified against the design; the small number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage; and the fullen and disrespectful
silence of the people, when the Queen appeared in public; were
manifelt symptoms of the violent and general diflatisfaciion of her
own fubjeds. The refusal of Du Croc the French Ambaflador to
be present at the nuptial ceremony or entertainnent discovers the
sentiments of her allies, with regard to this part of her conduct;
and although every other action in Mary's life could bejuftified
by the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the principles of vir-
tue, this fatal marriage would remain an inconteftible proof of
her rashness, if not of her guilt.

MARY'S firl: care was to offer some apology for her conduct,

to the courts of France and England. The inflructions to her am-
bafadors still remain, and are drawn by a masterly hand. But un-
der all the artificial and false colouring ihe employs, it is easy to
discover, not only that many of the steps flhe had taken were un-

* Andcrfon, 1. 87. ' Andcrf. 1. 136. 2. 276.

juftifiablc,

BooK IV. jutfifiable, but that She herself was conscious that they could not

be justified *
1567.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was not bestowed

upon Bothwell. Notwithitanding her attachment to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rash
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he Should sign in token of content, all the public
writs issued in her name t. This was nothing more than mere
form, but together with it, he poffeifed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; The was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjeds could ob-
tain audience without his permission; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her+. The Scottifl Monarchs were accustomed to live among their
fubjets as fathers or equals, without diflruft, and with little itate;
armed guards al'anding ai the uoors of the royal apartment, diffi-
culty of access, distance and retirement, were things unknown, and
unpopular.

Endeavours to THESE precautions were necessary for securing to Bothwell the
become maf-
ter of the power, which he had acquired. But, without being mafler of
Prince's per-
foncs pr the person of the young Prince, he elteemed all that he had gained

to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had committed her
son to the care of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
that nobleman were too well known to expect that he would be
willing to put the Prince into the hands of the man, who was so
violently fufpcded of having murdered his father. Bothwell, how-
ever, laboured to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety,

* Andcrfon, 1. 89. t Good. 2. 60. 1 Alnderr, . 136.

which

which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address as well BooK IV.
as authority were employed to persuade,, or to force Mar, into a
compliance with his demands *. And it is no flight proof both of
the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that he preserved a
life of so much importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to violent
attempts against it.

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time,,General in-

dignation

upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during which the
three months.. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in du&excied..
the prime of his days, and in his capital city; the person fufpe&ted.
of that: odious crime suffered not only to appear publickly, in every
place, but admitted into the presence of the Queen, diftinguilhed.
by her favour, and entrusted with the chief direction of her affairs;
fubjeaed to.a trial, which was carried on with most shameless par-
iality, alnd acquitted by a lentence, which served only to confirm:
the suspicions of his. guilt; divorced from his wife, on pretences'
frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, instead of meeting with:
the ignominy due to his acions, or the punishment merited by hisa
crimes, permitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a Queen,.
the wife of the Prince whom he had affafiinated, and the guardian
of those laws which he had been guilty of violating. Such a,
quick succession of incidents, so singular, and so detestable, is not,
to be found in any other history. They left, in the opinion of
foreigners, a mark of infamy on the character of the nation. The:
Scots were held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst scarce
appear any-where in public; and after suffering so many atrocious
deeds to pass with impunity, theywere universally reproached as

*Melv. 16o. Buci. 36.,
VOL,. A. a. a ' men:

BOOK IV. men void of courage, or of humanity, asequally regardless of the
-'567 reputation of their Queen, and the honour of their country *.

The robles THESE reproaches rouzed the nobles, who had been 'hitherto
combine a- amused by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power. The
gainlf her and '
Bothwell. manner in which he exercised the authority which he had acquired,

'his repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's person, to-
gether with some rath threatenings againit him, which he let fall--,
added to the violence and promptness of their resolutions. A con-
fiderable body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into an as-
fociation for the defence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol,
Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tul-
libardin,'Kirkaldy of Grange, andMaitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy t. Stewart Earl of Athol was remarkable
for an uniform and bigotted attachment.to'Popery, but his indigna-
tion on account of the murder of the King, :to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince, overcame, -on this
occasion, all considerations of religion, and united hinm with the mot
zealous Protestants. Several of the other nobles a&ed, without
queflion, from a laudable concern for-the safety of the Prince, and
the honour of their country. But the spirit which some of them
discovered, during the subsequent revolutions, leaves little room to
doubt, that ambition or resentment were the real motives of their
conduct; and that, on many occasions, while they were pursuing
ends juit and necessary, they were aCtuated'by principles and pas-
sions altogether unjustifiable.

THE firif accounts of this league filled the Queen and Bothwell
with great consternation. They were no firangers to the sentiments

* Anders. vol. i. 128, 134. Melv. 163. See Appendix, N°XX.

+ 1;Mclv.ibi, tKeith, 394.

8 r40s

of'the nation, with refpeC to their conduct; and though theirBooKIV.
marriage had not. met with public opposition, they knew that it 1567
had not been carried on without the secret disgust and murmur-
ings of all ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with which
this indignation would burf out, after having been so long sup-
pressed; and in order to prepare for the florm, Mary issued a pro- May 8.
clamation, requiring her filbjeas to take arms, and to attend
her husband by a day appointed. At the fame time, Ihe pub-
lifhed a fort of manifetfo, in which she laboured to vindicate
her government from those imputations with which it had been
loaded, and employed the.ftrongeft terms to express her concern
for the safety and welfare of the Prince her son. Neither of there
produced any considerable effe&c. Her proclamation was ill obeyed,
and her manifesto met with little credit*.

THE confederate Lords carried on their preparations with The Queen

1 y /- * .. ^and Bothwell

.ro les a-ivjty, and with .much .lmore. u.ceis. Among a warlikeretire to Dun-
people, men of so much power and popularity found it an easy bar.
matter to raise an army. They were ready to march before
the Queen and Bothwell were in a condition to refill them..
The castle of Edinburgh was the place whither the Queen
ought.naturally to have retired, and there her person might have
been perfecly fare. But the confederates had fallen on means
to ihake or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the de-
puty governor, and Bothwell durfl not commit to him such an
important trust. He: conduted the Queen to the caflle of
lorthwick, and on the appearance of Lord Home, with a bo-June6.
dy of his followers, before that place, he fled with precipita-
tion to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen, dilguifed in,
men's cloaths. The confederates advanced towards Edinburgh,

* Keith, 387, 395, 396.

A a a 2. where

BOOK IV. where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate the inhabitants to
'---ó' defend the town against them. They entered without opposition,

7 and were instantly joined by many of the citizens, whose zeal be,

came the firmest support of.their cause .

IN order to set their own conduc in the most favourable light,.

.and to rouze the public indignation against Bothwell, the nobles
;published a declaration of the motives which had induced them to
take arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enumerated, all his
wicked intentions displayed and aggravated, and every true Scots-
man was called upon to join them in avenging the one, and in
preventing the other -.

MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar, and as

he had many dependants in that corner, he soon gathered such
strength, that he ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the fuddenneis and secrecy of
their enterprize gave their friends at a distance no time to join them;
and as it does not appear that they were supported either with mo-
ney, or fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they could not
have kept long in a body. But on the other hand, Bothwell durfl
not rifque a delay $. His army followed him with reluctance in
this auarrel, and served him with no cordial affection; so that his
only hope of success was in surprising the enemy, or in striking
the blow before his own troops had leisure to recollea themselves,
or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opinion of his actions, which
had spread over the reft of the nation. These motives determined
the Queen to march forward, with an inconsiderate and fatal
speed.

Kelth, 398. 1- Anderson, vol..i 28. : Keith, 401.

ON

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the confederates ad- BooK IV.

vanced to meet her. They found her forces drawn up on the 1567.
fame ground which the English had occupied before the battle of The nobles

march againit

Pinkie. The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but there them.
was no equality in point of discipline. The Queen's army confiftedJue I.
chiefly of a multitude, hastily aflembled, without courage or expe-
rience in war. The troops of the confederates were composed of
Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their most truity
dependants, who were no less brave than zealous ".

Du CROC the French Ambassador, who was in the field, la- A accommG-

dation at-

boured, by negociating both with the Queen and the nobles, to tempted.
put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of blood. He re-
presented to the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards peace,
and her willingness to pardon the offences which they had commit-
ted. Morton replied, with warmth, that they had taken arms not
against the Queen, but against the murderer of her husband, and
if he were given up to juflice, or banished from her presence, The
should find them ready to yield the obedience which is due from
fubjedts to their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did not
come to ask pardon for any offence, but to punish those who had
offended. Such haughty answers convinced the Ambaflador, that
his mediation would be ineffectual, and that-their passions were too
high to allow them to liften to any pacific propositions, or to think
of retreating after having proceeded so far f-.

THE Queen's army was poRted to advantage, on a rising ground.

The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and
with the caution which was natural on that unhappy field. Her

* Cald. vol ii. 48, 49. 4' Keith, 401.

troops

BooKIV. troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no inclinea-

ó'7-.' tion to fight. Mary, endeavoured to animate them; the wept, lhe

threatened, the reproached them with cowardice; but all in vain;.
A few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager for the en-
counter; the reft flood wavering and irresolute, and some began to
fleal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by of--
fering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own-innocence in,
single combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange,
Murray of Tullibardin, and LordLindfay contended for the ho-
oaur of entering the lifts against him. But this challenge proved:
to be a mere bravade. Either the consciousness of guilt deprived,
Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the Queen, by her authority,
sorbad the combat *.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers, Ma-

ry would have been inexcusable,. had he hazarded a battle. To-
have retreated in the face of an. enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on.which the flood, with part of their cavalry, was utterly
impracticable.. In this situation, the was under the cruel necessity
of putting herself into. the hands of thole fubjeds who had taken-
arms against her, She demanded an interview with Kirkaldy, a
brave and generous man, who commanded an. advanced body of the
enemy. He, with the consent, and in name of the leaders of'
the party, promised that, on condition he: would dismiss Bothwell,'
from her presenc.e, and..govern the kingdom by the advice of her;'
nobles, they would honour and obey her as their Sovereign t-..

odtlwcll ob- DURING thispparley, Bothwell'took his.laft farewell ofthe Queen,
liged to ty. and. rode off the field with a few followers, This dismal reverse

happened exacly one month after that marriage, which had cost him

* Cald. vol. ii. 5., 1' Good. vol. ii, i6.. Mdlv. 65.

so

T'o many:crimes to accomplinh, and .which leaves ho foul a stain .on Boo.'IV..
'Mary's memory.

1567.
As soon as 'Bothwell retired, 'Mary surrendered to'Ki.kaldy, who Mary furren-

ders to the

conduted her toward the confederate army, the leaders of which noble,
received her with much refped; and Morton, in their name, made
ample professions of their future loyalty and obedience *. But she
was treated by the common soldiers with the utmoas insolence and'
indignity. As the marched along, they poured upon her all the op-
probrious names, which are bestowed only on the lowest and molt
infamous criminals. Wherever the turned her eyes, they held up
before her a standard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, firetched on the ground, and the young Prince kneeling
before it, and uttering these words, " Judge and revenge my cause,
O Lord !" Mary.turned with horror from such a :hocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the moif bitter complaints, ale
melted into tears, and could scarce be kept from finking to the
ground. The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and,
in spite of many delays, and after looking with 'the fondness and cre-
dulity natural.to the unfortunate for some extraordinary relief, fle
-arrived there. The streets were covered with multitudes, whom
zeal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an unusual
.scene. The Queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dull,
;and bedewed with tears, was exposed as a fpedacle to her own
subje&s, and led to the Provost's house. Notwithstanding all her
arguments and entreaties, the fame standard was carried before her,
.and the fame insults and reproaches repeated. A woman, young,
:beautiful, and in distress, is naturally the objec of compafion.

* Good, vol. ii. 165.

.The

BooKIV. The comparison of their present misery with their former fplen-
' $~' dour, usually softens us in favour of illustrious sufferers. But the

people beheld the deplorable situation of their Sovereign with insen-
fibility; and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt, and so
great the violence of their indignation, that the sufferings of their
Queen did not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or pro-.
cure her that sympathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate:
Princes *.

* Melvil, 166. Buch. 364..

TH E

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

0 .

S C O T L A Nt Do
SCOTLAND.

B O K V.
T H E confederate Lords had proceeded to such extremitTes, BOOK VL

againit their Sovereign, that it now became almost impof- -57
fible either r them' to 1Uop fhorrt, or to pursue a course Deliberations

of the nobles

less violent. Many of the nobles had;refufed to concur with them in concerning
their enterprize; others openly condemned it. A small circum- the Qeen.
(rance might abate that indignation with which the multitude were,
at present, animated againit the Queen, and deprive them of that
popular applause which was the chief foundation of their power.
These considerations inclined some of them to treat the Queen
,with great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affection for Bothwell continued

as violent as ever; file obflinately refused to hearken to any pro-
pofal for dissolving their marriage, and determined not to abandon
z,man, for whose love she had already sacrificed so much *. If they
fiould allow her to recover the supreme power, the first exertion of
it would be to recall Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his

* Keith, 419, 446, 449. Melv. 167. See Ajpenld N" XXI.
OLT r B b 4S rz nt .

BOOK V. resentment, from her conduct, and from their own, to' expec the:
'"^'ó feverelt effects of her vengeance.. These considerations surmount-
x·567.

ed every other motive; ind reckoning themselves absolved, by
Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the engagements:
which they had come under when she yielded herself a prisoner,

They imp- they, without regarding the duty which they owed her as their
They impri-
son her In Queen, and without consulting the reft of the nobles, carried her.
Lochlevin.

next evening under a firong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and:
signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to detain her
as a prisoner. This caffle is situated in a small. island, in the mid-
dle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near relation of
Morton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's mother. In this
place, under ftrid custody, with a few attendants, and fubjeded to
the insults of a haughty woman, who boasted daily of being the.
lawful wife of James V. Mary suffered all the rigour and mriferies of
captivity. .

IMMEDIATE LY after the Queen's imprisonment, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to strengthen their party; they:entered into;
new bonds of association; they assumed the title of Lords of the
Secret Council, and, without any other right, arrogated' to themselves
the whole regal authority. One of their first a&s of power was
to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concerned in.
the murder of the King. This shew of zeal gained reputation to
themselves, and threw an oblique reflecion on the Queen for her.
remissness. Several fufpe6ted persons were seized. Captain Black-
adder and three others were condemned and executed. But no dif-
covery of importance was made. If we believe some hiflorians,
they were convicted by sufficient evidence. I" we give credit to
others, their sentence was unjust, and they denied, with their last
breath, any knowledge of the crime, for which they suffered t..

* Keith, 403. Note (b). t Cald. vol. ii; 53. Crawf. Mem. 35.

AN

AN unexpeced accident, however,.put into the hands of Mary's BOOK V,

:enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt. Both- - -
well having left, in the castle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing fe-
veral sonnets and letters written with the Qeen's own hand; he now
;ent one-of his confiderts to bring to him this precious depofite.
But as his messenger returned, he was intercepted, and the caiket
seized by Morton *. The contents of it were always produced by
the party, as the most ample justification of their own conduct,
and the most unanswerable proof of their not having loaded their
Sovereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes A.

BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordinary fuc- Some of the
cess, were still far from being perfecly at ease. That so small a otbles favou

the Queen.

part of the nobles should pretend to dispose of the person of their
Sovereign, or to assume the authority which belonged to her, with-
out the concurrence of the reft, appeared to many of that body to
be unprecedented and prefurmptous. Several of these were now
assembled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they
ihould hold, in this difficult conjuncture. The confederates made
tfome attempts towards a coalition with them, but without effect.
They employed the mediation of the Assembly of the Church,
to draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh, but with no
better success. That party, however, though its numbers were
formidable, and the power of its leaders great, soon loft reputa.
tion by the want of unanimity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murmurs and complaints, and no scheme was concerted
for obftruding the progress of the confederates T.

THERE appeared some profped of danger from another quarter. Elzanbct il.
This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without any te"rpois ill rle.

behalf.
aid from Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge [[. And

* Anderson, vol. ii. 92. Good, vol. ii. 90.
l' See Dissertation at the end of the Appendix. : Kcith, 407. ] Id. 415.

B b b 2' though

9~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BOOK V. though fle was far from being displeased to fee the affairs of that

.56.7 kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom file hated, reduced to dif--

trefs; Ihe neither wilhed. that it ihould be in the power of-the one.
faction entirely to-fupprefs the other, nor could fie view the steps
taken by. the confederates without great offence. Notwithstanding
the popular maxims by which, he governed- her own: fubjets, her:
notions of royal prerogat:,,e were very exalted. The confederates.
had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their Sovereign,.
which.they had no right to controul, and had offered.violence to,
her person, which.it was their duty to esteem, sacred. They. had
set a dangerous example to other fubjeas, and Mary's cause be-
came the. common cause of Princes *. If ever Elizabeth was in-
fluenced with regard.. to. the affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of
her heart, rather than. by the considerations of interest, it was on
:ne. 30. this .occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton into Scotland,

with powers. to.negociate both with the .Qieen, and with the con-
federates. in his instructions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and.even for her reputation t.- And. the choice
of an Ambassador,. so devoted to the interest of the Scottish Queen,,
proves this solicitude to.have been sincere.. But neither Elizabeth's.
friendship,. nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail.to Mary.
The confederates forefaw.what would be the effects of these good.
offices; and that, the en,, elatedby the prope of protection,.
would reject with scorn the overtures, which they were about to,
make her. They, for that reason, peremptorily denied Throgmor-
ton accefsto their.prifoner; and what propositions he made to them.
on her behalf, they either refused, or eluded $.

SChemes of ME.AN while they deliberated, with the. utmost anxiety, cont
the confede- cerning the fcttlement of the nation, and the, future. disposal of
I*tc noblea. '

the Queen's person. Elizabeth, observing that Throgmorton made

* Kcltb,412, 415. t Id. 4
I.4 . :1: Id, 417, 427.

ncx

rioprogrefs in his negociations with them, and that they would liften BOOK V.-
to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards that party 7
of the nobles who were assembled at Hamilton; incited them to take
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty, and promised to as-
sift them in such an attempt, to the utmost of her power *. But
they discovered no greater union or vigour than formerly, and be-
having like men who had given up all concern either for their
Queen or their country, tamely allowed an inconffderabe part of
their body, whether we confider it with refpea to numbers, or to
power, to fettle the government of the kingdom, and'to dispose of
the Queen's person at pleasure. Many consultations were held, and
various opinions arose withi regard to each of these. Sbme seemed
desirous of adhering to the plan on which the confederacy was at
first formed; and. after punishing tlie murderers of the King, and
dissolving the marriage with Bothwell; after providing for the safe-
ty of the young Prince, and the security of the Protestant religion-;
they proposed to re-establish the Qeen in the pofl'efion of her le-
gal authority. The success with which their arms had been ac-.
companied, inspired others with bolder and more desperate thoughts,.
and nothing less would satisfy them than the trial, the condemnation
and punifliment'of the QOeen herself, as the principal conspirator
against the life of her husband and the safety of her son t-: the -
former was .Maitland's' fyitem, and breathed too much of a pacific
and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wishes of the
party: the latter was recommended by the clergy, and warmly
adopted by many laics; but the nobles durst not, or would not:
venture on. such an unprecedented and audacious deed J.

* See Append. N° XXII. 1. Keith, 420, 421, 422, 58i.

: The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to have been carried On

by some of her fubjets: at this time we often find Elizabeth boafling that Mary
owed her life to her interposition.. Digges's -Cmpl. Amb. x4, &c. SeeAppendix,,.
N? XVII.L

BOT It..

BOOK V. BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so moderate

I as the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to be persuaded

1567.

They oblige' or forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
the Queen to
resin the go- claimed King, and the Earl of Marray was to be appointed to go-
verment. vern the kingdom during his minority, with the name and autho-

rity of Regent. With regard to the Queen's own person, nothing
was determined. It seems to have been the intention of the con-
federates, to keep her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to
intimidate herself, and to overawe her partizans, they till reserved
to themselves the power of proceeding ,to more violent extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of this

pplan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accuflomed
to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity
for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which ihe was
born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own fubjets, to con-
lent to herown bondage, and to invest those persons, whom ihe
confidered as the authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which she herself was firipped, were points hard to
be gained. These, however, the confederates attempted, and they
did not want means to insure success. Mary had endured, for several
weeks, all the hardships and terror.ofa prison; no profpe& of liberty
appeared; none of her subje&s had either taken arms, or so much
as solicited her relief*; no person in whom she could confide was
admitted into her presence; even the Ambassadors of the French
King and Queen of England were refused access to her. In this
solitary slate, without a counsellor or a friend, under the preflure
of distress, and the apprehension of danger, it was natural for a
woman to hearken almost to any overtures. The confederates took

-* Keith, 425.

advan-

advantage of her condition, and of her fears. They employed Lord B o K V.
Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the party, to communicate their' t-567
fcbeme to the Queen, and to obtain her subscription to those pa-
pers, which were neceffary.for rendering it effectual. He executed.
his commission with harshness and brutality. Certain death was
before Mary's eyes, if ;he refused to comply with his demands. At
the fame time, ihe was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name
of Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe-
derates who were most attentive to her interest, that a resignation
extorted by fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was void in
law, and might be revoked so soon as (he recovered liberty. Throg-
morton, by a note which he found means to convey to her, fug-
geffed the fame thing *. ]' iference to their opinion, as well as
concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing which
was required, and to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented
to her. By one of these, she resigned the Crown, renounced all
share in the government of the kingdom, and consented to the co-
ronation of the young King. By another, fie appointed the Earl July 24,
of Murray Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers and
privileges of that high office. By a third, The substituted some
other nobleman in Murray's place, if he ;hould refute the honour
which was designed for him. Mary, when she subscribed these
deeds, was bathed in tears; and while the gave away, as it were,
with her own hands, the sceptre which (he had swayed so long,
fle felt a pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest, per-
haps, which can touch the human heart t. -

THrE confederates endeavoured to give this resignation all the Jamcs Vr.
weight and validity in their power, by proceeding without delay to C,',y d,','

fen Regent.
* Keith, 4.25. Note (b). Melv. 169. '1 Ibid. 430. Crawls Mem. 38.

7 crown

N.

BOOK V. crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling,

j5 67- on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in presence of all the

nobles of the party, a considerable number of lefler Barons, and a
.great assembly of the people. From that time, all public writs were
issued, and the government carried on, in name of James VI *.

No revolution so great was ever effected with more ease, or by

means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who neither possessed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, -and who never
brought 3000 men into the field, seized, imprisoned, and de.
throned their Queen, and without shedding a single drop of blood,
set her son, an infant of:a year old, Q& the throne.

Reasonings of DURI:NG this apid progress of.the confederates, the eyes of all
-both parties. the nation were turned on them, with astonishment; and various

and coitradicory opinions were formed, concerning the extraordi-
,nary steps which they hadttaken.

:. VEN under-the ariftocratical form .of government, which pre-

vails .in Scotland, said the favourers of the Queen, and notwith-
Sanding the exorbitant privileges ,of the nobles, the prince possesses
considerable power, and his person istreated with great veneration.
No encroachments should be made on the former, and no injury of-
sered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness of
the nation cannot be secured by any other means. Such cafes fel-
dom exist, and it belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at
.1pa to a majority of the society, to judge of their exifgence. By
..hat action could it be pretended, that Mary had invaded .the rights

# Keith, 437.

or

,r'property of her subje&s, or what scheme had she formed against BooK V.
the liberty and'conftitution of the kingdom? Were fears, and sus- i567
picions, andfurmifes, enough to.juftify the imprisoning, and the
deposing a Qeen, to. whom the Crown descended from so long a
race of Monarchs ? The. principal author of whatever was
reckoned culpable in her conduct, was now driven from her
presence.' The murderers of the King might have been brought
to condign puniihment, the safety of the Prince have been secured,
and the Protestant religion have been established, without wrest-
ing the sceptre lout of her hands, or condemning her to perpe-
tual imnprifonment. Whatever right a free Parliament' might
have had to proceed 'to such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever'
name its determinations' might have merited, a sentence of this
nature, passed by a few nobles, without acknowledging or con-
fulting the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion against
the government, and a co'infpiracy against the person of their Sove-
reign.

THE partizans of-the confederates reasoned very differently. 'Tis

evident, said they, That Mary either previously gave consent to the
King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid adcion.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and honours with which
dhe loaded him, the manner in which she suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent fpeed.with which she married a man,
stained with so many crimes, raise strong suspicions of the former,
and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have suffered the supreme
power to continue in the hands of an ambitious man, capable of
the most atrocious and desperate actions, would have been disgrace-
ful to the nation, dishonourable to the Queen, and dangerous to
the Prince. Recourse was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen

VOL. I. C c c had

I But her affeiion towatdhim 7ill cbotimiing unabated; 'her in-
7 digation against the 4athors of this eparation being visible, and

often expreiffd in the frongeft terms.; they, by restoring -her to her
ancient authority, wouAdd have armed her with power to destroy.
themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded
her ah opportunity of pursing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing, therefore, re-
mained, but by one bold. ation to deliver thiemilves and their coun-
try from all future tears. The expedient they had chosen was-no less.
refjeffuil to the.royal bloods thian.neceflary for the public: safety.
'While one Prince was set aside as incapable of governing, the
Crown was placed on his head, who. was the undoubted. reprefenta-
tive of their ancient Kings. ., i

WHATEVER opinion posterity may form on-comparing the argu-

ments of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments we may
entertain concerning' the justice or necessity of that course which
the confederates 'held, it cannot -be denied.thatt their conduct, so
far as rega-rded themflves, was' extremely prudent. Other expe-
dients less rigorous towards Mary might have been found for Let-
ling the nation; but, after the injuries they had already offered the
Queen, there-was rlone foeffestual for. ecuring their ownfafety, or
pepetrpetuat'ng their own power.

To a great part of the nations the condut of the confederates,

appeared not only wife, but just. The King's acceflion to the
throne was every-where proclaimed, and his authority submitted
to without opposition. And though -several of the nobles were fils
assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering into some combi-
nation against his government, an association for supporting it was

formed,,.

-famed, and signed by so many perfli? qs power and influence BooK -V,
throughout the nation, as: entirely discouraged the attempt . 5'- ~

15.67.
TH E return of the Earl. of Murray, about this time, added strength Murray

aflume; the

to the party, and gave it a regular and finished form. Soon aftergovecrmint.
the murder of the King, this nobleman had retired into France, upon
what pretence historians do not mention. During his residence there,
he had held aclofe correfpondencewith the chiefs of the confederacy,
and, at their desire, he now returned. He seemed,, at first, un-
willing to accept the office of Regent. This hesitation cannot be
ascribed to the scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray
wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition to aspire to
this high dignity. He had received the first accounts of his pro-
motion with the utmost fatisfaftion; but by appearing to continue
for some days in fufpence, he gained time to view with attention the
ground on which he was to ad; to ballance the firength and re-
sources of the two contending factions, and to examine whether the
foundation on which his future fame and success mufi reft, were
found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he waited on Mary at

Lochlevin. This visit, to a filler, and a Queen, in aprifon, from
which he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate
the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned among the cir-
cumftances, which discover the great want of delicacy and refine-
ment in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough and uncourtly
in his manner -f, expoitulated so warmly with the Queen concern-
ing her paif condut, and charged her faults so home upon her,
,that Mary, who had flattered herself with more gentle and brother-

* Anders. vol. ii. 231. 1t Keith, 96.

C cc .2 ly

BooK V. ty treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned herself
'-~ -' entirely to despair*. This interview, from which Murray could

j567.

reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so,
revere and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most bitter
circumstances in Mary's life, and certainly one of the most unjuftifia-
ble in his condua..

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray accepted the of-

August 22. fice of Regent, and began to a&in that character without opposition,
Fate of Both- AMIDST so many great and unexpected events, the fate of Both-

wel. well, the-chief cause of them. all, hath been almost forgotten. As-

ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked. for some time among
his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding it impof-
fible for him to make head, in that country, against his enemies, or
even to secure himself from. their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his
kinsman the Bishop of Murray; and when he, over-awed by the
confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he. retired to.the Ork-
ney isles. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he sus-
sered at once the miseries of infamy, and of want. His indigence.
forced him upon a course which added to his infamy. He armed
a few finall ships, which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, endeavoured to procure
subsistence for himself and his followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and
Murray of Tullibardin were sent out against him by the. confede-
rates; and surprising him while he rode at anchor, scattered his
small fleet, took a part of it, and obliged him to fly with a tingle
/hip towards Norway. On that coaf he fell in with a vessel richly
lbden, and immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed with armed.

Keith, 445, 4t6.

boats

boats to its assistance, and after a desperate fight, Bothwell and all BooK V.
-his crew-were taken prisoners. His name and quality were both 57
unknown, and he was treated at first with all the indignity and ri-
gour, which the odious crime of piracy merited. His real charac-
ter was loon discovered; and though it saved him from the infa-
mous death to which his associates were condemned, it could nei-
ther procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his impri-
fonment. He languished ten years in this unhappy condition;
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unassisted by firangers *.
Fewmen ever accomplished their ambitious projects by worse means,
or reaped from them less fatisfaAion. The early part of his life
was restless and enterprising, full of danger and' of vicissitudes. His
enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he attained by so many crimes,
was extremely short; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquieted
by many fears. In his latter years, he fufferedthe most intolerable
calamities, to which the wretched are fubjedt, and from which
persons who have moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempt-
ed;

THE good effets of' Murray's acceflion to the regency were Succes of the

quickly felt. The party forming for the Queen was weak, irre- mini'sration.
solute, and disunited; and no sooner was the government of the
kingdom in the hands of a man f6 remarkable both for his abili-
ties and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was composed loft
all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat separately with the
Regent. So many of them were brought to acknowledge the King's
authority, that scarce any appearance of opposition to the eftablifled
government was left in the kingdom. Had they adhered to the

* Melv. 68.

Queen,

BOOKV. Queen with any firmness, it is probable, from EIizabeth's difpofi-
u.-, 5-. tion at that time, that she would have afforded them such assist-
' 1567.

ance as might have enabled them to face their enemies in the field.
But-there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their councils,
.that she was discouraged from espousing their cause, and the Re-
gent taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to submit to
his government, without granting any terms, either to themselves,
,or to the Qeen -.

TIE Regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get into his

hands the places of strength in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy
governor, surrendered the cattle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtained terms
of great advantage to himself. The governor of Dunbar, who dif-
covered more fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate; some other
small forts surrendered without resistance.

Parliament THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the Regent to
.Decem. 15. call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wanting to confirm the

King's authority, and the proceedings of the confederates, except
the approbation of this supreme court; and after thebfuccefs which
had attended all their measures there could be little doubt of ob-
taining it. The numbers that retorted to an Assembly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of so much importance were great.
The meeting was opened with the utmost solemnity, and all its adts
passed with much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords who
had discovered the warmest attachment to the Queen were present.
But they had made their peace with the Regent. Argyll, Huntly,
and Herreis acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, that their beha-

Keith, 447, 450, 463.

'8 viour

viour towards the King had been undutiful and criminal*. TheirBooK V.
compliance, in this manner, with the measures of the Regent's 1567
party, was either the condition on which they were admitted into
favour, or. intended as a proof of the sincerity of their reconcile-
ment.

THE 'Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de- Confirms the

mand, either for the safety of their ownperfons, or thefecurityofPtheeeding
that form of government which they had eflablilhed in the king-derate's
dom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and. declared.
to be valid. The King's authority, and Murray's election, were
recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the Qeen, and all.
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronounced lawful.
The letters which Mary had written to Bothwell were produced,
and fie was declared to be accessory to the murder of the King +.
At the fame time, all.the acts of Parliament 1560, in favour of the
Protestant religion, were publickly ratified; new statutes to the fame:
purpose were enacted. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was neglected.

'IT is observable, however, that the fame parsimonious spirit pre-

vailed in this Parliament, as in that of 1 560. The Protestant clergy,
notwithstanding many discouragements, and their extreme poverty,.
had, for feveln years, performed all religious offices in the king-
dom. The expedients fallen upon for their libfiftance had hi-
therto proved ineffedual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withstanding their known indigence, and the warm remonstrances,'
of the assembly of the church, which.met this year, the Parliament'

* Anders. vol. iv. 153. See Append. N° XXIII,
t Good. vol. it. 66. Anders. vol. ii. 206.

did,

BOOK V. did nothing more for their relief, than prescribe some new re-

567.^ gulations concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices, which

did not produce any considerable change in the ituation of the
clergy.

1568. A :.EW days after the dissolution of Parliament, four of Bothwell's
Jan4ry3. dependants were convited of being guilty of the King's mur-

der, and suffered death as traitors. Their confeflions brought to
light many circumstances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime; but they were persons of a low rank,
and seem not to have been admitted into the secrets of the confpi-
racy *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal fubmiflion to the Regent's

authority, there fill abounded in the kingdom many secret murmurs
and cabals. The partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatelherault, who, as firfi
Prince of the blood, had, in their opinion an undoubted right to be
Regent. The length andrigour of Mary's sufferings began to move
many to commiserate her cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opi-
nions in religion dreaded'the effects of Murray's zeal. And he, tho'
his abilities were great, did not poflefs the talents requisite for sooth-
ing the rage or removing the jealousies of the different factions. By
insinuation, or address, he might have gained or softened many,
who had opposed him; but he was a stranger to these gentle arts.
His virtues were revere; and his deportment towards his equals,
especially after his elevation to the regency, distant and haughty.
This behaviour offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others. The
.Qeen's faction, which had been so easily dispersed, began again to

* Anders. vol. ii. 165.

gather,

gether, and to unite, and was secretly favoured by tome who had Book V.
hitherto zealously concurred with the confederates *. 5

i$68.
SUCH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards the Mary escapes

from Loch.

Queen, when /he recovered her liberty, in a manner no less fur- levin.
prizing to her friends, than unexpeced by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an opportunity of escaping,
which rome unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
had hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employed all her art to
gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen. As
her manners were naturally affable and insinuating, ihe treated him
with the most flattering diftindion; the even allowed him to en-
tertain the most ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expressions,
as if fie would chufe him for her husband s-. At his age, and in
such circumstances, it was impossible to refill such a temptation.
He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of
May, while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found means
to steal the keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates, to the Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind her,
and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipita-
tion to the boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching the
ihore, was received with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton,
and Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants, waited for
her. She instantly mounted on horseback, and rode full speed to-
wards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived
there that night, without being pursued, or interrupted. After halt-
ing three hours, she set out for Hamilton; and travelling at the
fame pace, she reached it next morning.

. Melv.'1l79. 1 Keith, 469.
VOL. I. D d d ON

BOOK V. ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, whoi, in their

8. 5'- present dilpofition, a much fmaler. accident would have rouzed,

Arrives at ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great
Hamilton,
and raises a and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of fol-
num, rous
,ary. lowers, as formed an army of above 6000 strong. In their pretence,

she declared that the resignation. of the Crown, and other deeds
fle had signed during her imprisonment, were extorted from her
by fear. Sir Robert MelviI confirmed her declaration; and on that,
as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles and chief men
ofher party pronounced all there tranfations void and illegal. At
IMay 8. the fame time, an association was formed for the defence of her per-

son and authority, and subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bishops, eigh-
teen Lords, and many gentlemen of diftintion *. Among them,
we find several who had been present in the last Parliament, and'
who had. signed the counter-affociation in defence of the King's
government; but such sudden changes were then so common, as.
to be no matter of reproach.

Consternation AT the time when the Queen made her escape, the Regent wasz
of the Re-
gent's adhe' at Glafgpw, holding a court ofjuftice. An event so contrary to.
rents. their expectations, and. so fatal to their schemes, gave a great liock

to his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering and irresolute;
others began to carry on private negociations with the Queen; and.
some openly revolted to her fide. In; so difficult a junaure, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depended on his choice,
the Regent's most faithful associates were divided in opinion.. Some
advised him to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The Queen's
army was already strong, and only eight miles distant; the adjacent
country was full, of the friends and dependants of the house of Ha,-

* Keith, 475.

milton,,

miltoi, and other Lords of the Queen's fa&ion; Giargo'r wais a BOOK V.
large and unfortified town his own train consisted of no greater 1568
number than was usual in times of peace; all these reasons pleaded
for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were urged of no
inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well aTfect-
ed to'the cause; the vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple
lay near at hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrive from other parts of the kingdom in a few days;
in war, success depends upon reputation, as much as upon num-
bers; reputation is gained, or los, by the firfl flep one takes; in
his circumstances, a retreat would be attended with all the igno-
miny of a flight, and would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire His prudent

condua

his enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this,Cl
the superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both
to chute with wisdom, and to at with vigour. He declared againit
retreating, and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for tome days, by pretending to hearken to some
overtures, which Ihe made for accommodating their differences,
he was employed, with the utmost induflry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. He was soon in
a condition to take the field; and though far inferior to the enemy
in number, he confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the negociation,
and determined to hazard a battle *.

AT the fame time, the'Queen's generals had commanded herMay 13.

army to move. Their intention was, to conduc her to Dumbar-
ton castle, a place of great strength, which the Regent had not
been able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the governor;

* Buchanan, 369.

D d d 2 but

BOOK V. but if the enemy should endeavour to interrupt their march, they

X'- 68 resolved not to decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no
i568'

resolution could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces was
assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans were soon
expeced; her sufferings had removed, or diminished the preju-
dices of many among her fubjeds ; the address with which she
Surmounted the dangers that obfiru&ed her escape, dazzled and
interested the people; the sudden confluence of so many nobles
added Iuftre to her cause; fie might assuredly. depend on the
friendship and countenance of France; ihe had reason -to expe&
,the protection of England; her enemies could not poflibly look
for support from that quarter. She had much to hope from pur-
suing flow and cautious measures; they had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her pas-

sions impetuous, was so elevated' by her sudden transition from the
depth of difrefs, to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that
she never doubted of success. Her army, which was almost double
to the enemy in number, consisted chiefly of' the Hamiltons, and
their dependants. Of these the Archbishop of St. Andrew's had
the chief diredion, and hoped, by a vicory, not only to crush.
Murray, the antient enemy of his house, but to get the person of
the Queen into his hands, and to oblige her, either to marry one
of the Duke's sons, or at least to commit the chief direction ot
her affairs to himself. His ambition proved. fatal. to the Queen,,
to himself, and to his family '*
Rattle of MARY'S imprudence, in refolvihg to fight, was not greater-

than the ill conduct of her generals in the battle. Between the.

*Anderson,, vol. iv. 32, Melvil, I8gs.

two;

two armies,' and on the road towards Dumbarton, there was an BooK V,
eminence called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the precau- '568.
tion to seize, and poited his troops in a inall village, and among
some gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advantageous fitua-
tion he waited the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the van-guard, ran so eagerly to the
attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen was fierce and
desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed, on
the one flank, to a continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, at-
tacked on the other by the Regent's most choice troops, and not
Supported by the roft of the Queen's army, they were loon ob- The Qeen's
liged to give ground, and the rout immediately became universal. armydefeatedb
Few viCories, in a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have
been pursued with less violence, or attended with less bloodshed.
Three hundred fell in the field; in the flight scarce any were
killed. The Regent and his principal officers rode about, beseech-
ing the soldiers to spare their countrymen. The number of prison-
ers was great, and among them many persons of diftindion. The
Regent marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks to
God for this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless victory *.

DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at no great dif- Hr fligt;

tance, and beheld all that passed in the field, with such emotions
of mind as are not easily described. When ihe saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confusion, her spirit,
which all her past misfortunes had not been able entirely to subdue,

* Keith, 477;
,w~~h M:

BOOK V. funk altogether. In the utmost consternation, she began her flight,5
·"6"" and so lively were her impreflions of fear, that she never closed her

eyes till she reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty
Scottish miles from the place of battle *.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less rapid, than

singular. In the thort space of eleven days, she had been a prisoner
at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies ; the had seen a power-
ful army under her command, and a numerous train of nobles at
her devotion; and now she was obliged to fly, in the utmost dan-
ger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of
her kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even in that retreat; her
fears impelled her to an action, the most unadvised, as well as the
most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her retiring into Eng-
land, a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to have appeared to
her ralh and dangerous.

Resolves on BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual distrust and jealou-
rtring nto fies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All theirfubfequent

tranfations had contributed to exasperate and inflame there pas-
sions. She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and intrigues,
to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to ad-
vance her own pretensions to the Englifi Crown. Elizabeth, who
possessed greater power, and a&ted with less reserve, had openly sup-
ported Mary's rebellious fubjees, and fomented all the dissensions
and troubles in which her reign had been involved. The max-
ims of policy still authorized that Queen to pursue the fame course;
as by keeping Scotland in confusion, she effectually secured the peace
of her own kingdom. The Regent, after his victory, had marched

* Keith, 481.

to

to Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the Qeen had taken, BooK V.
-it was several days before he thought ofpurfuing her *. She might 568
have been concealed in that retired corner, among fubjets devoted
to her interest, till her party, which was dispersed, rather than
broken, by the late defeat, should gather such strength, that she
could again appear with safety at their head. There was not any
danger, which The ought not to have run, rather than throw her-
fils into the hands of an enemy, from whom she had already sus-
sered so many injuries, and who was prompted both by inclina-
tion, and by interest, to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, Elizabeth

had declared against the proceedings of her fubjeds, and solicited
for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appearance of
sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in England, and had
promised to meet her in person, and to give her such a reception
as was due to a Queen, and an ally -. Whatever apprehension
Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs, while ihe had power
in. her hands, she was, at present, the objet, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would be both un-
generous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were fresh in
Mary's memory, and if Ihe should fall a second time into the hands
of her fubjeds, there was no injury to which the presumption of
success might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt efcap-
ing into France, was dangerous; and, in her situation, almost im-
possible; nor could ihe bear the thoughts of appearing as an exile,.
and a fugitive, in that kingdom, where she had once enjoyed all the
splendor of a Queen. England remained her only asylum; and, in
spite of: the intreaties of Lord Herreis, Fleming, and her other

Crawf. Mem. 59. t Camd. 489. Andcr vol. iv. 99. 120. Murdin, 369.

attendants,
4

BooK V. attendants, who conjured her, even on their knees, not to con-

. I5-ó-' fide in Elizabeth's promires or generosity, herinfatuation .was invin-

cible, and the resolved to fly thither., Herreis, by her command,

Her reception wrote to Lowther the deputy-governor of Carlisle, to know what
at Carlisle.

reception he would give her; and, before his answer could return,
her fear and impatience were so great, that she got into a fisher-boat,
May 16. and with about twenty attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cum-

berland, and thence lhe was conducted with many marks of refped
to Carlisle *.

Elizabeth de- So soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote a long letter to
liberates con-
cerning the the Queen, representing, in the firongeft terms, the injuries which
manner of
treating her. mhe had suffered from her own subje&s, and imploring that pity

and affifance which her present situation demanded t. An event
so extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper in con-
sequence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influen-
ced by considerations ofjuftice or generosity alone, they would hot
have found them long or intricate. A Queen, vanquilhed by her
own fubjeds, and threatened by them with the loss of:her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and thrown herself into
the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally, from whom the had
received repeated assurances of friendship and protecion. These
circumstances entitled her to refpet and to compassion, iand re-
_ quired that she lhould either be restored to her own kingdom, or

at least be left at full liberty to Leek aid from anyother quarter.
But with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
what was molt just or generous, but what was most beneficial to
herself, and to the English nation. Three different resolutions might

*Keith, 483. Anderson, vol. iv. 2. + Id. 29..

have

have been taken, with regard to the Qeen of Scots. To re-inflate BOOK V.
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire into France, 568
was another; to detain her in England, was a third. Each of
these drew consequences after it, of the utmost importance, which
were examined, as appears from papers still extant *, with that mi-
nute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers employed in all their
consultations upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were most firmly attached to the English
interest, would quickly feel the utmost weight of her resent-
ment. And as the gratitude of Princes is seldom strong or lasting,
regard to her own interest might soon efface the memory of her
obligations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own pretensions to
the English Crown. Nor was it possible to fetter and circumscribe
the Scottish Queen, by any conditions that would prevent these
dangers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her
return, even without any support from England, would inspire her
friends with new zeal and courage; a single victory might give them
the superiority, which they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to retire into France,

were no less obvious. The French King could not refute his as-
fiftance towards restoring his sifter and ally to her throne. Eliza-
beth would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and if the com-

*Andcrf. vol. iv. 34, 99, 102.
VOL. I. E e e motions

B.OOK V. motions in France, on accaout of religion, were fettled, the. Prices

56,. of Lorrain might resume their ambitious prpjcs, and. the united

forces of France and Scotland might invade England, w.hele it is
weakest and most defenceless.

Resolves to NOTHING therefore remainedbut to detain her-in England; and
detain her in
England. to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her in a.

prison. The former was a dangerous experiment. Her court would
become a place of resort to all the Roman Catholics, to the difaffet-
ed, and to the lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth affected to
represent Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as altogether ex-
travagant and ill-founded, she was not ignorant that they did not
appear in that light to the nation, and that many thought them pre-
ferable even to her own title. If the activity of her emissaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal influence was much
more to be dreaded; her beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the,
admiration and pity which they would excite, could not fail of
making many converts to. her party *.

'TWAs indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary as a

prisoner would excite universal indignation againfl Elizabeth, and
that by this unexampled severity towards a Qeen, who implored,
and to whom she had promised her. protecion, she would forfeit the
praise of justice and humanity, which was hitherto due to her ad-
ministration. But the English Monarchs were often so solicitous to
secure their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about'
the means which they employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had
seized the heir of the Crowi of Scotland, who was forced, by the

* Anders. vol. iv. 56, 6o.

violence

violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his BooK V.
kingdom; and, in contempt of the rights of hospitality, without 568
regarding his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his father,
detained him a prisoner for many years. This action, though de-
tested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to imitate. Her virtue
was not more proof than Henry's had been, against the temptations
of interest; and the poffefion of,a present advantage was preferred
to the profpea of future fame. The fatisfaation which she felt in
mortifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplishments she envied,
had, perhaps, no less influence than political considerations, in
bringing her to this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to
screen herself from the censure which this condut merited, and
to make her treatment of the Scottish Queen look like the effect of
necessity, rather than of choice, she determined to put on the appear-
ance of concern for her interest, and of deep sympathy with her
sufferings.

WITH this view, the instantly dispatched Lord Scroope warden May zo.

of the weft marches, and Sir Francis Knollys her Vice-chamber-
lain, to the Queen of Scots, with letters full ofexpreffions of kind-
ness and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had private in-
ftru&ions to watch all her motions, and to take care that She should
not escape into her own kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary de- Mary de-
manded a personal interview with the Queen, that (he might lay tance intoEli-
before her the injuries which /he had suffered, and receive from ,zabeth'prc
her those friendly offices which the had been encouraged to expect.
They answered, that it was with reluctance this honour was at
present denied her; that while ihe lay under the imputation of a
crime so horrid, as the murder of her husband, their mistress, to

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 36, 70, 92.

E, e e 2 whom

-BOOK V. whom he was Co nearly allied,. could-not, without bringing a itain

568.- upon her own reputation, admit her into her pretence; but, as Coon

as the had cleared herself from that aspersion, -they promised her a
reception suitable to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her dif-
,trefs *.

she offrs to NOTHING could be more frivolous than this pretence. It was
cnddate her the occasion, however, of leading the Queen of Scots into the snare, in

which Elizabeth and her Ministers wished to intangle her. Mary ex-
pressed the utmost furprize at this unexpected manner of evading her
request; but as she could not believe so many professions of friendship
to be void of sincerity, the frankly offered to submit her cause to the
cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs of her
own innocence, and of the falihood of the accusations brought against
her, as ihould fully remove the scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of the

Elizabeth English Queen. This was the very point to which Elizabeth la-
takes advan-
tage of this boured to bring the matter. By this appeal of the Scottish Queen,
offer'. he became the umpire between her and her fubjeds, and had it en-

tirely in her own power to protrat the inquiry to any length, and
to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the mean time,
she was furnished with a plausible pretence for keeping her at a dif-
tance from court, and for refuting to contribute towards replacing
her on her throne. As Mary's conduct had been extremely incau-
tious, and the presumptions of her guilt were many and strong, it
was possible her fubjets might make good their charge againit her;
and if this should be the result of the inquiry, the would, thence-
forth, cease to be the object of regard, or of compafion, and the
treating hw with coldness and neglect would merit little censure.

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 8. 55

ln

In a matter so dark and myflerious, there was no probability that BOOK V.
'Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, so incontefted, as to 568
render the conduct of the English Queen altogether culpable. And
perhaps, her impatience under restraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might engage her in such
cabals, as would justify the using her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages, which would

arise from an inquiry into the condua of the Scottilh Queen, car-
ried on under her diretion. There was some danger, however, that
Mary might discover her secret intentions too soon, and by reced-
-ing from the offer which Ihe had made, endeavour to disappoint
them. But even in that event, she determined not to drop the in-
quiry, and had thought of several different expedients for carrying
it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced that Mary was
accessory to the murder of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance
which it was natural for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza-
beth's justice, and solicited her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her huiband's, to bring the Scottish Queen to a trial for that
crime *. The parents of the unhappy Prince had a just right to
prefer this accusation; nor could ihe, who was their nearest kinf-
woman, be condemned for listening to so equitable a demand. Be-
fides, as the Scottish nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge by sufficient proof;
it would be no difficult matter to prevail on them, to petition the
Q.een of England to take cognizance of their proceedings against
their Sovereign; and it was the opinion of the English council, that
it would be reasonable to comply with the request A. At the fame

* Cambd. 412. Haynes, 46,. t Anders. vol. iv. 37.

time,

BOOK V. time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over Scot-

L-óo8J land began to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pretended
x$68.

that the decision of the contest between Mary and her fubjeds be-
longed of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all
these expedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve, to be made
use of as occasion might require, Ihe wished that the inquiry into
Mary's conduct ihould appear to be undertaken purely in compliance
with her own demand, and in order to vindicate her innocence; and
so long as that appearance could be preserved, none of the other
expedients were to be employed.

WHEN Mary consented to submit her cause to Elizabeth, he was

far from fufpeding that any bad consequences could follow, or that
any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
pe&ed that Elizabeth herself would receive, and examine her de-
fences *; she meant to confider her as an equal, for whose fatisfac-
tion lhe was willing to explain any part of her conduct, that was
liable to censure; not to acknowledge her as a superior, before
whom he was bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a very
different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered herself as chosen
to be judge in the controversy between the Scottih Queen and her
fubjecs, and began to at in that capacity. She proposed to ap-
point commiffloners to hear the pleadings of both parties, and wrote
to the Regent of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to produce what he could alledge in
vindication of his proceedings againlt his Sovereign.

Mary greatly MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable credulity on
offetnded at
Elizabeth's Elizabeth's professions of regard, and expected that so many kind
condut.

* Anders. vol.iv. Io.

XI speeches

speeches would, at last, be accompanied with-me fuotalefit actions. BOOK V.
But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceivecd ' -8
the artifice of Elizabeth's condua, and saw what a diminution it
would be to her own honour, to appear on a level with her re-
bellious fubjeas, and to stand together with them at the bar of a
superior and a judge. She retraced the offer which {he had made,
and which; had been perverted to a purpose so contrary to her in-
tention. She demanded, with more earnestness than ever, to be
admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote to her in a itrain June 30.
very different from what She had formerly used, and which fully
discovers the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart. " In
"my present situation, fays hie, I neither will, nor can reply to
"the accusations of my fubjeds. I am ready, of my own accord,
" and out of friendship to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to
"vindicate my own conduc. My fubjeds are not my equals;
" nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial trial, acknow-
' ledge them to be so. I fled into your arms, as into those of my
,( nearest relation, and most perfect friend. I did you honour,
" as I imagined, in chufing you preferably to any other Prince, to
( be the restorer of an injured Queen. Was it ever known that
< a Prince was blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of
'' those who appealed to his justice, againif the false accusations of
( their enemies ? You admitted into your presence my bastard-

brother, who had been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me
,( that honour! God forbid that I ihould be the occasion of bring-

ing any stain upon your reputation. I expected that your manner
of treating me would have added luRire to it. Suffer me either to
implore the aid of other Princes, whose delicacy on this head,

" will be less, and their refentinent of my wrongs greater; or let
( me receive from your hands that aUfaiance,. which it becomes you,

" more

BOOK V. " more than any other Prince, to grant; and by that benefit, 'bind

;568' t "me to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude *."

June 20. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did
Elizabeth's not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter be-
precautions
against her. fore the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwithlfand-

ing the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scottish Queen, to go on
with the inquiry into her conduct, and till that were finished, it
was agreed that Elizabeth could not, consistently with her own
honour, or with the safety of her government, either give her the
assistance which the demanded, or permit her to retire out of the
kingdom. And left ihe ihould have an opportunity of escaping,
while the resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable to
remove her to some place, at a greater distance from the bor-
ders t.

WHILE the Engliih court was occupied in there deliberations,

Proceedings
of the Regent the Regent did not negle& to improve the vidory at Langfide.
againfd the
aQeen's ad- That event was of the utmost importance to him. It not only
herents. drove the Queen herfelfout of the kingdom, but left her adherents

dispersed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seemed resolved,
at first, to proceed against them with the utmost rigour. Six per-
sons of some distinction, who had been taken prisoners in the battle,
were tried, and condemned to death as rebels against the King's
government. They were led to the place of execution, but by the
powerful intercefion of Knox they obtained a pardon. Hamilton
of Bothwellhaugh was one of the number, who lived to give both
the Regent and Knox reason to repent of this commendable at of
lenity $.

* Anders. vol. iv. 94. f Id. ibid. 10o. Cald. vol. ii, 99.

SOON

SOON after the Regent marched with an army, confiRting of 4000 B6OK V.
horse and ooo foot, towards the weft borders. The nobles in this '56

.i568.

part of the kingdom were of the Queen's faction; but as they
had not force sufficient to obftru& his progress, he must either
have obliged them to submit to the King, or would have laid waste
their lands with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it
was to keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance be-
tween the two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth the Scot-
tifh Queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her desire. After
keeping the field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the Eng-
lifh Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an expedition, which
might have proved fatal to his opponents, ended with a few acts
of severity *.

THE resolution of the English Privy Councilwith regard to Mary's Mar carried

person, was soon carried into execution; and, without regarding her to Bolton.
remonstrances or complaints, she was conducted to Bolton, a castle July 13.
of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire +. In this place,
her correspondence with her friends in Scotland became more diffi-
cult, and any profpet of making her escape was entirely cut off. She
now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though treat-
ed as yet with the respect due to a Queen, her real condition was
that of a prisoner. Mary knew what it was to be deprived of liber-
ty, and dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the remembrance
of her late imprisonment was still lively, and the terror of a new one
filled her mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper junture to renew her
former proposition, that she would susser the Regent and his adhe- July z.
rents to be called into England, and content to their being heard in

* Cald. vol. ii. 99. t Anders, vol. iv. 14.
VOL. I. F f f dcfcnce

BoOK V. defence of their own conduc. And on her Wart, she promnied,

568. whatever ohould be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all her pow-

er and influence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a

Agrees that few limitations, which were far from being unreasonable. Fear,

. an inquiry be

made into her impatience, despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which
condun.

conu the proposition was accompanied, induced the Scottish Queen to

comply *.

Her di.imu- IN order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired nothing so much
lation with as to render the union between them as close as possible, she shewed
regard to re-
igion. a disposition to relax.fomewhat in one point, with regard to which,

during all her past and-fubfequent misfortunes, The was uniformly
inflexible. She expressed a greatveneration for the liturgy of the
church of England; the was often present at religious worship, ac-
cording to the rites of.the reformed church; made choice of a Pro-
teftant clergyman to be her chaplain ; heard him preach against the
errors of Popery with attention and seeming pleasure; and discover-
ed all the symptoms of an approaching conversion -. Such was
Mary's known and bigotted attachment to the Popith religion, that
it is impossible to believe her sincere in this part of her conduct; nor
can any thing mark more strongly the wretchedness of her condi-
tion, and the excess of her fears than that they betrayed her into
dissimulation in a matter, concerning which..her sentiments were, at
all other times, scrupulously delicate.

Augift 18. AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in order to pro-
A parliament
in Scotlamnd ceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to acknowledge the

King's authority. The Queen's facion was alarmed, and Argyll
and Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants, the one

* Anders. vol.ivog109. Hayncs, 468. . Anders. vol. iv. 113. Haynes, 5o09

I in

in the south, and the other in the north of Scotland; began to as- BOOK V.
iemble forces to obftrua this meeting. Compassion for the Queen, --68.-
and envy at those who governed in the King's name, had added so
much strength to the party, that the Regent would have found it
difficult to withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her
cause to Elizabeth, she could not refute, at her desire, to command
her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently till mat-
ters were brought to a decision in England. By procuring this cef-
fation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the Regent's
faction, as she had formerly given to the Queen's *.

THE Regent, however, would not consent, even at Elizabeth's

request, to put off the meeting of Parliament. But we may ascribe
to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-
boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen from exterminat-
ing the other, any appearances of moderation which this Parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The most violent opponents of the-
King's government were forfeited; the reft were allowed itill to
hope for favour -.

No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her cause to her rival, Elizabeth re-

quires the
than Elizabeth required the Regent to fend to York, deputies pro- Regent to de-

f1iCi his con-

perly inftruated for vindicating his condut, in pretence of her cor- du..
missioners. It was not without hesitation and anxiety, that the
Regent consented to this measure. H is authority was already efta-
blifhed in Scotland, and confirmed'by Parliament. To susser its
validity now to be called in question, and fubjeeed to a foreign ju-
rifdi&tion, was extremely mortifying. To accuse his Sovereign be-

* Anders, vol. iv. 125. t Buch. 37 .

F f f 2 fore

BooK V. fore strangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish name, was as

68. odious talk. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to succeed

in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the adverse faction daily
increased. He dreaded the interposition of the French King in its
behalf. In his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had so
much at heart, her commands were neither to be disputed, nor dif-
obeyed *.

Both the THE necessity of repairing in person to York added to the igno-
Queen
and he ap- miny of the ftep which he was obliged to take. All his associates de-
pint Cors- clined the office; they were unwilling, itwould seem, to expose them-

selves to. the odium and danger with which it was easy to foresee that
the discharge of it would be attended, unless he himfelfconfented to
Septem. 18. share these in common with them. The Earl of Morton, Bothwell

Bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn Commendator of Dunfermling, and
Lord Lindsay were joined with him in commiflion. Macgill of
Rankeilor and Balnaves of Halhill, two eminent Civilians, George
Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man whose genius did honour to
the age, Maitland, and several others, were appointed to attend them
as affifants. Maitland owed this diltinftion to the Regent's fear,
rather than to his affetion. He had warmly remonstrated against
this measure. He wised his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependent on that nation. He was de-
firous of re-establishing the Queen in tome degree of power, not in-
consistent with that which the King possessed; and the Regent could -
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whose views were so con-
trary to his own, and who, by his superior abilities, had acquired
an influence in the nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families A.

* Buch. 372. See Append. NO XXV.
t Id. ibid. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melvil, 186, 188.

MARY

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord Livingston, Lord BooK V.

Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Hamilton Commendator of Kilwinning, IS68
Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir J'ames Cockburn of Skir-
ling, to appear in her name*.

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,

Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suflex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Com-
missioners to hear both parties.

THE fourth of Otober was the day fixed for opening the Con- The confe-

ference. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides, the dig- renceatYork
nity of thejudges before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the importance of
the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfadion no less illuftri-
ous, than it was singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, strikes us with an air of magnificence.
Her rival, an independant Queen, and the heir of an ancient race
of monarchs, was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her
ambassadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland, who
represented the majesty, and possessed the authority of a King, flood
in person at her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power her
ancestors had often dreaded, but could never subdue, was now ab-
folutely at her disposal.

THE views, however, with which the several parties consented Views of the

to this conference, and the issue to which they expected to bring it, different par.
were extremely different.

MAR Y's chief object was the recovering her former authority.

* Anders. vol. iv. 33.

'Th!i

BOOK V. This induced her to consent to a menafure, againt which she had
-'ó8o- long itruggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for enter-

taining hopes of being restored to he. kingdom; in order to which,
she would have, willingly, made many concessions to the King's
party; and the influence of the English Queen, and her own impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led her to many
more *. The Regent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
protection to his party, and seems not to have had the moit dif-
tant thoughts of coming to any composition- with Mary. Eliza-
beth's views were more various, and her schemes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honour, and Solicitous
that she should wipe off the aspersions which blemished her cha-
rarer. This flie pretended to be the intention of the conference;
amusing Mary, and eluding the solicitations of the French and
Spanifl ambassadors in her behalf by repeated promises of assisting
her, as soon as {he could venture to do so, without bringing dif-
grace on herself. But, under this veil of friendship and generosity,
Elizabeth concealed sentiments of a different nature. She expeced
that the Regent would accuse Mary of being accessory to the mur-
der of her husband. She encouraged -him, as far as decency would
permit, to take this desperate itep -. And as this accusation might
terminate two different ways, {he had concerted measures for her
future condua suitable to each of there. If the charge against Mary
ihould appear to be well founded, she resolved to pronounce her un-
worthy of wearing a Crown, and to declare that she would never bur-
then her own conscience with the guilt of an ation so detestable, as
the reitoring her to her kingdom .. If it should happen, that what

Anderson, vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. s'Anderson, vol. iv. xi, 45.
Haynes, 487. i Anderson, vol. iv. xn

her

her aecufers alledged, did not amount to a proof of guilt, but onfy' ofBooK V.
mal-administration, she determined to set on foot a treaty for re- 568.-

1568.

floring her, but on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own subjects *. And
as every flep in the progress of the conference, as well as the final
result of it, was in her own power, she would still be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses Ihe would hold; or if there appeared
to be any danger or inconveniency in pursuing either of them, she
might protrac the whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in
inextricable perplexity.

THE conference, however, was opened with much solemnity. Complaint of

the Queen's

But the very first ftep discovered it to be Elizabeth's intention to commissioners
inflame, rather than to extinguish the dissensions and animofities egnthe
among the Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the con-
tending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bring-
ing the Queen to offer pardon for what was palt, or her fubjeas to
promise more dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary, otoaoer 8.
Mary's commissioners were permitted to prefer a complaint against
the Regent and his party, containing an enumeration of their trea-
fonable acions, of their seizing her person by force of arms, corm-
mitting her to prison, compelling her to resign the Crown, and
making use of her son's name to colour their usurpation of the
whole royal authority. And of all there enormities, they required
such speedy and effectual redress, as the injuries of one Queen de-
manded from the justice of another -.

IT was then expected that the Regent would have disclosed the
whole circumflances of that unnatural crime, to which he pre-

* Anderson, vol. iv. 16. - Id. ibid. 52.

tended

BOOKV. tended the Queen had been accessory, and would have produced
i 'Só' evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,

68. the Regent did not even answer the complaints brought against

himself. He discovered a reluctance at the undertaking that office,
and started many doubts and scruples, with regard to which, he
demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself *. His reserve and he-
fitation were no less surprising to the greater part of the English
commissioners than to his own associates. They knew that he could
not vindicate his condu& without charging the murder upon the
Queen, and he had not hitherto shown any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this mystery.

Intrigues of THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most powerful and
Norfolk with
the Regent. most popular man in England. His wife was lately dead; and he

began already to form a projet, which he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with
the Queen of Scots. He saw the infamy which would be the con-
sequence of a public accusation againit Mary, and how prejudicial
it might be to her pretensions to the English succession. In order to
save her this cruel mortification, he applied to Maitland, and ex-
pressed his astonishment at feeing a man of so much reputation for
wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure so dishonourable
to themselves, to their Queen, and to their country; submitting the
public tranfacdions of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publishing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of their Sovereign,
which they were bound, in good policy, as well as in duty, to con-
ceal and to cover. It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were
the fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own conduct. He aifured

* Haynes, 478.

him,

him, that he had employed all his credit, to.difluadehis countryj-BboK V..
men from this measure; and would still contribute, to the utmost i -'

1568.

of his power, to divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to
communicate the matter to the Regent. He repeated and enforced
the fame arguments which he had used with Maitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he must expose himself, by such a vio-
lent action, as the public accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would
never forgive a man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of
infamy on her character. If she ever recovered any degree of power,
his deftru&ion would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it at
her hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him from this, by a pub-
lic approbation of his conduEt. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, she was resolved to give no definitive fen-
tence in the cause. Let him only demand that the matter Should
be brought to decision, immediately after hearing the proof, and
he would be fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions
were, and, by consequence, how improper it would be for him to
appear as the accuser of his own Sovereign *. The candour which
Norfolk seemed to discover, in these remonitrances, as well as the
truth which they contained, made a deep impreflion on the Re-
gent. He daily received the strongest assurances of Mary's willing-
ness to be reconciled to him, if he abifained from accusing her of
fiich an odious crime, together with denunciations of her irrecon-
cileable hatred, if he aaed a contrary part -. All there confidera-
tions concurred in determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the Duke had figgefted.

IlRI demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he proceeded far- Ocober 9,
ther, whether the English commiflioners were impowered to declare

* Melv. 187. Haynes, 573. + Anders. vol. iv. 77. Good..vol. ii. 57.
See Appendix, N XX I.

VOL I. G gg the

BOoK V. the Qean guilty by a judicial a&; whether they would promie. to

tif5. pa i entence without delay; hether the Qteen ihould be kept

undet such tai~ t, as to prevent her from disturbing the govern-
mant nowe eftabiihed in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if she
approved of the proceedings of the King's party, would engage to
protct it for the future *. The paper containing these demands
'was igned by hinfelf alone, without communicating it to any of
his attwendants, except Maitland and Melvil -. Nothing could ap-
pear more natural than the Regent's Solicitude, to know on what
footing he tood. To have ventured on a Step so uncommon and
dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without previously afcer-
taining that he might take it with safety, would have been unpar-
donable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expec that he
would have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered her
commissioners to give him that fatisfation which he demanded. It
became necefTry to tranfinit the articles to herself, and by the light
in which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that:
they .shoud make no flight impression on Elizabeth and her Minis-
ters. " Think not the Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or preci'e.
" Let us view their conduct, as we would with our own to be view-
" ed, in a like situation. The game they play is deep; their estates,
' their lives, their honour are at flake. It is now in their own

power to be reconciled to their Queen, or to offend her irreco-
"verably, and in a matter of oi much importance, the utmost de-

gree of caution is not exceflive :."

WHILE the English commifioners waited for fuller infiruc-

tions with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an answer
to the complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scottish

* Audcr. vol. iv. 55. t' Id. 56. Mclv. 9go. t Anders, vol. iv. 77..

(ueen..

Queen. It was expressed in terms perfeftly conformable to the sys- BOOK V.
tern which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infinua- x$68.
tion of the Queen's being accessory to the murder of her husband;
the bitterness of stile peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with
Bothwell, made it necessary to take arms in order to dissolve it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the keeping
her for some time under restraint; yet nothing more was said on
there fubjeas than was barely requisite in his own defence. The
Queen's commissioners did not fail to reply *. But while the ar- Oaober 17.
tide with regard to the murder remained untouched, there were
only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence towards ending the
contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis.-
fioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conducted in a manner The confer-

which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of these to Weanui-
discoveries which ihe had expected. The distance between York "'r
and London, and the neceflity of consulting her upon every difficulty
which occurred, consumed much time. Norfolk's negociation with
the Scottish Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a Princess so remarkable for her sagacity
in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing through their
.deepest schemes t. Instead, therefore, of returning any answer to
the Regent's demands, (he resolved to remove the conference to
Wefminfter, and to appoint new commissioners, in whom (he could
more absolutely confide. Both the Scottish Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this resolution $.

Anders. vol. iv. 64, 80. t Good. vol. ii. 160o And. vol. iii. 24.

$ Haynes, 484. Andedf.vol. iv. 94.

G g g WE

BOOK V. WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority of her commis-
'15'68 Bloners during the conference at York, and how, by the strength of

their arguments, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced all
their cavils *. The dispute stood, at that time; on a footing, which
rendered her vicory not only' apparent, but easy. Her participa-
tion of the guilt of the King's murder was the only circumstance,
which could justify the violent proceedings of her fubjeas. And
while they induitrioufly avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as
much as that of her adversaries loft by fupprefiing this capital
argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary should not enjoy the fame advan-

tage in the conference to be held at Westminster. She deliberated
with the utmost anxiety, how the might overcome the Regent's
scruples, and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She confidered of
the most proper method for bringing Mary's commissioners to answer
such an accusation; and as she foresaw that the promises with which
it was neceifary to allure the Regent, and which it was impossible to
conceal from the Scottish QTeen, would naturally exasperate her'to a
great degree, (he determined to guard her more narrowly than ever;
and though Lord Scroop had given her no reason to distrust his vigi-
lance or fidelity, yet because he was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-
in-law, (he thought it proper to remove the Queen as soon as possible
to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and commit her to the keeping of the
Earl of Shrewibury, to whom that castle belonged -f,

MaTy's ffpi- MARY began to fufpet the design of this second conference;
cion$ of Eli-
.abth'E in- and notwithstanding the fatisfaAion she expressed at feeing her cause
tentionr l taken more immediately under the Qeen's own eye :, she framed
Oaober 2t,

* Good. vol. ii. 186. 284. 350. + Haynes, 487. 1 Anders. vol. iv. 95.

her

her inftrutions to her commissioners, in such a manner, as to avoid BOOK V.
being brought under the necefity of answering the accusation of -'
her fubjets, if they ihould be so desperate as to exhibit one against
her *. These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circumstance
extremely mortifying. The Regent having arrived at London, in
order to be present at the conference, was immediately admitted
into Elizabeth's presence, and received by her, not only with re-
lpea, but with affedion. This Mary jufily confidered as an open
declaration of that Queen's partiality towards her adversaries. In Novem 22.

Clair's a per;-

the sirss emotions of her-refentment, she wrote to her commis- onal audi-
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the presence of the beth.ife
English nobles, and before the ambassadors of foreign Princes, of
the usage she had hitherto met with, and the additional injuries-
which she had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjeas were
allowed access to the Queen, she was excluded from her presence;
they enjoyed full liberty, the languished under a Iong imprison-
ment; they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
{he laboured under every disadvantage. For these reasons she once
more renewed her demand, of being admitted into the Qeen's pre-
fence; and if that were denied, the inftruted them to declare, that
ihe recalled the consent ihe had given to the conference at Weft-
minster, and protested, that whatever was done there, should be
held to be null and invalid -.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution Mary could have

taken. The pretences on which the declined the conference were
p!aufible, and the junaure for offering them well chosen. But
either the Queen's letter did not reach her commiflioners in due
time, or they suffered themselves to. be deceived by Elizabeth's.

* Good. vol. ii. 349. t Id. ibid. 184.

pro-

BOOK V. professions of regard for their Miltrefs, and consented to the open-

i 68. ing of the conferece *.
Novem. 25. To the commissioners who had appeared in her name at York,

Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon keeper of the Great Seal,
the Earls of Arundel and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil At. The difficulties which obftru&ed the proceedings at York
were quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given to the Re-
gent's demands; nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and
raise objections as formerly. His negociation with Norfolk had
been discovered to Morton by fonim of Mary's attendants, and he
had communicated it to Cecil $. His personal safety, as well as the
continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By favouring
Mary, Ihe might, at any time, ruin him, and by a question which
she artfully ftaried, concerning the person who had a right, by the
law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, she let
him fee, that even without reftoting the Queen, it was an easy mat-
ter for her to deprive him of the supreme direction of affairs i^.
These considerations, which were powerfully seconded by most of
his attendants, at length determined the Regent to produce his ac.
cufation against the Qeen.

The Regent HE endeavoured to leflen the infamy, with which he was fen-
accuses the
Queen of be fible this aaion would be attended, by protesting, that it was with

tnohaetfrorY the utmost relutance he undertook this disagreeable task; that his
and's mur- party had long suffered their condut to be misconstrued, and had

borne the worst imputations in silence, rather than expose the
crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of strangers j but that now
the insolence and importunity of 'the adverse faction forced them

* Anders. vol. iii. 25. t Id. vol. iv. 99. : Melv. 1 9 . Y Haynes, 484.

4 to

to publifli, what they had hitherto, though with lo£s to ttemfelces, BooK V.
endeavoured to conceal*. These pretexts are decent and had
the party discovered any delicacy or refrve, with regard to the
Queen's acions, in the reft of their conduc, might have pafled for
the real principles by which they were influenced. But their former
treatment of the Queen renders it impoflible to give any credit to
there profefions. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
necessity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation,
where no liberty of choice was left him; and was'obliged either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary
with having committed murder.

THE accusation itfelfwas conceived in the strongest terms. Mary

was charged, not only with having consented to the murder, but
with being accessory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the pursuits of
justice by her favour; and the had formed designs no less dan-
gerous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of the li-
berties and constitution of the kingdom. If any of these crimes
hould be denied, an offer was made, to produce the most ample
and, undoubted evidence in confirmation of the charge t.

AT the next meeting of the commifiioners, the Earl of Len- Novemb. z9..

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against
the Queen of Scots, whom lhe accused, upon oath, of being the
author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he pretended,.
would make good what he aUedged. The entrance of a new ac-
tor on the stage, so opportunely, and at a junaure so critical, can.

Anders. vol. i 'rg. t Id. ibid. i11;

scarce

BooKV. scarce be imputed to chance. This contrivance was manifestly

$568-. Elizabeth's, in order to encreafe, by this additional accufatien, the

infamy of the Scottih Queen *.

Hercommir- MARY'S commissioners expressed the utmost furprize and indig-
to anewefu nation at the Regent's presumption, in loading the Queen with ca-
Decemb. 4. lumnies, which, as they affirmed, the had so little merited. But,

inRead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the
charge, they had recourse to an article in their. infructions, which
they had formerly negleted to mention in its proper place. They
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed thei r Mif-
tress's request, of a personal interview, they protested, if 'that were
denied her, against all the future proceedings of the commissioners -.
A protestation of this nature, offered juit at the critical time, when
such a bold accusation had been preferred against Mary, and when
the proofs in support of it were ready to be examined, gave reason
to suspect that the dreaded the event of that examination. This
suspicion received the firongeft confirmation from another circum-
stance; Ross and Herreis, before they were introduced to Eliza-
beth, in order to make this protestation, privately acquainted Lei-
cefter and Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from the beginning,
discovered an inclination towards bringing the differences between
herself and her fubjeas to an amicable accommodation, so the was
still desirous, notwithstanding the Regent's audacious accusation, that
they flould be terminated in that manner .

SuCH moderation is scarce compatible with the strong resent-

ment, which calumniated innocence naturally feels; or with that
eagerness to vindicate itself, which it always dif overs. In Mary's

* Anderson, vol. iv. 12. Id. 133, 158. t Ibid. iv. 134. Cabbala, 157.

situation,

situation, an offer so ill-timed must be confidered as a confeflion of BOOK V.
the weakness of her caafe. The known charater of her commis- '"-*
fioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion
of treachery. Some secret conviction, that the conduct of their
Mistress could not bear so stria a scrutiny, seems to be the molt
probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they endea-
voured to avoid it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre-

tence for reje&ing it. She told Mary's commissioners, that, in the Decem. 4.
present junAure, nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mif-
trefs, as an accommodation; and that the matter would seem to
be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and
to hide her shame; nor was it pofible that the could be admitted,
with any decency, into her pretence, while she lay under the in-
famy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commissioners withdrew; and as they

had declined answering, there seemed now to be no further rea-
son for the Regent's producing the proofs in support of his charge.
But without getting there into her hands, Elizabeth's schemes were
incompleat; and her artifice for this purpose was as mean, but as
successful as any ihe had hitherto employed. She commanded her
commissioners to testify her indignation and displeasure at the Re-
gent's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a subjet, as to
accuse his sovereign of such atrocious crimes. He, in order to
regain the good opinion of such a powerful protearefs, offered to
ihew that his accusations were not malicious, nor ill-grounded.
Then were produced, and delivered to the Englilh commissioners,
the ads of the Scottihn Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's

VOL. I. HI h h authority,

.BOK V. autfiority, and ofethe Qenns feignatin; the cnfeffions of t&f
'-- 68" persons executed for the King's murder; and the fatal cafket-whichF

contained the letters, sonnets, and contract,. that- havo been. already
mentioned.

Elizabeth ELIZABtETH having got.thefe into her pofieffion; -began to lay
treats Mary
with greater aside the expressions of friendship and refpea which she had hith. -
rgour. to used in all her letters to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to!

her, in fich- terms, asif the presumptions of her guilthad amount-
ed alinoft to certainty; she blamed her for refuting to vindicate her-
self from an- accusation which could not be left unanswered,. without
a manifeff injury to her character; and plainly intimated, that un-
less that were done, no change would be made in her present fitua-
tion *. She hoped that such a discovery of her sentiments would in--
timidate Mary, who was scarce recovered from the fhock-of the Re-
gent's attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm her refig-
nation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's authority as Regent, and.
to consent that both herself and her son fliould reside in England,.
under her protection. This scheme Elizabeth-had much at heart ,
die proposed' it- both to Mary and to her commiflioners, and ne-
gle&ed' no argument, nor artifice, that could possibly recommend:
it. Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation, to her
pretensions, and even to her perfonal;fafety. She reje&ced it without
hesitation. " Death, faid'fhe, is less dreadful than such an igno-
, minious flep. Rather than give away, with, my own hands, the

Crown which descended to me from my ancestors, I will part
with life; but the last words I utter; fiall be those of a Queen.
, of Scotland't."'

* Anderson, vol. iv. 179, 183. Good. vol ii. 26o.
*t Haynes, 497. See Appendix,, N° XXVII. Good. vol. ii. 274, 301.

AT

,AT the fame time Ihe seems to have been sensible how open her BOOK V.

reputation lay to censure, while she suffered such a public accufa- 56' .
tion to remain unanswered; and though the conference was now
ldiffolved, {he impowered her cpmmiflioners to present. a reply to
the allegations of -her enemies, in which /he denied, in the strongest
terms,. the crimes imputed to her; and recriminated upon the Re- Decem. z:
gent and his party, by accusing them of having devised and exe-
cuted the murther of the King *. The Regent and his aflociates
asserted their innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to
insist on a personal interview, a condition which the knew would..
never be granted E.. Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own. ho-
nour. But it is evident from the delays, the evasions,. and fubter-.,
fuges, to which both Queens had recourse by turns, that Mary
avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make any further-progrefs
in the.inquiry.

THE Regent was now .impatient to return into ScotIand, I569,
where his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to raise Febr.s ,t

--"- Dismisses the
some commotions. Before he set out,-he was called into the Pri- Regent with-

' ' - '

*

. out either ap-
vy Council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. proving or

condemning

Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had his condu.
been objected to his conduct, which the could reckon detrimen+ ,
tal to his honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had. he, on
the other hand, produced any thing against his Sovereign, on which
the could found. an unfavourable opinion of her actions; and for
this reason, the resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precisely
in the fame.fituation, in which She had found them, at the be-

Good. 2. 285. . Ibid. 283, Cabbala, I57 .

II h h z ginning

,BooK V. ginning of the conference. The Q~uen's commissioners Ver diC
'- X ' miffed much in the fame manner *.

i569.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed so earnefily-

on this conference, upwards of four monthi, such a conclusion of
the whole, appears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. Nothing,,

Bputcretfy however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's original' views,.
party. or more subservient to her future schemes, Notwithltanding her

seeming impartiality, she had no thoughts of continuing neuter r nor
was ffle at any loss on whom to bestow her protection. Before the
Regent left London, she supplied him with a conficerable fum of'
money, and engaged to support the King's authority, to the ut--
most of her power -t.. Mary, by her own conduct, fortified:
this resolution. Enraged at the repeated inflances of Eliza-
beth's artifice and deceit,, which she had. discovered during the
progress of the conference, and despairing of ever obtaining:
any succour from her, Ihe endeavoured" to rouze her--own adhe-
tents in. Scotland to arms, by imputing uich. deffgns to Elizabeth:
and Murray, as could not fail to inspire every Scotfrnan: with: in-
dignation.. ,Murray, she pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the places
of greatef firength in the kingdom ;. and to acknowledge the de-
pendance of the Scots upon' the Englfh nation;. In'rtturn for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of Scot-
land; and, at; the fame time, the question with regard to the Eng-
lifh fucceffioon was to be decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford,
who had.promifed to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account,

* Good.'2. 315. 333. + Id. 213. Carte, 3.478..

of

4,

of these wild and chimerical proje&s was spread indufRriouly a- BOOK V.,
mong the Scots. Elizabeth,, perceiving it was calculated of pur.- 69..
pose to bring her government into difreputation, laboured to de-
stroy its effeAs, by a counter-proclamation, and. became more dic-
gusted than ever with the Scottilh Queen *,

THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the utmof Efforts ofMa-

ry's adherents

tranquillity. But the rage of the Queen's adherents, which had against him.
Been suspended in expectation that the conference in. England would-
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break out with all.
the violence of civil war. They were encouraged, tool by the ap-
pearance of a leader, whose high quality and pretensions, intitled:.
him to great authority in the nation. This was the Duke of Cha-
telherault, who had resided. for some years in France, and was now
sent over by that court with a small supply of money, in hopes;
that the presence of the firt. nobleman in the kingdom would.
strengthen the Queen's faction. Elizabeth had detained him iin
England,. for some months,. under various pretences, but was- ob--
liged at last to. susser him to proceed on his journey. Before his
departures Mary invetfed him with the high dignity of her Lieu-Feb. 25.
tenant General in Scotland,, together with the. fantastic title of her
adopted father..

THE Regent did not give him time to form his party into any His vigorous
regular body. He assembled an army, with his usual expedition, condua

breaks her

and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly,.party.
who composed the chief part of the Qeen's faction lying in very
distant corners of the kingdom, and many of the Duke's depen-.

* Haynes, 500, SPT, See Append. No XXVIII.

dante

BooK V.t dants having fallen, or having been taken in the battle of Langlidec

5- ,-. the spirit and strength of his adherents was totally broken,, and an

accommodation with the Regent was the only thing, which .could
prevent the defiruction of his.eftate and vaflals. This was effected
without difficulty; and on no unreasonable .terms. The Duke pro-
mifed to acknowledge the authority both of the King and of the
Regent; and to claim no jurifdi&ion in confequenee of the com-
mission, which he had, received from the Qeen.. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the a&,. which had. passed for attainting
several of the Queen's adherents; to restore all,..who would sub-
mit to the King's.government, to the possession of:their estates and
honours; and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties should. be fettled by mutual consent. The
Duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty; and,
in token of.their ficerity, he and Lord Herreis. accompanied the
Regent to Stirling, and visited the young King. The.Regent set
at liberty the prisoners. taken at Langfide, .*

ARGYLL dnd Huntly refused to.be included in this treaty. A fe-

cret negociation was carrying on, .in England, in favour of the
captive Queen, with so .much success, that her affairs began to wear
a better afpeat, and her return into her own kingdom seemed to be
an event not very -distant. The French King had lately obtained
such advantages over the Hugonots, that the extinction of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
meItic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from protecting
her friends in Britain. These circumstances not only influenced
Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impression on .the Duke,

*.Catbala, 161. Crawf. Mer. io6,

that

tiat he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and plainly discovered BooK V..-
that he wished to evade .the accomplishment of the treaty. The 69
Regent saw the danger of allowing the Duke to ihake himfelfloofe,
in this manner, from his engagements; and instantly formed a re-
solution equally bold, and politic. He commanded his guards to'
seize Chatelherault in his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had
come, in.order to attend the Convention agreed upon; and, regard-
less either of his dignity as the firif nobleman in the kingdom, and
next heir to the Crown, or of the promises of personal security, on.
which he had relied, committed him and Lord Herreis,. prisoners April 16..
to the caftle..of Edinburgh.*. A. blow so fatal and unexpected di-
spirited the party. Argyll submitted to.the King's government, and
made his peace with the Regent, on very easy terms; and .Huntly,
being left alone,, was at last obliged to lay down his arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought let- July =r.
ters to the Regent both from the English and Scottish Queens. AA Propof1'0in

,

. . . .^- favour of Ma- -

Convention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza- ry rejeced.
beth's letter contained three different proposals with regard to
Mary; that.fle should either be restored to the full possession of
her former. authority; or be admitted to reign jointly with the
King her son; or at. least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in some
decent retirement, without any share in the administration of go-
vernment. These overtures were extorted by the importunity of
Fenelon the French ambassador, and have some appearance of be-
irng favourable to. the captive Queen. They were, however, per-
fetly suitably to Elizabeth's general system with regard to Scottish'
affairs. Among propositions so unequal and difpropprtionate, she

'Crawf, Mem. li. Melv. 202,

7i easily

·BOOK V. eafilyfaw where the choice wolAd fall. The two formerwere e-

ISc;9 jetred; and long delays must neceffarilyhave intervened, and many

difficulties have arisen, before every circumstance relative to the lat
could be finally adjusted *.

MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found inva-
lid, should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This fa-
-tal marriage was the principal source of all the calamities ihe had
endured for two years; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries, her reputation had suffered by that ftep. It was
her interest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy to account

Norfolk's for her long silence with refpec to this point. Her particular mo-
kcheme for
marrying the tive for proposing it, at this time, began to be so well known, that
Qotn of the demand was rejeted by the Convention of estates. They im-

puted it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her eager-
ness to conclude a marriage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the object of that secret negociation in Eng-

land, which we have already mentioned; but, like all those con-
certed for the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first conceived this
scheme. During the Conference at York, he communicated it to
the Duke himself, and to the Bishop of Ross. The former readi-
ly closed with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The latter
confidered it as a probable device for restoring his Mistress to li-
berty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor was Mary, with
whom Norfolk held a correspondence, by means of his sifter Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have restored her to

* Spotfwood, 230.

her

her kingdom, with so much splendor *. The sudden removal of BooK V.
the conference from York to Westminster suspended, but did not 156.
break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were flill the Duke's
prompters, and his agents; and many letters and love-tokens were
exchanged between him and the Queen of Scots.

BuT as he could not hope, that under an administration so vigi- Conceals it

from Eliza-

lant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long concealed, beth.
he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of openness and can-
dor, an artifice which seldom fails of success. He mentioned to her
the rumour, which was spread of his marriage with the Scottish
Queen; he complained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif-
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full of
contempt, both for Mary's characer, and dominions. Jealous as
Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the Qeen of Scots, she
seems to have credited there professions t. But, instead of difcon-
tinuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and ad-
mitted into it new afrociates. Among there was the Regent of Scot-
land. He had given great offence to Norfolk, by his public accufa-
tion of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which he had en-
tered at York. He was then ready to return into Scotland. The
influence of the Duke, in the North of England, was great. The
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the most powerful
noblemen in that part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the Regent, the injuries which he had done his Sovereign. In or-
der to secure his safe retreat, he addressed himself to Norfolk, and,
after some apology for his past conduct, he insinuated that the

* Camd. 419. Haynes, 573. State Trials, ., 73.
t Haynes, 574. State Trials, I. 79, ,o.
VOL. I. I i i Duke's

BoOK V. Duke's scheme of marrying the Qeen his sifter was no lefs.accept-

--óJ able to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms:; and that he would
i569.

concur, with the utmost ardor, in promoting so defireable an
event *. Norfolk heard him with the credulity, natural to those,
who are passionately bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
Earls to desist from any hostile attemptfagainft Murray, and to that
he owed his passage through the Northern counties, without dif--
turbance.

Gains the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Regent, he next at--
consent of the
Englilh no- tempted to draw the English nobles to approve his design. The
bles. nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept

the question with regard to the right of succession undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated England for
more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the
houses of York and Lancaster, was still recent. Almot the whole
ancient nobility had periihed, and the nation itself had been brought
to the brink of deftrucion, in that unhappy contest. The Scottish
Q.een, though her right of succession was generally held to be
undoubted, might meet with formidable competitors. She might
marry a foreign and a Popish Prince, and bring both liberty and
religion into danger. But, by marrying her to an Englishman,
a zealous Protestant, the mofft powerful and most universally be-
loved of all the nobles, an effectual remedy seemed to be provided
against all these evils. The greater part of the Peers, either di-
recly, or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary projet. The Earls
of Arundel, Pembroke, Leiceffter, and Lord Lumley subscribed a
letter to the Scottish Queen, written with Leicester's hand, in which.

* And. 3. 34.

thqy

'they warmly recommended the match, but infiafed, by way of pre- Booi V.
liminary, on Mary's promise, that she should attempt nothing, in i569.
consequence of her pretentions to the English Crown, prejudicial
to Elizabeth or to her posterity; that ihe should content to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms; that the should
confirm the present establishment of religion in Scotland; and re-
ceive into favour such of her fubjeds as had appeared in arms against
her. Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying there ar-
ticles, they engaged that the English nobles would not only con-
cur in restoring her, immediately, to her own throne, but in fe-
curing to her that of England, in reversion. Mary readily con-
sented to all these proposals, except the second, with regard to
which, she demanded some time for consulting her ancient ally the
French King *.

THE whole of this negociation was industriously concealed from

Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scottish Queen was well known,
nor could it be expected, that she would willingly come into a
measure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation, and to in-
crease the power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much confe-
quence to the nation, the taking a few steps without her knowledge,
could scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every person con-
cerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, declared that nothing
should be concluded without obtaining her content, the duty and
allegiance of fubjees seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light. Those who
conduted the intrigue, had farther and more dangerous views. They
saw the advantages which Mary procured by this treaty, to be pre-
sent and certain; and the execution of the promises which she came

* Anders. vol. iii. 51. Camd. 420.

I i i a under,

BOOK V. under, to be distant and uncertain. They had early communij.

1 69. cated their scheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and obtained '

their approbation *. A treaty, concerning which they consulted
foreign Princes, while they concealed it from their own Sovereign,
could not be deemed innocent. - They hoped, however, that the
union of so many nobles would render it necessary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, that a combination so firong
would be altogether irresistible; and such was their confidence of
success, that when a plan was concerted, in the north of England,
for refcuing-Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who
was afraid that if the recovered liberty, her sentiments in his favour
might change, used all his interest to diffwade the conspirators from
attempting it --.

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord Boyd arrived'

from England , and, besides the letters which he produced pub-
lickly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk. and:Throgmorton
to the Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the most fan-
guine hopes. The whole nobility of England concurred, siid they,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjusted; nor- was
it possible that a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so much art,
and flupported both by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or
be defeated' in the execution. Nothing now was wanting, but the
concluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haften that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would remove the only
obstacle that flood in the way. This was expeted of him, in con-
sequence of his promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would not fail to fulfil
these engagements $.

* Anders. vol iii. 63. t Camd. 420. T Igaynes, 520. Spots, 230.
See Appendix, NO XXIX,

BUT

BUT the Regent was now in very different circumitances, from BOOK V.

those which had formnerly induced him to affect an approbation of C56
Norfolk's schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own power muff
be the first consequence of the Duke's success. And if the Queen,
who confidered him as the chief author of all her misfortunes, should
recover her ancient authority, he could never expeEt favour, nor
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined a flep so fatal
to himself, and which would have eftablilhed the grandeur of ano-
ther on the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But,
as every other circumstance was fettled, the Bishop of Ross,. in name
of his Mistress, and the Duke, in person, declared, in presence of
the French Ambassador, their mutual content to the marriage, and
a contract to this purpose was signed, and entrusted to the keeping
of the Ambassador *

THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could not long.Augut 13.

remain a secret. It began to be whispered at court; and Elizabeth Eliasbethe di-
calling the Duke into her presence, expressed the utmost indigna- Dukes de-
tion at his conduct, and charged him to lay aside all thoughts of fats it.
prosecuting such a dangerous design. Soon after, Leicester, who
perhaps had countenanced the projet with no other intention, re-
vealed the whole circumitances of it to the Queen. Pembroke,
Arundel, Lumly, and Throgmorton were confined, and examined.
Mary was watched more narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl
of Huntington, who pretended to dispute with. the Scottish Queen
her right to the succession, being joined in commission with Shrews-
bury, rendered her imprisonment more intolerable, by the excess
.of his vigilance and rigour --. The Scottish Regent, threatened.

* Carte, vol. iii. 486. ' HIayncs, 525, 2r', .o,0 532..

witfl

BOOK V. with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke.. :puthis

L"T9' letters in her hands; and furnished all the intelligence in his power'.

The Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-
tempt of a summons to appear before the Privy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imprisonment of his afbo-
ci.tes; coldly received by his friends in that county; unprepared for
a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some
Oaober 3 days, and at last obeyed a second call, and repaired to Windsor.

He was first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then sent to
the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble fubmiflion to Elizabeth, giving
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen --. During the progress of Norfolk's ne-
gociations, the Queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt
of their issuing in her restoration to the throne, with an increase of

Maitland im- authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that
prisoned by
,thp Regent. party, and the person, whose adtivity and abilities the Regent

chiefly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He continued to foment
the spirit of difaffetion in Scotland, and had reduced from the Re-
gent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former aflociates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not reckon his own
power secure. For this reason, he employed Captain Crawfurd, one
of his creatures, to accuse him of being accessory to the murder
of the King; and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He would soon have been brought to trial, but was
saved by the friendship of Kirkaldy, governor of the cattle, who,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the Regent, got him
.out of the hands of the person, .to whose care he was committed,

* See Append. N" XXX. t Haync, 520, 597.

and

and condu&ed him into the castle, which, from that time, was el- Boolc V.
tirely under Maitland's command. The loss of a place of so much -ó-'
importance, and the defetion of a man so eminent for military
skill as Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into some difreputation, for
which, however, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly com-
penfated.

THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottish Q.,een to liber-A rebellion

again f El;za-

ty having been discovered, and disappointed, an attempt was made, beth by Ma--
to the fame purpose, by force of arms; but with no better fuc-r
cess. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, though
little distinguished by their personal merit, were two of the most
ancient and powerful of the English peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they possessed that influence over
the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the popular and martial
families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attached to the
Popish religion, and discontented with the court, where new men,.
and a new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in England,
they had warmly espoused her interest; and zeal for popery, oppo-
fition to the court, and commiseration of her sufferings, had en-
gaged them in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding the
vigilance of her keepers, they held a close correspondence with her,
and communicated to her all their designs *. They were privy to
Norfolk's schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded did
not suit their ardor and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottifli
Qeen was not their sole object. They aimed at bringing about a..
change in the religion, and a revolution in the government of the
kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the aid of the King of
Spain, the. avowed and zealous patron of Popery in that age. No--

* Iaynes, 595. Murdin, 44, 62, &c..

7, thing

BooK V. thing could be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or

"" more neceflary towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,

than the involving England in the confusion and miseries of a civil
war. The Duke of Alva, by his direcion, encouraged the two
Earls, and promised, so soon as they either took the field with their
forces, or surprised any place of strength, or rescued the Queen of
Scots, that he would supply them both with money, and a itrong
body of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dif-
guise of a sailor, founded the ports where it would be most pro-
per to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablefi officers,
was dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling some commer-
cial differences between the two nations; but in reality, that the
rebels might be sure of a leader of experience, so soon as they ven-
tured to take arms *.
Defeated. THE conduc of this negociation occasioned many meetings and

messages between the two Earls. Elizabeth was informed of these;
and though she fufpe&ed nothing of their real design, she con-
cluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's confidents.
They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to court. Con-
fcious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving obedi-
ence, A second, and more peremptory order was issued. This
they could not decline, without thaking off their allegiance. And

November as no time was left for deliberation, they instantly ereaed their
November 9'

Standard againit their Sovereign. The re-eftabliihing the Catho-
lic religion; the fettling the order of fucceflion to the Crown; the
defence of the ancient nobility; were the motives they alledged to
justify their rebellion t. Many of the lower people flocked to
them, with such arms as they could procure; and had the capacity of

* Carte, vol. iii. 489, 490. Camd. 421. f Strype, vol. i. 547.

4 the

the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprize, it muf BooK V.
have soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth a&ced with , 6;
prudence and vigour; and was served by her fubjecas with fidelity
and ardor. On the first rumour of an infurretion, Mary was re-
moved to Coventry, a place of strength, which could not be taken
without a regular siege; a detachment of the rebels, which was
sent to rescue her,' returned without success. Troops were assem-
bled in different parts of the kingdom; as they advanced, the male-
contents retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away,
and their spirits funk. Despair and uncertainty whither to direct
their flight, kept together, for some time, a small body of them,
among the mountains of Northumberland. But they were at length December z r..
obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottish
borderers. The two Earls, together with the Countess of Nor-
thumberland, wandering for some days in the waftes of Liddifdale,
were plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the sea-
son, and left destitute of the necessaries of life. Weftmoreland was
concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherft, and after-
wards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized.
by the Regent, who had marched with some troops towards the
borders, to prevent any impression the rebels might make on those
mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of the church, Churchaffaiis.

for two years, have almost escaped our notice. Its General Assem-
blies were held regularly; but no business of much importance
employed their attention. As the number of the Protestant clergy
daily increased, the deficiency of the funds, set apart for their sub-
fiftance, became greater. Many efforts were made towards recover-

* Cabbala, 171. Camdcn, 42,
VOL.. t K k k i lg

BOOK V. ing the ancient patrimony of the church, or at least so. much of it,
-I-'"-'J as was possessed by the Popish incumbents, a race of men, who were,

now, not only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But though
the manner in which the Regent received their addresses and conm
plaints, was very different from that to which they had been ac-
customed, no effecual remedy was provided; and while they sus-
sered intolerable oppression, and groaned under extreme poverty,
fair words, and liberal promises, were all they were able to obtain *.

1570. ELIZABETH began now to be weary of keeping such a danger-

Flizabeth re- ous prisoner as the Scottifll Queen, During the former year, the
s\lves to give
up Mary to tranquillity of her government had been disturbed, first by a secret

g combination of some of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others

and The often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the
bidden caife of both. Many of her own fubjeas favoured, or piti-
ed the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly interested in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, she foresaw, would be made the pretext or
occasion of perpetual cabals and insurrections among the former,
and might expose her to the hostile attefnpts of the latter. She re-
solved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose security, no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from rc-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpose
was carried some length, when it was discovered by the vigilance
of the Bishop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanifli
Ambafadors, remonstrated against the infamy of such an action,
and represented the surrendering the Queen to her rebellious sub-
jecs, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth flould, by her own au-
thority, condemn her to instant death. This procured a delay

* COld vol. 11. 80, &c,

and

and the murder of the Regent prevented the.revival of that de- BooK.V.
sign*. r, o '

1570.

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person who committed Butheisjaur-

this barbarous action. He had been condemned to death soon after dred.
the battle of Langfide, as we have already related, and owed his
life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his efiate had been be-
ilowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who seized his house,
and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, she became furiously mad. This injury
made a deeper impression on him, than the benefit he had receiv-
ed, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged upon the Re-
gent. Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private resentment..
His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded the enterprize. The max-
ims of that age justified the molt desperate course he could take to
obtain vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time, and
watched for an opportunity to strike the blow. He resolved at
last to wait till his enemy thould arrive at Linlithgow, through
which be'was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He
took his Rand in a wooden gallery, which had a window towards
the itreet; spread` a feather-bed on the floor; to hinder the noise of
his feet from being heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that:
his ihadow might not be observed from without; and after all this
preparation, calmly expected the Regent's approach, who had
'lodged during the night in a houft not far d'istant. Some indif-
tint information of the danger which threatened him, had been
conveyed to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it, that
he resolved to return by the fame gate through which he had en-
tered, and to fetch a compass round the town. But as the croud.

* Carte, vol. iii. 4.9; Andcrfon, vol. iii. 84..

K k k 2 about

BOOK V. about the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted with fear,

'-J' he proceeded directly along the street; and the throng of the people

obliging him to move very slowly, gave the affaflin time to take so
true an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet, through the
lower part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentleman who
rode on his other fide. His followers instantly endeavoured to break
into the house whence the blow had come, but they found the door
strongly barricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton
had mounted a fleet horse, which stood ready for him at a back pas.
sage, and was got far beyond their reach. The Regent died the
fame night of his wound *.
is claraer. THERE is no person, in that age, about whom historians have

been more divided, or whose charater has been drawn with such
opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military skill, sagacity and
vigour in the administration of civil affairs, are virtues, which even
his enemies allow him to have possessed, in an eminent degree.
His moral qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to be
praised, nor censured, without great reserve, and many diftintions.
In a fierce age, he was capable of using victory with humanity, and
of treating the vanquished with moderation. A patron of learning,
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown, or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which distinguished him, even
at a time, when profeflions of that kind were not uncommon.
His confidence in his friends was great, and inferior only to his
liberality towards them, which knew no bounds. A disinterested
passion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to oppose the
pernicious system, which the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the
QCeen-mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland, he

* Buchan. 385. Crawf. Mem. 124.

served

served her with a zeal and affetion, to which he sacrificed the BOOK V.
friendship of those who were most attached to his person. But, " o
on the other hand, his ambition was immoderate; and events hap- I5
pened, that opened to him vast profpeds, which allured his en-
terprifing genius, and led him to actions, inconsistent with the
duty of a subjet. His treatment of the Queen, to whose boun-
ty he was so much indebted, was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The
dependance on Elizabeth, under which he brought Scotland, was
disgraceful to the nation. He deceived and betrayed Norfolk, with
a baseness unworthy of a man of honour. His elevation to such
unexpected dignity, inspired him with new passions, with haugh-
tiness and reserve; and instead of his natural manner, which was
blunt and open, he affected the arts of diflimulation and refinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flattery, and impatient of ad-
vice, his creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him astray, while
his ancient friends flood at a distance, and predicted his approaching
fall. But, amidst the turbulence and confusion of that factious pe-
riod, he dispensed justice with so much impartiality, he repressed
the licentious borderers with so much courage, and eftablilhed such
uncommon order and tranquillity in the country, that his admi-
niftration was extremely popular, and he was long and affection-
ately remembered among the commons, by the name of the Good
Regent.

The EN D of the F Rs V L U M E.

# BOOKS printed for, and sold by A. MILLAR in the Strand, LONDON.

B 0 0 K S printed for, and fold by A. M I L L A R in the Strand,

L o N D 0 N.

FOL 1O.
I. H E HiJlory and Antiquities of Scotland, from the earliest Account of Time, to the

Death of 7ames I. anno '437. By William l1aitland, F. R. S. And from that
Period to the Acccr/'n of fames V'1. to the Crostn of England, Anno 1603. -'By an-
other Hand. The whole compiled from the most authenticlk Vouchers.

It ought to he oifci.ved, that as it w.as soar many Centuries the Policy of both England and

France, to be allied wvith Scotland, so there is no ur:lefianding the HiJtories of those Nations,
vwtóbouot a tho' cugh Kenoswlcdge of th.t of the Scots, qzvhih hsote.ver canlot be obtained
si.on a.ny itiory of that People hitherto publljhe d.
z. An ULl.ivefl Hi,/ior)', flom the earlielt Account of time to the prefcnt. Illulratcd
with Maps, Cuts, Chronological and other 'ables. In to vols. or 21 in Svo.

3. The Hlltory of the Grc.vth and Decay of the Otlhman Em/ir-c, in z Parts, adorned with
za Hcads of the Tikl/h Emprerrs. Tranflared from the Latin of Den:ctriu s Cactctr.r, late
Prince of AMo/da-va. By N. Tiii/al, M. A.

.. A Com.yliee Sflem of Gesgraphy : Illuflrated with 7o Maps. In z vols.
;. BJAijop Burnct's Hj/frj cf his owns Times. In 2 vols. or 4 vols S8o.
~i/hop Bun et's Hijlory of the Reformation of the Church of ENiglan.t. The 3d Part. Being
a Supplement to the z vols. formerly published.

6. Britannsia: Or, a Chorographical D)cfcription of CG-rt-Britani and Ireland. Written by

WIliiami Cainzen, C'arenceux King at Arms; and tranfla.ed into Enrgl/h, with Addi:ions and
Improvements. Revised, digelted and published, with large Additions, by Edn. Gil/soi, D. D.
late Lord Biflop of London. The 3d Edition. Illullrated with Maps of all the Counties, and
Prints of the Br/tif, Roman, and Saxon Coins. In z vols.

,. The genuine lorks of Flavins JfiVph.s, the 7cwijh Hillorian. Translated from the

Origin.d Greek, according to Ha.cernamp's ;.ccurate Edition, into English. With an Account
of the yc-vci/ Coins, Weights, and Measures. In z vols. Royal Paper. By William WFhi/lon,
M. A. some Time Professor of the Mathematicks in the University of Cataridge.
The fame Book in r vol. on a smaller Paper, or in 4 vols. in Svo.

U A R 0.
S, /A New Hillory of Great-Britain. In z vols. Vol. I. Containing the Reigns of

A. 'm7aes I. and C/,a-rls I. Vol. II. Containing the Commonwealth, and the Reigns

of Charsl II. and amencs I1. By David Hlime, Efq;

9. Efliys and Treatises on fcvcral SubjeEts, inl . vol. By David Hume, Efq; To whicl
is added, an index.

Tlhe fname, in 5 vols. lino.
o1. Memoirs ot the Reign of :2teen Elizabeth, fiorn the Year 1551, till her D,'ath. By Tao-
miirs lirch, D. I). F. tR. S. In z vols.

1. 'The H-illory of Philosophy: Containing the Lives, OPniars, .'/iOns, and DiJor,/.l of

the 'h lijhXr, of every Sei. By Thimar Stanley, Efq; T'le I' Foullrt Eition. In swhichl tlhe
ia!,ocernl e M flakes, both in the 'Text and Notes of all former Eilitions are corrc.tcd; the Ci.
tt!iols and i];el rce cxnttly adjullcd, and compared throughcut with the Originals, and with
tile Latin pT'm./Ilstion, plinted at L.eifick.

12. An Iilloric:l Aolnt of' tlhe irilit Trade over tle C.ian iea:; with the Author's
Jourlal of lr:avl floinm ELngland throuLli RunJia into Perria; and back through Ruil/iA., ('-

an

. .!y', and IolNan/ . To wliichl are added, thce Revolutions of l'erfi/ du.ring the prclent rCel-

tury, wit l the particilar I illoiy of the Great Usurper ANa.i K;s,/i. Illufiratd with IMaps
rlil (CopL'tr-pilaltc 'he zd El'diionl, reviscd and corrcttcd. Il : vols. By :j.nrs 1laiOuiy,
Merchant.

~~~4.~ ~ ~ ~~1 O L .
4

tit H. B O O K S printed for,' ad fold by A. M L L A

-;:' ' pS 0 L I L;

i~ rA . .4
7 C. iugfli iThaani Hiforia ii Temporis. Edita per S. Bickley. In 7. vols.

.r. , The /Works of the Hon. Robert Boyle. To which is prefixed, A new Account of hs
Lfe, confifing partly of Memoirs, drawn up by himself. In 5 vols.

15. The Works of Francis Bacon, Lord High Chancellor of England. With. several addi,

;iana!Pieces, never before printed in any Edition of his Works. To which is prefixed, a new
Life of the Author. By Mr. Mallet. In 3 vols. The 3l Edition.

The Additiinal Pieces and Life may be had alone, to complete the first Edition of.the 4 vols.
in 1730.

16. The Oeeana, and other Works of 7ames Harrington, Efq; The 3d Edition. To which
is now added, an Index.

The Appendix may be had alone, to complete those Gentlemen's Books, who have bought
Mr. Toland's Edition.

r7. An Hijforical and Political Difour/e of the Laws and Government of England. By Na-

th.niel Bacon of Gray's-Inn, E!q; The 4th Edition. Correoed and improved by a Gentle-
man of the Middle-Temple.

18. The Waorks of Edmund Ludlow. Containing his Memoirs and other Trasss, now collec-
ed into r vol. To which is prefixed, the Life of the Author, by the Editor.

19. Difourfes concerning Government. By Algernon Sidney. To which is added some Let-

ters of Mr. Sidney's never before publilhed, and a Life of the Author, by Thomas Birch, D. D.
and S. R. S. With a copious Index.

There are a few of the above Seven Books printed on a fuptr.Wlriting-Paper.
20. All the l/orks of John Locke, Efq; with Alphabetical Tables. The: sth Edition. In 3 vols.
21. The Ruins of Palmyra, otherwise Tedmcr in the D.art. This Work contains 59 Plates

of the Ruins, and 3 of In/criptions chiefly in the Greek and Palmyrian Languages, with large Ex-
plications. To which are prefixed, the Publilher's Account of the Undertaking; an Inquiry
into the ancient State of Palmryra, and a Journal of the Passage through the Derrt.

The above Work is elegantly pr:nted in French.
22. The Ruins of.Balbec, anciently Heliopolis,. in Celorfyia, near the Source of the Orontesr,

and within 15 Leagues of Damascus. This Work contains Views of the Ruins as they are at
present, with Plans and Elevations of the Bui:dings, from Drawings and Measures taken on
the Spot, by the Gentlemen who made the Tour of the Med terranean in 1750, and 175 L.
And who have given the Phblick the Ruins of Palmyra as a Specimen of their Labours. To
which is prefixed, an Account of the ancient and present State of the Place, such as the M..-
torials collected by those Gentlemen afford. The Plates are equal to those of Palmyra in
Number, and are engraved by the fame marlerly Hands, and printed on the fame Size Paper.

The above Work is also elegantly printed in French.
23. Andepfani '7ihaurus Diplomatum & Numi/fnatum Scotiet, auxit & locupletawvi Rudiiaun-

24. A Ditionary of the EngliJh Language; in which the Words are deduced from their

Originals, and illustrated in their different Significations, by Examples from the bell Writers.
I'o which are prefixed, a Hifjloy of the Language, and an EngliJh Grammar. In a vols. By
Samuel 'ohnnon, A. M.

25. A General Diiionary,. Hi/lorical and Critica . By the Reverend Mr. John Peter Bernard,.

the Rey.. Dr. Thomas Birch. S. R. S. Mr. John Leckman, and othtr Hands. In lo vola. 'Thl
Oriental Lives, by the late Gworge Sale, Elq;

'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ *
'
