THE
HISTORY

F
SCOTLANDA N

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Q.een MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccEssION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEWof the SCOTTXSHHIsTORYprevioUs tothat Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

Minifier of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME JI.
THE FIFTH EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for A. MILLAR, and fold by T. CADELL, il

the Strand. M DCC LXIX.

# BOOK VI.

ITO

THE

HOF
I s
SCOTLAND.

BOOK Vt.
T H E unexpe&ed blow, by which the Regent.B o o

was cut off, struck the King's party with VI.
the umoft consternation. Elizabeth be- --

Wailed his death as the mot fatal disaster, which Diorder,
could have befallen her kingdom ; and was inconfo-. bythe"R
lable to a degree that little suited her dignity. gent'»
Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, her reftora-deat.
tion were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who
exprefied such indecent joy at the commiflion of it.
And as the affaflin made his escape on a horse, which
belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled directly
to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it
Was concluded that the Regent had fallen a l;crificc
to the refemment of the Queen's party, ratherthan

VQL. I. B 10o

B o o K to the revenge of a private man. On the day after

VI. the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ser-

niherft, both zealous abettors of the Queen's cause,
1570.

5 entered England in an hostile manner, and plun-

dered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of
which expected no such outrage. If the Regent
had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on
such an ireguiar incursion, nor could it well have
happened so soon after his death, unless they had
been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the

anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave oc-
cation. During ufch generalconfufion, men hoped
for univerfil impunity, and broke out into excesses
of every kind. As it was impoflible to restrain
thele, without a fcttled form of government, a

Steps t.:;en Convention of the nobles was held, in order to de-
teleing liberate concerning the election of a Regent. The
another Queen's adherents refuted to be present at the meet-
zbs. . ing, and protested against its proceedings. The

King's own party was irresolute, and divided in
opinion. Maitland, whom Kirka!dy had set at li-
berty, and who obtained from the nobles then as-
tembled a declaration acquitting him of the crime
which had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by pro-
poing to admit the Queen to the joint adminiftra-
tion of government with her son. Elizabeth ad-
hering to her ancient system with regard to Scottih
aflirs, laboured, notwithstanding the solicitations
of Mary's friends *, to multiply, and to perpetuate

* Se Append. No. I.

the

the factions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. B o o
Randolph, whom he dispatched into Scotland on VI.
the first news of the Regent's death, and who was her'~ 1
usual agent for such services, found all parties so 5
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irre-
concilable rancour, that it colt him little trouble to
inflame their animosity. The Convention broke up
without coming to any agreement; and a new meet-
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited,
was appointed on the first of May *.

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who fill A coal:tio

continued to acknowledge the King's authority, of arties
were at the utmost pains to restore some degree of in vain.
harmony among their countrymen. They procured
for this purpose, an amicable conference among the
leaders of the two rfations. But while the one de-
manded the restoration of the Queen, as the only
thingwhich could re-establish the public tranquillity;
while the other esteemed the King's authority to be
so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called
in question or impaired ; and neither of them would
recede in the least point from their opinions, they
separated without any profpea of concord. Both
were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by
the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from
France with promises of powerful succour to the
Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in that
kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating
in peace, it was expeted that Charles would soon
be at liberty to fulfil what h promised. On the
other hand, the Earl of Suffex was aembling a

C raws, Mem. 131. Caldyrw. . 17.

B a power-

B o o K powerful army on the borders, and its operations

VI. could not fail of adding spirit and strength to the
1570 King's party *.

Queen's THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the
prrY in factions proved ineffectual, it contributed somewhat
of Edin. to moderate, or suspend their rage; but they soon

began to at with their usual violence. Morton,
the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide,
solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for
the safety of a party, so devoted to her interest,
and which food so much in need of her afiftance.
The Chiefs of the Queen's fation, assembling at
April o. Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and

Kirkaldy, who was both Governor of the castle,
and Provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens,
though with some difficulty, to admit them within
the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of
Athole, and Maitland, acceded almost openly to
their party; and the Duke, and Lord Herreis, hav-
ing recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
retimed the places, which they had formerly held
in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition
of persons, so illustrious by their birth, or so emi-
nent for their abilities, they published a proclama-
tion, declaring their intention to support the
Queen's authority, and seemed resolved not to
leave the city before the meeting of the approach-
ing Convention, in which, by their numbers and
influence, they did not doubt of securing a majority
of voices on their fide -t.

"Crawf. AMem. 34. t Ibid. 137. Caderw. 2. 176.

2 AT

AT the fame time, they had formed a design of B o o K

kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if VI.
they could engage them in hostilities, and revive""

57o.

their ancient emulation and antipathy, they hoped, Endeavour
not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advan- e nnvato
tage to the King's cause, but to reconcile their coun- i'"a war

with Eng

trymen to the Queen, Elizabeth's natural and mot land.
dangerous rival. With this view, they had, imme-
diately after thenmurder of the Regent, prompted
Scott and Ker to commence hoffilities, and had
since instigated them to continue and extend their
depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one
hand, the dangerous confcquences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and relblved, on the other, not
to susser such an insult on her government to pass
with impunity; she issued a proclamation, declaring
that she imputed the outrages which had been com-
mitted, not to the Scottish nation, but to a few def-
perate and ill-defigning persons; that, with the for-
mer, he was resolved to maintain an inviolable
friendlhip, whereas the duty, which lue owed to
her own fubjeas, obliged her to chattife the licen-
tioufnefs of the latter *. Suffix and Scroop, accord-
ingly, entered Scotland, the one on the eart, the
other on the weft borders, and laid walte the adja-
cent countries with fire and sword --. Fame mag-
nified the number and progress of their armies, and
Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe in
Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill affected
to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There by a April 8.
publick proclamation they asserted the Queen's au-
thority, and sorbad giving obedience to any, but

Cald. z. 181. t Cabala, 174.

B 3 tlh

B oo o Xthe Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Huntly,

VI. whom she had constituted her Lieutenants in the

.-. kingdom.

1570.

King's par THE nobles who continued faithful to the King,
tyienter E though considerably weakened by the defecion of
AIay . so many of their fiiends, assembled at Edinburgh

on the day appointed. '1 hey issued a counter-pro.
clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder both of the late King, and
of the Regent. They could nor, however, pre-
fume so much on their own strength as to venture
either to lea a Regent, or to take the field against
the Queen's party; but the aflfitance, which they
received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both,
By her order, Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with a thousand foot, and three hundred
horse; the King's adherents joined him with a con-
fiderable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already be-
gun hostilities by attacking the castle, they forced
them to retire, plundered the neighbouring country,
which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after feiz-
ing tome of their castles, and razing others, return-
ed to Edinburgh.

Moties ors UNDER I)rury's rrotecion, the Earl of Lennox
lr'i' 'b returnLd into Scotland. It was natural to commit
w lis.gard the government of the kingdom to him, during

the minority of his grandson. His illufrious birth,
and alliance with the royal family of England, as
well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that

honour

honour; and his rfentment against Mary beingB o o K
implacable, and his estate lying in England, and VI.
his family reiiding there, Elizabeth confidered him t'.Ji
as a man, who, both from inclination, and from 5
interest, would at in concert with her, and ardently
wished that he might succeed Murray in the office
of Regent. But, on many accounts, fle did not
think it prudent to discover her own sentiments, or
to favour his pretenlions too openly. The civil
wars in France, which had been excited by a pre-
tended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierce-
ness that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be
on the point of coming to an issue; and after shed-
ding the best blood, and wafting the richest pro-
vinces in the kingdom, both parties derfred peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the negotiations,
which were carrying on for that purpose. Charles
IX. was known to be a paflionate admirer of
Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser
a Queen of France, and the most ancient ally of
his crown, to languish in her present cruel situation,
without attempting to procure her relief. He had,
hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monltrating, by his ambassadors, against the indig-
nity, with which he had been treated. But if he
were once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations,
Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from
the impetuosity of his temper, and the power of
his arms. It therefore became necessary for her to
act with some reserve, and not to appear, avowed-
ly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and pre-
judices of the Scots required no less management.

B 4 Had

Bo o K Had he openly supported Lennox's claim; had (he

VI. recommended him to the Convention, as the can-
570. didate, whom she approved; this might have rouz-

ed the independant spirit of the nobles, and by too
plain a diftovery of her intention, he might have
defeated its fucccfs. For these reasons, she hefirated
long, and rerurned ambiguous answers to all the
meflages, which fhc received from the King's party.
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments was
at last obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature seems to have been the occasion of it. Pope
Pius V. ha,\ing issued a bull, whereby he excom-
municared Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom,
and absolved her fubjets from their oath of allegi-
ance, Flton, an Englilhman, had the boldness to
fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's pa-
lace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this fa-
tal sentence against the most powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now
less regarded, its proceedings were more cautious;
and it was only when they were rouzed by some
powerful Prince, that the thunders of the church
were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed
this ftep, which the Pope had taken, to a combi-
nation of the Roman Catholic Princes against her,
and fufpeaed that some plot was on foot in favour
of the Scottish Queen. In that event, he knew
that the lf'ety of her own kingdom depended on
preferying her influence in Scotland; and in order
to strengthen this, he renewed her promises of pro-
tecting the King's adherents, encouraged them to

proceed to the elecion of a Regent, and even ven- B o o K
tured t point out the Earl of Lennox, as the person VI.
who had the bllt title. That honour was accord- "--'-'
ingly conferred upon him, in a Convention of the 1570.
whole party, held on the 12th of July *.

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meet- Lennox

cl., -

,.~~ ,. .1~

d~ Rele -cd Re-

ing of the Pa liament, which the Queen's party ne.
had fumnmoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having
effected that, he marched againit the Earl of Hunt-
ly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garrison, which he had placed in Brechin, to fur-
render at discretion. Soon after, he made himself
matier of some other castles. Emboldened by this
successful beginning of his administration, as well
as by the appearance of a considerable army, with
which the Earl of Suffex hovered on the borders,
he deprived Maitland of his office of secretary, and
proclainmed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other
leaders of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies
of their country -.

IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Mry'ad.
Queen's adherents had recourse to the King ofher'"nsr-

ociate

Sp.ain , with whom Mary had held a close corref- witi Spain.
pondence ever since her confinement in England.
They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two
of his officers to take a view of the country, and
to examine its coasts, and harbours; and obtained
from him a small lupply of money and arms, which

* Spotfw. 240. Ca'd. 2. 186. See Appcndix, No. l.
t Crawf Mem. 159. Cald. 2. 198.
t See Appendix, No. 1II.

were

B o o were sent to the Earl of Huntly *. But this aid,

VI. so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have
i|- ' availed them little. They were indebted for their

Elizabeth afety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
propotesa under colour of restoring the captive Queen to her
treaty of
accommo. throne. The first teps in this negociation had been
dtvo l;a. taken in the month oi May; but hitherto little pro-
ibj" her grefs was made in it. The peace concluded between

the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and
her apprehenions that Charles would interpose with
vigour in behalf of his fifter-in-law, quickened Eli.
zabeth's motions. She affeeed to treat her prisoner
with more indulgence, he listened more graciously
to the solicitations of foreign ambassadors in her fa-
vour, and seemed fully determined to replace her on
the throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her fin-
cerity, the laboured to procure a cessation of arms
between the two contending fa&ions in Scotland.
Lennox, elated with the good fortune, which had
hitherto attended his administration, and flattering
himfelt with an easy triumph over enemies, whose
estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, re-
fused, for ofme time, to come into this measure.
It was not safe for him, however, to dispute the
will of his protedrefs. A cessation of hostilities
during two months, to commence on the third of
September, was agreed upon; and being renewed
from time to time, it continued till the first of
Ap:il next year t.

SooN after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir
Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots. The dig-

' A.lcrfl. 3. 12. Crawf.Mem. 153. t Spot(w. 243.

nity

aity of there ambafladors, the former her prime Mi- B o o
nifter, the latter Chanceiloyof the Exchequer, and VI.
one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties
that the negociation was serious, and that the hour 1570.
of Mary's liberty was now approaching. The pro-
positions, which they made to her, were advan-
tageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in
Mary's situation, had reason to expect. The rati.
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing
any pretensions to the Englilh Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the ad-
hering to the alliance between the two kingdoms;
the pardoning her fubjeEts, who had taken arms
against her; and her promising to hold no corref-
pondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that
mightdilurb Eiizabeth's government; were among
the chief articles. By way of security for the ac-
complifhment of these, they derr. ndei.l that some
persons of rank hould be given as hollages, that
the Prince her son should reside in England, and
that a few cartles on the border should be put into
Elizabeth's hands. To ome of theie propositions
Mary contented; forre she endeavoured to miti-
gate; and others he attempted to evade. In the
mean time, flie transmitted copies of them to the
Pope, to the Kings of France and Spain, and to
the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without
some timely and vigorous interposition in her be-
half, she would be obliged to accept of these hard
conditions, and to purchaie liberty at any price.
But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by
his efforts against the Turks, his treasury was en-
tirely exhausted. Charles had already begun to me.

dit.o

B o o K ditate that conspiracy against the Hugonots, which

VI. marks his reign with such infamy; and it required

t lei

jmuch lihure, and perse& tranquillity, to bring that
£570' execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed

in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great re-
nown to the Chriltian arms, by the vitory over the
infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened
an infurrefion; and his subje&s in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppreflion, and many indigni-
ties, were breaking out into open'rebellion. All
of them, for these differen.t reasons, advised Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude the
treaty on the belt terms he could procure*.

Elil;aletI'i- MARY, accordingly, consented to many ofEli-
artfics in
the ^'r.da zabeth's demands, and d covered a facility of dif-
of it. position, which promiled still frther conceflions.

But no conccfison ile could have made, would have
satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated
profcfT.ons of sincerity to fureign ambassadors, and
notwitifl.anding the Iblenitiy with which she car-
ried on the treaty, had no other object in it, than
to amuse Mai y's allies, and to gain time t. After
having bs long treated a Queen, who fled to her for
refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could not
now difi-ls her with fafetv. Under all the difad-
vantages of a rigorousconfinement, Mary had found
means to excite commotions in England, which
were extremely formidable. What desperate effcts
of herjuf rfentmnen might be expeted, if she were
et at liberty, and recovered her former power ?

Anders. vol. iii. o1, zo. t Digges, Comipl. Amb. 7.

What

What engagements could bind her, not to revenge B o o c
the wrongs he had suffered, nor to take advantage VI.
of the favourable conjunctures, that might present '-
themielves ? Was it possible for her to give such 1570.
security for her behaviour, in times to come, as
might remove all suspicions and fears? And was
there not good cause to conclude, that no future be-
nefits could ever obliterate the memory of past inju-
ries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though hbe
continued to as as if her views had been entirely
different. She appointed seven of her privy coun-
fellors to be commiflioners for fettling the articles
of the treaty; and as Mary had already named the
Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Leving-
fton, for her ambassadors, she required the Regent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the
King. The Earlof Morton, Pitcairn, abbot ofDun-
fermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons 1571.
chosen by the Regent. They prepared for their
journey, as slowly as Elizabeth hertelf could have
wished. At length they arrived at London, and
met the commiflioners of the two Queens. Mary's Feb. 1.
ambafladors discovered the fironge!t inclination to
comply with every thing, that would remove the
obstacles, which stood in the way of their mistress's
liberty. But when Morton and his associates were
called upon to vindicate their condut, and to ex-
plain the sentiments of their party, they began, in
jultification of their treatment of the Queen, to ad-
vance such maxims concerning the limited powers
of Princes, and the natural right of Tibjets to relifil
and to controul them, as were extremely fnockin
to Elizabeth, whose notions of regal preroLasive

vwcr~

B o o r were very exalted. With regard to the authority

V-. which the King now possessed, they declared that

they neither had, nor could possibly receive infiruc-
5 tions, to content to any treaty, that tended to sub-

vert, or even to impair it, in the least degree *.
Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than
such a reply from the commiifloners of the King of
Scots, to the Queen of England. His party de-
pended absolutely on her prote&ion, her hand had
feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed
the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease,
she could have brought them to talk in a very dif-
ferent manner; and whatever conditions lhe might
have thought fit to prescribe, they would have had
no other choice but to submit. This declaration,
however, the affe&ed to confider as an insuperable
It proves difficulty. And finding that there was no reason to

fu . dread any danger from the French King, who had

not discovered that eagerness in support of Mary,
which was expeced; the reply made by Morton
furnished her with a pretence for putting a stop to
Much 14 the negociation, till the Regent should fend ambaf-

fadors with more ample powers. Thus after being
amused for ten months with the hopes of liberty,
the unhappy Queen of Scots remained under ftri&er
cultody than ever, and without any profpe&t of
escaping from it; while those subje&s, who still ad-
hered to her, were exposed, without ally or protec-
tor, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in
this negociation rendered flill more insolent t.

' Cald. . 234. Digges, 51. Haynes, 523, 524.
t Aid. iii, . Rcr .

I Orr-

ON the day aftertheexpirationof the truce, which B o o K

had been oblcrved with little exatnefs on either fide, VI.
Captain Crawford of Jordan-hill, a gallant and en- -

1571.

terprifing officer, performed a service ot great im- Dun5brton
portance to the Regent, by surprising the castle of'c"l r-ur

prized by

Dunbarton. This was the only fortified Flacr in th.eeg.
the kingdom, of which the Queen had kept plslc.
lion, ever since the commencementof the civil wars.
Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rifes in the middle of a plain,
rendered it extremely firong, and in the opinion of
that age impregnable; as it commanded the river
Clyde, it was of great consequence, and esteemed
the most proper place in the kingdom for landing
any foreign troops, that might come to Mary's aid.
The strength of the place rendered Lord Fleming,
the governor, more secure than he ought to have
been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who
had served in the garrison, and had been disgusted
by some ill usage, proposcd the cheme ro the Re-
gent, endeavoured to demnnftrate that it 'as prac-
ticable, and offered himself to go the foremort man
on the enterprize. It was thought prudent to rifque
any danger for so great.a prize. Scaling-ladders,
and whatever else was necessary, were prepared with
the utmost secrecy and difpatcli. All the avenues
to the castle were seized, that no intelligence of the
design mightreachthe governor. To' IarJs evening,
Crawford marched from Gl..igow, vwiti a 1inall but
determined. band. By miuniglt, they arrivcd atihe
bottom of the rock. The nioon was 1st, and the
iky, which hitherto had been extreinely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where tih rock

was

B o o K was highet, that the assailants made their attempt,

VI. because in that place there were few centinels, and
'-' they hoped to find them leaf alert. The first lad-
357'1 der was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness

of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed at the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and
fastened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which grew
in a cleft. This place they all reached with the ut-
most difficulty, but were ill at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladder was made
fafl a second time; but in the middle of the ascent,
they met with an unforeseen difficulty. One of their
companions was seized with ome sudden fit, and
clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All
were at a and. It was impoflible to pals him.
To tumble him headlong was cruel; and might oc-
cafion a discovery. But Crawford's presence of mind
did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall when
the fit was over: And turning the other fide of the
ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there still remained
a high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many
greater difficulties, this was oon accomplihed. A
sentry observed the first man, who appeared on the
parapet, and hadjuft time to give the alarm, before
he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol.
diegs of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and
more solicitous about their own Iafety, than capable
of making resistance. The assailants rushed for-
wards, with repeated llouts, and with the utmost

fury

fury; took poffelfon of the magazine; seized theB o o K
cannon; and turned them against their enemies. VI.
Lord Fleming got into a small bat, and fled all ' '
alone into Argylfhire. Crawfurd, in reward of 7
his valour and good condut, remained master of
the castle; and as he did not lose a ingle man in
the enterprize, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French En-
voy, and Hamilton Archbilhop of St. Andrew's,
were the prifbners of greatest diftinaion *.

VERAC'S charaterproteted him from the usage, Archbishop

which he merited by his activity in firring up ene- dfrt'st ut
mies against the King. The Rezent treated the ro death by
lady with great politeness, and humanity. But a
very different fate awaited the Archbishop; he was
carried under a strong guard to Stirling; and as he
had formerly been attainted by a of Parliament,
he was, without any formal trial, condemned to be
hanged; and on the ifurth day after he was taken,
the sentence was executed. An attempt was made
to convict him of being accessary to the murther
both of the King and Regent, but there accusations
were supported by no proof. Our historians ob-
serve that he was the first Biflop in Scotland who
died by the hands of the executioner. lhe high
offices he had en'oyed, both in church and are,
ought to have exempted him from a punifhnnenr,
inficled o:ily un the ow'it cr:minals. But his zeal
fbr the Qicen, his abilities, ,tnl liis profellion, ren-
.: red him odiious anil formiiildab;e to (he King's ad,
he;cnts. Lcn;ox hated hii as the p. ifrn, by wlhoi

' B.:ch. 3:+
VcL. i. C counfiS

B o o K counsels the reputation and power of the house of

Vl. Hamilton were supported. And party rage, and

G--) personal enmity, dictated that indecent sentence, for
1571' which some colour was fought, by imputing to him

such odious crimes *.

Kirkaldy THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment
d fendi the
Cle(f of the Archbillop, perplexed and enraged the
Edinburgh Queen's party; and hotilities were renewed with
Queen's all the fierceness, which disappointment and indig-

e""", nation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, duringthe truce,

had taken care to increase the number of his garri-
son, and to provide every thing necessary for his de.
fence, issued a proclamation declaring Lennox's au-
thority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded
all whp favoured his cause to leave the town within
fix hours; seized the arms, belonging to the citi-
zens, planted a battery on the steeple of St. Giles,
repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affeftions of the inhabitants leaned
a different way, held out the metropolis againit the
Regent. The Duke, Huntly, Home, HFrreis, and
other chiefs of that faction, repaired to Edinburgh
with their followers; and having received a maall
fum or money, and tome ammunition from France,
forined no contcntiptible army within the walls. On
the other flt.!, lorton) sized Leich, and frtified
it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable
body of men. Whil e e armies lay Ib near each
other, daily flirminihs lapl:cned, and with various
fucccfS. 'ihe Queen's party was not slrong enough
to take th il d r againil tilte Regent, nor was his

Sp:,f;'. 5 .l iori

7 superiority

superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the B o o K
castle, or of the town *. VI.

1571.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands oth par-

of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- parih,.
liament to meet in that place. In order to prevent mets.
any objection against the lawfulness of the meeting,
the members obeyed the proclhmation as exatly as
pollible; and aembled in a house at the head of
the Canongate, which, though without the walls,
lies within thj liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmolt to interrupt their meet-
ing; but they were so strongly guarded, that all his
efforts were vain. They pafled an acd attailing
Maitland, and a few others, and then adjourned to
the 28th of August --.

THE other party, in order that their proceedings

might be countenanced by the fame shew of legal
authority, held a meeting of parliament soon after.
There was produced in this assembly, a declaration
by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, where-
by he had resigned the crown, and cunented to the
coronation of her son. Conformable to this decla-
ration, an act was past, pronouncing the rcfignation
to have been extorted by far; to e null in itself,
and in all its coniequences; and enjoining all good
subjes to acknowlc.ege the Queen alone to be tlheir
lawful Sovereign, and to .f.por those who at..d in
her ne. '1 he prtfJi-t ei.iblifihment of the prq-
t: tlt..n rcligion wts .orfiramid by another flatute;

' C.13 . :;, &c. ] C:rn...' :.
':. n,-7.

and,

B o K anc!, i imi ation cf the adv. f ;..rrv, a new meet-

VI. ing Va; a;poUi:;.-d on the 6,ii ur Agultt*.

1571.
Miferabl MCANWII 1LE, all the miserics of civil war defo-
condilon
o::; ikig-lated the kingdom. Fellow citizens, friends. bro-
di"l. rhers, took diiffrent fides, anti ranged thi;. ;cves

under the tandards of the contending ta'tions. In
every county, and almolt in every town and vi.iiae,
Kig's. -mI and C.lueen's-imen; were names o dit;nc-
tion. Political hatred diflblved all natural ties, and
extinguilied tlie reciprocal good will and confidence
which hold mankind together in society. Religious
zeal mingled itelf with these civil dillintions, and
contributed not a little to heighten, and to inflame
them.
srar o, THE factions which divided the kingdom were,

'. in appearance, only two. But in both thele, thre

were perlons, with views and principles, so diffe-
rent from each other, that they ought t be dillin-
guifhed. With fore, conideraAoun; of religion
were predominant, and they either ahered to the
Queen, because they hoped, y her means, to re-
eftablifll Popery, or they c.t

. nlicd cl;c Kin%'s au-

tlority, as the Ibct lpprort f site 'roieftn. t itl.
Among thef: '.c oppoition w., vioulr irre-
concileable. tilers ucrc irnilunced ,i;tical
moiiv':r onl), ),r .illtrci i,y views o, , !he
Rlcgenr aimn:d a: 'r.:;r n".. :l, an' . ;ir
(if gai;iing, 'y ,:-'itic ;. r s, man ce-
rents to ackruv lcdg: tile King' . . c-

* Crawf. -'.i. 17.

land and Kirkaldy had formed the slime design of aB o o K
coalitini, but on lich terms, that t'>e Queen might VI.
be reliored to some share in the government, and -'"
the kingdom hake off its dependance on England.-
Morton, the ablef, the molt ambitious, and the
molt powerful man of the King's party, hld! a par-
ticular course; and movin only as hi was prompt-
ed by the court of England, thwarted every mna-
iure, that tended towards a rccncilcment of the
fa&ions; and as he served Eii.ibeth with much si-
delity, he derived both power and credit from her
avowed protection.

THE time appointed by botih parties, for the

meeting of their parliamcnts, now approached.
Only three peers and two bihu:ops appeaeid in
that, which was held in the Q cn's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible .s rheir numbers were,
they pasl.d an act for attalnting upwards of 200 of
the adivcrfe si on. Tie :-.ee:ing at Siriing was
numerous and splendid. T'.e Regent hiad prevail-
ed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglin,::, Caflils, and
Lord Boyd, to acknowleie the K!ng's authority.
The three Earls were aong the nimoI po.vcrfil
noblemen in the king om, an.i had hith-rto been
zeaous in the Queen's caute. Lord B,;jd liad been
one of Mary's commilioaers at York an.l Weftlnin-
sier, and, since that time, had been admitted into
all her molt fecrec councils. But, during that tur-
bulent period, the conduct f individuals, as weil .s
the principles of f cions, varied oI octen, tlihat the
sense of honour, the chief prelervative of coniitence
in charater, was encircly loit; and widhout any re-

C 3 gard

B o o K gard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one par.

VI. ty, and adopted all the violent passions of the other.
' 1 The deftction, however, of so many persons of dif-
I57I.

tin7tion, not only weakened the Queen's party, but
added reputation to her adversaries.

The King's AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin-
prized in burgh, that at Stirling began with framing as a-
Stirling. gainft the opposite facion. But in the midst of all

the security, which confidence in their own num-
bers, or diltance from danger could inspire, they
were awakened, early one morning, by the houts
ept. 3. of the enemy in the heart of the town. In a mo-

ment, the houses of every person of diftintion were
surrounded, and before they knew what to think of
so firange an event, the Regent, the Earls of Ar-
gyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton, Mon-
trofe, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogil-
vie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind
troopers, who were ready to carry them to Edin-
burgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this daring en-
terprize; and if he had not b:en induced, by the
ill-timed folicicude of his friends about his safety,
not to hazard his own person in conducting it, that
day might have terminated the contest between the
two fations, and have ref ored peace to his coun-
try. By his direction, four hundred men, under
the command of Hluntly, Lord Claud Hamilton,
and Scott of Buccleugh, fee out from Edinburgh,
and the better to conceal their design, marched to-
wards the south. But they ibon wheeled to the
right, and horses having been provided for the in-
fantry, rode ftreight to Stirling. By four in the

morn nsg,

morning, they arrived there; not one sentry was B o o K
pofled on the walls, not a single man was awake VI.
about the place. They met with no resistance from 'l
any person they had seized, except Morton. He 1571.
defending his house with obstinate valour, they were
obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
till forced out of it by the flames. In performing
this, some time was consumed; and the private
men, unaccustomed to regular discipline, left their
colours, and began to rifle the houles and ilops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar of the town
reached the castle. The Earl of Mar sallied ouc
with thirty soldiers; fired brifily upon the enemy,
of whom almost none but the officers kept together
in a body. 1 he townsmen tookl arms to aift their
governor; a sudden panic struck the aTailants; some
fled, some surrendered themselves to their own pri-
foners; and had not the borderers, who followed
Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the
horses within the place, not a man would have
escaped. If the Regent had not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been
as inconfide able, as the alarm was great. Think on
the /Ichbisop cf St. ,Andrew's, was the word among
the Queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a l'.crifice to 're RP.
his memory. The officer, to whom he fi:rcndered, sent k.,l.d.
endeavouring to protet hini, lout iis own life in
his defencc. lie w:;s slain, acctlin to the genc-
ral opinion, by comniiand of Lord Claud I-lilril-
ton. Kirklaldv had the gl(ory of concerting this plan
with g.'cat !ecrecy al rudecncc; but MuIton's
fortunate obtiinacy, and tlie wavt of iicilplinc a-
mong his own truops, deprivcd l ilin of fulcc,, tlhe

C 4 olly

B o o < on'y thing wanting to render this equal to the mo:t

VI. applauded mili:ar- entcrprizes of the kind*.

.:, c.,,- As so m?.ny, of the nobles were aflembled, they
r.n !'.; nt, proceeded, vir.'cut delay, to the election of a Re-

' gent. Ar-'yII, Morron, iand Mar, were candidates
'orr

tac .ic. ^ S chosen by a majority of

voices. :\ !!. ii ail the fie;ce diicntior.s, which had
p':evaicilc t, lolng in Scotlnd!, he had diltirngui-cd
hirn!cir b. hs md.eration, his humanity, and his
'di!.ter',.tlcrcii'. And a; his power was fa: inrferior
to A.ri'li'', an,! his abilitie not so great as Mlor-
t..n's, 1ie was, t r thceic reafosrs, le!s formidable to
the oiler nobls. His nerit, too, in having so
i:ta!y rcfcued c!:e Leaders of the party from inm-
I;.incnt (iLliruEt:: n, contributLd not a little to his
prelerment.

r,.cced- WUlLE these things were carrying on in Scot-
','

'" land, the tranfations in England were no less inte-
i lt refilr t Mary, and still more fatal to her cause.

Thle p.F:liamcnt of t!.at kingdcm, which met in
A .il, Fal:'d a n a, by which, it was declared to
be 'l,: trclbn, tc claim any ight to the Crown
tdril Lile litf of t;:e Qeen; to affirm that the title
c: i::; .:ii;cr , ;, j! was better tl;an hers; or to nai:.-
t;i:n ii.t tii. l,,.lialmrnt had not power to f-etle, and
to lIr:: t. !:. u,-Jcr of fuccefEcn. Tlhis remarkable
iLtt Lltc vai tcndiicd nut only ti-r the icuritv of their
o.n ' .(".- .

:,n1, but to curb t:e retlels and in-

tii ,!n, ' i. li; uor t Scottiih Q1ieen, and her adhlc-
I'c :.ta -!'.

* Ai . 2/. . C. , ,lc/.f. C.cM. 20.. t Camd. 43'.

A

AT this time, a treaty of marriage betweenB o oK

Elizabeth, and the Duke of Anjou, the French VI.
King's brother, was well advar:ced. Both courts l'-7
feerned to desire it with equal ardor, and gaveMarriage
out, with the utmof confidence, that it could not betocaed
fail of taking place. Neither of them, however, Elizabeh

ad the

wi ed it fuccels; and they encouraged it fr nODukeof
other end, but because it iterved to covet or toAnjou
promote their particular designs. The whoie policy
of Catherine of Medicis was bent towards the ac-
complifhment of her dcteftable project for the de-
frudion of the Hugonot chiefs; and by carrying
on a negociation for the marriage of her fun with a
Princcis, who wasjut!y eeemned the protetrels of
that party, by yielding obme things in point of re-
ligion, and by discovering an indiilerence with re-
gard to others, Ihe hoped to amu!e all the P'rotte!anrs
in Europe, and to lull aflcp the jealoui even of
the Hugonots themselves. Elizabe: l lattcrcdl hcr;,!f
with reaping advantages of another kind. l)urin.
the dependance of the negociaion, the Frcni co:l
not with decency give any open aslance to 'e
Scottinfi Queen; if they conceived any hopes of ;n-
ctrs in the treaty of marriage, they wouldl, o( cou;W,
iritreit themfclves but colly in hcrconcer.;.; 1

';.:-.

herself must be dcje&d at loling n all, w!;on ii,:
lad hitherto reckoned her nmolt powcr'ul lprior;'or
and by interrupting her correlpondlence witrl: 1 a.ice,
one source, at lea(', of the cablls and irntrii-cs
which diftur',:cd the kingldom, wculd be io: ;. oh.l
QiCeens fucceded in their l] L .lls. Ctk'rli!'i'.'a ir-
tilices imi.! eC d on l'lizab.c!it, and ] l iil i.''

b :l-

gonots. 'fh1 French ciijcoveilcd L utt::

1, iL '-

rcncc'abotLt the intrcil of the Scot::!l h, '" :.
Q '.

B o o K Mary, confidering that court as already united with

VI. her rival, turned herself, for protection, towards the
-57 King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and thought-

Norfok's ful mind delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had
ipsr held a secret correspondence with Mary, for some

Tar*. time, by means of the Bilhop of Ross, and had

supplied both herself, and her adherents in Scotland,
with small fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the cha-
raer of a banker, and who aed privately as an
agent for the Pope, was the person whom the Bi-
fkop intruited with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to
the Duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately
reltored to liberty, upon his solemn promise to have
no further intercourse with the Queen of Scots;
,'hich, however, he regarded so little, that {he took
no ftep in any matter of moment, without his ad-
vice. She complained in a long letter, which she
wrote to him in cyphers, of the balenefs, with which
the Irecnch court had abandoned her interest; he
declared her intention of imploring the afflifance of
the Spanihi Monarch, which was now her only re-
source ; and recommended Ridolphi to his confi-
dence, as a perlbn, capable both of explaining and
iadancing the scheme. The Duke commanded
l-ick rd, his ecretary, to decypher, and then to
bu;;'; t.i, letter; but whether he had been already

n.iic-d by the court, or resolved at that time to be-
tiay !is mailer, he dilbbeycd the latter part of the
or':', and hid the letter, lotcthcr with other trea-
lbnb'.!c papers, under the Duke's own bed.

* D:', i}, 148. Caad. -1;4.

Ri co.r ,

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omit- B o o K

ted none of those arguments, and spared none of VI.
those promises, which are the usual incentives to
rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great 1571.
fum in readiness to beflow in so good a cause. The
Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand
men, not far from London. The Catholics to a
man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half
the nation had turned their eyes towards him, and
called on him to revenge the unmeritedinjuries,which
he himself hadfuffered; andto rescue an unfortunate
Queen, who offered him her person, and her Crown,
as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved of
the design, and though he refused to give Ridolphi
any letter of credit, allowed him to use his name, in
negociating with the Pope, and Alva *. TheBifhop
of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and
impatience to procure relief Tor his mistress, was apt
to run into rash and desperate designs, advised the
Duke to assemble secretly a few of his followers, and
at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this the
Duke reje&ed as a scheme equally wild and hazard-
ous. Meanwhile, the English court had received Dilcovered
some imperfet information ofthe plot, by inter- i,,h.
cepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident A.uu".
happened, which brought to light all the circum-
flances of it. The Duke had employed Hickford
to tranfinit to Lord [-erreis, some money, which
vas to be diifributed among Mary's friends in Scot-
land. A person not in the secret was intruded with

* nludcr 3. 161.

convey-

B o o conveying it to the borders, and he, fufpefting it

VI. from the weight to be gold, whereas he had been
*' rtold that it wa. flver, carried it diretly to the Pri-

vy Council. The Duke, his domestics, and all who
were privy, or could be llfpe.ted of being privy to
s-pt. 7. the defi n, were t.;kcn into custody. Never did the

accomplices in a connpiracy diilcover less firmness;
or servants betray an indulgent n!a'ler with greater
bafeneFl:. Every one confcfiird the whole of what
he kne ..Hiickford gave dire&tions how to ind
the a-.'rr, ,:.l;-.*h 'e

! .::'d1.;:. The Duke him-

seif, :;:)i:: . -:: .:o: hilcity of his associates,
and believing all angerous papers t, have been de-
stroyed, c:nidcn! ly as. rte his own ir ncence; but
when thei; d,,:fi;;ii s and the ,::pe' thelfelves
were pr.,duct-d, aonifh!ed at tiheir treachery, he
aclkno wlccit'e ,.n:, guiir, ant iploreti thu Queen's
mercy. IIl.-. ofiKne as too hcino.s, anl too oui'en
r':.'t~ t" t" ( b: rin pardon ; ard Eliz.l;eth tholught
it c fit y to dcter her fuhjrcb, by his pun.lment,
fro'n lol. ing crr', pondei:ce with the Qlieen of
Scots, or her niilalre . Being tried by hi; Peers,
lie was found guilty of high trcalbn, and, after fe-
vir;:ll dclays, fuffcrcd death for the crime*.

THi : difoveryofthis cnfpir.,cy produced many

efcicls, extrc-iin'y (detrimental to Mary's intreft.
't'he liihop of Ross, who appeared by the consef-
fI.,n of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal aiinil' Flizabt th, was taken into cuf-
to.:y, his pa;pcr; iL.;'chic' , himiilfcommitted to the

.\)'r. . i.!,. Sat;Tri: s, Iow ,

2 tower,

tower, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened B o o K
with capital punishment, and after a long confine- V.
ment, set at liberty, on condition that he hould '~
leave the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived
of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his
abilities, but was denied from that time, the privi-
lege of having an ambassador at the Englir currt
The Spanish ambassador, wvhom, the power and
dignity of the prince h. represented, exempted ifrjm
such insults as Ross had suffered, was commanded
to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a ,r . i guard than formerly, the number of her
cl meltics abridged, and no person permitted to fee
her, but in prefcnce of her keepers t.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm Elizabeth

which was gathering, on the continent, against herd -ly .
kingdom, began to will that tranquillity were re- 'gain the
stored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's late at- party.
tempt against her government, she determined to
a&, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the
King's party. This refolutiun she intimated to the
leaders of both factions. Mary, fl(e told them,oa. 13.
had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conlpiracies both againlt her crown and her life, that
flhe would henceforth .onfider her as unworthy of
protection, and would never content to ritore her
to liberty, tfir lets to replace her on her throne. She
exhorted them therefore, to unite in ncknowltcgoing
the King's authnr:y. She p:l iit.l to rocure by

L Diggt<' irj t *;;';*-!e. .V n :i on,*

l r

B o o K her mediation equitable terms for those, who had

VI. hitherto opposed it. But if they fill continued re-

L' -

X fradory, ihe threatened to employ her utmost power
1571' to compel them to submit *. Though this decla-

ration did not produce an immediate effect; though
hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gor-
don, by his bravery, and good conduct, had routed
the King's adherents in the North, in many encoun-
ters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's
entiments contributed not a little to animate one
party, and to depress the spirit and hopes of the
other J-.

1572. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's for-
Hoatiities ces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy ftil held out the-
carried on
between town and calble of Edinburgh, scarce a day passed
them. without a skirmish. And while both avoided any

decisive ation, they harraffed each other by attack-
ing iinall parties, beating up quarters, and inter-
cepting convoys. These operations, though li:tle
memorable in themselves, kept the palions of both
factions in perpetual exerci'e and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fur,
which rendered them regardless not only of the laws
of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, andi during the heat of
combat, that this implacable rage appeared; both
parties hanged the priboners they took, of whatever.
rank or quality, without mercy, and without trial,
Great numbers fuffcred in this hocking manner

' See Append. No. V.
t Cald. a. 289, t9;.
' :r 'e, 2. 76.

the

the unhappy vi&Eims were led, by fifties at a time, B o o
to execution; and it was not till both fides had VI.
smarted severely, that they discontinued this barba-
rous pra&tioe, so reproachful to the characer of the 5
nation *. Mean while, those in the town and castle,
though they had received a supply of money from
the Duke of Alva t, began to susser for want of
provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the mills
in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
small garrisons in all the houses of strength around
it, scarcity daily increased. At lait all the mireries
of famine were felt, and they must have been soon
reduced to such extremities, as would have forced
them to capitulate, if the English and French am-
baffadors had not procured a suspension of hostilities,
between the two parties :.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage, between league be-

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had been fruit- nd an
less, both Charles and he were desirous of conclud- Francec
ing a defensive alliance between the two Crowns.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the best
device for blinding the Protestants, against whom
the conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution;
but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious mca-
sure might expose him. Elizabeth, who had hi-
therto reigned without a single ally, now iw her
kingdom so threatenedwith intestine commotion, or
exposed to invasions from abroa', that hle was ex-

Craw. Mem. i, 2. t Cald. 2. 3 !.
. Id. 36.

B o o K tremely solicitous to secure the affitance of lo pow.

VI. erful a neighbour. The difficulties ariling from
C"^-" the fitua:ion of the Scottiih Queen, were the chief

7 occasions of any delay.' Charles demanded some

terms of advantage for Mary, and her party. Eli-
zabeth refused to liften to any proposition of that
kind. Her obltinacy overcame the faint efforts of
the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so
much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard
to Scottish aairs, a short article was inserted, in ge-
April . neral and ambiguous terms, to this purpose, " That

the parties contrating hall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any franger to enter, and to
foment the facions there ; but it hall be lawful for
the Queen of England to chastise, by force of arms,
those Scots who shall continue to harbour the Eng-
lilh rebels now in Scotland *." In consequence of
this :reaty, France and England affected to at in
concert with regard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and
Sir William Drury, appeared there, in name of their
refpeAive Sovereigns. By their mediation, a truce,
for two months, was agreed upon, and during that
time, conferences were to be held between the lead-
ers of the opposite facsions, in order to accommo-
date their differences, and eltore pence to the king-
dom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval of
tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South;
but in the North, it proved fatal to her interest.
Sir Adam Gordon had till maintained his reputa-
tion and fperiority there. Several parties, under
diilrercnt olicrs, were lnt againit him. Some of
thenm hle att:cked in the field; against others he

Diigcs, 170, 191. Caend. 4.14

employed

employed stratagem; and as his courage and con- B o o c
dud were equal, none of his enterprizes failed of VI.
success. He made war, too, with the humanity, X2J
which became To gallant a man, and gained ground
by that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If
he had not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend
his operations, he would, in all probability, have
brought that part of the kingdom to submit entire-
ly to the Queen's authority *.

NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuc- Proceed-

cess, Mary's interest was on the decline, not only 'd agan" t
in her own kingdom, but among the Engliih. No- Mary.
thing could be more offensive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the profpet of
the Spanith yoke, than her negociations with the
Duke of Alva. The parliament, which met in
May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn confe-
rence between the Lords and Commons, both houses
agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty of
high treason, and to deprive her of all right of fuc-
cession to the Crown. This great cause, as it was
then called, occupied them during the whole feflion,
and was carried on with much unanimity. Eliza-
beth, though Ihe applauded their zeal, and approv-
ed greatly of the course they were taking, was fa-
tisfied with (hewing Mary what she might expeft
from the resentment of the nation; but as flie did
not yet think it time to proceed to the mos violent
extremity against her, fle prorogued the parlia-
ment -

Ctawf. lMcm. . i D'Ewe Journ. zo6, &:c.
VOL. 11. D T 4 L

B o K THESE evere proceedings of the Englilh parlia-

VI. ment were not more mortifying to Mary, than the
572L- coldness and negle&t of her allies the French. The
1572.
The French Duke of Montmoiency, inldeed, who came over to
neglet her ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a shew of in-
intcreft.

teresting himself in favour of the Scottish Queen,
but instead of soliciting for her liberty, or her re-
ftoration to her throne, all that he demanded was
a flight mitigation of the rigour of her iiprifon-
ment. And even this finall request, he urged with
so little warmth or importunity, that no regard was
paid to it*.
'rhe maf.- THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth

oari. ' much fatisfa&ion, and he expeEted from it a great

increase of security. She now turned her whole at-
tention towards Scotland, where the animofities of
the two factions were still so high, and so many in-
tersering interests to be adjusted, that a general pa-
cification seemed to be at a great distance. But
while he laboured to bring them to some agree-
ment, an event happened which filled a great part
of Europe with aftonifiment, and with horror.
This was the massacre of Paris; an attermpt, to
which there is no parallel in the hiflory of mankind,
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or for
the cruelty and barbarity, with which it was put
in execution. By the most solemn promises of ffetry
and of favour, the leaders of the Protestants were
drawn to court; and though doomed to destruction,
they were received with carelfs, loaded with ho-

* Jebb, . i z.

nours,

nours, and treated, for seven montFs, with every B o o K
poflible mark of familiarity, and of confid-nce. In \'.
the midst of their security, the warrant for their de- e--

15 2.

ftruftion was issued by their Sovereign, on whose Augut 14.
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their
countrymen, their fellow citizens, and companions,
imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten thousand
Protestants, without diffintion of age, or lIx, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were fnt to other parts of
the kingdom, and a like carnage ensucd. This
deed, which no Popish writer, in the prelfnt age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time, ap-
plauded in Spain; and at Rome, fJlemnn thanks-
givings were offered to God, for its success. But
among the Protestants, it excited incredible horror;
a friking pi&ure of which is drawn by the French
Ambassador at the court of England, in his ccount
of his first audience after the massacre. " A gloomy
sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers
of the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
ing, and as'l passed through them, not one belcow-
ed on me a civil look, or made the leat return to
my salutes *."

EUT horror was not the only palilon, vrh which D ,i.

this event inliircd the Proe'c:nts: it '!.l t!' '';' 1"
with fear. They confildrcd it as the Tl::'Lid: to a..
some greater blow, and bclicved, not '.viit':u: much

· C1 tc, 3. '2.

D 2 pro-

B o o K probability, that all the Popilh Princes had conrpir-

VI. ed the deftrufion of their fee. This opinion did

no small disservice to Mary's affairs in Scotland.
Many of her adherents were Protestants; and,
though they wished her restoration, were not wil-
ling, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which
they professed. They dreaded her attachment to
a religion, which allowed its votaries to violate the
most solemn engagements, and prompted them to
perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A general
confederacy of the Protestants seemed to them, the
only thing that could uphold the Reformation against
the league, which was formed to overturn it. Nor
could the present establishment of religion be long
maintained in Britain, but by a itri& union with
Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations,
in espousing the defence of it, as a common caufew.

TheRegent THE Regent took hold of this favourable con-
endeavours. et r
to unite juncture for negociating a general peace. And as
both par. he laboured for this purpose, with the utmost zeal,

and the adverse faction placed entire confidence in
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed
of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came
so near to an agreement with him, that scarce any
thing remained, except the formality offigning the
treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the difap-
pointment he met with in his pretensions to the Re-
gency; his abilities, his wealth, and the patronage
of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the Regent himself; and
he took plea'ure in thwarting every measure pur-

*Dirges, z44, 267.

fuei

sued by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and B o o K
his aflociates recovered any hare in the adminiftra- VI.
tion, his own influence would be considerably dimi-
nihed ; and the Regent, by their means, would re- 572
gain that ascendant, which belonged to his station.
With him, concurred all those, who were in posses-
sion of the lands, which belonged to any of the
Queen's party. And his ambition, and their ava-
rice, frustrated the Regent's pious intentions, and
retarded a bleflng so necefcary to the kingdom, as
the eftablilhment of peace *.

SUCH a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition, His dea:,.

which reigned among his party, made a deep im-
pression on the Regent, who loved his country, and
wished for peace with much ardor. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on
a fettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of
which he died on the 2 th of O&ober; He was,
perhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who could
have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy,
and have left it, without loss of reputation. Not-
withstanding their mutual animofities, both fa&tions
acknowledged his views to be honourable, and his
integrity to be uncorrupted t.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. Morton
The Queen of England powerfully supported his hofe"n Re.

gent.

claim, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, Novcm.
and the jealousy of the nobles, he was elected Re-
gent; the fourth, who, in the space of five years,
had held that dangerous office.

MlIv.lv . C rvf. Mcr . 237. t d. zi.

D 3 As

B o o K As the truce had been prolonged to the firIt of

V 1. January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-

ing the negociations with the opposite party, which
7- lad been IFt on foot by his predecessor. They pro-

duced no cffecs, however, till the beginning of the
next year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, some events, hi-
therto untouched, deserve our notice.

Tu: E.rl of Northumberland, who had been

kept priloncr in Lo::hlevin, ever since his flight in-
to Scotlrnd in the year 1569, was given up to Lord
-lunf.!uon governor of Berwick; and being carried
to York, tfflircd there the puniiifment of his rebel-
lion. '1 he King's party were so sensible of their de-
penlence on Elizabeth's protection, that it was
scarce pofiTble for tein to refuTe putting into her
hap.i l a person who had taken up arms against her.
B;t as a fum of money was paid, on that account;
and li;ared btween Morton and Douglas of Loch-
levin, the former of whom, during his exile in
England, had been much indebted to Northumber-
lan''s friendtliip, ti-e abandoning this unhappy
nobleman, in such a manner, to certain deLtrution,
w-s deeieed an ungrateful and mercenary aion *.

Aff.itn c.f THIS year was remarkable for a considerable in-
t; c]llucl. novation in the government of the Church. Soon

after the Reformation, the Popiflh Bishops hd been
confirmed by law in poffiion of part of their bc-
ncficcs; but the fpiritualjuriflditiun, which bclong-

I Crawf. Mem. 5;, s2. CamJ. .iS.

cd

ed to their order, was exercised by fuperintendants, B o o K
though with more moderate authority, On the V'I
death of the Archbilhop of St. Andrews, Morton '"
obtained from the Crown a grant of the tempora- 7
lities of that fee. But as it was thought indecent
for a layman to hold a benefice, to which the cure
of fouls was annexed, lie procured Douglas, retor
of the university of St. Andrews, to be chosen Arch-
bishop; and allotting him afnall pennion out of the
revenues of the fee, retained the remainder in his
own hands. The n(;b!es, who aw the advantages
they might reap fionm such a pradice, supported
him in the execution cf his plan. Ic gave great
offence, however, to the Clergy, who, inflead of
perpetuating an order, who!e name and power was
odious to them, wviiled that the rcvcnues which had
belonged to it, might be employed in supplying such
parihes, as were fill unprovided with fettled pastors.
But on the one hand, it would have been rafl in
the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen,
on whom the veryexi[enceof rhe rotetant Church
in Scotland depended ; and Morton, on the other,
conducted his cheme with fuich dexterity, and ma-
naged thenl with so much art, tht i: ::'a, at lase,
agreed, in a conventionl conipofed of the leading
men among the Clergy, together with a committee
of privy council, " tli:.i the name and office of
Archbifllop, and Bishop, flould be continued during
the King's minority, and these dignities be confer-
red uon te;c best qualified among the Protestant
Minilters; but that with rci.grd to their Ipiritualju-
rifdt(ions, they fiould be subjed to the general as-
fcmbly of the Church." The rules to be obfirved

D 4 in

B o o K in their election; and the perfonswho were to supply

VI. the place, and enjoy the privileges, which belonged
I'3 2 to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery, were

5 likewise particularly specified *. And the whole be-

ing laid before the General Afiembly, after some
exceptions to the name of Arcbbifbop, Dean, Chap-
ter, &c. and a protestation that it hould be con-
fidered only as a temporary constitution, till one
more perfet could be introduced, it obtained the
approbation of that court . Even Knox, who
was prevented from attending the Assembly by the
ill state of his health, though he declaimed loudly
againf the Simoniacal pa&ion, to which Douglas
owed his preferment, and blamed the nomination of
a person, worn out with age and infirmities, to an
office, which required unimpaired vigour both of
body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings ofthe Convention; and in a letter to the
Assembly, approved of some of their regulations
with refpet to the election of Bishops, as worthy
of being carefully observed . In consequence of
the Assembly's conent to the plan agreed upon in
the Convention, Douglas was installed in his office,
and at the fame time, an Archbishop of Glasgow,
and a Biflhop of Dunkeld were chosen from among
the Proceftant Clergy. They were all admitted to
the place in Parliament, which belonged to the ec-
clefiafical order. But in imitation of the example
set by Morton, such bargains were made with them
by different noblemen, as gave them poffeflion only

* Cald. . 30o. 1 Id. 354.
$ See Appendix, No. V.

of

of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to B o o K
their fees *. VI.

SOON after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, 1572.

NOV. 27.

the prime inflrument of spreading and establishing Death and
the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life, ha,,'xr
in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif-
intereftednefs, were virtues which he poffefled, in an
eminent degree. He was acquainted too, with the
learning, cultivated in that age; and excelled in
that species of eloquence, hich is calculated to
rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too severe, and the impetuosity of his
temper exceflive. Rigid and uncomplying himself,
he thewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.
Regardless of the diftincions of rank and character,
he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony and ve-
hemence, more apt to irritate, then to reclaim.
This often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful
expressions, with refpe&t to the Queen's person and
condut. Those very qualities, however, which
now render his chara&er less amiable, fitted him to
be the instrument of Providence for advancing the
Reformation amonga fierce people, and enabled him
to face dangers, and to surmount opposition, from
which, a person of a more gentle 1pirit would have
been apt to Ihrink back. By an unwearied appli-
cation to study, and to business, as well as by the
frequency and fervor of his public discourses, he
had wornoutaconftitution, naturally strong. Dur-
ing a lingering illness, he discovered the utm-ost for-
titude; and met the approaches of death, with a

* SFot. zr.

nmagna-

B o o K magnanimity in.fcprabie from his character. He

VI. was confar.tly employed in acts of devotion, and

comforted himfeir with tlhoe profpe&s of immorta-
J7' lity, which not only preserve good men from def-

ponding, but fill thcm with exultation in iheir lait
moments. The Ea:l of Morton, who was present
at his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few
words, the more honourable for Knox:, as they
came from one whom he had often censured with
peculiar severity, " There lies He, who never fear-
td the face of man ."

1573. THCu-GH Morton did not desire peace from such
Th IR.- cenerous motives as the former Regent, he laboured,
,viti tic however, in good earnest to eftablifl it. The pub-
Queen lic confusions and calamities, to which he owed his
party,

power and importance wten he was only the second
person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
him, now that hc* was raied to be the first. While
so many of tle nobles continued in arms against
him, his .uthority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Ei zabeth was no lcfs dcfirous of
extinguifiing the flame, which she had kindled, and
kept so long live in Scotland 1-. She had disco-
vered the alliance with France, from which lhe had
cxpected fich advantages, to be no foundation of
security. And though app-ar:nces of fiicndlhip
itill subs:l2d bl .t'.een her and thatcourt, and Charles
daily rcnev.( cl his prorcefations of inviolable adhe-
rerce to the treaty, fle was convinced, by a fatal
cxa:nple, hov iir.le ihe ought to rely on the pro-
nmics o o atls ou that perfidious Monarch. Her

" SpfT ;:. C . 2.
*7. it Dig 'c, :9-).

all -

ambassador warned her that the French held fccret B o a I
correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, VI.
and encouraged them in their obstinacy . The V3
Duke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that king- 5
dom, with less disguise. She was persuaded that
they would embrace the first serene interval, which
the commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land in
Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prcvent their
getting any footing in the island, and to cut off all
their hopes of finding any affillance there, by uni:-
ing the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled tl:e r-r;o-,r

Regent to carry on his negociations with them reto. '.r
great advantage. They were now divided ino to fio :'i;:I d

- ~ and! K,)k-

fa&io.ns. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe- aidy.
rault, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkak!dy ere
the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their
extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
lowers, rendered the former confider.ble. The lat-
ter were indebted for their importance, to tlheir pcr-
fonal abilities, and to the strength of the caf!e of
Edinburgh, which was in their pofc':iion. The
Regent had no intention to coioprehendl both in the
fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the Queen's
parry, if it rem::i:led entire, would be able to thwart
and embarraa his administration, he resolved to di-
vide and weaken it, by a ieparate ncgociation. I-Ie
ma'e the rfl' overture to Kirkally, and his nfT)-
ciates, and endcavoured to renew the negociatiun

* DigS;-,, :96, 312.

with

B o o K with them, which, during the life of his predecef-

VI. for, had been broken off by his own artifices. But
"-* '" Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of go-

73vernment to be very different from those of the

former Regent. Maitland confidered him, as a
personal and implacableenemy. They received re-
peated assurances ofprote&ion from France. And
though the siege of Rochelle employed the French
arms at that time, the fame hopes, which had so
often deceived the party, still amused them, and
they xpeAed that the obltinacy of the Hugonots
would soon be subdued, and that Charles would
then be at liberty to at with vigour in Scotland.
Mean while, a fpply of money was fenr, and if
the castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effec-
tual aid was promised*. Maitland's genius delight-
ed in forming schemes, that were dangerous; and
Kirkaldy pofiffed the intrepidity, necessary for put-
ting them in execution. The castle, they knew,
was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's
power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate
the treaty with France, by fending forces to his as-
fiftance; and if the French should be able to land
any considerable body of men, it might be pofible
to deliver the Queen from captivity, or at least to
ballance the influence of France and England in
such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the dif-
honourable dependance on the latter, underwhich it
had fallen. This splendid, but chimerical projet,
they preferred to the friendship of Morton. They
encouraged the negociation, however, because it
served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame

* Digges, 314.

pur-

purpose, that the whole of the Queen's party hould B o o K
be comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy flould VI.
retain the command of the castle, fix months after ' J
the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the 573
Regent to reje& the former; his penetration disco-
vered the danger of complying with the latter; and
all hopes of accommodation vanished *.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever, to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty with
Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of arms
fill continued with them.

THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, Accepted

by Chatel.

and listened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke herault and
was naturally unsteady, and the approach of oldHuntly
age increased his irresolution, and averflon to action.
The miseries of civil discord had afflited Scotland,
almost five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration of any former conreft. The war, instead
of doing service, had been detrimental to the Queen;
and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had
gained much honour; both had suffered great loses;
and had exhaulted their own estates, in wafting
those of their adversaries. The commons were in
the utmost mifcry, and longed ardently for a peace,
which might terminate this fruitless, but deftrutive
quarrel,

Melv. 235, &c.

A , REA.T

B o o K A GREAT fep was taken towards this deGrable

VI. event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, between
573 the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and

Articles of Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil-
i:b.tr'a3. legrew, Elizabeth's anbaffador . The chief arti-

cles in it were these; that all the parties compre-
hended in the treaty should declare their approbation
of the Reformed religion, now etablilhed in the
kingdom; that they hould submit to the King's
government, and own Morton's authority as Re-
gent; that they flould acknowledge every thing
done in opposition to the King, since his coronation,
to be illegal; that on both fides the prisoners who
had been taken should be fit at liberty, and the
lands restored to their proper owners; that the at
of attainder passed against the Queen's adherents
hould be repealed, and indemnity granted for all
the crimes, of which they had been guilty since the
i5th of June 1567; and that the treaty should be
ratified, by the common consent of both parties, in
parliament .

Sieeof the KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his aflociates,
Edi but' who neither discovered flicitude nor made provision

for his safety, did not lose courage, nor entertain
any thoughts of accommodation . And though

all

See Append. No. VI. Crawf. Mem. 251,

t Mclvil, whoie brother Sir Robert was one of tholi who

jci.,id witl Kiik;ildy in the deence of the caflel, and who wag
hin'nflf trongly atached to their party, arts that KirkaldJ
oiTl;il to accept f ar.y ,cef n.',ble terms of composition, but
rl:hit .;'I his ofcrs were ri ::icl by the Regent. lMclv. 2.,. Eut
a. L.:z.!;ctil was, at tli.t 'i:ll, cxtreenily dcirous of rcil!li.g

pV<eó

all Scotland ha now submitted to the King, he ftll B o o K
resolved to defend the cafdl, in the Qleen's name; VI.
and to wait the arrival of the promised succours. 5-
The Regent was in want of every thing necessary 573
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who de-
termined, at any rate, to bring the difntions in
Scotland to a period, before the French could find
leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him
ffiffcient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 15co foot, and a considerable train
of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all his April zs-
forces; and trenches were opened and approaches
regularly carried on, againf the catle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great fum of
money, remitted to him from France, arnd which
fell into the Regent's hands, through te treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the mofR corrupt man of that
age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
despair. Three and thirty days ';e rfi. led all the
efforts of the Scotch and Englil', wvio pufled on
their attacks, with courage, and with emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the foi.tiications
were battered down, and cne of the wells in the
cafile dried up, and the other choakcd with rubbish.
Even then, his spirit was unfubducd, and he dcter-
peace in Scotl.nJ, and her ambafltidor Killegrew, as w.ll s the
Earl of Rothes, ulcd their utnlolt enisdcavoe: t(i pce!iiadl i;rk-
aldy to acccede to the treaty of 'erth, it fr-ins mo e credible
to impute tle co tiiuannce of hoflilitics to I :!:lJ.dd 's oblliiacy,
his diltrufl of Morton, or his hope ot fo:in aiJ, thi.: to any
otl:er c:iuf;.

'1 hat this was really the cnte, i; ce'iWent from t!e poitrve tef-

timony of S otliv .

2 :',. nn .

c';. l o'.nlf. I' ;

.-

l)iL,.ee, 33+. Cr.;'.lo:di s account agre.'R, il the r.li,, Yvi:h
their, LMc.;i. z; 3,

* n'ilncd

B o o K mined rather to fall gloriously behind the lad in.

VI. trench ment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies.
-l ' But his garrison was not animated with the fame he-
1573. roic or dcfperate resolution, and rising in a mutiny,

forced him to capitulate. He surrendered himself
May z9.

to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mif-
trefs, that he should be favourably treated. Toge-
ther with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord
Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few citi-
zens of Edinburgh, and about 160 soldiers, were
made prisoners *.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac-
company them into the Low-countries, and enter-
ing into the service of the States, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military
virtue, which has always been the chara&eriftic of
the Scottish Nation.

Review of THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt-
', r;fbrch ly, and the surrender of the castle, the civil wars in
p. Lies. Scotland were brought to a period. When we re-

view the ate of the nation, and compare the
strength of the two factions, Mary's partizans
among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers, and in power. But these
advantages were more than counterballanced by
others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents, which
times of ation form, or call forth, appeared chiefly
on the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boast

Ca!d . 40. Mclv. 40o. Crawf. Mem. 65.

of

of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur- B o o K
ray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity VI.
of Morton the subtle genius, and insinuating ad- 57^
dress of Maitland; or the successful valour of Kir-
kaldy; all which were, at first, employed in lay-
ing the foundations of the king's authority. On
the one fide, meafu res were concerted with prudence,
and executed with vigour; on the other, their re-
solutions were rash, and their condut feeble. The
people animated with zeal for religion, and prompt-
ed by indignation againit the Queen warmly sup-
ported the King's cause. The Clergy threw the
whole weight of their popularity into the fame scale.
By means of these, as well as by the powerful in-
terpofition of England, the King's government was
finally established. Mary loft even that ihadow of
obvereignty, which, amidf' all her sufferings, she
had hitherto retainedamong part of her own subjeCts.
And as fie was no longer permitted to have an Am-
bafdor at the court of England, the only tark of
dignity which she had, for some time, enjoyed there,
she mull hencefotth be confidered as an exile firip-
ped of all the ehfigns of royalty; guarded with
anxiety in the one kingdon, and totally deserted or
forgotten in the other.

KIRFA!.DY and his associates remained in Drury's Kirkizld?

custody, and were treated by him with great huma- Pd,,.
nity, till the Queen of England, whose prifoncrs
they were, should determine their fate. Morton
inliftc( that they should susser the puniihment due
to their rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that
so long as they were allowed to live, he did not

VOL. II. E reckon

B o o K reckon his own person or authority secure; and Eli-

VI. zabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his
.- .. Opromifes in her name, gave them up to the Regent's

5 dilpola. lie first confined them to lfparate pri-
ion.s; and, soon after, with Elizabetl's content,
Ausufl 3* condemned Kirkl(ldy, and his brother, to be hang-

ed at the crous of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did
not exipct to be treated more favourably, prevent-
ed the ignominy of a public execution, by a vo-
luntary death, and " ended is days, fays Melvil,
aser the old Roman fal ion*."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the fblitude of her prison. At
thi fime time, her health began to be much impair-
ed by cnfinf- ;:enr, and want of exercise. At the
inm:'aty cf tl!e French Ambassador, Lord Shrews-
bl'I: he k' l- 'r w vas permitted to carry her to Btlx-
tcn-\v-!!s, r:jt ir r from Tuthbury, the place of her
i!i:riib;nlelt. Cecil, who lately had been created
Ba.t(,n cuf itJlh! and Lord High Treasurer of
En!anl':. li;;. hP i'.'.-J to be there at the fame time.
;,nd I 'u-; ! no ninile.r ever entered more warmly
ii;o ti:' x'>., f a Secreign, or gave tronger
proui:; ,' l;is iclity and attachment, than this
great anr, y et such \wa , Eiizabeth's diltruf: of every
pcriLn, \i:. .irItrOacIhcl the Queen of Scots, that
l;cr lili)cions extncll e ven to lim; and while
Mary jLlly recklored hi m her t-;oit daingerous ene-
m), he fotund fomc dliic;i i' in prfiiading his own

* .\LiV. =.i 2.

mnif.

miffrefs, that he was not partial to that unhappy B o o K
Queen . VI.

THE Duke ofAlva was this year recalk:d from 1573.

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppressive administration rouzed a fpi-
rit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhaust-
ed its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glo-
ry. Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a
milder temper, and of a less enterprizing genius.
This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetil
disquietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with
the Scottish Queen, and his zeal for her interel.

THouGH tie kingdom was now fettled in pro- 157 -

found peace, many of the evils, which accompany T'1i Re-
civil war, were still felt. Tile restraints of law,,,,;,,;,
which, in times of public confusion, are little re- inti-
garded even by civilized nations, were totally de- *dluus.
Ipifed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to the re-
gular administration of justice. The dlilIrders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intoler-
able; and unde te tio o t o r

the

proteion of the one, or t

other faaion, crimes of every kind v/ere comrlirs-
ted, with impunity. The Regent It himllf to
redress these, and, by his indufry and v;-ou!r, order
and Iccurity were re-established in t.cI inrdo-1'.
But he lolt the reputation, dlue to this inlporarict 1c'-
vice, by the avarice, which he dilcovcrcd, in per-
forming it; and his own xacltions bec-am nc r.
pernicious to the nation, tnn all tile irrcguliiii ::,
wlich he rclhraincd-1-. Stics ;Iml iiifurincrs vwc:

* Strype, 2. 4, zS.
, Set A:pic. Noi . \ I.

L'. 2 7.,

Bo o K every where employed; the remembrance of old

VI. offences were revived; imaginary crimes were in-
574. vented; petty trefpaflcs were aggravated; and de-

linquents were furced to compound for their lives,
by the payment of xorbitant fires. At the fame
time, the current coin was dcbafed* ; licences were
fold for carrying on prohibited branches of com-
merce, unulual taxes were imposed on commodities;
and all the refinements in opprt flon, from which,
nations so imterfectly pollhedas the Scots are ufu-
ally exen.pted, were put in practice. one of these
were complained of more loudly, or wi h greater
reason, than his injustice towards the Church. The
thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy re-
ceived their fubfiffance had always been slowly and
irregularly paid to colleors, appointed by the Ge-
neral Alimrnbly; and during the civil wars, no pay-
ment could be obtained in several parts of the king-
dom. Under colour of redrefling this grievance,
and upon a promise of aigning every Minister a
ftipcnd within his own parish, tie Regent extorted
troin the Church the thirds to which they had right
by law. But the Clergy, intlead of reaping any
advantage from this alterntion, found that pay-

* The corrution of the Cnin, during Morton's adminiifra-

tion, w s very geat. Although the quantity of current money
coined out of a pound of Bullinn, was braduialy incieafed by
ftru(.r p nces; the flandard or firenefs suffered little :lterat.on,
and the rirture of alloy was nealy the fame, ith what i new
intic. ':it Mtlorton nmixed a fourth pait of alloy, .ih every
pound If f lvtr, and lur.k, by corlcqucnce. the value f coi,,
in p'o:onrti.n,. n the ecar iSRt. ill the mloney coinel by him

a caille.i in, nd appoinred to be recoined. Th'e (ikr.dard ws

r lr.J o toe ame puri:y a formerly. Rudd;,m. Ps. to.An.
der. I)!, lon) p. -

men;s

ments became more irregular and dilatory than B o o K
ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with VI.
the care of four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was
allotted him, and the Regent's insatiable avarice 574
seizcd on the reft of the fund*.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this

year, was a new misfortune to the Scottilh Queen.
Henry II. who succeeded him, had not the fame
attachment to her prfon, and his jaloufy of the
houie of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Queen
Mother, greatly alienated him from her interest.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault must 157.;

likewise be confidered as some los to Mary. As J'"'a 3
the Parliament had frequently declared him next
heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great ref-
pet among his countrymen, and enabled him,
more than any other person in the kingdom, to
counterballance the Regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scotrifh and English
marches, a scuffle happened, in which the English
were worsted; a few kille d on the fpor; and Sir
James Forrefcr, the warden, with tiveral gentle-
n;en who attended him, taken prilbners. But both
Elizabeth and the Regent were too fenfiblc of the
advantage, which resulted from the good under-
flanding that fubfilted between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

Caws. Mem. 272. Spots. 273. Cald. A. 40o, 427.

E 3 THE

B o o K THE domcfdic tranquillity of the kingdom was

VI. in ibn;e danger of being disturbed by another cause.
-"'"Though the perfors, raiied to the dignity of Bi-
157- c
Atemptsof shops, poiliTed very small revenues, and a very
the C:ercy moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom
ayainft thec

c
Epifcopali the egent and all his mealures were become ex-

o. trctmey odious, began to be jealous of that order-

Knowing that corruptions fieal into the Church,
gradually, un-'er honourable names, and upon de-
cent pretences, they were afr;id that, from such
finsall beg;nnilngs, the hierarchy might grow, in
tinme, to be as powerful and oppreliive as ever.
The chiei ut!!or of these fuiicions was Mr. An-
drew iMelvil, a man, diftinguifled by his uncom-
ilon erudition, by the severity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirer.ent of an academy, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life; and being more attentive to
the cn.s which he pursued, than to the means
which he emniloyed for promoting them, he often
defeated lau :able defirgn, by the impctuolity and
imprudetnce with which he carried them on. A
quefcion was moved by him in tle assembly, " whe-
ther the office of Bifulop, as now exerciled in the
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?"
In the ecciufiatica.l judicatories, continual corn-
p'i::irts were inade of the Biihops, for negle of
dc::y, ti'rny of whicl, their knownremilsnefstoowell
jtllfl.!. 'I lie Bif;op of 1utikeld, being accued
of d..i-itL:a:ing his benefice, was found guilty by
the Tffembly. And the Hegent, inltead of check-
ing, corn:\cl d at thlee diputes a:out cclefiaftical
goverlnlcntr, ,.s they diverted the zeal of the Clergy

fronl

£rom attending to his daily encroachments on the B o o K
patrimony of the Church *. VT.

THE weight of the Regent's opprefive admini- 1576.

ie irrittes

ftration had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the oe of the
lower, and middle rank ; but he began now to take nobl'j.
such steps, as convinced the nobles, that their dig-
nity would not long exempt them from feeling the
effe&s of his power. An accident, which was a
frequent caufc of dissention among the Scottill no-
bles, occasioned a difierence between the Earls of
Argyll and Athole. A vaTal of the former had
made ibme dcpred.iions on the lands of the latter.
Athole took aris to punish the of!inder; Argyll,
to prott5: him; and this ignolle qual-rel they were
ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by
interporing his authority, obliged tllhm to disband
their forces. Both of them had been guilty of ir-
regularities, which, though common, were con-
trary to the letter of the law. Of teC the Re;ent
took advantage, and resolvcd to found on them a
charge of treason. This design was revealed to the
two Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The conm-
mon danger, to which they were expoled, compell-
ed t!hem to forget old quarrcls, andt to unire in a
close confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their
junaion rnvl^:red them formidable; they dceipilid
the li.;1mons which the Regent gave then to ap-
pear before a court of justice; antd le was obliged
to desist from any further prol'ccution. But the in-
jury he intended made a deep imprclion on their
minds, and drew on hin s1evere vengeance

* Cald. ' tAnnbll ies, 1574, .-c, J.,fiiil. ti!. i;.
4 Crav.f Mcm, "'5.

I'; *\ NoR

B o OK No:, was he more successful in an attempt, which

V1. he made, to load Lord Claud IHamilton with the
J577 guilt of having formed a conpiracy against his

life. T'hough those, who were fuppo!id to be his
accomplices, xwere liized, and tortured, no evi-
dence of any thing criminal appeared but, on the
contrary, many circumltances diScovered his inno-
cence, as well as the Rcgent's secret views in im-
puting to him such an odious design .

They turn TIlE Scottifi Nobles, who were amoft eqtLal to
their eyes
towar-ds their Monarchs in power, and treated by them witli
*e '"sn much dillintion, observed theli ai'biira"y proceed-

ings of a Regent, with the utmoil oidignation.
T'he F:e ple, who un'!cr a ifoi o goverrmn

nta ex-

tremely imp'.u, h.Ad bn lille ac IiuilomcJ to the
burden of taxes, co:0!!:pL;in ! lutdiv ot tlic Reg.nt's
rapacity. id. 1! l bc-gan to turn Liidr cYee. towards
r;e yo;!. 1,; liri g,o rr)m vlno tihey cxpcx:'i'e the re-
direis of ll tci;r ; icvanc-s, alnd te retlrn of a
more gentLC, and Imor equal adtin;ill': ro' .

irrc', .JAMRES was now i!' the twlfth y)er of hlis ae.
,',;,,,o TL;c Qt.en, son .s;er his birth, had comnliir(:d

.""'". him to the care. of tihe Farl of MaIr, and diurir;.:r the

civil .'!rs, l'e had rcikld securely in thc ctlk of
Stiilng . Alex.dnlr Li :ine, tha n ll;r,;i's ' o-
thcr, ih.d the chief dirct ion of his educautin. Un-
der liiiin, tlic f.!nlOus l3uclanan acted as ;recccptor,
tr;,l't!r wiil' three olithr malcrs, the mol eninclr,
the i:ati(.n ai.!rdcd!, tr fLill in tholi sciences,
v,;'c!i v. ce dczrnlcd nc iiry for a prince. T'he

* Cra'.vr

: '.;'=f . ,'.7
.

youn~

57

young King hewed an uncommon passion for learn- B o o K
ing, and made great progress in it. And the Scots VI.
fancied that they already discovered inhim, all those I
virtues, which the fondness or credulity of fubje&ls 577
usually ascr.ibe to princes, during their minority.
But as James was still far from that age, at which
the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to
the sentiments of the people, nor refle&t, how na-
turally these prejudices in his favour might encou-
rage the King to anticipate that period. He not
only negle&ed to secure the friendship of those
who were about the King's person, and who pof-
sessed his ear, but had even exasperated ome of
them, by personal injuries. Their resentment con- H;s sue.
curred with the ambition of others, in infusing into plci'ou of
the King early suspicions of Morton's power, and gent's
designs. A King, they told him, had often reason power.
to tear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, and by interest, he would endeavour to
keep the Prince in perpetual infancy, at a distance
from his fubjeCs, and unacquainted with business.
A Imall degree of vigour, however, was flifficient
to break the yoke. Subjects naturally reverence
their .'overcign, and become impatient of the tem-
porai y and delegated jurifdilion of a Regent.
Morton h:,d overned with rigour, unknown to
the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation
groaneil ur;ldr his opprelffons; and would welcome
tt.c iirit profpet of a milder adminitration. At
preent the King's name was scarce mentioned in
Scotland, his friends were without influence, and his
favourites without honour. But one effort would

discover

B o o K discover Morton's power to be as feeble, as it was

Vl. arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himlelf
C~.- in pofelTion of his just authority, and rescue the
1J57' nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not re-

gard his own rights as a King, let him liften, at
least, to the cries of his people *.

A ¢Ft THESE fuggeltions made a deepimpreflion on the
a,'l'c a- youngr King, who was trained up in an opinion that
JAcg nt. ile was born to command. His approbation of the

deiign, however, was of small consequence, with-
out the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of
Argyll and Athole, two of the most powerful of
that body, were animated with implacable reient-
ment againfl the Regent. To them the Cabal in
Stirling-cafle communicated the plot, which was
on foot; and they entering warmly into it, Alex-
ander Erskine, who, since the death of his brother,
aid during the minority of his nephew, had the
conmard of that forr, and the cutody of the
King'sperfon, admitted them fecre:ly into theKing's
pretence. They gave him the fame account of the
mifiery of his llbjeccs, under the Regent's arbitrary
adninitlration; they complained loudly of the in-
jutficc, ith which tlhemrnlves h:ad been treated;
and bclbught the King, as the only means for re-
drcffing the grievances of the nation, to call a coun-
cil of all the nobles. James contented, and letters
were ifueTd, in his name, for that purpolc ; but the
two Earls took care that they fliould be sent only
to ifuch as were known to bear no good will to
Morton --.

*Mclv. 2.19. t SpctF. 278.

THE

THE number of these was, however, so inconfider- B o o r

able, that on the day appointed, far the greater part VI.
of the nobles aflembled at Stirling and so higtily 5.
were they incensed against Morton, that although, March 4,
on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's
interview with the King, he had made a sint as if
he would resign the Regency, they advise ' the King,
without regarding this offer, to deprive him of his
office, and to take the adlninitlration of govern-
ment into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chan-
cellor, and Herreis, were appointed to signify this
resolution to Mulrton, who was, at that time, in
Dalkeith, his uual place of refidcnce. Nothing H, es,.
could equal the joy, with which this unexpecded re- nelit:e
solution filled the nation, br the lurprize occasion-
ed by the teeming alacrity, with which the Regent
descended from so high a station. He neither want-
ed sagacity to forete the danger of resigning, nor
inclination to keep pofielorn of an oiFice, tor the
expiration of which, the law had fixed lo dif.n;: a
term. But all the fourccs, ul:ence the stion of
which he was head, derived their itrength, had ei-
ther failed, or now upplied his advcrllries with
the means of humbling him. The Commons, the
city of Edinburgh, the Clergy, were all totally
alienated from him, by his mu':ipiicd oppressions.
Elizabeth, having lately bound herlilf by treaty,
to fend a confiderabie boi. of troops to the afTill-
ance of the inhabi:ants of tlie Netherlands, who
were struggling for liberty, had little leisure to at-
tend to the affairs of '.cotind ; and as she had no-
thing to dread frln F'ranice, in tvi:oi councils the
Princes of Lorrain had nor, at tlit rime, mucl in-

fluence,

B o K fluence, she was not displeased, perhaps, at the

VI. birth of new facions in the kingdom. Even those

z. '
8 nobles, who had long been joined with Morton in

fa&ion, or whom he had attached to his person by
benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcarn the
secretary, Murray of Tillibarden Comptroller, all
deic ted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the
council at Stirling. So many concurring circum-
stances convinced Morton of his own weakness, and
determined him to give way to a torrent, which
March 1. was too impetuous to be resifted. He attended the

chancellor and Herreis to Edinburgh; was present
when the King's acceptance of the government was
proclaimed; and, in the presence of the people,
surrendered to the King, all the authority to which
he had any claim in virtue of his office. This ce-
remony was accompanied with such excessive joy
and acclamations of the multitude, as added, no
doubt, to the anguish, which an ambitious spirit
must feel, when compelled to renounce supreme
power; and convinced Morton how entirely he had
loft the affections of his countrymen. He obtain-
ed, however, from the King an at, containing the
approbation of every thing done by him in the
exercil of his office, and a pardon, in the most
ample form, that his fear or caution could dcvife,
of all past offences, crimes and treasons. The
nobles, who adhered to the King, bound themft lves,
under great penalty, to procure the ratification of
this at, in the first parliament *.

* Spots 278. Crawf. Mem. 239. Cald. z. 52.

3 A coUN-

A COUNCIL of twelve Peers was appointed to B o o

assist the King, in the administration of affairs. VI.
And Morton, deserted by his own party, and un- '578
able to firuggle with the fa&iun, which governed c. ni ues
absolutely at court, retired to one of his leats, and t w'tin
seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occu i d o r;c ad-

versc party.

only in the amufenents, of a country life. H:s ver
mind, however, was deeply difquiet.d with all the
uneasy rflections, which accompany difa lpointed
ambition; and intent on schemes for recovering his
former grandeur. Even in this retreat, which the
people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and abilities
rendered him formidable. And the new Coun-
fellors were so imprudent as to rouze him, by the
precipitancy with which they hastened to strip him
of all remains of power. They required him to
surrender the caifle of Edinburgh, which was still
in his poffeflion. He refused at first to do so, and
began to prepare for its defence; but the citizens of
Edinburgh having taken arms, and repulsed a part
of the garrison, which was ent out to guard a con-
voy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that
important fortress, without resistance. This en-
couraged his adversaries to call a parliament to meet
at Etldinbur'gh, and to multiply their demands upon
him, in such a manner, as convinced him that no-
thing lIis than his utter ruin would satisfy their
invcterate hatred.

THEIR pver and popularity, however, egan

nhieadcy to decline. The Chanccllor, theablcft ..n
niof m.derate man in the party, having been klii,cd
at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter bctw.cn his

tul.

B o K followers and those of the Earl of Crawford;

VI. Athole, who was appointed his successor in that

high office, the arls of Eglington, Cathnefs, and
Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at court,
were either avowed Papists, or fulpeaed of leaning
to the opinions of that set. In an age, when the
return of popery was so much, and so justly,
dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as Mor-
ton had always treated the Papils with rigour, this
unikafonabie indulgence made all zealous Protef-
taint remember that circumstance in his admini-
flration, with great praise *.

Refniles MOKrTON, to whom none of these particulars
uthorit'y were unknown, thought this the proper junLture for

litting to work the instruments, which he had been
preparing. Having gained the confidence of the
Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother, he
irlinllatcd to the that Alexander Erikine had
forilicd a plot to deprive his nephew of the govern-
ment J.'Stirling-caftle, and the custody of the King's
perlon; and eaElly induced an ambitious woman,
a;ti a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent
':is llppoled injury. The Earl repairing suddenly
to Slirling, and being admitted, as usual, into the
cartle with his attendants, seized the gates early
April 6. i; te nm.rning, and turned out his Uncle, who

dreaILeld no danger from his hands. The foldicrs
ol te ga;rriion libmittdc to him as their governor,
alni;, Vith little danger, and no effusion of blood,
he bc.nmc m:tler bth of the King's perfbn, and
the firtr'l,;.

* ;:.:n; ',. 1- C i..
C , A5.

5; AN

AN event so unexpeced occasioned great confter- B o o K

nation. And though Morton's hand did not ap- VI.
pear in the execution, he was universally believed '57
to be the author of the attempt. The new Coun-
fellors law it to be necessary, for their own afety,
to change their measures, and instead of pursuing
him with such implacable resentment, to enter inmo
terms of accommodation with an adversary, still so
capableof creating them trouble. Fourwere named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met
not far from Dalkeitll. And when they had brought
matters near a conclusion, Morton, who was too
sagacious not to improve the advantage, which their
security and their attention to the treaty aiForcled
him, fct out in the night time for SLirling, andi :ny z4,
having gained Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's un!e,
was admitted by him into the castle; andl manl.i;-
ing matters there with his usual dexterty, ihe ifon
had more entirely the command of the io:-t, than
the Earl himself. He was likewif amitted to a
feat in the privy council and acquired the fame
afcencdart in it:.

As the tin:e appointed for the ncerirn of o ar-

liament at Edinburgh now approalied, this ave
him fonme anxiety. Hle was afraid of carrsing the
young King to a city, wholf inhab:tants wc:-e si
much at the lcvction of the adverse faction. IIe
was no less unwilling to k ave Jamcs behind at Stir-
ling. In order to avoid this dilemma, he ied a
proclamlation, in the King's name, changing the
place of lieering from Edinburgh to St.rlilg- al(}.

' C(,!,'. 2. c3',.

Th.

B o o K This Athole and his party repreSented as a ftep al

VI. together unconfRitutional. The King, laid they, is
5ior Morton's prisoner; the pretended counsellors are

his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may
repair without fear, and where they may deliberate
with freedom, is absolutely necessary for fettling the
nation, after disorders of such long continuance.
But in an assembly, called contrary to all form,
held within the walls of a garrison, and over-awed
by armed men, what safety could members expeet ?
what liberty could prevail in debate ? or what be-
nefit result to the public? The Parliament met,
July s. however, on the day appointed, and notwithftand-

ing the protestation of the Earl of Montrose and
Lord Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded
to business. The King's acceptance of the govern-
ment was confirmed; the at granted to Morton,
for his security, ratified; ome regulations, with
regard to the numbers and authority of the privy
council, were agreed upon; and a pension for life
granted to the Countess of Mar, who had been so
inetrumental in bringing about the late revolu-
tion .

Argyll and ME ANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their follow-
Akl: ,ns ers, took arms, upon the specious pretence of ref-
aaint cuing the King from captivity, and the kingdom

from oppression. Jn:les hlimllf, impatient of the
servitude in which lie was hell, by a man whom he
had long been taught to hate, Iccretly cncouraged
theirenterprize; though, at the lhnlc time, e was
obliged not only to (dltivow litm in public, bt

· Cald . ;-. P:.I. V I, \.

ta

to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by B o o K
proclamation, that he was perfetly free from any VI.
conflraint, either upon hii perlon, or his will. Both -~"
fides quickly took the field. Argyll and .A thole 57
were at tie head of 7o00 men; the Earl of A nus,
Morton's nephew, met them with an armiy ,oooAuguft r.
strong; neither party, however, was eag'-r to en-
gage. Morton dtrulled the fidelity of' his own
troops. The two Ei:rls were fenlble th.at a fnile
vicory, however coiplcat, would not b (iecifv-;
and as they were in nu conldition to ulecrt,I:c tlhe
liege of Stirling-ctle, here the

t King vw:.s kept,

their strength would lol b exiTaulted, while Mor-
ton's own wealth, and te patronage of the OtQuten
of Engl.ind, might furnilh liln with eidlcli rc-
sources. By the indiation of Bow.s, wilhon Eli-
zabeth had ltnt into Scotland to ncgociate an ac-
commodation between the two factions, a treat;, Eiz.helt,
was ci;ncluded, in consequence of lwhich, Argiyll !'°"C"'"e

- ' * ;.ll ;ICCO;i11

and Athole were admitted into the King's preT;-ncc; no,.,;i ..
fbme of their party were added to the privy council; t!,L,,
and a Convention of nobles called, in orn'er to brin;
all remaining differenccs to an a.icailc iilue .

So soon s James afrumned the government intn

his own hands, he d:lipatched the abbot o Iull-
termling to inifrm Elizabeth of that event; tr (t
fcr to renew the a'iance between the :v.'o kling, frn
and to demand pofir:lTon of the e'iate, wli; i.
lately fallen to him, bv the death oi hi r;ln '!r-
ther, the Couti-cs of Lennox. 'i liat Lai.':; 'iv
cond fn had left oe ciaugchter, Arabelli .' tv,:;l ,

C* cIa.w . :n,. v;-.
VOL. II. E v, !,

B o o K who was born in England. And as the chief ob-

VI. je&ion against the pretensions of the Scottish line to
77 the crown of England, was that maxim of Englilh

law, which excludes aliens from any right of in-
heritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by grant-
ing this dec:r!.:cl, wouid have eablifhed a prece-
dent in James's favour, that might have been esteem-
cd deciivc, with regard to a point, which it had been
her coi.ft.!nt care t kcep undecided. Without sus-
terin tis ,delicate qlueic,'on to be tried, or allowing
any new'v li-l t to be ti';o:vn on that, which the con-
lidtrcd a; :!-1 rrrcat niyllery of her reign, he com-
maniil thl rcir.s ci th!e cliate to be fequeftcred by
l.ord Burici:, nailcr of the wards; and by this
method of picc. einr, Czve the Scottiih King early
warning i;ow n:ecefTary it would be to court her fa-
vour, i- ever n" Ioped! f r fciucccs in claims of greater
i:ip,';L.ancc, but cq.ially liable to be controverted*.
1-9. .r : it mnay delays, and with much difficulty,

the contcd::ing nobles were t laii: brought to some
ai_'ce:cn:t. L :t it was followed by a tragical event.
M1ltslr, in token of reco'nilecnilt, having invited
:.;:4. tl:e dcisL'tCl of the ouppClice party to a great enter-

t.inient, A1thole the Chancellor \as, lbon after,
taken ill, and died within a cw days. The fly p-
to;ls and vio'ence of the d(i!eale gve life to trong
lull'i,:i:n o his being poilbnsid; and though the
phylicians, who opened his body, differed in opinion
as to tile caule of the diltcmpcr, the Chancellur's re.
lations publicly accuted Morton of that odious
crime. Th: advantage which visibly accrued to hin,

Camd. 41I.

by

by the removal of a man of great abilities, and B o K
averse from all his measures, was sufficient proof of VI.
his guilt to the people, who are ever fond of i;nl-
puting the death of eminent persons to extraordinary
causes *.

THE office of Chancellor was beflowed upon Morons'a

ilega pro.

Argyll, whom this prlf:rnmcnt reoo;ailce, in a great c,,dl;0s
nmca.rilc, to Morton's ad:nii;i'rationi. lie had now lailt !i

fainr;lv of

recovered all t!he authority lie pollfd during his ,i:.'.un.
Regency, !nil hald ietirely broken, or balfLd, th:
power and cabls of' his enemies. Nrone of- ti.' ,rc':r

rnailits rcmnained to be the (,,ji,::t o£r fiis jaluu!i,

or to obfiruA Iiis ('lin, lbut.at of i l.;mnlcon.
'1 lhei Earl of Arraln, the cl.'ei b)rother, hi.ad n cr
recovered the oc-, vw h i;e rcc-ived froni the
ill lilcscls of his pairoci l e

r t!h Queen, and L.d

now alti)gether lolt his relb:i. Lord John, te l-
coni brother, was in pofidilio; of the family. ei;.:e
lord Claud was Commnnd.:or of P in:',; bldl

osr

them young men, an bitious, and cierpu:"';i.i:,.
M'iorron d cretiJed rhir i[flience in the 1i,-c):; ; t.e
co;;: icers io)ed1 to fl;' e their l.:il:;3 i:unJl tiln ;;
;;i. as .il {i l'c:; n:tL:rilv view [c;r Vfcce:.: l. I'
jc'... ! and h .ic'd, it v.'.;s ('.!y t ill',i:c ti:cl ' i,.l
Lhu :; n tlhe inid o': t.he v>;'.;? K'i;. ;\ pri.
tCi'- v'.',it ) ,nl;l; t.) j~iliVt ill':;;(;:[ v .:! ':: |; :t

p : . l-

in s. T rle par o. i, liil.,:d i i t ;c I -..t, ;i i-'i.h,

;d no t c:.c;,id ).(, *.);t :, v'.*,:;

. ,.Cli.t;',,

r, . !

!;a..lrd!(t" !;- [:.;..,VI .; :,; oF 1.'.; .;;. .O
,

)loi ,.!1.1 i, l):' r';;!'r \', .' J,;ji, (."t 'i .-.:it).r :!:

dc. h O o,!t 1e

,;:'I

c i i , a .

:0 b';r.!
1Ii V : , !-

: .. ',

r c
o tWc-

B o o K ed in a general a of attainder on that account.

VI. Without summoning them to trial, or examining

79 a single witnfs to prove the charge, this attainder

was now thought sufficient to subject them to all
the penalties, which they would have incurred by
being formally conviEted. The Earls of Morton,
Mar, nd Fllinton, together with the Lords Ruth-
ven, Bo.,d, and Ca.hcarr, rcc.i.ed a commifion
to fcze their Ferfons and efates. On a few hours
warning, a coni.lerable b::di c.f troops was ready,
an mahd

mache tow.rs ! in il:on, in holtile array.

I l.ppi;y, the two broithcrs n;'e thleir e!cape,
t'h:;:h x itih grea;t clisicultv. But their lands were
coinfiiatcdt ti;e calles of I lailton and Draffan
bcicrgul ; thol who defended them pun'fihed.
The E!arl of Arran, though i;ic.pable, from his
fitiuti;;n, ofconimm.itirn any crime, was involved,
by a iiarneful abuii of law, in the common ruin of
his 'family; and as if !e, too, could have been
guilty of rebellion, confined a close piler. Thef
prccedings, so contrary to the funr.damcntal prin-
ciples ofjuRice, were all ratified in the lubfctqucnL
parliament *.

ABOUT this time Mary fcrt, by Nau !;h'r ficre-

tary, a letter to her Ibn, toge;lher with itme jc\cL'l
of value, and a vcft ernob:idered with her ov.:
hands. ut as flc gave him only the title of Plrince
of Scul rnd, til n;meflngcr was difiniffld, without
being aidmitted into his p;rience-i.

Crawf. l . . 311. Spofv, 3,,
t C, wf. Me'r. 314.

6 Tlrc;t

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti- B o o K

cular reason to fear any attempt of the Popish Prin- X I.
ces, in Mary's favour, she Iill continued to guard -

= I79.

her with the fame anxious care. The acquilirion Negocia-
of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of'ions fr
the Netherlands, on the other, fully employed the hv'"ecn

Elihzibglt

councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pcces and the
by intelline commotions, and under a weak and ca- D"ke o

Aleirojn.

pricious Prince, delpifed and di'trufted by his own
ilbjects, was in no condition to difiurb its neigh-
bours. Eiizabeth had long amuied that court by
carrying on a treaty of marriage withl the Duke of
Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at the
age of forty-five, she really intended to mar'y a
Irince of twenty ? whether the pleasure of being
flattered and courted, made her liilen to the addref-
fes Qs so young a lover, whom fih ailowed to visit
her at two different times, and treated with the moit
diftinguilhing relpe ? or whether confidcrations of
interelt, predominated in this, as well as in every
other trJnlfa.tion of her reign, are problems in his-
tory which we are not concerned to resolve. Dur-
ing the progrei, of this negociation, which was
drawn out to an extraorin:iry length, Mary could
cxpert no afinance from the Frtnch court, and
flems to have held little correrpondence wih it.
And there was no pcr.o i i her reign, wherein Eli-
zabeth enjoyed more perf;lc: ccuriry.

MORTON reems at this time to have ben e l-. Two ra.

ly secure; but his iecurity was not Ib well founded. , ,,,.,'',;,r.
HI-e had weathered out oe Itorm, hd crulhid his ' dllt
adverl'Jries, and Was ;ligin in pOIi"on o t' r lIle

}/ 3 Ci.t!:;n

Bo o K direcion of affairs. But as the King was now of

VI. an age, when the chara&ter and dispositions of the
t"- mind begin to unfold themfclvcs, and to become vi-

' fible, the lfalleft attention to thele might have con-

vinced him, that there was reafn to expec new
and more d.n:nerctis attacks on his power. .ames
early dilcuvered that excelive attachment to favou-
rites, which accompanied him through his whole
life. This 3affion, which naturilly arises fromr inex-
perience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be
expetled that the choice of the objets, on whom he
placed his affections, should be made with great
Ikill. The molt confidcrable of them, was Efme
Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second
brother of the Earl of Lennox. ife was diftin-
gu'flhed by the title of Lord D'Aubigne, an estate
in France, which defended to him from his ancef-
tors, onwhom it had been conferred, in reward of
their valour, and ervices to the French crown. He
Sept. S. arrived in Scotiand, about this time, on purpose to

demand the efate and title of Lennox, to which hc
pretended a legal right. IIe was received, at first,
by the King, with the respect due to so near a rela-
tion. The gracefulnels of his perlbn, the elegance
of his drc's, and his courtly behaviour, made a great
itmpriion on James, who, even in his more mature
years, was iittle able to reffi these frivolous charms;
and hii aflrtion flowed withI its usual rapiiity, ancl
Frofufion. W'ithin a few days after Stwvart's ap-
pearance at c('trt, he was created Lord A b,'rbru-
thock, Iblon ..fiter l'lar, and ten Duke of Lcnnox,
G;uv.rnot r l3tinbar:cn cAllz, C.:i;t.:.a of il:; c ar.l,

fil:^

firR Lord of the bed-chamber, and Lord High B o o K
Chamberlain. At the fame time, and without any VI.
of the envy, or emulation which is usual among --"C

1579.

candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, the
second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great con-
fidence. But notwithstanding this union, Lennox
and Captain Stewart were persons of very opposite
chara&ers. The former was naturally gentle, hu-
mane, candid; but unacquainted with the Itate of
the country, and misled, or milinformed by those,
whom he trusted; not unworthy to be the compa-
nion of the young King, in his amusements, but
utterly disqualified for ating as a Minifler, in di-
recting his affairs. The latter was remarkable for
all the vices, which render a man formidable to his
country, and a pernicious courn!ilor to his Prince;
nor did he posess any one virtue, to counterbalance
these vices, unless a dexterity in conduing his own
designs, and an enterprizing courage, ulpericr to
the lenle of danger, may pats by that name. Un-
restrained by religion, rc'gardle ofi diccency, and un-
difmiayed by opposition, e aimed at objects, fcem-
ingly unattainable ; but under a Prince, void of ex-
perience, and blind to a'l the defetss of those, who
had gained his favour, his audacity was fuccefsiul;
and honours, wealth, and ower, were the reward
of his crimes.

BOTFI t!:e fvourites concurred in employing their They I,,.
whole C.d..'i :s. to u nc:im.n;l M (crtc;n'.- crdlit, which h"', ro ,n-

de, r:'.ir e

alone o ri'tuctil tl.'Kir i.l' p i frlon of power. And ;'.rolw

as J ::;-:. ilad ac"n
;'.' : u; w:h an avcriio:: for that 'y'

i' 4 noble-

B o o K nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the

VI. authority of a Tutor, than to aa with the obfequi-
'579. o:lIneFs of a Mini:icr, they found it no difficult mat-

tcr to accomnplifh their delign. Morton, who could
n.- ionger k;eep thie King finu up within the walls of
Olob. 17. S;;rling-c.:,;e, having called a parliament to meet

;': [.diiinbur h, brought Ih!m thliiher. James made
L:,:; c ':;- ii.o ithc :a;lital, vitih great folrmnitv; the
citizcns reccivci him with t.e itoutcfl- acclamations
or joy, an. with m.!ny .

cx; cfive p3agants, accord-

iig to the ric,dct or that age. As;er a long period
cf ti irt. :enl years, during which, Scotland had
Leern fllthjc.icd to the delegated power of Regents,
or to ti;c iebile government of a woman, and had
fiff.ercd all the mllriei of civil war, and felt the in-
fJlence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee
tlhe Iccptrc once more in the hands of a King. Fond
even of that shadow of autllority, which a Prince of
fifteen cou!d pfls, the Scots flattered themlelves,
that union, order, and tranquillity would now be
restored to the kingdom. James opened the parlia-
ment with extraordinary pomp, but nothing re-
markable passcd in it.

THrESE dtmnonrlations, however, of the people's

love and attachment to their Sovereign, encouraged
thi faivourites to continue their insinuations against
Mcrton ; and as the King now reided in the palace
of Ialy-rud house, to whi h all hia fubjecs had ac-
cers, tl:e cabal against the Earl grew daily tronger,
and the intrigie, which ccafioned his fall, ripened
nrad lly.

MOR TON

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and B o o K

endeavoured to put a top to the career of Lennox's VI.
preferment, by reprelenting him as a formidable --V

theResorme 580o .

enemy to the Reformed Religion, a secret agent in Morton
favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the endeavours

to prevent

house of Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every them.
rumour of this kind, spread the alarm among the
'people. But Lennox, either out of complaisance
to his mnalter, or convinced by the arguments of
some le.,rned Divines, whom the King appointed to
intlruc him in the principles of the Protestant Re,
ligion, publickly renounced the errors of Popery, in
the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a
member of the Church of Scotland, by signing her
Confeflion of Faith. This, though it did not re-
move all suspicions, nor flencefome zealous preach-
ers, abated, in a great degree, the frccof the ac-
culation *.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Mor-

ton was preparing to seize the King's person, and to
carry him into England. Whether despair of main-
taining his power, by any other means, had driven
him to make any overture of that kind to the Eng-
lifh court, or whether it was a calumny, invented
by his adversaries to render him odious, cannot now
be determined with certainty. As he declared at his
death, that fich a design had never entered into his
thoughts, the latter fems to be moit probable. It
afforded a pretence, however, for reviving the office
of Lord Chamberlain, which had been for ome
time difulied. 'hat honour was conferred on Len-

' Crawf, Mem. 319. Spots. 308.

nox,

B o o K nox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy,

VI. was his deputy; they had under them a band of
5So Gentlemen, who were appointed confRantly to attend

the King, and to guard his person .

Elizabeth MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies
interles intended to insinuate, by such unusual precautions
half. for the King's lafety; and as his last resource, ap-

plied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often flood
him in stead, in his greatest difficulties. In confe-
quence of this application, Bowes her Envoy accuf-
ed Lennox of practices against the peace of the two
kingdoms, and infilted, in her name, that he should
infantly be removed from the Privy Council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered by the
Couniellors, as an affront to the King, and an en-
croachment on the independance of the kingdom.
They asseSed to call in question the Envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence, refused him farther audi-
ence; and he retiring in disgust, and without taking
leave, Sir Alexander Home was sent to expostulate
with Elizabeth on the subjet. After the treatment
which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought
it below her dignity to admit Iome into her pre-
ii!ce. ':'leigh, to whom he was commanded to
i,;;':;';t his com milion, reproached him with his
-*:. :Ir's i;nl'atitt!e towards a benefactrels, who had

e1.' ,:;1 the Crwn11 oni his head, and required him to

:la i, '

eh. iina to bc:ware us lacri;cing the friend-

!1': o' lb n-'c icllary m ally, to the ',Jy mour
u'i c\( t Il'.an, v.'itio;t xjceri.;cc, ';;d Lirongly

* C'r;i.w !, inII., j,.- .

fur -

futlpced of principles, and attachments, incompa- B o o K
tible with the happiness of the Scottish nation. VI.

1580.

THIs accusation of Lennox hastened, in all pro- Moronac.

bability, Morton's fall. The a of indemnity, murderof
which he had obtained when he resigned the Re-'h"lte
gency, was worded with such scrupulous exatnefs,
as almoRf screened him from any legal prosecution.
The murder of the late King was the only crime,
which could not, with decency, be inferred in a par-
don, granted by his son. Here Morton till lay
open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stew-
art, who shunned no action, however desperate, if
it led to power, or to favour, entered the council-
chamber, while the King and nobleswere assembled,
and falling on his knees, accused Morton of being Decem. so.
accessary, or according to the language of the Scot-
tifl law, art and part, in the conspiracy againf the
l;fe of his Majesty's father, and offered, under the
usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dence. Morton, who was prefenr, heard this ac-
cufation with firmnnfs; and replied with a disdain-
ful finile, proceeding either from contempt of the
int;,,nous ch'ara'5er of his accuser, or from confci-
ot;lef's of his own innocence, " that his known
z- al, in punishing thole who were fufpedcd of that
dete; ble crime, might well exempt himself from
a:ty !flicion of being acccffry to it, nevertheless,
he would cheerfully iLbmlit to a trial, either in that
placc, or in any other court; and doubted not buc
iis owvn i;locence, and the malice of his enemies,
wouldi tlihen alpcr in the cicaref: light." Stewart,
v..!i was Hill un is knees, began to enquire how

he

B o o K he woull reconcile his bellowing ft many honours

VI. en Archibald ouglas, whom he certairly knew to
SOQ be one of the murtherers, with his pretended zeal

against that crime. Morton was ready to answer.
But the King commanded both of them to be re-

l 5 . moved. The Earl was confined, first of all, to his
January . own houte, and then committed to the cafle of

Edir.burgh, of which Alexander Erflzinc was Go-
vernor; and as if it had not been a sufficient indig-
nity to fubje i him to the power of one of his ene-
mies, he was, oon after, carried to Dunbarton, of
Jan. I,. which Lennox had the command. A warrant was,

likewise, iued for apprehending Archibald Dou-
glas; but he, havirn received timely intelligence of
the approaching danger, fled into England *.

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent

proceedings not to hatred against Morton alone, but
to the ancient enmity between the houses of Stewart
and of Douglas, and who believed that a conlpiracy
was now formed tor the dcfsrutiion of the whole
name, was re.ily to take arms in order to rescue his
kinfir.an. Et:t ,Molrton ahfolutely sorbad any such
atteenlpt, ar.d declar:. thlt he would rather susser
ten thoullndl dleaths, than bring an imputation on
his own charailcr by lceming to decline a trial t.

vTl7.,h, Ei.zF:I. n.'rr; dil not fail to interpose, with
mclrri . , w.rmnth, in bh.:lf ofa man, who had contributed so
crd, r to
Ifav 11in). much to prcfrc;ve her influence over Scotland. The

late tranf.iLt ions i that kingdom had given her great
uncanfin:I. The power which Lennox had acquir-

r.'.'s. ;,rn. 3 '. t Johns. 64. Spotrw. 31.

d

ed independent of herwas dangerous; the treatment B o o K
her ambairadors had met with, differed greatly from VI.
the refpet, with which the Scots were in uie to re- .-
ceive her Ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an in-
tention to sow the feeds of discord between the two
nations, and to seduce James into a new alliance
with France, or into a marriage with onbme l'opifh
Princess. Full of these ap};rchenfions, she ordered
a considerable body of troops to be afiLrnbicd on
the borders of Scotland, and di!:atchcd Randolph
as her ambafTador into that kingiom. lie addretd
himlfcf not only to James, and to his council,
but to a convention of eltates met at that time. Ile
began with enumerating the extraordinary betncrs
which Elizabeth had conferred on the :c,)tt':lh i.a-
tion: That without demanding :at 1T.1c J;oo o'
land for herself, without cncroaching on th.: liibr-
ties of the kingdom in the fimll.lce articlt, Ilic ;had,
at the expence of tlhe blood of her riljb cts, and r'-e
treaflires of her Crown, rfcucd the Scots t'r.jn the
dominion of France, etablilhed among themn true
Religion, and put them in puollcTien of tllir an-
cient rights: That from the bcgil ni.g the h.id ro-
teted those, who efpoulesl the King 's c; uie, nd
by her allitlance alone, the ('own l;ad bteen prc-
servcd on his head, and all the atc:.ltcs of the ad-
verli: fation baflied : Th.iLt an u111io01, unk:nown to
their ancellors, biut c(.qiuly bicrlcficil ;( both king-
doms, had fiblilcdi l Ir a long pl.riod ol y.ars; and
though to many Popish Princes hd coimbircd to
dtiltii;b tis hal'py slate of tihins, I: r c.ire, and
their conl I;'n , l !d I'tlhero dc -aleia nil ckc'1 es-

ibrts:

B o o K forts: That he had observed, of late, an unusual

VI. coldness, distrust, and erangement in the Scot-
L'"v itilh Council, which she could impute to none

but to Lennox, a fubjc& of France, a retainer
to the house of Guile, bred up in the errors of
Popery, and still fulpeEted of favouring that fu-
perltition. Not satisficd with having mounted so
fafl to an uncommon height of power, which he
exercised with all the rashness of youth, and all
the ignorance of a firanger; northinking it enough
to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the autho-
rity, due to his abilities, and experience, he had
conspired the ruin of that nobleman, who had often
exposed his life in the King's cause, who had con-
tributed more than any other subje&t to place him
on the throne, to resist the incroachments of Pope-
ry, and to preserve the union between the two king-
doms. If any zeal for religion remained among
the nobles in Scotland, if they wined for the conti-
nuance of amity with England, if they valued the
privileges of their own order, he called upon them,
in the name of his Miarefs, to remove such a per
nicious counlcllor as Lennox from the presence or
the young King, to relfu : Morton out of the handi
of his avowed enemy, and fcure him to the bencli'
ofa fair and impartial trial: Anl if force were ne-
cs.ry r towards accompii hnr a design Ib l1;'. ar/
to the K;ing and kingdeom, lie pr)iCl '.:d .'n t-
protec'ion of his Millr.ls in t!:i entcrlpiz:, ;a:d

hat'\'cvr al;:ance they ni;ould dLmand ;theC of men
or money

L41.., 3, 6. Strypc, 2.6.1.

r:·-

BUT these extraordinary remonstrances, accomr- B o o .

panied with such an unusual appeal from the King VI.
to his fubjedts, were not the only means employed'-
by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and again 15
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour,
which many of his fubjecs had displaycd in the f.r-
vice of the States, to enter into a long detail of the
rettlefs enterprizes of the Popifl Princes, againl teC
Protestant Religion; to bel}ech him to adhere in-
violably to the alliance with England, the (;nlv bar-
rier which secured his kingdom againf t'cir da:.-
gerous cabals; and above all things, to diirufi the
insinuations of those, who endeavoure t wcu:ic;r
or to dissolve that union between tll itifi r.: tio:,
which all the Proteflants in Europe beheld w 'i ib
much pleasure *.

JAMES'S Counsellors were tno intent upon the c j: J::.c *.-

ftrution of their enemy to liften to tlicl- :rc:on-

C ,,'...'.ll. -

ftrances. The officious interpolition ot the rrinceE'"'t ' '':
of Orange, the hau1,hty tone of Eli.'abeth's mc
sage, and her avowed attempt to excite ltbitcts to
rebel against their Sovereign, wxere confider;ed as un-
examplcd inlults on the nlaicity and inclep)endalncc
of a crowned head. A general and cvafive an.Acr
was given to Randolph. James prepared to alTirt
his own dignity with spirit. All thole ifufpelced of
favouring Morton were turned out of oil-ce, i;rc
of them were required to ulrrender thenmlclves pri
f,'r:.rs; the fcncilble men t!irol.ilouot l!: iii
k loiin

' (..aid 3'
q.

V.. C (

B o o K were commanded to take arms; and troops Were

VI. levied, and posted, on the borders. The English
S 1... ambassador, finding that neither the public mani-

fefto which lie had delivered to the Convention, nor
his private cabals with the nobles could excite them
to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland,
where libels againlt him had been daily published,
and even attempts made upon his life. In both
kingdoms every thing wore an hofiile aspez. But
Elizabeth, though flec wished to have intimidated
the Scottilh King by her preparatiuns, had no incli-
n-tion to enter into a war witll him, and the troops
on the borders, which had given such umbrage,
were loon dilpc-rcl *.

T' E greater solicitud'e Elizabeth discovereJ for

Morton's fafitv, the monre eagerly did lhis ClneilCS
drive on their fchems for his ldcfcrucion. Captain
Stc;vw!rt, his accufcr, was sirs appointed Tt:or to the
Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and
cilte of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced
lonme frivolous claim, were conferred upon him.
' lie ncw-made Peer was crommanded to condut
Morton fiom Dunbarton to Edinburgh and, by
that choice, the Earl was not o.ly warned lwhat fate
lie might exprcc:, but had the cruetl mortification of
rfeing his dcacdiy enemy already loadecd with lonours,
in reward of the malice with which he had conlri-
bLtcd to his ruin.

}i isi,.;I TtlI records of the court of y:j/?,'i -t at tlis C-..
"J'"'." iiod 11rc lull. The acccunt v.l ich our hiiloriianl

Ca,,F. ?,.im. 3'-S Srype. -. 'rr 1';

'-it.~~~~[ i',.;.

give of Morcon's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfac- B o o K
tory. The whole proceedings seem to have been V I.
violert, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order ' ,
to extort evidence, tortured several ofthe Earl's dc-
medfics with unusual cruelty. During the trial,
great bodies of armed men were drawn up in diffe-
rent parts of the city. The jury was eompofed of
the Earl's known enemies; and though he challeng-
ed fevtral of them, his obje&tons were over-ruled.
After a hort consultation, his Peers found him
guilty of concealing, and of being art and part in
the conspiracy against the life of the- late King.
The first part of the verdit did not furprize him,
but he twice repeated the words art andpart wi-h
some vehemence, and added, " God knows it is not
so." The doom, which the law decrees against a
Traitor, was pronounced. The King, however,
remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the fen-
tence, and appointed that he flould susser death next
day, by being beheaded .

DURING that awful interval, Morton poflTeffd His deatii.

the utmot composure of mind. He fupped chear-
fully; slept a part of the night in his uual manner,
and employed the reft of his time in religious con-
ferences, and in aEts of de.votion, with some Mini-
fters of the city. The Clergymen who artended
him, dealt fretly with his conlcience, and prelfed
his crimes home upon him. What he conftfld
with regard tothe crime for which he suffercd is re-
markable, and supplics, in fume measure, the Im-

' Spotv. 314. J:)!rll. 65. Crawf Mewr. 332. CaJ, J. 45.
VOL. I. G .-

B o o K perfection of our records. He acknowledged, that

VI. on his return from England after the death of Ri-

8-~~ Zio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy
5' againit the King, which the Queen, as he told him,

knew of and approved that he solicited him to
concur in the execution of it, which, at that time,
he absolutely declined; that, oon after, Bothwell
himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their solicitations to the fame purpose, he had
required a warrant, under the Queen's hand, autho-
rising the attempt, and as that had never been pro-
duced, he had refused to be any farther concerned
in the matter. " But, continued he, as I neither
"contented to this treasonable a&, nor assisted in
" the committing of it, so it was impossible for me
"to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I
" make the discovery ? The Queen was the author
" of the enterprize. Darnly was such a changeling,
' that no lecret could be safely communicated to
" him. untly and Bothwell, who bore the chief
' sway in the kingdom, were themfeives the per-
petrators of the crime." These circumfances,

it muf be confeffd, go tome length towards exte-
nuating Morton's guilt; and though his apology
for the favour he had shewn to Archibald Douglas,
whom he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far
less satisfactory, no uneasy rcfiecions seem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account *. When
his keepers told him that the guards were attending,
and all things in rcadinefs, " I praise my God, said
" he, I am ready likewise." Arran commanded
there guards; and even in those moments, when

* C;a wf . Mer. App. 3.

.6 the

the mos implacable hatred is apt to relent, the ma- B o o K
lice of his enemies could not forbear this insult. VI.
On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his coun- -
tenance and voice unaltered; and after fume time
spent in devotion, he suffered death with the intre-
pidity, which became the name of Douglas. His
head was placed on the public jail of dinburgh;
and his body, after lying till fun set on the scaffold,
covered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by com-
mon porters to the usual burial-place of criminals.
None of his friends durst accompany it to the grave,
or discover their gratitude and respect by any fymp-
toms of sorrow *.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than Odious

audacious in his public conduct, soon after drew the 'd"u of
attention of his countrymen, by his infamous mar-
riage with the Countess of March. Before he grew
into favour at court, he had been often entertained
in her husband's house, and without regarding the
laws of hospitality or of gratitude, carried on a cri-
minal intrigue with the wife of his benefacor, a
woman young and beautiful, but according to the
description of a cotemporary Hiltorian, " intolcr-
able in all the imperfections, incident to her sex."
Impatient of any restraint upon their mutual desires,
they, with equal ardor, wiflied to avow their union
publickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the
offspring of their unlawful passion. The Countess
petitioned to be divorced from her husband, fora rea-
son, which no modest woman will ever plead. The

* Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotfw, 314.

G 2 judges,

P o o Kjudge., over-awed by Arran, pafhre. sentence without

dlay. And tii;s infamcus Icene was czncluded by a

Ai" " ...- fi)lemnized with great pomp, and beheld
. *sr by i, .;.,ts of men with the utmost horror *.

-4. A PA LtAM E J r wae held this year, at the opening

of w:iicih im' t difput(s arose between Arran and the
Earl nuw ,.reared Duke of Lennox. Arran, haugh-
ty by ra:,.re, and puffed on by his wife's ambition,
began to affect an equality with the Duke, under
whole proteaion he had hitherto been contented to
place Lirfelf. After various attempts to form a
party in the council against Lennox, he found him
fixed so firmly in the King's affeltions, that it was
impoflible to fhakc him, and rather than lose all in-
terest at court, from which he was banished, he
made the most humble fubmifiions to the favourite,
and again recovered his former credit. This rp-
ture contributed, however, to render the Duke still
more odious to the nation. During the continu-
ance of it, Arran asscd to court the Clergy, pre-
tended an ex:raordinary zeal for the Protestant Re-
ligion, and labou:ed to confirm the suspicions, which
were entertained of his rival, as an emiflary of the
louse of Guise, and a favourer of Popery. As he
was supposed to be acquainted with the Duke's most
secret designs, his calumnies were listened to with
more credit, than was due to his characer. To
the fame caulf, we muff acribe fcveral as of par-
liament uncommonly favourable to the Church, par-
ticularly one, which abolilhcd the practice, intro-

· Spotfw, 3 1.

duccd

duced by Morton, of appointing but one minilter B o o K
to several parishes. VI.

No notice hath been taken for several years of Ec- Fccliafli-

clefiaftical affairs. While the civil government un- cal assais.
derwent so many extraordinary revolutions, he
Church was not free from convulsions. Two ob-
je&s, chiefly, engrossed the atten:in of the Clergy.
The one was the forming a ifytem of discipline. or
Ecclesiastical polity. After long labour, and many
difficulties, this was at last brought to some degree
of perfecion. The Assembly fulemnly approved
of it, and appointed it to be laid before the Privy
Council, in order to obtain the ratification of it in
Parliament. But Morton, during his adminiftra-
tion, and those who, after his all, governed Lhe
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into
execution; and by flarting difficulties, and throw-
ing in objections, prevented i from recei''ing a le-
gal flanction. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The Bishops were
so devoted to the King, to whom they owed heir
pronotion, that the tutl-ion itself wa.; by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being :llowed
a feat in Parliament, and diftinguilhed by titles of
honour, thelic not only occasioned many avocations
from their spiritual e:;lployn.ents, bu: loon render-
ed their chara&er andc manners extremely difcrent
fiom thol of tlie Clergy in that age. 1 h nobles
viewe.i ithir power with jealuy; the lopulact con-
lidercd their lives as profane ; and both .vin-ied their
downfal with equal ardour. The personal emula-
tion between Mclvil and itAamibn, a man of learn-

G 3 ing,

Bo o K ing, and eminent for his popular eloquence, who

VI. was promoted, on the death of Douglas, to be
" - Archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the

paflions on each fide, and heightened them. At-
tacks were made, in every assembly, on the order
of Bifops; their privileges were gradually circum-
fcribed; and at latf an aEt was passcd, declaring the
office of Biihop, as it was then exerciscd within the
realm, to have neither founiation nor warrant in
the word of God; and requiring, under pain of
excommunication, all who now poifeffed that of-
fice, inflantly to resign it, and to abstain from
preaching or adniniftring the sacraments, till they
ihould receive permission from the Assembly. 1 he
court did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy
lhap;ening, soon after, in the lee of Glasgow, Mont-
go,.cry Minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickle,
prclumptuous, and more .pt, by the blemilhes in
his characer, to have alienated the people from an
order already beloved, than to reconcile them to
one which, was the object of tleir hatrcd, truck up
an infamous bargain with Lennox, and on his re-
commici;dation was chosen Archbishop. he Pref-
byteiy of Stirling of which he was a member, the
prcfDbtcry of Glasgow whither he was to be tranf.
lated, the General Assembly, vied with each other
! S2. in prosecuting him on that account. In order to

fcrten Montgomery, Jamrs made trial both of gen-
tle and of rigorous measures, and both were equally
ineffectual. The Genral Assembly was jult ready
to pronounce aigainft hlim the sentence of excom-
nLu:,ication, when an Herald entered and conm.
:rndcd hei, in the King's name, and under pain

of

of rebellion, to lop further proceedings. Even B o o K
this injunction they despised. And though Mont- VI.
gomery, by his tears, and seeming penitence, pro- 158-
cured a hort respite, the sentence was at last issued
by their appointment, and published in all the
churches throughout the kingdom.

THE firmness of the Clergy in a collecive body,

was not greater than the boldness of some indivi.
duals, particularly of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
They inveighed daily against the corruptions in the
administration, and, with the freedom of speech
admi:ted into the pulpit in that age, named Len-
nox and Arran as the chief authors of the grie-
vances, under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained
to the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
the Clergy. In order to check the boldness of their
discourses, James issued a proclamation, command-
ing Dury, one of the moss popular Miniflers, not
only to leave the town, but to abstain from preach-
ing in any other place. Dury complained, to the
judicatories of the Church, of this encroachment
upon the immunities of his office. They approved
of the doctrine which he had delivered; and he
determined to disregard the royal proclamation.
But the magistrates beingderermined to compel him
to leave the city, according to the KIing's orders,
he was obliged to abandon his charge, after pro-
testing publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against
the violence, which was put upon him. The people
accompanied him to the gates, with t;irs and la-
mcntations and the Clergy ct noi;;ccd the ven-

G 4 gennce

B o n K geance of heaven againf the authors of this out.

VI. rage .

IN t-is perilous situation stood the Church; the

authority of ;tsjudicatories called in qefti.,n, and
the liberty of the pulpit retl,;;ire ', when a sudden
revulution of the civil g 'vcrnnent pocured them
unexpeted relief.

;isfavrur- THE t. ' fu -i' ., L -

,'*v;r ?.iit I ;:- te

.i ....:.:. i.-. - .ts , l ^; .1 c.}. t'O, i , , .. A

i. 1- r; . t .c icing-

'. ': * .r'.. m, a-'d e.erife it w;tl. . noft wanrt.n"ef.
nlca:uiu3.

.lu es .i ' re:i'!ei at it

:, ;* .

: - rhe

i;: ,ts u(r L ..X . :.u '.i. :, .nli w,.s a. . ded
by such c .'mi "'r , *nL. l yJ ii. U, ! ,.1 in" '-
n ents, as ldid not iLlit ih: . ,ignit; 'i - leti us
thole, who had contrih. -Ci ! it Lc place th r. n
oi, is ihcatd were b little re-n l-r.cred. Mtany
who ha.l oppo:ed h 1i yit: L. reatclt virulence,
enjoyed t rw,.-ds nrid luvours, rn whic the
others were entr'ed }'.xai:L i.J.nsi O of rtaal pre-
rogatie, uoterly ; confifcnt witli 'he . ntltcution
of gcotlaiil, being 'nitiictl by his f . *urtes into
the mind of the young Monar,: 'lortlaiely
made, at that cal!y age, a deep imuici.:on there,
and became the source of almolt all his fuibfequcnc
errors in the government of both kingdoms t.
Courts ofjufitie were held in almost every county,
the proprietors of land were called before them,
and upon the flghtrlt neglect of any of the nume-
rous forms, which are peculiar o feudal holdings,

* Cald. ,ifrnmh. 1-;6- iSR7. SPoifw. 277, &c.
t a:d.j. 1;,:

they

they were fined with unufuai and intolerable rigour. B o o K
The Lord ' hainberlall revived the obfol te jurif- VI.
dition of his office .., r the Boroughs, and they -582.
were fubje6ted to exacions no less grievous. A de-
sign seemed, likewise, to have been formed to ex-
afperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with
her, which all good Protestants esteemed the chief
sec .ity of their religion in Scotland. A close cor-
rcfpondence was set on foot between the King and
his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty of
aflbciai ion, as Maitland had projacte d; which could
not s.i ot endangering or dlrrinihing his authority,
a d must have proved tatal to those, who had ated
:i^inft her with greatelt vigour *.

AiL there circumstances irritated the impatient The nobles

¢onfpire

spi'lt of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to tole- again,
rare no longer the iniolence of the two minions, or them
to Itand by, while their prelumption and inexperi-
ence ruined both the King anti kingdom. Eliza-
beth. '.o, during the adminiltration of the four
Regerts, i: d the entire direaion of the affairs of
Scotla,./, fe-. herfrlf deprived of all influence in
that kingeloi:-; er since the deatl of Morton, and
was ready to cuuntenance any attemipt to rescue the
King out of the hands o f.vtourites, who were
leading him into meafires, so repugnant to all her
views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord
Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord
Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the
Malter of Oliphant, with several Barons and gcn-

C alJ. 3. 157.

tle ren

B o o K tlemen of diftinstion, entered into a combination

VI. for that purpose; and as changes in administration,
'Ls, which among polilhed nations, arc brought about

slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were
in that rude age ffected suddenly and by violence,
the King's situation, and the security of the favour-
ites, encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

sie the J..AMES, after having resided for some time in
i'on it Athole, where he enjoyed his favourite amusement
Ruthiven. of hunting, was now returning towards Edinburgh,

with a finall train. He was invited to Ruthven-
castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpe&ed
no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport.
Augufl z. The multitude of firangers whom he found there

gave him some uneafnefs; and as those who were
in the fecrct arrived every moment from different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces in-
cre.alld his f ars. IHI concealed his uneasiness,
how.ver, wit th e utmost care; and next morning
p:eparcd for the field, expecting to find there some
oyportunity of making his escape. But just as he
Wva. ready to depart, the Nobles entered his bed-
chamber in a body, and prelented a memorial against
the illegal and opprefive actions of his two favour-
ite, v. homn they repreSented as most dangerous ene.
mics to the religion and liberties of the nation.
James, though he received this remonstrance with
the conplai.nce which was necessary in his present
f.ru.ation, was extremely impatient to be gone ; but
as lie appr .l;cel the door of the apartment, the
Tutor of Clamis rudely lopped him. The: King

corn-

complained, xpoftulated, threatened, and finding B o o K
all these without effet, burst into tears; " No mat- VI.
ter, said Glanis fiercely, better children weep than -
bearded men." These words made a deep impref- I
sion on the King's mind, and were never forgotten.
The confpiratois, without rr-girng his tars or
indignation, dilmriflct luh of his followers as they
suspected; allowed none but their own party to
have access to him ; and though they treated him
with great respect, guarded his person with the ut-
most care. This enterprize is usually called, by our
hiltorians, The raid of Ruthven *.

LENNOX and Arran were aflonifhed to the last commit

degree at an event so unexpeatd, and b fatal to Arrn to
their power. The former endeavoured, but with-
out success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arams in order to rei.ue their Sovereign from
captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuofty,
mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
had befallen the King, and with a few followers,
rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable
body of the conspirators, under the command of
the Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose
him, he separated himlelf from his conpanions,
and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
cattle. At the fight of a man lb odious to his
country, the indignation of the conspirators rose,
and instant death mnlif have been the punishment of
his ralhnels, if the Iiicilhip of Gowrie, or fume
other cause not explained by our hillorians, had not
saved a life, so pcrnicious to the kingdom. He

* Culd, 3. 13+, SpotCv . 32,) ,'v. 357.

was

Bo o was confined, however, to the caRtle of Stirling,

VI. without being admitted into the King's presence.

1i582. T4t King, though really the prisoner of his own
Command
tnnox to subje&s, with whose condiu he could not help dif-
leave the
singdom. covering many symptoms of disgust, was obliged to

publiih a proclamation, signifying his approbation
of their enterprize, declaring that himicif was at
full liberty, without any reltraint orviolen.e offered
to his person; and forbidding any attemnt against
thofl concerned in the Raid cf Puithven, under pre-
tence of efcuing him out of their hands. At the
A.eunt 8. lame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scot-

land before the 2oth cfSepttmber .
The on- Sco: a- :;, ' . rev, and Bowes, arriv-

,t ed as ambassadors from Flizabeth. 1 hc pretext
snznIdby c!f theit cnmbafy was to inquire after the King's

fafe:y to encourage and countenance the confpi-
tai;ts was the real mnotive of it. By their inter-
ccffc;, the Earl of Angus, who ever since tl-e
death ct his uncle Morton, had lived in exile, ob-
taincd leaic to r!eurn. And the accelion of a no-
blcm..n powerful and lo popular trengthened
the faction '-.

ILN NOX, wlVhoi amiaibj'c and gentle qualities had

proccutd him many tr:tnds, and who received pri.
vate afiirances that the King's favour towards him
w:S in no degrct ab..itccl, iceimed rdbolved, at firlt»
to pay no regard to a command, extorted by vio-
irze, andl no Icls iilagrCeeab1le to Jatins, than it was

' aid. 3. 125, i3. t C,:d. 3 ';.

rigor.

rigorous with regard to himflf. But the power of B o o K
his enemies, who were mailers of the King's per- VI.
son, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and '"7'
openly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from
an enterprize, the success of which was dubious,
and the danger certain both to himself, and to his
Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure,
however, by various artifices, in expetation either
that James might make his escape from the confpi.
rators, or that fortune might present some more
favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

ON the other hand, the conspirators were ex-Their con.

dua ap.

tremely solicitous not only to secure the approbation provod hy
of their countrymen, but to obtain some legal fanc- b"ly Ad.A
tion of their enterprize. For this purpose, they pub- con.ontion

pb- of olates.

lifhed a long declaration, containing the motives,
which had induced them to venture on such an ir-
regular flep, and endeavoured to heighten the pub-
lic indignation against the favourites, by reprelcnt-
ing in the strongest colours, their inexperience and
insolence, their contempt of the nobles, their vio.
lation of the privileges of the Church, and their
oppression of the people. They obliged the Kin:,
who could not with safety refue any of their de-
mands, to grant them a remiion in thle mors am-
ple form ; and not latisficd with that, they applied
to the A ll-mbly of the Church, and caiiy procur- o4. v
ed an ac, clcarirn, , ilhat they lild tlone good
and acceptable crvic( o. C(,1, tG to their Sovrn-ign,
and to Cheir native counrty ;" .iedI requiring .l1 fin-
cere Protefljnts t ) co:L~cr Wvic;! tl':u ; ' (;i:':nL'

B o o K the greater weight to this a&, every MinifRer was

VI. enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to inflic
-2- the Censures of the Church on those who et them-
58' selves in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven-

tion of estates, aemnbled a few days after, pafled
an act to the fame effect, and granted full indemnity
to the conspirators for every thing they had done *.

I.cnnox's JAMES was conducted by them, first to Stirling,

delp:ir rture

fronm Scot- and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe;
land. and though he was received every where with the

external marks of refpet due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
a restraint no less strict, than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conlpirators. Lennox,
after eluding many commands to delpart out of the
kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for Ibme time in the neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had still intended
to make one effort towards rcftoring the King to
liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own
disposition, averse to blood-shed and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause, unknown
to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for
Dec. 30. France, by the way of England. The King iflued

the crder for his departure, wih no less relutance
than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a
fcparation, which neither of them had power to
prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguifl of his mind,
threw him into a fever. In his last moments he
difcovcred such a firm adherence to the Protestant

Cald. . 1 7, 187, aoo. Spotfi;'. 32z.

faith,

faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im-B o o K
putation of an attachment to Popery, with which VI.
he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland *. As 1^:
he was the earliest, and belt beloved, he was, per-
haps, the most deserving, though not the moll able
of all James's favourites. The warmth and tender-
ness of his Master's affection for him was not
abated by death itself. By many acts of kindness
and generosity towards his posterity, the King not
only did great honour to the memory of Lennox,
but set his own character in one of the most favour-
able points of view.

THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived Mary'

James of liberty, made great noise over all Europe; ot ;,^
and at last reached the ears of Mary in the prison Con.
to which he was confined. As her own experience
had taught her what injuries a captive Prince is ex-
posed to susser; and as many of those, who were
now concerned in the enterprize against her son,
were the fame persons whom he conlidered as the
chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natu-
ral for the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that
the fame calamities were ready to fail on his head;
and such a prospect did not fail of adding to the
diflrefs and horror of her own situation. In the
anguiih of her heart, fle wrote to Elizabeth, com-
plaining in the bitterest terms of the unprecedented
rigour, with whith (le herself had been treated,
and belceching her not to abandon her fbn to the
mercy of his rebellious fuljecs; nor permit him to
be involved in the fame misfortunes, undler which

* S ctfWv. 32 1.

the

E o3 o v she ha f long rroaned. The peculiar vigour and

. ,c ari!' !ly ot itle, tor wai '- ,., letter is remark-

able, iif over 'cr pirit of the Scottish
Q1:ecn, iulub ed ',) i.t l'uffer;-.., and the vio-
lence of h; r incldinarin at kEiatu-i'.;'s ar ifices and
severity. But t was i1! alap;ed o gaii ric el; ihe
had in view, ani accordingly it net:her procured
any mitigation of the rigour of her own confine-
ment, nor any interposition in favour of tile King *

1583. HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated
Amrbaffa- the Princes of Guile, was often obliged to court
dots arrive
from their favour, interposed with warmth, in order to
France and
Inaland. extricate James out of the hands of a party so in-

tirely devoted to the Er'glilh interest. He com-
manded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambaflador at
the court of England, to repair to Edinburgh, and
to contribute his utmost endeavours towardsplacing
James in a situation, more suitable to his dignity.
As Elizabeth could not, with decency, refute him
liberty to execute this commiflion, she appointed
Davison to attend him into Scotland as her Envoy,
under colour of concurring with him in the nego-
ciation, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions,
and to obftrut his luccefs. James, whose title to
the Crown had not hitherto been recognized by any
of the Pl ncs on the Contin. at, was extremely fond
of fuich an honourable ebally from the French
Monarch; and, on that account, as well as for the
liake of t!;e errand on which lie came, received Fe-
Jan. 7, relon with great relpe&t. 1 he nobls, in whose

po'er th}j Ki:ng was, did not rclifh this interpoficion

Ci'am , .'4,.

of

of the French court, which had long lot its anci- B o o K
ent influence over the affairs of Scotland. The VI.
Clergy were alarmed at the danger to which reli- "
gion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise 1533
ihould recover any ascendant over the public coun-
cils. And though the King tried every method for
reitraining them within the bounds of decency, they
declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise, against the Ambassador, against
entering into any alliance with such notorious per-
fecutors of the Church of God, with a vehemence,
which no regular government would now tolerate,
but which was then extremely common. The Am-
baflador, watched by Davison, diltlufted by the
nobles, and exposed to the insults of the Clergy,
and of the people, returned into England without
procuring any change in the King's Situation, or re-
ceiving any answer to a proposal which he made,
that the government should be carried on in the
joint names of Janies, and the Queen his mother*.

MEANWHILE, James, though he dissembled with J:.mcs c-r
great art, became every day more uneasy under his t ':,o, of

the hads

confinement; his uneafincfs rendered him continu ofte ,con-
ally attentive to find out a proper opportunity foratr
making his elcape; and to this attention, he at last
owed his liberty, which the King of France was
not able, nor the Queen of England willing to pro-
cure for him. As the conlpirators had forced
Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a
dilttance from court, they grew secure; and ima-
gining that time had reconciled the King to thein,

Cald. 3. 207. Srotrfw 324. Sec .AppiJiix, N.'. V,[.
VoL. II. HI and

B o o K and to his situation, they watched him with little

VI. care. Some occasions of discord had arisen among

themselves andthe French Ambaflador, byfoment-
ing these, during the time of his residence in Scot-
land, had weakened the union, in which alone their
lafety confined *. Colonel William Stewart, the
commander of the band of gentlemen, who guard-
ed the King's person, being gained by James, had
the principal merit n the scheme for restoring his
June ;, master to liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit

to te Earl of March his grand uncle, James was
permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's.
That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged
at firlt, in an open defenceless house in the town,
but pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner
was he entered with some of his attendants whom
he could trust, than Colonel Stewart commanded
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of
his train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll,
Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others
to whom the fcret had been communicated, entered
Ihe town with their followers; and though Mar,
with fcver.l of the leaders of the facion, appeared
in arms, thty found themfelvcs so far out-number-
dl, that it was in vain to think of recovering poi-
c-E.ion (cf the King's person, which had been in their
power tinet'wlhat longer tan ten months. James
was atutrally of lb soft and duiile a temper, that
tlofe who w'C re near his person, commonly madc a
d(eep inprefiion on his heart, which was frmned to
be un !er the sway of favoiurites. As he rI'iaince
inip1clilclc anid uinrIconciicd to the col u nlrirators,

' C^I;ij. .4 ..

dur.-

during so long a time, and at a period of life when B o o K
resentments are rather violent than lating, they VI.
must either have improved the opportunities of in- 583'
finuating themselves into favour with little dexterity,
or the indignation, with which this first insult to his
person and authority filled him, must have been
very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and exceflive. ReColivt,

He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James however,
Melvil, and his wisest counsellors, to aft with the them with

modeau

utmost moderation. Having called, into his pre- tion.
fence, the leaders of both factions, the neighbour-
ing gentry, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs,
the Ministers, and the heads of colleges, he de-
clared, that although he had been held under re-
fraint for some time by violence, he would not im-
pute that as a crime to any man, but without re-
membering the irregularities, which had been so
frequent during his minority, would pars a general
as of oblivion, and govern all his fubjets with un-
diftinguilhing and equal affecion. And as an evi-
dence of his sincerity, he visited the Earl of Gow-
rie at Ruthven-cafile, and granted him a full par-
don of any guilt he had contracted, by the crime
committed in that very place .

BUT James did not adhere long to tlls prtuent u, Arran

and moderate plan. His former favourite, the .l;'!,"'
Earl of Arran, had been permitted for lomc time tlvcr I1"1.
to reside at Kinneil, one of his country [feats. As
toon as the King felt himiclf at liberty, his love for

* Mel. 277.

hi 2 him

B o o K him began to revive, and he exprefed a ifrong desire

VI. to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed the re-
' 3' turn of a minion, whose insolent and overbearing
1583·

temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detested
his crimes. James, however, continued his impor-
tunity, and promising that he hould continue with
him no longer than one day, they were obliged to
yield. This interview rekindled ancient affecion;
the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his
afcenJant over him; and within a few days resumed
the exercise of power, with all the arrogance of an
undclerving favourite, and all the ralhnefs peculiar
to hitelf *.

A.'., :'e TTHE first tceect of his influence was a proclama-
,:ili.- tion with regard to those concerned in the Raid of
,lr rllb. R!thLen. They were required to acknowledge

their crime in the humblelt manner; and the King
promied to grant themn a full pardon, provided
their future conduct were Iuch, as did not oblige
him to remember past nlifcarriages. The tenor of
this proclamation was extremely different from the
act of oblivion, which the confpirarors had been
encoura-ed to cxpc&t. Nor did any of them reckon
it fate to rely on a promil:, clogged with such an
equivocal condition, and granted by a young Prince,
under the ('ominion of a miniftcr, void of faith,
regardlels of decency, and tranfi:l;rted by the de-
tire of revenge, even beyond the usua;l f-roci y of
his te:!:ur. Many of the le.ia.-rs, who had at frlt
api'.'.; :o,;enly at court, retire. t: theirown hu Ics;
and tti.'.. In the dangerous florm lwhich was ga..

* \i'clv. 2-4.

thcri,i,r

thering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign B o o
countries. V].

ELIZABETH, who had all along protected the Eiiz.be,ls
conspirators, was extremely disgusted with measures onl.3'-

tions in he-

which tended so visibly to their deftrudion, and half ofthe
wrote to the King a harfli and haughty letter, tras.'
reproaching him in a stile, very uncommon among Augs 7.
Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to
court, and with imprudence in proceeding so rigor-
oufly against his belt and most faithful subje&s.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that pro-
mises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
out of fear, were no longer binding, when there
were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chufe what ministers he would employ in his ser-
vice; and that though he resolved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clem:ncy, it
was neceflary, for the support of his authority, that
fich an insult on his perb'n fnould not pals altoge-
ther uncenfured t.

EL IZ.A ETH'S letter was quickly followed byWal. Scpt. .

finr.ghim her ficrctary, whom flie appointed her am- WaIl'in-
bafbador to James, and who appeared at the Scut- baCr into
t;fh court, with a plcndor and magnificence, well
caiculated to please and dazzle a young rince.
WaLll;.lgham was aittCel to several conferences
with J;n:cs himiei';, in which he infiled on the
fan!:- t.:)ics contained il the Icttcr, and the King
repc.itcd his former anlfscrs.

· \el v. :- pgot6. 3: a. :ai. ,. 3^.
t 3 "!' . : .

11 3 AFTER

B o O K AFTER suffering several indignities, from the ar-

VI. rogance of Arran, and his creatures, he returned
"X"~to England, without concluding any new treaty

with the King. Walsingham was, next to Bur-
leigh, the Minister on whom the chief weight of
the English administration refted; and when a per-
son of his rank, ftept so far out of the ordinary
road of business, as to undertake a long journey, in
his old age, and under a declining state of health,
some aftair of conflquence was supposed to be the
cause, or some important event was expected to be
the effet of this measure. But as nothing confpi-
cuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy,
it is probable that Elizabeth had no other intention
in employing this sagacious Minister, than to dif-
cover, with cxactnefs, the capacity and disposition
of the Scottih King, who was now arrived at a
time of life, when, with ome degree of certainty,
conjecures might be formed concerning his charac-
ter, and future condut. As James pofreffed ta-
lents of that kind, which make a better figure in
conversation, than in ation, he gained a great deal
by this interview with the Englilh secretary, who,
notwithltanding the cold reception he met with,
gave such an advantageous representation of his abi-
lities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, hence-
forward, with more decency and refpc *.

Er. z . n ETli's eagerness to protet the conspirators

renderCLl James more violent in his p;roccedings
ii''.n'il them. As they lad all r'ul l to acccpt of
j ii'i, upo)l lheC terli , h\lliclh l c ,:... i 'cl, they

* \v,. 2,3. CJ, 3. 2z8. JcLb, . 53':.

were

were required, by a new proclamation, to furrenderB o o K
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Angus alone VI.
complied; the reft either fled into England, orob- 15-
tained the King's iicence to retire into foreign parts.
A Convention of estates was held, the members ofDecem. 17.
which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's,
declared those concerned in the Raid of Ruth-ven to
have been guilty of high treason; appointed the
a& pasfd last year approving of their conduc&, to
be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prolcuting the fugitives with
the utmost rigour of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done

any thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age,
among mutinous nobles, and under an unftcticd
state of government, must be acknowledged tohave
been guilty of an at of treason againit their Sove-
reign ; and James, who confidered their conduc in
this light, had good realbn to boalt of his clenmenc/,
when he offered to pardon them, upon their conifi-
sing their crime. But, on the other hand, it muli
be allow.ve that, after the King's voluntary promile
of a general oblivion, they hd ome reason to
complain of breach of fI:i:h, and could not, wihil-
out the mors unpardonable imprudence, have pu
their lives in Arran's po.vcr.

Tii interefl of the Church was considerably as-

si.ctd by thllci contrary Revolutions. Whiic the 'r:n.. cr.l;
conlirators lkept poflc~.on of power, the Clerg !, 1'.. .,'
nut only recovered, but exte:dedl their pltwVI'c '. *..' a't

- 1. .'..tc th,'e
As they had lur.mcrly d:tclarcd the hierarchy ta be Kn.

i 4 tin-

B o o K unlawful, they took some bold measures towards

VI. exterminatingthe Episcopal orderoutof theChurch;
15+ and it was owing more to Adamson's dexterity in

perplexing and lengthening out the process for that
puirFofi, than to their own want of zeal, that they
did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate all the
Biflops in Scotland. When the King recovered
his liberty, things put on a very different afpe&.
Thl flvour bestowed upon Arran, theenemyof every
thing decet and sacred, and the rigorous profecu-
tion of thole nobles, who had been the most zeal-
cus defend.rs of the Protrftant cause, were con-
f:idred as fire prct.ges of the approaching ruin of
the Churci. The Clergy could not conceal their
apprchenlions, nor view this impending danger in
filcnce. Drury, who had been restored to his of-
fice as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, openly
applauded the Raid of Rulbven in the pulpir, at
v.hich the King was ti enraged, that, notwithftand-
ingiib:n frymptoms of his ifbmiflion, he command-
eC him to rfiign his charge in the city. Mr. An-
drew Mclvil, bing summoned before the Privy
Council to a:nlver for the doftrine he had uttered in
a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accufled of compar-
in:g th;e rcnr: grievances of the nation with tlhoi:
indcir James III. and of intimating oblicquly that
th-y t;! t to e rcdreflcd in the fame manner,
thoiLht it incuirlbent on himn to behave with greater
firnr-;&;. H1e declined tlicjurif:litionl of a Civil
court, in a ca; i ili hi-' n.ait.:i. c.i to 1): puriely
I.ccle;iafti . al; t:c l'rei'lbyr~try .f' wiiLLh lie vs ;
ncm bicr h;l, ;as lie (o:; t'(lcc d, the ije il; !it to cail
ilm to acicou::t ior wcrd ti pu'i,. i:i ; tle pnll't; nan

npci

neither the King nor council could judge, in the first o o K
instance, of the doctrine delivered by Preac!: r, VI.
without violating the immnities of the Church. -

1584~

This exemption from civil jurifdi&ion was a Frivi-
lege, which the 'opifh Ecc!iaffics, admi:abe
judges of whatever contributed .o increarc t]r lustre
or power of their body, hadl long ftrtugled for, and
had at ist obairlcd. It the lame p! -Y had now
been admitted, th: Prottfint Llei-y .v voui hve
become inciepiendant on the civi Mai nlr.e¢;
and an order of men extremely useful to society
while they inculcate thole duties which t:nri to pro-
mote its happiness and tranquillity, might have be-
come no leis pernicious by teaching, without fear or
controul, the most dangerous principles, or by ex-
citing their hearers to the most desperate and lawless
actions. The King, jealous to excess of his prero-
gative, was alarmed at this daring encroachment on
it; and as Melvil, by his learning and zeal, had
acquired the reputation and authoriry of head of
the party, he relolved to punish him with the ri-
gour, which that pre-eminence rendered necessary,
and to dilcouragc, by a timely severity, the revival
of flich a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England ; and the
pulpits relbunded with complaints that the King
had extinguiflied th- light of learning in the king-
dom, and dclprivd the Church of the ablest and
molt s.i :!: fl gua::idi.:n of its liberties and discipline :.

Ti r sE violent declnamations oftheClergy, againfl
the nim:i!iires o' t!ie court, were extremely accept-

* 3 . :I
t' !. . 3 34.

able

B o o K able to the people. The conspirators, though dri-

VI. yen out of the kingdom, still poTeffed great influ-
"584. ence there; and as they had every thing to fear

from the resentment of a young prince, irritated by
the furious counsels of Arran, they never ceased
soliciting their adherents to take arms in their de-
fence. Gowrie, the only person among them who
had submitted to the King, and accepted of a par-
don, soon repented of a itep, which loft him the
efterm of one party, without gaining the confidence
of the other; and, after suffering many mortifica-
tions from the King's neglect, and the haughtiness
of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave Scot-
land, and to relide in France. While he waited at
Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was in-
formed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a icheme for fur-
prifing the cale of Stirling. In his situation, lit-
tle periuafion was neccffary to draw him to engage
in it. Under various pretexts, he put offhis voyage,
and lay ready to take arms on the day fixed, by
the confplirators, for the execution of their enter-
prize. Hlis lingering so long at Dundee, without
any apparent re:;ion, awakened the suspicion of the
court, proved i^al to himniclf, and iiappointed the
li,<cccs of the con!ipiracy. Colonel William Sewv-

a;-t wI;ro::i..lc

tc Ihouil where he lodged ith a

houJi of !l .! rs, anI in lpite of his r:lIance, took

h:ri -'ri~jlcr. 1' o .liays after, Angus, 'Mar, and
G!;:lnis, t;lzld tl: c.tle of St'iri! :, annd rctilng
rtlcir lin.i!J..rd t!;c:c, pl.blisicd a mlini'':lo declar-
ing thl. tlcl tc'i:

t ar';s for no oli r rcalbn, bu to
remcuc. lb iU; L;lei.;' ;.\l.C;e, a n;i::ion whl

7 lhd

had acquired power by the most unworthy aftions, B o o K
and who exercised it with the most intolerable info- VI.
lence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment 1584.
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it 5
to treachery on his part, and fufpe&ed that as he
had formerly deserted, he had now betrayed them.
At the fame time, a fum of money, with which
Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being
duly paid, and their friends and vaflals coming in
slowly, they appeared irresolute and disheartened;
and as the King, who ated with great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men,
they fled precipitately towards England, and with
difficulty made their escape *. This rash and fee-
ble attempt produced such effeas, as usually follow
disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the
cause, for which it was undertaken, but added
strength and reputation to the King; confirmed Ar-
ran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
measures with more boldness, and greater success.
Gowrie was the first victim of their relentment.
After a very informal trial, ajury of Peers found
him guilty of treason, and he was publickly be-
headed at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next Piep. :y ,.

But as it became necessary, for this purpose, to c 1, A .r:-
in the aid of the legislative authority, a Parlill-nt :' "l ..
was hattily summoned: and while b many j!r th.
nobles were Laniled out of the kincldom, or or-
bidden to appear in the K;ng's prclcnce; v; ilc Ar-
rai's iaughtinnefs kept Iobm at a distance, and in;i-

i!omi'3s lif. of Iluf ofDugl. 376. SpGtf.v. ;c.

midaited

B o midatcd others; the meeting confifled only of

VI. t! ol, who were a.llutcly at the devotion of the

c'"" curt. In or'.cr to conceal the laws which were

scvre. a.s frdaning fron the knowledge of the Clergy, the
ti,,.h"l' Lords of the Articles were sorn to fecrefy; and

when iorme of th;-: M.nifters, who either fulpeated,
or were inforTmc' of t;e danger, deputed one of
their numcr to declare their apprehensions to the
King, he .was seizcd at the palace-gate, and carried
to a ditiant priibn. Others, attempting to enter
the Fa'.lament-houfe, were refilfed admittance*;
aPy and fich laws were paired, as totally overturned the

conFtiution and discipline of the Church. The re-
fusing to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Privy
Council; the retending an exemption from the
authority of the civil courts, the attempting todi-
n-inilh the rights and privileges of any of the three
estates in parliament, were declared to be high trea-
lon. Tne holding Aemblies, whether Civil, or
Ecclcfiailical, without the King's permiflion orap-
pointnlcnt; the utterng, either privately, or pub-
li.kly, in termons, or in declamations, any false
an ifca.ainitous reports againl: the King, his ancef-
tor.-, or .,i..ier:, were pronounced capital crimes -.

\';V ;:t; tlhe'fc la;.s V 're putlli:led iat the cross of

l ..!:' .:. .. , .. accl:dig to thi . ciint cutom, Mr.
K.::ci'rr 'ii-., .linifi:cr of St. Cuthbcrt, and one
;rs :.' i. .rcis of S'foi.on, fokImnly prot'clcd aga:nft
ri:.i, ii tie i.:' of is brethren, bcauFe they
;,:. !'.'; n li.' :

' .;*t!)Ult tht

l.io',,l: 1' or coIl'ent
i' ._ ' .. .iunt .i'. I'. 'r lice tl:c it jritin, tli

° '.',!, 3. ' . . rd . s. I;ac. \ I.

Iu,1-

pulpits and ecclefiafticaljudicatories, had both been B o o K
esteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had VI.
been accuftorned to censure, and admonish, witlh 'l
unbounded liberty. In the latter, they excrcistd an
uncontrouled and independant juriluiclion. The
blow was now aimed at both thcte privileges. These
new statutes were calculated to render curchmen
as inconsiderable as they were indigent; and as the
avarice of the nobles had strippcd them of the
wealth, the King's ambition was about to deprive
them of the power which once belonged to their or-
der. No wonder the alarm was universal, and the
complaints loud. All the Ministers of Edinburgh
forsook their charge, and fled into England. 1 he
mofteminent Clergymen, throughout the kingdom,
imitated their example. Desolation and astonish-
ment appeared in every part of the Scottish Church;
the people bewailed the loss of Pastors, whom they
esteemed; and full of consternation, at an event b
unexpected, openly expressed their rage againit Ar-
ran, and began to fufpe&t the King bimfelf to be an
enemy to the Reformed Religion "

* Spo-. .v. -,;-

# BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK VII.

H I L E Scotland was torn by intestine sac- B o o K
tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru- VI.

mour of a project in agitation for secting Mary at
liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Chcfhire gentle- Thrnogmrr-
man, was fufpeEted of being deeply concerned in ""' i'"'
the design, and on that suspicion he was taken into rinf Fli-
custody. Among his papers were found two liss, t
one of the principal harbours in the kingdom, with
an account of their situation, and of the depth of
water in each; the ot::er, of all the c:nincnt o::i:
Catholics in England. This circu Inlance confl.-i
ed the suspicion a rnInl-

l;im, ;and l lnmc ;.:'I;:: a.;

dctpt rat con;p)i ;Icy wa iippl,,;>)fct:lfl rcr:) to h:-ct 'k
out. At rift he b,,dliy avo.,c l,! i. , r;rio:rfrc, ;':i3

B o o K declared that the two papers were forged by the

VII. Queen's Ministers, in order to intimidate or insnare
'r him; and he even endured the rack with the utmost
1584 fortitude. But being brought a second time to the

place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he
not only acknowledged that he had held a secret
correspondence with the Queen of Scots, but dif-
covered a dcfign that was formed to invade Eng-
land. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to
furnish troops, ard to conduct the enterprize. The
Pope and King of Spain were to supply the money
necessary for carrying it on; all the Englifll exiles
were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics at
home would be ready to join them, at their landing;
Mendoza, the Spanish abaffador, who was the life
of the conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the
spirit of diiaffi&ion among the English, or in has-
tening the preparations on the Continent; and by
his command, he made the two lifts, the copies
whereof had been found in his poffflion. This con-
ferilon he retracted at his trial; returned to it again,
after lentence was pafled upon him; and retracted
it once more at the place of cxecution *.

To us in .'he prcfent age, who arc afilted inform-

ing c:ur opinion of this matter, by the light which
ti:..e and ldt!iory have tihrown upon the dfigns and
cl.:;::'i.cis cif the Princes of Guise, m;:a.y circum-
lt ,::;c :; (.l 'i'r!l!.rnoto;ls cou;lfc 'li .: ' aptear to be
rx::,;;;cly rIc'lln'.c irom:ll truth, or even from proba-
l:il:ct.. ' I;.: 1Dtul of CG;ilb was, at that juncure,
far f,;m L:cii i;n a fiLua.ion to undertake tuicliig

" I: I;.^
, c.>, 137c.

con -

conquests. Without either power or office at court; B o o c
hated by the King; and persecuted by the.favou- VII.
rites, he had no leisure for any thoughts of disturb- 15~r
ing the quiet of neighbouring Rates, and his valt
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying
the foundation of that famous league, which hook
the throne of France. But about the time Eliza-
beth deteEted this conspiracy, the close union be-
tween the house of Guise and Philip II. was remark-
able to all Europe, and as their great enterprize
against Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they en-
deavodred to conceal that under their threatenings to
invade England, Throgmorton's difcoveryappeared
to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew
how ardently all the parties mentioned by him wiflh-
ed her downfal, thought that he could not guard
her kingdom with too much care. The indiscreet Defings or
zeal of the Englilh exiles iricreafed her fears. Not Mary'ss ..
satisfied with iriceffant outcries against her severity gainfl EIl-

0'~~~~~~~~~~~

.  ,1 « < zabctlh.

towards the Scottish Queen, and her cruel perfecu-
tion of her Catholic fubjets, nor thinking it enough
thatone Pope had threatened herwith the sentence of
excommunication, and another had atually pro-
nounced it, they now began to disperse books and
writings, in which they endeavoured to persuade
their difcipies, that it would be a meritorious a&ion
to take away her life they openly exhorted the
maids of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holo-
fcrnes, and by such an illustrious deed, to render
their own names honourable and sacred in the Church,
throughout all future ages *. For all there reasons,
Elizabeth not only inflited the punilhment of a

*Camd. 497.
VO,. IL 1 traitor

B o o K traitor on Throgmorton, but commanded the Spa-

VII. nilh ambaiador instantly to leave England; and
'584' that she might be in no danger of being attacked

within the island, she determined to use her utmost
efforts, in order to recover that influence over the
S.cottiih councils, wI.ilJ she had for some time en-
tirely loft.

She endea. THERE were three different methods, by which
yours to re.e
eflahith Elizabeth might hope to accomplish this; either by
her infu furnilhing such eficEtual aid to the banished nobles,
ez.e in
Scotland, as would enable them to relilme the chief direaion
Abrrgni" of affairs; or by entering into fich a treaty with

Mary, as might intimidate her son, who being now
accustomed to govern, would be apt to agree to any
terms, rather than resign the sceptre, or admit an
associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl of
Arran, to secure the direction of the King his maf-
ter. The last was not only the easiest, and fpeedieff,
but most likely to be fucccfsful. This Elizabeth
resolved to pursue; but without laying the other
two altogetler aside. With this view, fIe sent Da-
vilbn, one of her principal f1cretaries, a man of
abilities and addrels, into Scotland. A Miniler. so
venal as Arran, hated by his own countrymen, and
holding his power by the mofc precarious of all te-
nures, the favour of a young Prince, accepted Eli.
zabetli'= olerrs without hesitation, and elecmned the
acquisition of her proteEtin t be the moll solid
foundaltion of his on greaTlncl. Soon after, he
Ausuf ,, contented to an interview with Lord l-lunidon the

Covernor of Be: wick, and b ing honoured with the
pomlpous ti:!c ui Licu:cnan t Gecrerl Ibr the King,

he

he appeared at the place appointed, with a splendid B o o K
train. In Hunfdon's presence, he renewed his pro- VII.
mises of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the ---
English interest, and assured him that James should 54'
enter into no negociation, which might tend to in-
terrupt the peace between the two kingdoms; and
as Elizabeth began to entertain the fame fears and
jealoulies concerning the King's marriage, which
had formerly disquieted her with regard to his mo-
ther's, he undertook to prevent James from lifien-
ing to any overture of that kind, till he had previ-
oufly obtained the Queen of England's consent *.

THE banished Lords and their adherents soon felt Sev-re pro-

the effects of Arran's friendlfiip with England. As c,,
Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge in her 1","1,e'
dominions, and several of her Minilfers were of opi-
nion that she ought to employ her arms in defence
of their cauli, the fear of thi W te nl

t ol thilb,

which restrained James and his favourie, from pro-
ceeding to such extremities aginft thc:n, as might
have excited the pity or indignation of t i 'lnifl,
and have pro:p;i :. t t o u*xrt :mhe:!;l-ves \'itlI
vigour in their belalf. Lut very alprchenofin ofuufti,,
this kind bei i niw renmoe, th. vcnr d to c'll
a parliamnnr, in which a an t v..'s p.!iil!, attaint-
ing Angus, . '.ar, (Glalis, and a wc. ': nLumbcr of
their followers. Their lites d.c volv d to thcCrown,
and according to the practice of the 'cottii Mo-

C.l S, ;.ho were obM.I., to reward ,'. e. in.

1 2 , 's.'0;5

B o o c spoils of the vanquifled, James dealt out the great-

VII. er part of these to Arran, and his aflociates *.

1584.
Againtl the NoR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigo-
Ctlrgy. rous. All Ministers, readers, and professors of

Colleges were injoined to subscribe, within forty
clays, a paper teiilfying their approbation of the
laws concerning the Church ena6ted in last parlia-
ment. Many, overawed, or corrupted by the
Court, yielded obedience; others food out. The
stipends of the latter were fequeffered, some of the
more acdive committed to pnlbn, and numbers corn-
pelled to fly the kingdom. Those who complied,
fell under the suspicion of a&ing from mercenary
or ambitious motives. hose who suffered, acquir-
ed high repu:ation, by giving such convincing evi-
dence of their firmness and sincerity. The judica-
tories of the Church were almost entirely fupprefled.
In forhe places, scarce as many Ministers remained,
as to perform the duties of religious worlhip; they
soon funk in reputation among the people, and be-
ing prohibited not only fron discoursing of public
affairs, but obliged, by the jealoul, of the admini.
itration, to frame every ifntiment and expreffon in
such a manner, as to give the court no offence, their
lfrmons were deemed lInguid, insipid, and con-
temptible; and it became the general opinion, that
together with the molt virtuous of the nobles, and
the molt faithful of the Clergy, the power and vi-
gour of Religion vwre now banished out of the
kingdom t.

* Cald. 3. 5-. t bid. 3. 8q.

ME A N

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of B o o K

those fruitless negociations with the Queei of Scots, VIl.
which it had become almost matter of form to re- 184
new every year. They served not only to amuse
that unhappy Princess with some profpet of liberty;
but furnithed an apology for eluding the folicita-
tions of foreign powers in her behalf; and were of
use to overawe James, by shewing him that he
could, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to dif-
pute his authority These treaties the suffered to
proceed to what length she pleased, and never want&
ed a pretence for breaking them off, when they be-
came no longer necessary The treaty now on foot
was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which
preceded it; the reasons, however, which rendered
it ineffecual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders Newcon.
towards Scotland, the hip on board of which he fir"Yi-

gainit Eli-

was a passenger happened to be chased by Pirates, zabeth.
who, in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton in great confusion, tore in pieces ome
papers in his custody, and threw them away; but
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the hip, and they were immediate-
ly taken up by Ibme of the paflengers, who carried
them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He,
with great industry and patience, joined them toge-
ther, and they were found to contain the account of
a plot, laid to have been formed by the King of
Spain, and Duke of Guise, for invading England.
The people were not yet recovered from the rear
and anxiety occasioned by the conlpiracy, in which

I 3 Throg-

B o o K Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his disco-

VII. veries appeared now to be confirmed by additional

evidence, not only all their formerapprehenfions re-
curred, but the conflernation became general and
excessive. As all the dangers, with which England
had been threatened for some years, flowed either
immediately from Mary herself, or from those, who
made ue of her name to justify their insurrections
and conspiracies, this gradually diminished the com-
pafion due to her situation, and the English, inflead
of pitying, began to fear and to hate her. Eliza-
beth, under whufc wife and pacific reign the Eng-
lifl tenjoycd tranquiliity, and had opened sources of
wealth unknown to their ancestors, was extremely
beloved by all her people; and regard to her safe-
ty, not less than to their own interest, animated

Occsor., them against the Scottish Queen. In order to dif-
l'i'n::- courage her adherents, it was thought necessary
politionto to convince them, by some publick deed, of the

My a:tachment of the Englifl to their own Sove-

reign, and that any attempt against her life would
prove tat..l to her rival. With this view, an //-
o, bcr ;9. cialic; was frianed, the subscribers of which bound

thcmrlcves by the inoft filemnn oaths, " to defend
" tle QLicen againll all ler encemies, foreign and

domeltic; and if violence fiould be offered to

"her life, in order to favour the title of any pre-
" tender to the Crown, they not only engaged ne-
"ver to alowv or acknowledge the person, or per-

funs, by whom, or tor wio:n, fuc a dctct'ablca&t
flould be committed, but vowed, in the presence

" of the Eternal God, to proccute filch erlbn, or
' perlons, to the death, and to pursue them, with

" their

"c their utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow B o o K
"and extirpation ." Persons of all ranks fublcrib. VII.
ed this combination, with the greatelt eagernels and tJ

1584.
unanimity. 1 .

MARY confidered this combination, not only as Which

an avowed design to exclude her from all right of garrsl'r.
fuccelflon, but as the certain and immediate fore-
runner of her deftrudion. In order to avert this,
he made such feeble efforts as were still in her pow-
er, and sent Naue her secretary to court, with offers
of more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth,
in every point, which had been the occasion of their
long enmity, than all her fufflrings hitherto had
been able to extort . Bur wheth r Mary adhered
inflexibly to her privileges, as an independant Sove-
reign, or yielding to the necessity of her situation,
endeavoured, by concefiuons, to booth her rival, flue
was equally unfucccfsful. Her firmness was im-
puted to obstinacy, or to the ccret hope of foreign
aflifance; her concclions were either believed to be
inincere, orto flow from the fear oflone imminent
danger. Her present willingness, howe er, to com-
ply with any trms were so great, tha, W:lfil.gh.? n
warmly urged his miftrels to come to a final agre-
ment with her. But Elizabct i vas prrfuailid, that
it was the fliirit railled by the lfuciatin, which had
rendered her so pallive ad compli.!-t. She always
mlnagined that there wais tlbnethin;i, :nlrit.ts :in..i
deceitful in all Mar)'s :cions, and tlullpclcd her ot
carrying on a ant;crous corrlcfioji;.l ..c with t!;

n1nglibi Cathlics, buth w ithin a;il w i I'ut th 1.ki:ng-

^ State' al Zl

, . 12. i t t
.' !'', .ii,.

I 4 Aol:.

B o o K dom. Nor were her suspicions altogether void of

VII. foundation. Mary had, about this time, written a

8-
_ letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to haften

the Execution of what the calls the Great plot or De.
fignment, without hesitating on account of any din-
ger in which it might involve her life, which he
would most wiilingly part with, if, by that sacrifice,
she could procure relief for so great a number of the

Sheistreat- oppressed children of the Church *. Instead, there-
ed with
greater f;re, of hearkening to the overtures which the Scot-
riour. tilh Queen made, or granting any mitigation of the

hardlhips of which file complained, Elizabeth re-
solved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and
Sir Drue Drury to be her keepers. Shrewsbury
had discharged his trust with great fidelity, during
fifteen years, but at the fame time, had treated
Mary with gentleness and respect, and had always
sweetened harsh commands, by the humanity with
which he put them in execution. The fame po-
li:enefs was not to be'expeEted from men of an in-
ferior rank, whole severe vigilance, perhaps, was
theirchief recommendation tothat employment, and
the only merit, by which they could pretend to gain
favour or preferment tf

- y

| As James was no less eager, than eve': to deprive

r"ev 'the the banifled Nobles of Elizabeth'sprotcftion, he ap-
K^ng'. pointed the Mafler of Gray his A'mbassador to the

court of England, and entrufed him with the con-
dut of a negociation for that purpose. An honour

? Strype, 3. :4. t Camd. 500.

for which he was indebted to the envy andjealoufy B o o x
of the Earl of Arran. Gray possesed all the talents VIT.
of a Courtier; a graceful person, an infsnuating ad- -'
dress, boundless ambition, and a restless and in-
triguing spirit. During his residence in France, he
had been admitted into the molt intimate familiarity
with the Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his
favour, had renounced the Protestant Religion, and
profefred the utmost zeal for the captive Queen,
who carried on a secret correspondence with him,
from which Ihe expeted great advantages. On his
return into Scotland, he paid court to James with
extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplilhmentsdid
not fail to make their usual impreflion on the King's
heart. Arran, who had introduced him, began
quickly to dread his growing favour; and flattering
hirntelf, that absence would efface any sentiments of
tenderness from the mind of ayoungPrince, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most pro-
per person in the kingdom, for an embassy of such
importance: and contributed to raifehim tothat high
dignity, in order to haften his fall. Elizabeth, who
had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper
instruments for carrying on her designs, endeavour-
ed, by careses, and by presents, to secure Gray to
her nterell. The former flattered his vanity, which
was great; the latter supplied his profuseness, which
was fRill reater. HIe abandoned himself without
reserve to Elizabeth's diretions, and not only un-
dertook to retain the King under the influence of
England, but ated as a spy upon the Scottifi
Qeen, and betrayed to her rival every secret, that

he

B o o K he could draw from her by his high pretensions of

VII. zeal in her service *.

xi84efL GRAY'S credit with the Englilh court was ex-

fits inter:R
withthe trmely galling to the baniflhed nobles. Elizabeth
C¢urt of
iLngl.ind no longer thought of employing her power to restore

them i he found it easier to govern Scotland, by
corrupting the King's favourites; and in compli-
ance with Gray's solicitations, fle commanded the
exiles to leave the north of England, and to remove
r-em,.; .into th.e heart of the kingdom. This rendered it

difficut for them to hold any correspondence with
their partizans in Scotland, and almost impossible
to return thither without her permiflion. Gray, by
gaining a point which James had o much at heart,
rivetted himself more firmly than ever in his favour;
and by acquiring greater reputation, became capa-
ble of lerving Elizabeth with greater fuccels -.

-,85. ARRAN had now possesld, for some time, all

Arran's the power, the riches, and the honours, that his
corruption immoderate ambition could desire, or the fondness
and info-
lence. of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality to-

wards his favourites, could bestow. The office of
Lord Chancellor, the highest and mofl important in
the kingdom, was conferred upon him, even dur-
ing the life of the arl of Argyll, who succeeded
Athole in that dignity ; and the publick beheld,
with atonillment and indignation, a man educat-
ed as a soldier (f fortune, ignorant of law, and a
conteimner ofjultice, appointed to precide in parlia-

* Siryp., 3. ez. M4cl. 31'. t Cald. 3. 643.
. C'.^vtf . ;tIic. u; St;:c, .p. 447.

m.ent,

ment, in the privy council, in the court of session, B o o K
and intrusted with the supreme disposal of the pro- VII.
perty of his fellow fubjets. He was, at the fame X S
time, governor of the cartles of Stirling and Edin-
burgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Pro-
voftof the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all
these accumulated dignities his merits were not sus-
ficiently recompenced, he had been created Lieute-
pant General over the whole kingdom. No person
was admitted into the King's pretence without his
permifion; no favour could be obtained but by his
mediation. James, occupied with youthfulamufe-
ments, devolved upon him the whole regal autho-
rity. Such unmerited elevation increaed his natu-
ral arrogance, and rendered it intolerable 1-le was
no longer content with the condition of a fubje&,
but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his
title to the Crown was preferable to that of the King
himself. Bt, together with these thoughts of roy-
alty, he retained the meanness, suitable to his pri-
mitive indigence. His venality as a judge was scan-
dalous, and was exceeded only by that of his wife,
who, in defiance of decency, made herself a party
in almot every queltion which came to be decided,
employed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe
thejudges, and alrn(,t openly diltated their deci-
sions . His rapacioullels as a Minilicr was infa..
tiable. Not fitisicd witvi the revenues of lo many
offices; with tlh eltatc, and honours wlichi belcn'-
ed to the family of Limilton ; or with the gre;,t r
part of Gowric's lands, -whiih had fallcn to hi:,

* Cald. 3. 331. Scotllarvet' Sl.iSgting S;::, :

flI;lci

B o K lhare; he grasped at the poffllions offeveral of the

VII. nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to exchange

part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil;
and because he was unwilling to quit an ancient in-
heritance for a pofieflon so precarious, he stirred up
vgainft him, his hereditary rival, the Laird ofJhn-
son, and involved that corner of the kingdom in
a civil war. He committed to prilbn the Earl of
Athole, Lord Home, and the Mailer of Caffils;
the first, because he would not divorce his wife,
a daughtr of the Earl of Gowrie, and entail his
eflate on him; the second, because he was unwilling
to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his
ieftes; and the third, for refuting to lend him mo-
ney. His spies and informers filled the whole coun-
try, and intruded themselves into every company.
The nearest neighbours diftrulted and feared each
other. All familiar society was at an end. Even
the common intercourses of humanity were inter-
rupted, no man knowing in whom to confide, or

'ere to utter his complaints. There is not per-
hitps in history, an example of a Miniller so univer-
Ltiiv cteftable to a nation, or who morejuftly de-
jirved its detestation *.

ARRA?, notwithstanding, regardless of the fen-

tinents, and despising the murmurs of the people,
gave a loole to his natural ten-per, and proceeded
to acts ill more violent. David Home of Argaty,
and Patrick his brother, havingreceivedletters from
one of the banilhed Lords, about private business,
tcre condemned and put to death, for holding cor-

* Spotfw. 337, 338,

rpOn-n

refpondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drum- B o o .
whafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of VII.
honour and reputation, were accused of having con- 1j
spired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's
perbon. A ingle witness only appeared; the evi-
dence they produced of their innocence was unan-
fwerable; their accuser himself not long after ac-
knowledged that he had been suborned by Arran;
and all men believed the charge against them to be
groundless: They were found guilty, notwithitand- Feb. 9.
ing, and suffered the death of traitors *.

ABOUT the fame time, that these gentlemen were Parry's

punished for a pretended conlpiracy, Elizabeth's. ,,
life was indangered by a real one. Parry, a Doc- E'Z*bc.-
tor of laws, and a Member of the House of Com-
mons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute
spirit, had lately been reconciled to the Church of
Rome; and fraught with the zeal of a new con-
vert, he offered to demonstrate the sincerity of his
attachment to the religion which he had embraced,
by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had publilh-
ed a book, to prove the murder of an excommu-
nicated Prince to be not only lawful, but a merito-
rious ation. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the
Jesuits both there and at Paris, the Engiifh exi'es,
all approved of the design. The Pope hims If ex-
horted him to persevere; and granted him, for his
encouragement, a plenary indulgence, and remition
of his fins. Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter
to the fame purpose. But though he often got ac-
ccfs to the Queen, fear, or some remaining li:nfe of

Spotfiv. 338. Cald. 3. 79d
.? duty,

B o o K duty, refrained him from perpetrting the crimei

VII. Happily, his intention was at last discovered by

.- Nevil, the only person in England to whom he

had communicated it; and he himself having vo-
March.,. luntarily confcledl hi', guilt, he suffered the punish-

ment which it deserved *.

Atevere THESE repeated conspiracies against their Sove*
flatute,
which reign awakened the indignation of the Englilh par-
fatal o liament, and produced a very extraordinary tatute,
Mar. which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of

Scots. By this law the association in defence of
Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was further
enaced; that if any rebellion shall be excited in

the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the
' hurt of her Majesty's person, by or for any per-

f" on pretending a title to the Crown, the Queen

" hall empower twenty-four persons, by a com-
" miflion under the Great Seal, to examine into,
' and pass sentence upon such offences; and after
' judgment given, a proclamation hall be iued
·' declaring the persons whom they find guilty, ex-
' eluded from any right to the Crown; and her

Majesty's fubjets may lawfully pursue every one
of them to the death, with all their aiders and a-
" bettors: And if any dclign again t the life of the

"Q Queen take eW..t, the perins, by cr for whom,
1 such a deteltablt aci is executed, and the;r iils,
' being any wile aflcnting or rivy to the I,:r.:., fihall
' be iiibabicd f;r ever from pretending to tne Cr)wn,
'i and be purlued tu death in the like manner --."

St.:e TrLIl, vol. i. 103. t lUiJ. I'3.

This

This a was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots B o o R
and whether we confider it as a voluntary expression VI1.
of the zeal and concern of the nation for Eliza- .o'
beth's safety, or whether we impute it to the influ. 5
ence, which that artful Princess prefcrved over her
parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with
the general principles ofjuftice, or humanity. Mary
was thereby rendered accountable not only for her
own aAions, but for those of others; in contequence
of which, he might forfeit her right of fuccefiion,
and even her life itself.

MARYjuftly confidered this a, as a warning to Tie rigoa

prepare for the worst extremities. Elizabeth's mi- e wva
nilters, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, reated: i
to take away her life; and suffered books to be
publiihed, in order to persuade the nation, that this
cruel and unprecedented measure was not only ne-
ceffary, but just . Even that hort period of her
days which remained, they rendered uncomfortable,
by every hardship, and indignity, which it was in
their power to inflit. Almost all her iervants were
dismissed; she was treated no onger with the re-
fpet due to a Queen; and thouhl the rigour of
feventccn years impritonment had broken her con-
ilituticn, she was cornlind(l to tv.' ruinous chambers,
scarce habitable, even in the middle of fiumnmer, by
reason of cold. Notwitlllanding the cantinefs of
her revenue, he had been accustomcd to ditiribute
ret.ul.rly Ifor:e alims ;,rnoI ,! tl: poor in ti e village
adjo::ing to the cattlc. '..i lt, no;, refufd lihr

* Strype 3. :;. .

lib'r:y

B o o liberty to perform this pious and humane office,

VIl. which had afforded her great consolation, amidit

8 her own sufferings. The cattle, in which she re-
3 585 tided, was converted into a common prison; and a

young man, fufpeted of Popery, was confined
there, and treated under her eye, with such rigour,
that he died of the ill usage. She often complained
to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries, and ex-
poRfulated as became a woman, and a Queen; but
as no political rcafon now obliged that Princess to
amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes, far from
granting her any redress, (he did not even deign to
give her any answer. The King of France, closely
allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended for a-
liftance, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause, with
any warmth; and all his solicitations in her behalf
were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Castle-
nau, the French ambassador, whose companflon and
zeal for the unhappy Queen supplied the defects in
his infiruCtions, remonstrated with such vigour a-
gainft the indignities, to which (he was exposed,
that, by his importunity, he prevailed at length to
have her removed to Tuthbury; though The was
confined, the greater part of another winter, in her
present wretched habitation *.

A breach NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the ne-
hb>v"n plect of her friends, made such an impreflion on
Mary ai:d r
L, igon. Mary, as the ingratitude of her son. James had

hitherto treated his mother with filial rrpeet, and
had even entered into negociations with her, which
gave umbr.ge to Elizabeth. But as it was not her

" Jebb, v, :. 5;5-;9.

intcrcft

Interest that this good correspondence ihould conti- B o a
nue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland, found VII.
his favour with the King greatlyincreafed by the fuc- 'A ·
cess of his embassy, persuaded him to write a harlh
and undutiful letter to his mother, in which he ex-
prefly refused to acknowledge her to be Queen of
Scotland, or to confider his affairs as conne&ed, in
any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her
maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for-
row and despair. " Was it for this, said (he, in a March J
" letter to the French Ambafrador, that I have in-

dured so much, in order to preserve for him the
inheritance, to which I have a just right ? I am

" far from envying his authority in Scotland. I
" desire no power there; nor with to set my foot
" in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
' of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
" loved with too tender affection. Whatever he
' either enjoys or expecs, he derived it from me.
' From him, I never received afiftance, supply, or
" benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him

any longer as a King; he holds that dignity by
' my content; and if a speedy repentance does not
" appease my just resentment, I will load him with
4' a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with
" all my pretensions, to one, who will receive them
"' with gratitude, and defend them with vigour*.'
The love which James bore to his mother, whom
he had never known, nay whom he had been early
taught to confider as the noft abandoned person of
herfcx, cannot be fuppoled ever to have been ardent,

Jebb, :. 57. See Apend. No. X,
VOL. II. and

B o o K and he did ot now take any pains to regain he'

VII. favour. But whether her indignation at his undu-

tiful behaviour, added to her bigoted attachment
to Popery, prompted Mary at any time to think fe-
rioufly of disinheriting her son; or whether the
threatenings were uttered in a sudden sally of difap-
pointed affection, it is now no easy matter to deter-
mine. Some papers which are fill extant seem to
render the former not improbable *.

Dangerous CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting,
fituaton f
Llizibctl, occupitld Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm, which

she had long enjoyed, fcemed now to be at an end;
and such storms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring
nations had undergone revolutions, extremely to
her disadvantage. The great qualities, which Hen-
ry III. had dtfplayed in his youth, and which railed
the expectations of his fubjets so high, vanished on
his ascending the throne; and his acquiring supreme
pow r teems not only to have corrupted his heart,,
but to have impaired his understanding. lie soon
loft the esteem and affection of the nation; and a
life divided between the aufterities of a fuperfitious,
devotion, andr the extravagancies of the nollt diffo-
lute d(z!bauchcry, rendered him as contemptible as
he wvas odious on account of his rapaciousness, his
prot.f;iion, and the fondness with which he doated
on many unworthy minions. On he death of his
only brother, those entiments of the people burlt
out with violence. Henry had no children, and
though but thirty-two years of age, the fucceflion

* See Aperndix. No, XI.

of

of the Crown was already confidered as open. The B o o K
King of Navarre, a distant delcendant of the royal VII.
family, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was 1585
a zealous Protestant. The profpe&t of an event, so rrom the
fatal to their Religion, as his arcending the throne rcasuo
of France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe,
and the Duke of Guise, countenanced by the Pope,
and aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
defender of the Romish faith, and the asserter of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's righc to the Crown. In
order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, distinguishei by the name of the I-loly
League. All ranks of men joined in it with emu-
lation. The spirit spread with the irrecllible rapi-
dity, which was natural to religious p,'fions, in
that age. The eftruaion of the Reformation not
only in France, but all over Europe, see.ned to be
the objec and wish of the whole party; and the
Duke of Guise, the head f tis mighty and zea-
lous body, acquired authority in the kinglom, far
superior to that, which the ili; i linilift polg;;d.
Philip II. by the conquei: or ' .tu1,:!, 1;:l greatly sion, the
increased the naval power o :' .: , ;.n had ai lafl pPowLr'o

- ......' Philip 11,

reduced under 1!is dominin l;ol !I ,..t pJ!c;on of the
Continent, whicl lies bcyon.l te Pyrcuean mnoun-
tains, and which nature ceiLns to ia.'e dltined to
sorn one great monarchy. \Vi!iLm, lrince cf
Orange, who lirft encou;ad il.c l;e i;';,;a s o.
the Netherlands to ali':r tlci. lifLic:, nJ whose
wisdom anti valour forined ani! p:jot t]'d the rising
comlonwealth, had fallen by th hanl of an as-
liafin. The fupcrior genius of thle Plirlce of Parma,
had given an entire turn to t!,; site of the war in

K thae

B o o K the Low Countries; all his enterprizes, concerted

VII. with consummate skill, and executed with equal
'55 bravery, had been attended with success; and the

Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on the
point of falling under the dominion of their ancient
master.

Her wife NONE of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth
rous co had hitherto owed her security, existed any longer.
dud. She could derive no advantage from the jealousy,

which had subsisted between France and Spain;
Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
of Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both
kingdoms. The Hugonots were unable to contend
with the power of the league; and little could be
expeced from any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long employ the arms, or divide the strength of
Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Europe, it
became neceTary for Elizabeth to form a new plan
of condu6t; and her wisdom in forming it, was
not greater than the vigour with which he carried
it on. The measures, molt suitable to her natural
temper, and which he had hitherto pursued, were
cautious and safe; those fie now adopted were en-
terprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but
was not afraid of war; and was capable, when com-
pelled by necessity, not only of defending herself
with fpirir, butof attacking her enemies with a bold-
ness, which averted danger from her own domi-
niars. She immediately furnified the Hugonots
with a considerable fpply in money. She carried
on a private negociation with Henry II1. who;

though

though compelled to join the league, hated the lead-B o o K
ers of it, and wished for their deftrution. She VII.
openly undertook the protection of the Dutch com-'
monwealth, and lent a powerful army to its assist-
ance. She endeavoured to form a general confe-
deracy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to the
Popish League. She determined to proceed with Reolvesto
the utmost rigour against the Queen of Scots, whose punilh Ma

ry, and to

sufferings and rights afforded her enemies a fpeciousgain the
pretence for invading her dominions. She refolvedin"'
to redouble her endeavours in order to effef a closer
union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate
her influence over the councils of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce moif

of the Scottilh courtiers to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother for-
merly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden, the Justice Clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident at
London, were the persons in whom he chiefly con-
fided. In order to dire& and quicken their mo-
tions, she dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along ,,
with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay,
well-bred and entertaining; he excelled in all the
exercises, for which James had a paflion; and
amused the young King by relating the adventures
he had met with, and the observations he had made,
during a long residence in foreign countries; but
under the veil of thele uperficial qualities, he con-
cealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon
grew into high favour with James, and while he
was fcemingly attentive only to pleasure and diver-

K 3 sions,

B o o K ens, he acquired influence over the public coun-

VII. cils, to a degree which was indecent for a stranger

Wt - to poflcfs'.

z585'

rropes a NOTHu'o., however, could be more acceptable
league with
Scotland. to the nation, than the proposal he made of a ftri6

alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of
the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarming
progress of the Popish league seemed to call on all
Protestant Princes, to unite for the preservation of
July 19, their common faith. James embraced the overture

with warmth, and a Convention of estates empow-
ered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliament -t. The alacrity with which
James concurred in this measure, must not be whol-
ly ascribed either to his own zeal, or to Wotton's
addres; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's libe-
rality. As a mark of her motherly affection for the
young King, the fettled on him an annual pension
of 5000 pounds; the fame fum which her father
had allotted her before ihe acended the throne.
This circumstance, which fne took care to mention,
rendered a flmn, which in that age was far from be-
ing inconsiderable, a very acceptable present to the
King, whose re.enues, during a long minority,
had been almost totally diifipated :.

'uncr. BUT the chiefobje6t of Wotton's intrigues, was
"' Al,'. to ruin Arran. While a minion so odious to the
,i. nation continued to govern the King, his afiftance

could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Huns.

* Mcv\. 317. I- sop;fv. 3;9. $ Cal, 3. 5C5.

dane,

;danc, had appeared extremely for her interelf, he B o o K
could place no great confidence in a man, whose VII.
condu& was so capricious and irregular, and who, '-r'
notwithstanding his proteftarions to the contrary, 5
still continued a ecret correspondence both with
Mary, and with the Duke of Guise. The banilh-
ed Lords were attached to England from affeion,
as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency,
she could thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left
London, they had been summoned thither, under
.colour of vindicating thcmlves from his accufa-
tions, but, in reality, to concert with him the modl
proper measures for reltoring them to their country.
Wotton pursued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen
it for execution; and it was greatly facilitated by
an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft, the Englith
and Scottish wardens of the middle marches, hav-
ing met, according to the cuitom of the borders,
about mid-summer, a fray arose, and Lord RusTel,
the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be
killed. This scuffle was purely accidental, but Eli-
zabeth chore to confider it as a design formed by
Ker, at the inltigation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them
should be delivered up to her; and though James
eluded that demand, he was obliged to confine Ar-
ran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen. Dur- Aif the
ing his absence from court, Wotton and his aTo- h;lnithed

nobl[s.

ciates carried on their intrigues without interruption.
By their advice, the banished nobles endeavoured to
accommodate their differences with Lord John, and

K 4 Lord

B o o K Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons,

VII. whom Morton's violence had driven out of the
75S7' kingdom. Their common sufferings, and cornm-
pa. i,. mon interest, induced both parties to bury in obli-

vion the ancient discord, which had subsisted between
the houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Eliza-
beth's permiflion, they returned in a body to the
borders of Scotland. Arran, who had again reco-
vered favour, insisted on putting the kingdom in a
posture of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and
Maitland, secretly thwarted all his measures. Some
necessary orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffte&ual, by the manner of
execution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and
with relucance *.

WoTTON's fertile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to seize the King, and to carry him
by force into England. But the design was happily
discovered; and in order to avoid the punilhment his
treachery merited, he departed without taking
leave t-

'Theyre- MEANWHILE the banished Lords hafened the
tucn into
cotlnd execution of their enterprize; and as their friends
and ae re- and vassals were now ready to join them, they enter-
;oniled to j
shcKins. ed Scotland. Wherever they came, they were wel-

comed as the deliverers of their country, and the
most fervent prayers were addrcled to Heaven for
the success of their arns. They advanced with-
out losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the
head of o,ooo men. The King, though he
had assembled an army fuperiqr in number, could

* Spots. 34. t :clv. 335.

Q;t

not venture to meet them in the field, with troops, B o o K
whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at VII.
best, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor '--
was either the town or castle provided for a siege. 5
The gates, however, of both were Ihut, and the
nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night Nor. s.
they furprized the town, or more probably it was
betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who had un-
dertaken to defend it, was obliged to save himself
by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invested
the castle, in which there were not provisions for
twenty-four hours; and James was necefitated im-
mediately to hearken to terms of accommodation.
They were not so elated with success, as to urge ex-
travagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to
make every reasonable conceflion. I hey obtained
a pardon in the molt ample form, of all the of-
fences they had committed; the principal forts in
the kingdom were, by way of security, put into
their hands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel
Stewart were removed from the King's presence;
and a parliament was called, to eftabliih tranquil-
lity in the nation

THOUGH a great majority in this parliament con- A Paria.

sifted of the confederate nobles, and their adherents, " t,.
they were far from discovering a vindicive spirit.
Satisfied with procuring an at, restoring them to
their ancient honours and eates, and ratifying the
pardon granted by the King, they seemed willing to
forget all past errors in the administration, and
spared James the mortification of feeing his Mini-

' Cald. 3 795.

ecrs

B o o K ters branded with any public note of infamy. Ari

VII. ran, alone, deprived of all his honours, stripped of
'.-. his borrowed spoil5, and declared an enemy to his

country by public proclamation, funk back into
obscurity, and mulf, henceforth, be mentioned by
his primitive title of Captain James Stewart. As
he had been, during his unmerited prosperity, the
object of the hatred and indignation of his country-
men, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all
his sufferings mitigate their resentment in the least
degree.

Church r- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who
firs' obtained no redress of their grievances by this revo-

lution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
affected to be confidered as guardians of the privi-
leges and discipline of the Church. In all their
manifestos they had declared their resolution to re-
store these, and by that popular pretence, had gain-
ed many friends. It was now natural to expet
some fruit of these promises, and some returns of
gratitude towards many of the most eminent preach-
ers who had suffered in their cause, and who de-
manded the repeal of the laws paiffd the preceding
year. The King, however, was resolute to main-
tain these laws in full authority; and as the nobles
were extremely solicitous not to disgust him, by
insisting on any difagrecable request, the claims of
the Church in this, as well as in many former
instances, were sacrificed to the interest of the laity.
The Ministers gave vent to their indignation in the
pulpit, and their impatience under the disappoint-

ment

ment broke out in some expressions, extremely dif- B o o K
refpe&ful even towards the King himlelf*. VII.

THE Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the 1586'

effe&s of their anger. The Provincial Synod of
Fife summoned him to appear, and to answer for
his contempt of the decrees of former Affcmblies,
in presuming to exercise the funAion of a Biihop.
And though he refused to acknowledge the jurif-
difion of the court, and appealed from it to the
King, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregular, was pronounced against him. ^pril ,.
Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his
archiepiscopal excommunication againftMelvil, and
some other of his opponents.

SooN after, a General Aflembly was held, in

which the King, with some difficulty, obtained an
a&, permitting the name and office of a Bishop fill
to continue in the Church. The power of the or.
der, however, was considerably retrenched. The
exercise of discipline, and the infpeeion of the life
and doctrine of the Clergy, were committed to Pref-
byteries, in which Bihops hould be allowed no
other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as perpe-
tual moderators. They themselves were declared
to be fubje&. in the fame manner as other pastors,
to the jurifdition of the General Alembly. And
as the discussion of the Archbiflop's appeal might
have kindled unusual heats in the Assembly, that as-
fair was terminated by a compromise. lie renoun-
ced any claim of supremacy over the Church, and

* ;'Cot/"v. 343.

pro-

B o o K promised to demean himself suitably to the charac-

VII. ter of a Bishop, as described by St. Paul. The As-
';' fcfembly, without examining the foundations of the

fentenceofexcommunication, declared that it should
be held of no effet, and restored him to all the
privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pro-
nounced. Notwithstanding the extraordinary ten-
dernefs ffewn for the honour of the fynod, and the
delicacy and refpet, with which its jurifdiaion was
treated, several members were so zealous as to pro-
test against this decision *.
Aleague THE court of Scotland was now filled with per-

th Eng. sons, so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the

laud con.
eluded. league between the two kingdoms, which had been

proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French Envoy. James him-
self first offered to renew the negociation. Eliza-
beth did not susser such a favourable opportunity to
iy . flip, and instantly dispatched Randolph to conclude

a treaty, which he so much desired. The danger
to which the Protestant religion was exposed, by
the late combination of the Popili powers for its
deltrudion, and the neceflity of a ftri&t confederacy
among those, who had embraced the Reformation,
in order to obftruC their pernicious designs, were
mentioned as the foundation of the league. The
chief articles in it were, that both parties hould
bind themselves to defend the Evangelic Religion;
that the league should be offenive and defensive
againt all, who shall endeavour to disturb the ex-
ercife of religion in either kingdom that if one of

Cald. 3. 8)4. Spotfv. 346.

the

the two parties be invaded, the other, notwithRfan4- B o o
ing any former alliance, hould not, directly or in- VII.
direaly, alfift the invader; that if England be in- ''
vaded in any part remote from Scotland, James
should aflitl the Queen with 2000 horse, and 5000
foot; that if the enemy landed or approached within
sixty miles of Scotland, the King lhould take the
field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as
he would do in defence of his own kingdom. Eli-
zabeth, in return, undertook to at in defence of
Scotland, if it hould be invaded. At the fame
time, he assured the King that no flep hould be
taken, which might derogate in any degree from
his pretensions to the English Crown *. Elizabeth
expressed great fatisfa ion with a treaty, which ren-
dered Scotland an useful ally, instead of a dange-
rous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of fecu-
rity on that fide, which all her ancestors had aimed
ar, but none of them had been able to obtain. Zeal
for religion, together with the blessings of peace,
which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a con-
fiderable period, had so far abated the violence of
national antipathy, that the King's conduct was
universally acceptable to his own people t.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time,

exposed James to much and deserved censure. This
man was deeply engaged in the conspiracy againf
the life of the King his father. Both Morton and
Binny one of his own fcrvants, who suffered for
that crime, had accused him of being present at the

* Spotfw. 351. jt Carmd. 513.

n; U r-

B o o murder*. He had escaped punilhment by flying

VII. into England, and James had often required Eli-

zabeth to deliver up a person so unworthyof her pro.
tedion. He now obtained a licence, from the King
himliclf, to return into Scotland ; and after under-
going a mock-trial, calculated to conceal rather
than to detect his guilt, he was not only taken into
favour by the King, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable charadter of his am-
baffador. James was now of such an age, that his
youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse
for this indecent tranlfction. It must be imputed
to the excessive facility of his temper, which often
led him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of
his own dignity and reputation -.

Rife of na- NOT long after, the inconsiderate affetion of
bnpiracy the Englilh Catholics towards Mary, and their
againt Eli- implacable refentn:ent aainft Elizabeth, gave rife
zabcth.

to aconfpiracy, which proved fatal tothe one Queen,
left an indelible stain on the reputation of the other,
and presented a spectacle to Europe, of which
there had hitherto been no example in the history
of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodg-

fun, priiit educated in the fminary at Rheims,
had adopted an extravagant and entlhufaltic notion,
that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dic-
tated imn-cdiatcly by the H-Ioly (holt. This wild
opinion they inltilled into Savage, an officer in the

* See Apperd. di. NI . XL. :3. C. 3. 91

Spa-

Spanish army, noted for his furious zeal, and dar- B o oK
ing courage and persuaded him that no service VII.
could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away 1586
the life of an excommunicated Heretic. Savage, April 6.
eager to obtain the Crown of martyrdom, bound
himself by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal-
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come
Over to Paris, and bolicited Mendoza the Spanilh
ambassador there, to procure an invasion of Eng-
land, while the affairs of the league were so profie-
rous, and the kingdom left naked by fending so
many of the Queen's best troops into the Nether-
lands. Paget and the English exiles demonfirated
the fruitlessness of such an attempt, unless Eliza-
beth were first cut off, or the invaders f cured of a
powerful concurrence on their landing. If it could
be hoped that either of these events would happen,
efrt~ual aid was promised; and in the mean time
Ballard was sent back to renew his intrigues. May I5.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Ba-

bington, a young gentleman in Derbylhire, of a
plentiful fortune, and many amiable qualities, who
having contracted, during his rfidence in France,
a familiarity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, had
been recommended by him to the Quccn of Scots.
-le concurred with Paget in confidering the death
of Elizabeth as a nceffary preliminary to any inva-
sion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would
soon b. put to her days, and imparted to him Sa-
vage's vow, who was now in Lond,n waiting for
an opportunity to strike the blow. But Babingtnll
thought the attempt of too much i'portance, to

~~~~~5 rely

B o o K rely on a single hand for the execution of it, and

VII. proposed that five resolute gentlemen should bejoin.,
"" ed with Savage, in an enterprize, the fuccei of
586. which was the foundation of all their hopes. He

offered to find out persons willing to undertake the
service, whose honour, secrecy, and courage, they
might safely trust. He accordingly opened the
matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury,
Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all
of them, except Polly, whole bustling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of good
families united together in the bonds of private
friendship, strengthened by the more powerful tie
of religious zeal. Many consultations were held;
June. their plan of operations was at last fettled and their

different parts afligned. Babington himself was

The chcme appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots; Salisbury,
ofp e con- with ome others, undertook to excite several coun-

ties to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the
most dangerous and important service of all, fell to
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. And
so totally had their bigoted prejudices extinguished
the principles of honour, and the sentiments of hu-
manity suitable to their rank, that without scruple
or compunaion, they undertook an aion, which
is viewed with horror, even when committed by
the meanest and motl profligate of mankind. This
attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no le;i
honourable than it was desperate, and in order to
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a piture
drawn containing the portraits of the fix alafins,

with

With that of Babington in the middle, and a motto B o o K
intimating that they were jointly embarked in some VII.
hazardous design. 586.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and bicovered

imprudent instance of vanity, seem to have thought by,^.,^
adifcovery scarce poflible, and neither diflrulted the
fidelity of their companions, nor doubted the fuc-
cess of their undertaking. But while they believed
that their machinations were carried on with the
most profound and impenetrable secrecy, every flep
they took was fully known to Walsingham. Polly
was one of his spies, and had entered into the con-
fpiracy with no other design than to betray his as-
fociates. Gilbert Gifford, too, having been sent
over to England to quicken the motions of the con-
fpirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
gave him sure intelligence of all their projecs. That
vigilant minister immediately imparted the difcove-
ries which he had made to Elizabeth; and without
communicating the matter to any other of the Coun-
Icllor, they agreed, in order to undertanid the plot
more perfctly, to wait till it was ripened into ibme
form, and brought near the point of execution,

A r lbt, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and cri- Tiiey.a

minal to cxpofe her own life, and to tempt Provi- puniflid.
dcnct any farther. Ballard, the prime mover in ""Auu4.
the whole conspiracy, was arretled. His associates,
diiconcerted and struck with aonilhment, endea-
voured to save themfilves by flight. But, within a
few days, all of them, except Windo(r, were leized
in different places of the kingdom, and committed

VOL. I. L to

B o o K to the Tower. Though they had undertaken the

VII. part, they wanted the firm and determined spirit of
L ^T- aiffins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, dif-

586. covered all they knew. The indignation of the

people, and their impatience to revenge such an ex-
ecrable combination against the life of their Sove-
reign, hallened their trial, and all of them suffered

Sept. so. the death of traitors *.

Mlary is ac- THUS far Elizabeth's condu& may be pronounc.
being an ed both prudent and laudable, nor can he be ac-
acconplice cufed of violating any law of humanity, or of tak-
in the con-.
(fiacy. ing any precautions beyond what were necessary for

her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with
regard to which, potferity will pals a very different
judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men ac-

counts sufficiently for all the wild and wicked de-
signs which they had formed. But this was not the
light, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose
to place the conspiracy. They represented Babing-
ton and his aflbciates to be instruments employed
by the Queen of Scots, the real though lfcret au-
thor of so many attempts against the life of Eliza-
beth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They pro-
duced letters, which they ascribed to her, in sup-
port of this charge. Theflc, as they gave out, had
come into their hands, by the following lingular,
and mylleii.us method of conveyance. G.fford,
on Iis return into Eingland, had been in:ruited by
Come of tl;e ex;s w ith Ictecrs to Mary; but in or-

* Camd. 515. Sta; Tia:s, \Vol. . lzo.

der

der to make a trial of his fidelity and address, they B o o K
were only blank papers made up in that frm. These VII.
ybing safely delivered by him, he was afterwards e 8
employed without farther scruple. Walsingham
having found means to gain this man, he, by his
permifion, and the connivance of Paulet, bribed a
tradcfman in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whi.
thee Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the
letters in a hole in the wall of the caltle, covered
with a loose stone. Thence they were taken by the
Queen, and in the fame manner, her answers re-
turned. All these were car;icd to Waifingham,
opened by him, decyphered, fealed again so dexte-
roufly that the fraud could not be perceived, and
then transmitted to the persons to whom they were
directed. Two letters to Babington. with several
to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the EngiIlh
fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It wa;
given out that in there letters Mary approved of the
conspiracy, and even of the aarfnation; that she
directed them to proceed with the utmost circum-
fpedion, and not to take arms till foreign axilia-
ries were ready to join them; that £ne recommended
the Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young
Earl ofNorthumberland, as proper prlbns to con-
dut and to adl reputation to their enterprize; that
1he advised them, if polilsile, to excite at the fame
tine f)ne commotion ii; Irelnd ; and above all, be.
fought them t conc'l. xv itlh care the means of her
ec;ape, fuggelting to tie' cai fveraJ expedients for
that purpole.

L ALL

B o o K ALL these circumstances were opened at the trial

VII. of the conspirators. And while the nation was un.
C' ' der the influence of those terrors which the alffcia-
I.,86.
The indig- tion had raised, and the late danger had augmented,
nation f they were believed without hesitation or enquiry,
the English
againi hr and spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her
on that
iccount. religion was well known; and in that age, exam-

ples of the violent and sanguinary spirit which it
inspired, were numerous. All the cabals against
the peace of the kingdom for many years had been
carried on in her name; and it now appears evi-
dently, said the Englilh, that the safety of the one
Queen is incompatible with that of the other. Why
then, added they, hould the tranquillity of Eng-
land be faerificed for the fake of a stranger ? Why
is a life so dear to the nation exposed to the repeat-
ed assault. of an exasperated rival ? The cafe sup-
poitd in the association, has now happened, the fa-
cred peroln of our Sovereign has been threatened,
and why should not art injured people execute that
juit revenge which they had vowed ?

ti'.aFIeth No f ntiments could be more agreeable than these
rtfulves to
yrc.e to to Elizabeth and her Ministers. They themselves

,, U.t1t had at irfs propagated them among the people, and
ag.ir.lt her. they now served both as an apology, and a motive,

for their proceeding to such extremities against the
Scottith Qicen, as they had long meditated. The
nmore ini';! is Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the more
flie sic aild hated that unhappy Queen, and
c;l;;lc at lat t be persuaded that there could be no
otiher I 'clrity ior her own life, but the death of her
rival.- Bulre. ich ald Walsingham had promoted so

zea-

zealoufy all her measures with regard to ScottifhB o o K
affairs; and had acted, with so little reserve, in op- VII.
position to Mary, that they had reason to dread the 1586.
most violent effects of her resentment, if ever he
should mount the throne of England; and there-
fore they endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal to
themselves, by confirming their Mistress's fear and
hatred of the Scottish Queen,

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unufualrer do-

mealcs,

vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her ig- papers, t&c
norant of the discovery of the conspiracy. Sirs'i'd'
Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court, to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with
which Ihe was loaded as accelary to that crime;
and he furprized her with the account, just as Ihe
had got on horseback to ride out along with her
keepers. She was struck with astonishment, and
would have returned to her apartment, but she was
not permitted; and in her absence, her private clo-
set was broke open, her cabinet and papers were
seized, fealed, and sent up to court. Her principal
domestics, too, were arrested, and committed to
different keepers. Naue and Curie, her two fecre-
taries, the one a native of France, the other of
Scotland, were carried prisoners to London. All
the money in her custody, amounting to little more
than 2000 pounds, was secured. And after lead-
ing her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
house to another, she was conveyed to Fotheringay,
a strong castle in Northamptonshire *.

Camd. 517.

L 3 No

B o K No farther evidence could now be expected a-

VII. ainft Mary, and nothing regained but to decide

8ó~ what flould be her fate. With regard to this, Eli-

i;,86
Drlibcra:s zabeth and those Ministers in whom lie chiefly
con. rnirg; confided, fem to have taken their resolution but
the metnhod
es l,.ccd. there was till great variety of sentiments among

her other Counsellors. Some thought it sufficient
to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
under uch close restraint, as would cut off all pof-
fibility of corresponding with the enemies of the
kit:gdom; and as her constitution, broken by long
confinement, and her spirit deje&ed with so many
cares, could not long support such an additional
load, tlh Queen and nation would soon be deliver-
ed from all their fears. But though it might be
cafy to ecure Mary's own person, it was impofllble
to diminilh the reverence which the Roman Catho-
lics had for her name, or to extinguish the com-
pallion wi'h wllich they viewed her sufferings; while
these continued, in:i;rred&ins and invasions would
never Le wanting for her relief, and the only effe't
oa any new rigour would be to render them more
fire;ucnt and dangerous. Por this reason the expe.
dient was rcjcec'ed.

Detrminces A PUBLIC and legal trial, though the most un-
to h r
l.ubli!;ly. exailnpled, was judged the mofl unexceptionable

methcd of procceding; and it had at the fame time,
a f inblance ofj:i'tice, accompanied with an air of
dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient re-
cords, for any flatute or precedent, to justify such
a.; ut!comn.on ftep, as te trial of a foreign Prince,
who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but

8 had

had fled thither for refuge. The proceedings against B o o K
her were founded on the a of last Parliament, and VII.
by applying it in this manner, the intention of I '6
those who had framed that severe flatute became '
more apparent *.

ELIZADETH resolved that no circumfance of

pomp or solemnity should be wanting, which could
render this tranfation such as became the dignity
of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
commifflon under the great feal, forty persons, the
most illustrious in the kingdotn, by their birth or
offices, together with five of the judges, to hear and
decide this great cause. Many difficulties were start-
ed by the lawyers, about the name and title by
which Mary ihould be arraigned; and while the
essentials of justice were 1i grofly violated, the
empty forms of it were the objects of their rare.
They at length agreed that he should be fiikd,
*' Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King
4' of Scots, commonly called Queen of Sco:s, and
' Dowager of France -."

AFTER the many indignities which she had lately

suffered, Mary could no longer doubt but that her
destruCtion was determined. She expeted, every
moment, to end her days by poison, or by ltOr.e of
thoft fcret means, usually employed againlt cp-
tive .rinces. And left the malice of her cnemie ,
at the l.le time

ti t it deprived her of life, thoi.l

endcavour likewili to blast her reputation, siei
wrote to the Duke of Ouilf, and vindicatctd l:-

* c'amJ. 5 19. Johnll. li:. 113. Stry-'. ; .":'.

L 4 ktt;

B o n K self, in the strongest terms, from the imputation of

VII. encouraging or of being acceflary to the conspiracy
-6' for assassinating Elizabeth*. In the solitude of her

prison, the strange resolution of bringing her to a
public trial had not reached her ears, nor did the
idea of any thing so unprecedented, and so repug-
nant to regal Majefly, once enter into her thoughts.
Thetrial at ON the eleventh of Ocober, the Commiflioners

llc"i' appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay.

N,-xr murning they delivered a letter from her to
lviars, in which, afier the bitterei reproaches and
acctia;ions, lhe informed her, that regard to her
own fafcry had, at lalE, rendered it necessary to make
a pubic enquiry into her conduc&, and therefore re-
quiled her, as she had lived lb long under the pro-
tetion of the laws of England, to submit now to
the triAl, hich they ordained to be taken of her

fr.s e-. crinme-. Mary, though furprized at this message,
rrit -o was neither appalled at the danger, nor unmindful
P: L. of her own dignity. She protested, in the moti so-

lcmn niann r, that Ihe was innocent of the crime
laid to her chargc, and had never countenanced any
attempt against the life of the Queen of England;
but, at tli fame time, refuled to acknowledge the
juriiliaion of her commiflioners. " I came into
" tl;e kingdom," said he, " an independent So-
,' vcreign, to implore the Queen's affiltance, not
" to fiubj.ct myself to her authority. Nor is my
" fl.ilrit so broken by its past misfortunes, or so in-
t" ti;nidaecl by present dangers, as to stoop to any
* thirng unbecoming the Majesty of a crowned head,

Jcbh, 2. 283.

!; or

At or that will disgrace the ancestors from whom I B o o K
"am descended, and the son to whom I hall leave VIi.
" my throne. If I must be tried, Princes alone '
" can be my Peers. The Queen of England's sub. i58
"je&s, however noble their birth may be, are of
* a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in
" this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner.
' Its laws never afforded me any protection. Let
"them not now be perverted, in order to take
"away my life."

THE Commiflioners employed arguments and in-

treaties to overcome Mary's relblution. They even
threatened to proceed according to the forms of law,
and to pass sentence against her on account of her
contumacy in refuiing to plead; flie persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline theirjurifdiction. An
argument used by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain,
at lat prevailed. He told her, that by avoiding a
trial, she injured her own reputation, and deprived
herself of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be
more agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the
Queen their Mistress, than to be convinced, by un-
doub ted evidence, that {he had been unjustly loaded
with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible hould impofeon Content
the unwary Queen, or that file, unassisted, at that however to

do o.

time, by any friend or counsellor, should not be
able to detea and elude all the artifices of Eliza-
beth's ablest Miniacrs. In a situation equally me-
lancholy, and under circumstances nearly similar,

her

B o o K her Grandson, Charles I. refused, with the utmof

VII. firmness, to acknowledge the usurped jurifdiion of

e-ó the High Court of Justice; and posterity has ap-

proved his conduct, as suitable to the dignity of a
King. If Mary was less constant in her resolution,
it must be imputed solely to her anxious desire of
vindicating her own honour.
8. 214. AT her appearance before the Judges, who were

feated in the great hall of the catle, where they re-
ceived her with much ceremony, she took care to
protest, that by condescending to hear and to give
an answer to the accusations, which hould be of-
sered against her, she neither acknowledged theju-
rifdision of the court, nor admitted of the validity
and justice of those as, by which they pretended
to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, en-

deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court.

The acou. TrEN the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor open.
tion ar. ed the charge against her, with all the circumstances

of the late conlpiracy. Copies of her letters to
Mendoza, Babington, Engleficld and Paget were
produced. Babington's confession, those of Ballard,
Savage, and te other conspirators, together with
the declarations of Nauc and Curle her secretaries,
were read, and tlhe whole ranged in the mos fpe.
cious order, which the art of the lawyers could de-
v;ie, and heightened by every colour, their elo-
r;uence could add.

MAR

MARY listened to their harangues attentively, B o o x

and without emotion. But at the mention of the VII.
Earl of Arundel's name, who was then confined '"'

I596.

in the Tower, on suspicion of being accefiary to
the conspiracy, he broke out into this tender and
generous exclamation: " Alas! how much has

the noble House of Howard suffered for my
" fake !"

WHEN the Queen's council had finished, Mary Ter de

flood up, and with great magnanimity, and equale"
presence of mind, began her defence. She bewail-
ed the unhappiness of her own situation, that as-
ter a captivity of nineteen years, during which he
had suffered treatment no less cruel than unmerited,
she was at last loaded with an accusation, which
tended not only to rob her of her right of fuccef-
sion, and to deprive her of life itself, but to tranf-
mit her name with infamy to future ages: That,
without regarding the sacred rights of fovcreignty,
-he was now fubjeted to laws framed againti pri-
vate persons; though an anointed Queen, com-
manded to appear before the tribunal of fubjeEts;
ant, like a common criminal, her honour exposed
to the petulant tongues of lawyers, capable of wrelt-
ing her words, and of mifieprefnting her aionss:
That, even in this diihonourable situation, fie was
denied the privileges uually granted to criminals,
and obliged to undertake her own defence, without
the preltece of any friend with whom to advie,
without the aid of council, and without the u!e of
her own papers.

SiE

Bo o K SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in

VII. the accusation. She absolutely denied any corref-
56. pondence with Babington: The name of Ballard

was not so much as known to her: Copiesonlyof her
pretended letters to them were produced: Though
nothing less than her hand-writing or subscription
was sufficient to convit her of such an odious
crime: No proof could be brought that the letters
were delivered into her hands, or that any answer
was returned by her direcion: The confeflions of
wretches condemned and executed for such a detest-
able action, were of little weight; fear or hope
might extort from them many things inconsistent
with truth, nor ought the honour of a Queen to be
isaincd by finch vile testimony. The declaration of
her secretarics was not more conclusive: Promiies
and threats might easily overcome the resolution of
two f,;-angers; in order to screen themselves, they
migiih throw the blame on her; but they could dif-
cover nothing to her prejudice, without violating,
in the firfl plkc, their oath of fidelity; and their
perjury, in one inffance, rendered them unworthy
of credit i;a r:nothcr; The letters to the Spanish am-
baffador were cither nothing more than copies, or
contained only what was perfealy innocent: " I
'; have often," continued she, " made such efforts
" ior thI; recovery of my liberty, as are natural to
' a human creature. And convinced, by the Jad
"' experience of so many years, that it was vain to
' expect it from the justice or generosity of the
"Queen of England, I have frequently solicited
" forcign Princes, and called on all my friends to
" cl;-ploy their whole interest for my relief. I

have,

,, have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the B o o K
" Englilh Catholics some mitigation of the rigour VII.
"I with which they are now treated; and if I could '
"hope, by my death, to deliver them from op-5
" prellion, I am willing to die for their fake. I
t( wiTh, however, to imitate the example of Esther,
" not of Judith, and would rather make intercef-
" sion for my people, than hed the blood of the
" meanest creature, in order to save them. I have
t often checked the intemperate zeal of my adhe-
" rents, when either the severity of their own per-
"fecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of inju-

ries which I have endured, were apt to precipi-

" tate them into violent councils. I have even
"warned the Queen of dangers to which thele

harlh proceedings exposed herself. And worn

" out, as I now am, with cares and fuffcrings, the
' profpe& of a Crown is not so inviting, that I
' should ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am
" no stranger to the feelings of humanity, nor un-

acquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor

" the detestable crime of aafflnation, as equally
s repugnant to both. And, if ever I have given
«1 consent by my words, or even by my thoughts,
"4 to any attempt against the life of the Queen of
" England, far from declining the judgment of
" men, I shall not even pray for the mercy of
' God *."

Two different days did Mary appear before the
Judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-

* Camd. 5:o, &c.

tained
A,

B o o v tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered with

VII. the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

1586. THE Commillioners, by Elizabeth's express comn;

Sentence a-
gainfticr. mand, adjourned, without pronouncing any sentence,
ob. z2. to the Star-Chamber in Weltminfter. When as-

fern bled in that place, Niaue and Curie were brought
into coup, and confirmed their former declaration
upon oath. And after reviewing their whole pro-
ceedings, the Commissioners unanimoufy declared
Mary " To be accessary to Babington's conspiracy,
"'and to have imagined diverse matters, tending to
" the hurt, death, and dftru&fion of Elizabeth,
" contrary to the exprels words of the statute, made
" for the security of the Queen's life *."

Irregulari- T is no easy matter to determine whether the in-
ijn'he justice in appointing this trial, or the irregularity in

conducing it, were greatft and most flagrant. By
what right did Elizabeth claim authority over an
independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply
with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could
the subjes of another Prince become herjudges ?
or if ilch an ini;lt on royalty were alowed, ought
not the common forms ofjuttice to have been ob.
frve ? If the tefimony of Babington and his afro-
ciates were fu expllii, why did noc El zabeth Ipare
thcnl for a few weeks, and by confronting tlem
with Mary, overwhelm her with the full convision
of her crimes. Nauc and Curle were both alive,
wherefore lid not they appear at lI'c;teringay, a nl br
wh.t reason were they produced in the S:ar-Cham-

armd. 525.

ber,

her, where Mary was not present to hear what they B o o K
deposed ? Was this suspicious evidence enough to VII.
condemn a Queen ? Ought the meanelt cri - inal to
have been found guilty, upon such feeble and in-
conclusive proofs ?

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced

at her trial, that the sentence againlt Mary was
founded. That served as a pretence tojuftify, but
was not the cause of the violent steps taken by Eli-
zabeth and her Ministers towards her deftrution;
and was employed to give some appearance of jus-
tice, to what was the offspring of jealousy and fear.
And the nation, blinded with resentment against
Mary, and solicitous to secure the life of its own
Sovereign from every danger, observed no irregu.
larities in the proceedings, and attended to no de-
seas in the proof, but grasped at fiufpicions and
proba3bilities, as if they had been irrcfragable de-
monftraions.

THE parliament met a few days fter fcntence T par
was pronounced against Mary. Il t;at illutl'ious ment c,;-

firrn the

assembly more temper and dilcernment than are to Int,
be found among the people, mighlt have beca cx-
pected. Both Lrds and Commons, however,
were equally undcr the dominion of popular preju-
dices and pflions, and the fme excEfi.:s of zeal or
of tsar, which i reviled in t':. ntion, are aparent
in all their procccding. They en. crc.1 with imna-
tience upon al enquihy into tlhe conf,:iracy, and the
d.,n;ei's which tlhruatenced the Quc ul's lit-, and the
p:aci of the king"'om. Aiil the p.ie'rs, which had

been

B o oK been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before

VII. them. And after many violent invetives against
"-86. the Queen of Scots, both houses, unanimously, ra-

tified the proceedings of theCommiflionersbywhom
she had been tried, and declared the fentenceagainft

and de- her to bejuft and well founded. Not satisfied with
wand the
xecutin this, they presented a joint address to the Queen,
e' it. beseeching her, as the regarded her own safety, the

preservation of the Protestant religion, the welfare
and withes of her people, to publish the sentence;
and without farther delay to inflit on a rival, no
lets irreclaimable than dangerous, the punihment
which he had merited by so many crimes. This
request, didated by fears unworthy of that great
Assembly, was enforced by reasons still more un-
worthy. They were drawn not from justice, but
from conveniency. The moit rigorousconfinement,
it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing
Ipirit; her address was found, by long experience,
to be an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of
all her keepers: The livereft penal laws could not
rcftrain her adherents, who, while they believed
her perbn to be sacred, would despise any danger
to which themselves alone were exposed: Several
to;:ign Princes were ready to second their attempts,
and waited only a proper opportunity for invading
the kingdom, and aflerting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons,
was incompatible with Elizabeth's safety; and if
fihe were Ip)ared out of a falfi clemency, the Queen's
perlon, the religion and liberties of the kingdom,
could not be orne moment fccure. Neceflity requir-
ed that fle Ihould be facrilixccd in order to preserve

therfe

there; and to prove this sacrifice to be no Icf; jus B o o K
than neceflary, several examples in hiflory were pro- VII.
duced, and many texts of liripture quoted, but both
the one and the other were milapplied, and diltorted
from their true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable Elizabetl's

to Elizabeth than n address in this slrain. It ex-tonu-
tricated her out of a ituation, extremely embarraf-
sing; and without de;privin her of the power of
sparing, it enabled her to punifn her rival with less
appearance of blame. If she chfe the former, the
whole honour would redound to her own clemency.
If he determined on the latter, whatever was rigo-
rous might now seem to !e extorted by the Iblici-
tations of her people, rather than to flow from her
own inclination. Her anlwer, however, was in a
file, which fh: often uled, ambiguro.us and evasive
under the appeirance of op, nnef and candor; full
of such profellio,'s of regaru tfor her people, as firv-
ed to heighten their loyalty; of lbci complaints of
Mary's ingratitude, as were clcul ed ;o excite their
indignation; and of ic iinuatio is tllu her own
life was in d;n -er, as could not ail r, keep alive
their fears. In the end, Ihe belluht r!;em to lave
her the infamv .inl rl

t pain of i;vcrin upi a

Queen, hern; arei kinlwoman, o ,l .f)

*i *nt; and

to confider w .c . .t mi;,.1- rc It.:L :e n-fible ro
provide for the j. uli c .., \ h1 .t turcinig ler
to imbrue her hands in r .,, b 0,'.

TIHE true me ning. of '1is rcpi'y v:is a'ily under-
ftod. 'l'ie Lur,.s and ..umiions r .ewcd their

VOL. II. N tformer

B o o K former request, with additional importunity, which

VII. was far from being either unexpe&ed, or offensive.
'"86 ~ Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;

and having obtained such a public tantion of her
proceedings, there was no longer any reason for pro-
tracting this scene of dilrimulation; there was even
some danger that her feigned difficulties might at last
be treated as real ones; she therefore adjourned the
parliament, and reserved in her own hands the sole
disposal of her rival's fate *.

Franc in- ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceed-
terpn(e
febly in ings againit Mary with atonifhment and horror;
bhalf of and even Ilenry II. notwitlhfanding his known

aversion to the House of Guise, was obliged to in-
terpofe in her behalf, and to appear in defence of
the common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his rcfi-
dent Anbaffador, and ellievre who was sent with
an extraordinary commiflion to the fame purpose,
interceded fr Mary with great appearance of
warnth. They employed all the arguments which
ov,.. the cause naturally luggeied; they pleaded from

jultice, from generosity, and humanity; they inter-
mingled reproadhes and threats. But to all these
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and hav-
ing received fume intimation of Henry's real un-
concern about the fate of the Scottilh Queen, and
knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guile, she
trusted, that thele loud remonstrances would be fol-
lowed by no violent refentmentt.

* Camd, 526. D'Ewcs -;3. t Camd. 531.

SHE

SHE paid no greater regard to the foiicitations of3 o o K

the Scoccilh King, which, as they were urged with VII.
more finceritv, merited more attention. Thlough i 6.
her comimili.,ners had been extremely careful tojamesen-
sooth James, by pub;ilimng a declaration that their'!av°ur to
sentence againtl Mary d;d, in no degree, derlog. tc mother's
from his honour, or invalidate any title w\hicl hel
formerly pofneltdl; he bheld the indignities to
which his ]'-other had been cxpofed vi-h filial con-
cern, and with the sitntiients hlich became a King.
The pride of the Scottifi nation was rouzcd, by
the insult offered to the blood of their Monarchs,
and called upon him to employ the molt vigorous
efforts, in order toprevent or to re cnge the Qeen's
death.

AT firR, he could carce believe lhat Elizabeth

would venture upon an ation o unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render cte erb)ns of
Princes lels acred in the eves of the people, and
which degraded the regal diniyr, of which, at other
times, she ws ob remarkably jcilou-. But as loon
as te extrajrdia:y Iteps whiich ihe took dif overed
her intention, he dilpatched Sir WV'iiam Keith to
London; who, to-ether with Dl)ougrls his Ambal.
fador in olin..ry, remonilratcc, in :h': .r.ngft
terms, agaiit the injury done to n indepen.-icnt
Q.Ceen, in lbbjiting her to be tried like a private
pe lbn, and by laws to which she o vd no cbedi-
ence; and belotligt Llizal.ccti not t add to this
inj.ry, ly luff ring a lntence iin ult in It!if, as
well as dilhonourable to the Kin o Scots, to be
put into execution *

* Sce Aplcnl di, No. :;Ill.

M 2 ELIZA-

B o o K ELIZABETH returning no answer to thefereneon-

VII. firances rs his ambassador, James wrotr to her with
586. h's own hand, complaining in the bittercll terms

of her con ctc, not witlhout threats that both his
duty and hs honour would oblige him to renounce
her friendilil, and to ct s became a n when
called to revenge his mother's w.rongs *. At the
alme time he anmblcd the nobles, :lwho roild
to fland by !;iri in so good a caule. lie appointcd
anmbaf3lliors to l'rance, 'pain. andl Ienmark, in
order to iplo:e the and of thJ'ct c.ur:s; and took
o;l;er fleps to wards :c:cu:ing hi; th.reas with vi-
gour. The gh lhrain (f iiis letter enraged Eliza.
Lctli to luich a 'erree, th.t flie was ready to dilils
his anba'ala.'ors wi;.iout any retlv. But his prepa-
r'tiuns alardniC and ecmlarrcThd ecr M inifter, and
at their intrcaty flie rclrnrcd a ft and valive an-
fwer, promifi,g to liflcn to ary verture front the
King, t!hat tcnded to iis n-otiilr's fiatty; and to
ulfpend the execution of the tentcnce, till the arri-
al! of new an:;billidorsi from Scotllnd t.

D)ce 6 . r..\xwi ItL, 1. collmllancd-l Ir hfcntence ngainfl
ni,. - i., ry to be plbiiic.l, ;:nd ibrgot not to inform the
'i'l,f"rY people, that tiis was exiorted tio:r hr by the re-

peated intriaty of both houfcs o parliament. At
the fame time, fle dispatched Lord Buikhurft and
Hcale to acqtuaint Mary witl the sentence, and how
importunately the nati n !demanded the execution of
it; and, though ile hidl not hitherto ) ielded to these
flicitaltion;, f ie ;..dvilcid hie to preijare for an event,
s bich n.ight becone niceflhry for lIcuring the Pro-

' 13IIc , M m i. , 2 .
0{ t'p:tf.'. :jl. Cald. 4, 5.

tcilant

tcflant religion, as well as quieting the minds of the B o o
people. Mry rctived the message not only with- VII.
our ymptoms of fear, but with exprefions of"5'8 '
triumph. " No wonder, ifid (le, the Englilh
" hfould now tirll for the blood of a foreign
" Prince, they have often offered violence to their

own Mon.irch;. Buc after so many lufferings,
death comies to nlm as a welcome delivwrcr. I

n
am proud to thnk that my life is cftcemed of
"import.ince to the Catholic religion, and as a

ma: tyr for it am now willing to die *."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was sie i

stripped of every remaining mark of ro) alts. The ' t,,
canopy of slate in her apartment was pullkd down; u'tlio ri-
Paulet entered her chamber, and approachld he; pcr.
bon witho:t any ceremony ; and even appeared co-
ver-ed in her presence. hocked with thcdi indig-
nitits, and cffer.dcd .:t this gros familiarir,., to which
he iihi never iben accu: ored, Mary once more
complaincd to ':lza.;'t hi ; ::nd at t!:e fn:e time, as he- Dccen. .
lat requelt, intreated tlat ile w vould ptcrnii her 1cr.
vants to ca y her deadl boi', into France, to he laid
among: her ancrelors, in hallowed ground; th:t
oimc of lcr dotieftics might be present at her death,
to bear witnrls of her innocence, and firm adhe-
rence to the Catholic raith; that ail her servants
milit be Ifufilrel to leave the kingdomn, and to en-
joy thole finall legacies, which he hould bestow
on them, as teitimonies of her affction; and that,
in the mean time, her almoner, or obme other Ca-

* CamJ. 528. Jcbb, 91.

M 3 tholic

B o o K th('lic I'rici, might be allowed to attend her, and

\'l. to ,l hir i pr,.paring tor an eternal world. She

6 bdnlgiulith her in the nil!a;e of Je-us, by the foul and
J56.

n:.e.ory of lniy VII. their common progenitor,
by their nealr conllati:uirn.., and the royal dignity
with which thecy were o.1i in.efted, to gratify her
in hllc l' prticulirs, and to indulge her to far as to
flgni'y her compli.inic by a letter under her own
hand. W' Ither M1ary's letter was ever delivered to
Elizal'cth i uncertain. No answer was returned,
and no r ga'd p.i.l to her rtquells. She was offer-
ed a ProteLant 1ilhop or Dean to attend her.
Them she r jee'cd, an.l without any clergyman to
direed her delvotions, fie prepare., in great tran-
qiillity, for the approach of death, which he now
beliexedI to be at no great distance .

i-c7. JA? i. S, without losing a moment, sent new am-
Jlaes e- b.xfios to Londcon. These were the master of
ne'w. IS
flciat'ions ,yirl., and Sir Robert Melvil. In order to remove
in hr bc- Eiliz abcl's fears, they offered that their Master
hialf.
..nuary . w\.,uld bc:me bound that no conpiracy hould be

undrtakcn againl her perlbn, or the peace of the
kin(, 'ion, with Mary's conilnt; and for the faith-
lu! t t .: r!;:ar;ce of this, would deliver some of the
monl corr.;tcrable of the cottifh nobles, as hosta-
gt's. 1l this w.ere not thought fufficicnt, they pro-
;otdi that Mary ihould ref gn all her rights and pre-
tenlions to lh.r lon, from whom notiing injurious
to the 'roc:itant religion, or inconlitent with Eli-
zabet's fStlty, could be feared. The ormer pro-
pol;l, Eii/abcth it rcicicd as iticur c the latter, as

dan-

dangerous. The ambafladors were then inftruaed B o o K
to talk in a higher tone; and Melvil executed the VII.
commiflion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray,- '

"

with his usual perfidy, deceived his Matter who 1557
trusted him with a negociation of so much impor-
tance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was em-
ployed to flve. He encouraged and urged Eliza-
beth, to execute the fcntence against her rival. He
often repeated the old proverbial sentence, " The
dead cannot bite." And whatever thould happen,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at kaft
to prevent any violent effctas of his resentment *.

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp- Ellzabcth',

toms of the most violent agitation and disquietude of diinlad
mind. She (hflnned focicty, fle was often found in a ion.
melancholy and mufingpofture, and repeating, with
much enphafis, thefc stntences which she borrow-
ed from forre of the devices then in vogue; uit
ser autferi; e feriare, feri. Much, no doubt, of
this apparent uneafinels must be imputed to diflimu-
lation; it was impossible, however, that a Princess,
naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture
on an ation, which might expose her memory to
infamy, and her life and kingdom to danger, with-
out reflecting deeply, and hesitating long. The
people waited her determination in furpence and an-
xiety; and left their fear or their zeal should fulh-
fide, rumours of danger were artfully invented, and
propagated with the utmost industry; Aubefpine,
the French ambassador, was accused of having sub-

* Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 68. See Append. No. XIV.

M 4 orncd

B o o K crned an aflT.fin to n:u;dcr the Queen. The Spa.

VII ni!li set w.,s Lid by lome to be already arrived at

" NMilford-haven. Others affi.i;cd that the Duke of

Guise had landed with a strong army, in Suffex.
Now, it was reported that the Narthern Counties
were up in arms; next day, that the Scots had en-
tered Endglnd M. ith all thlir forces; and a confpi-
r;cy, it was whili,ered, was on foot for seizing the
Quen, and burning the city. The panic grew
every . y more violent; and the people, aftonifled
and cnrla'ci, caled for the executionof the fentencc
agarfit i ry, as the only thing which could reItore
traiilquil!ity to the kingudom .

Warrant WI'I:LE t!:efe sentiments p'revailed among her
fr lay's fui' jects, Eliz:aib-t thought she might faifly venture
rigne.l to lrike the blow, which he had so long meditat-
]Fbruary I . r C

yed. She commanded Davilbn, one of the fecreta-

ries of llatc, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and
her belavi(lur, on that orcaficn, plainly Ihewed that
it is nor to humaniy, that we muf lujbfcribe her for-
b:.arlanc, hiltlcr:o. A't the very ionoment she was
fubl;tribing the rit which gave up a oman, a
(Q .cln, an,; her own nearcet relation, into the rantds
ct tl.C: x:cut'onr, he was capable ot', i Ing. Go,
f.yi; fli to l)avilbn, and cll aliinhalim what I
have now dune, tout:i I a afra;id he will lie for
gris when he h, ars it." l--!cr h:cef anxiety was
now ro fecurt the advantages which would aril'ct: o:
Mary's death, without appe.lring to hve g'vC Vn :er
con cn: to a 'eed tl ifaamous. She

. cft tn ll;ntcL to
l'aule and 'riury, as well as r luine oti;r cour-

CamJ. 533, j;4.

tiers,

tiers, that now was the time to discover the fin-B o o K
cerity of their concern for her lafty, and that he I-.
expeted tlheir zeal would extricate her out of '87
her prelent perplexity. But they were wile enough
to tcemn not to understand her meanizng. l.vcn
after the warrant was figndc, she commanded a
letter to be written to Paulct, in ic's ambiguous
terms; complaining of his remiflhne in sparing so
long the life of her capital enemy, and begging him
to remember at last what was incumbent on him as
an affectionate fubjeet, and to deliver his Sove-
reign from continual fear and danger, by horten-
ing the days of his prisoner. iPallet, though rigo-
rous and harlh, and oen brutal in the dilcharuc
of what he thought his clu:), a Mary's keeper,
was neverthclefs a man of honour and integrity.
He rcjected the propolal wi:h il.i;dain ; and lament-
ing that he flould ever have been deermed capable
of a&ing the part of an altahfin, he declared that
the Queen rnilht diifiolt of lis li' a her plicaiirce
but i.e would never ltain his ()i n honour, nor leave
an everl fling mark o inrrnv on is poftcrity, by
k]nding his hand to perpetrat 'i ;' ul a ci :e. ()i
the receipt f this allw\er, L.i.:;:btl t'.m-c.!:.e x-
tren.ely peevilh; and c;!ilin: I'.!':1! a d:.in1;v and -i-c-
cii'/e'.loz', who would prru)zn:.- ,:r;ih, buc leriorn
nctam!n, fl; propoldl to c'enrloy one Wingfiel,'
who h;ad 1 0oth cur.;( an11d' iiilination to ltrikce he
blow *. 13ut I)livln r;'roiiitaiiiing igainl this
mct!hod, as no lcls dl.nce;o ts tliln (iil]onouraible,
she aain diciared her ittt nil n tli ta fcnt;-nce
pronounced by the commifliiiers lilouild be cxccut-

B'iogr. B,'i;an. aiic: ,-'c ..'/, .ed

ed

B o o K ed according to law; and as lhe had already signed

VII. the warranr, he begged that no farther application

8. .
nlmight be made to her on that head. By this the

privy counliillors thought thcmfelves sufficiently au.
thorized to proceed; nd prompted, as they pre-
tcnde l, by zeal for the Queen's safety, or inftigar-
ed, as is more probablc, by the apprehension of the
danger to wii h they would thenfelves be exposed,
if the life of the Queen of Scots were spared, they
allembled in the Co(uncil C hamber, and by a letter
un'er all thcir hands, empowered the Earls of
Shreu bury and Ken;, together with the High She-
rif of the county, to fee the sentence put in exe-
cution *.

M.ry's be- ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earlk
hc death. arrived at Fotheringly, and demanding access to

the Queen, read in her presence the warrant for ex-
ecution, and reqjuired her to prepare to die next
morning. Mary heard them to the end without
emotion, and crofing herself in the name of the
Fath. r, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
' 'I h;:t tbul, said lie, is nt worthy the joys of
fie.jven, wh.ch repines because the body mull en-
dure the stroke of the executioner; and though I
did not expeLt that the Qicen of England would
set the fll It example of violating the sacred person
of a Svcrcign l'rince, I willingly submit to that
whik h Providence has decreed to be my lot." And
laying her hanl on a Bible, which happened to be
near her, she solemnly proteled that (he was inno-
cent of that conlpiracy which Babington had carried

Camd. 53.}. Strype, 3. 361, 364.

on

on agiainft Elizabeth's life *. She then mentioned B o o K
the requests contained in her letter to Elizabeth, VII.
but obtained no fatisfatory answer. She entreated '- -
with particular earneltnefs, that now in her last 187
moments, her Almoner might be suffered to attend
her, and that he might enjoy the coniblation of
those pious institutions prescribed by her religion.
Even this favour, which is ufualy granted to the
vilest criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this converfition, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two Earls, with difficulty fuppirefrc
their anguish; but no sooner did 1;ent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and
burt out into the mofl pafilonate exprefl'ons of ten-
dernefs and sorrow. Mary, however, not oily re-
tained perfect composure of mind, but endeavoured
to moderate their exceflive grief. And falling on
her knees, with all her domeflics round her, he
thanked Heaven that her fuflTrings were now so
near an end, and prayed that she might be enabled
to endure what lill remained x ith decency, and with
fortitude. The greater part of the evening he em-
ployed in fettling her woitdly aniaiis. She wrote
her Testament with her own hand. iHer money,
her jewels, and her cloathl, fle diitributed among
her servants, according to their rank or merit. She
wrote a short letter to the Kin( of France, and an-
other to the Duk of Gu;:1, fiil of ender but mag-
nanimous lentimnnts, and r-cc :Q:lr'.lnded :er foul to
their prayers, and her afili&dle fcr'ants to their pro-

* JcLb, 2, 3o0.

teftion.

B o oK tRccion. At f:Ifper, flie eat temperately, as usual,
VII. and convert'd not only with eali, but with chear-

.-- tfulnc!s; fhc drank t)o every one of her servants, and
7· afkele t.hiirforg':nefs, if.ever fle had tailed in any

part cf her duty towards th-n:. At her wonted
time the went to bed, and lpt cal:ly a few hours.
LEarly in the norl.:'in:r' t1h retired i:o her cloi.t, and
emp lo (u a conidie.- ra;ble tilr in d: vction. At eight
> i'ci: k, the lii .ii Si' l-ier;i' .r his c.5cers entered
licr ch 'tlcr, a:.. ;.iincti ilIr

h lil kneccling at the al-

tar. Sh i:r:: i:. y ilartei ut,, anil with a ma-
jit:c rni.cn, an:l : cot,i!c.::e undifinaved, and
e;-n (chcar'ul, a;.i-:arceti t'.i!:.s' t'ic place oi- exe-
cU, tir, iclaning cn two of i 't:;Lt's a itlldants. She
was d:ciTef! in a mLrr.cing I.ab'it, but with an le-
gan.. and fpk;;dou., v ili'.h Ihe had long laid afile,
except ;(n a ew fci.'tvai d(l;'s.. Ain ,;nus Dei hung
by a pon-anier chain at her neck ; her beads at her
gir.dle and in her hi.:nd t:e ca!rie.l a crucifix of
ivory. At the b,tto:n of the fairs the two Earls,
attended by tiver.il gentlemen from tie neighbour-
ing Countics, rceivei her; and there Sir Andrew
Mcilvil, the niafler of heIr hounflolJ, who hal been
tic'udt.l, tfr 1 .nme weeks, from :er prcience, was
permitted to take his l.i' i';rcCel. At the fglt of a
', ill refs whom he tenderly l,.ved, in such a situation,
lie r.elted int , t'.'ar; an.i as he was b w.iling hercon-
(licton, nd cor!n;l,.ining of his ov'n h;lrd fate in be-
ing all:'ilr.,l 1o 4 rry tie account of stich a mourn-
ful Cevelt ri.tO ) '*tian.!, MNary replied, ' \Weep
nut, ts..AI vlcviv, t.c, i a pr,:l'rlrt reater caulte
for rt;joicinig, '1'iiu fli al this day kce Mary Stuart
delivered from all her cares, and iluch an end

put

put to her tedions fuflerings, as file has long expc2-B o o K
ed. Bear witnef t!:at I die confiant in my religion; VII.
firm in my fi.tlity towrds Scotland; and un- .
changed in n-y aiTction to France. Commend me
to my fun. Tell him I have done nothing inju;i-
ous to his kingidom, to h:s honour, or to 1 iS ri ,hts;
and God forgive a11 tlht v.of ho :ave thirstcd, with-
out caui, fcr my b!:,::!."

WXITH much dif r

rr.l, .nd :.fitr mnrnv intre.ti: s,

fle Fre'.'a'l'l (en rtc t'."o a;;rls to allow Miv;l,
togethcr with til:-;' of 1::r n -cin tl':i:t:, and two
of her racds, tj . ait t.: I r tou lc li. i *..Id. It was
eredied in the t.:m1: !: I wl;t

' ''] ic' !r:!l been tried,

raied a lir...:!;t ;c ' . '...', ;:'i. covtred, as we l
as a chair, te cul]:;o;', ;r.d blcck, with b'c
c!oh. Mary incutcintd ti;' 'c:s x :i'h alacriy. be-
hie!ld all this apI;aratu. of deiat v. ith n nalte!rt

'rnJ w t crcrus,

count'n;n(e, .an;. signing '.riw1 with the crci,
she fat down in the cih ir. Be:i!e :'.at! the warrant
fur execution with a o vc.., t) which file li!i
tened v.ith a ca,'c';;':l; , .::n c c!ce i occuied in
ot'hr thoughts. 'l 'h :n t I)( an c" PeterbCrou u
began a devout diicouiitl, i;ita!':c to her prcient
condition, and ,'.-reec up lra crI t) leaven in hr
behalf; but he d':'larc t t ihe cuild not in con-
iciencc hearken to oel, nor join ih the other;
and stilling on lcr I.np.cs, irpcat;.l a !.,:tin prayer.
W hen the D an hall 1 li [::;.:i hii.'; : -::, Ie,

,.!

an audible voice, and ii t,! tn. i.:'i t:n u.'e:, rc-
commnllcd unto) Gd t' : . :.;! i.:te (t, te
Church, anI1 ra'cd f'1r pr )'c;': t( ir j'n, .;1nd
for a long lite, :ndl ;e;;:'.,:bl., 1L;n lto liar'-n.

('*:

B o o K She declared that he hoped for mercy only through

VII. the death of Christ, at the foot of whose image he
587' no.v willingly h-d her blood; and litting up, and

kissing the crucifix, fle thus addrelfed it, " As thy
arms, O Jesus, were extended on the Cross; so
with the outflretched arms of thy mercy, receive
me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off

her veil, and upper garments; and one of the exe-
cutioners rudely endeavouring to aft, fle gently
checked him, and fid, with a ile, that he had
not been acculomncd to undress before so many
fpetators, nor to b fervcdi by ibch valets. With
calm but undauntej fortituld, she laid her neck on
the block; and while one executioner held her
hands, the other at the l-cond itroke, cut off her
head, which falling out of its attire, discovered
her hair already grown quite gray, with cares and
sorrows. The executioner held it up ill stream-
ing with blood, and tl;he Dean crying out, " So
perish all Queen Elizabeth's ene!nies," the Earl of
Kent a!ne anfwc vre Aen. The rcfl of the spec-
tators continued fGient, and drowned in tears; be-
ing incapable, at that moment, of any other fen-
timents, but thojl of pity or admiration *.

Sentiments SUCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of
ofhonri- Scos, after a life of forty-four years and two
an con-
cerning months, almol :linttcn years of which he passcd

in captivity. '1 lie litical parties which were form-
ed in the kingdo:, during her reign, have subsist-

Ciimd. 5S4. Spotfw.3;S. Jebb, 2. 3Co. Strypc, 3. 38R.

9 ed,

ed, under various denominations, ever since that B o o K
time. The rancour, with which they were at first V.
animated, hath delcended to succeeding ages, and
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been 5
perpetuated, and even augmented. Among His-
torians, who were under the dominion of all rhele
passions, and who have either ascribed to her every
virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed to
her all the vices, of which the human heart is sus-
ceptible, we search in vain for Mary's real charac-
ter. She neither nierited the exaggerated praises of
the one, nor the undiltinguilhing cenlure of the
other.

To all the charms of b-aut, and the utmo HSer cha-

elegance of external form, fne added thole accom- r'lEc
plifhments, which render their impreflion irretiiti-
ble. Polite, aable, insinuating, prightly, and
capable of speaking and of writing with equal cafe
and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all
her attachments; becau!e her heart was warm and
unfufpicious. Impatient of contradition; becauie
she had been accuftomred from her infancy to be
treated as a Queen. No stranger, on ome occa.
sions, to diflimulation; which in that perfidious
court where (he received hereducation, was reckon-
ed among the ncefTary arts of government. Not
insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that plea.
sure, with which almost every woman beholds the
influence of her own beauty. Formed with ;h
qualities which we love, not with the talents t.ha
we admire; she was an agreeable woman rather th. i
an illustrious Qeen. The vivacity of her lir:t

ljit

B o o K not sufficiently tenpered with found judgment, and

VII. the warnmth of her heart, which was not, at all
.~-. times, under the rtliraint of discretion, betrayed
J587 her bo:h into errors, and into crimes. To lay that

he was always unfortunate, will not account for
that long and almost uninterrupted succession of ca-
lamities which besel her; we must likewise add that
file was often imprudent. Her paflion for Darnly
was ralh, youthful, and excefive. And though
the fdden tranfirion to the oppofiteextrenme vas the
natural t.ffet of her ill-requited love, and of his
ingratitude, iniblcnce and brutality; yet neither
theie, nor Bothv'ell's artful address and important
icrvi.es, cn jullify lhr attachment to that noble-
man. Even the maianers of the age, licentious as
they were, are no apology for this unhappy passion;
nor can they induce us to look on that tragical and
irfamous ficere which followed upon it, with less
abhorrence. Iumnanity will draw a veil over this
part of !er l a:.^icr which it cannot approve, and
mry, pcrhais, prompt some? to impute her aftions
to her fir!aricn, nu.c! th..n to hlcr ditlo!'tions ; and
to lament t!'e unli:.lpinel; cf tfhe tformer, rathcr
than accuc the oervcslineli us the latter. Mary's
filfTring? exceed, l-:th in (cdree and in duration,
thole tragical diftrcfls, which fancy has feigned to
excite sorrow and cominilcrtiion; and while we
ilrvey thenm, we are apt altogether to forget her
frailties, we think cf her L'iults with lets indignation,
and oapprove of our r(:ars, 2s if they were hed tor
a pcrfln ho had attained much nearer to pure
vi: tuc.

WITH

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circum- B o o K

tance not to be omitted in writing the history of a V.
female reign, all cotemporary authors agree in as- "'
cribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of countenance, 1587
and elegance of hape, of which the human form
is capable. Her hair was black, though, accord-
ing to the falhion of that age, he frequently wore
borrowed locks, and of different colours. Her
eyes were a dark grey; her complexion was exqui-
fitely fine; and her hands and arms remarkably de-
licate, both as to fape and colour. Her stature
was of an height that role to the majestic. She
danced, the walked, and rode with equal grace.
Her taste for music wasjuft, and he both sung and
played upon the lute, with uncommon kill. To-
wards the end of her life, the began to grow fat;
and her long confinement and the coldness of the
houses in which he had been imprisoned, brought
on a rheumatism, which deprived her of the use of
her limbs. No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld
her person without admiration and love, or will read
her history without sorrow.

NONE of her women were suffered to come near

her dead body, which was carried into a room ad-
joining to the place of execution, where it lay, for
tome days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from a
billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons
of the executioners, and every thing stained with
her blood, were reduced to ashes. Not long after,
Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnifi-
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employed in

Vol. II. N vain;

B o o i vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did not

VII. efface the memory of those injuries, which laid

8* - Mary in her grave. James, soon after his acceflion
587. to the English throne, ordered her body to be re-

moved to Weftminfter-abbey, and to be deposited
among the Monarchs of England.

Elizabeth ELIZABETH affected to receive the accounts of
fntMa. Mary's death, with the most violent emotions of
y's death. furprize, and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamenta-

tions and mourning, were all employed to display
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident
marks of difinrulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of Elizabeth's proceedings
against the life of the Scottiih Queen. The corn-
million for bringing Mary to a public trial was seem-
ingly extorted from her, by the intreaties of her
privy counsellors. She delayed publishing the fen-
tence against her, till he was twice solicited by both
houses of Parliament. Nor did he sign the war-
rant for execution without the utmost apparent re-
lu5tance. One scene more of the boldelf and moil
folen;n deceit remained to be exhibited. She under-
took to make the world believe that Mary had been
put to death without her knowledge, and against
her will. And Davison, who neither fufpeced her
intention, nor his own danger, was her inflrument
in carrying on this artifice, and ill a victim to it.

IT was his duty as secretary of state to lay before

her the warrant for execution, in order to be signed;
and by her command, he carried it to the Great
Seal. She pretended, however, that she had charg-

ed

id him -not to communicate what he had done to B o o K
any person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of VII.
his hands, wi hout her express permiflion; that, in 8
contempt of this order, he had not only revealed 5
the matter to several of her Ministers, but had, in
concert with them, aflTmblcd her Privy Counsellors,
by whom, without her content or knowledge, the
warrant was issued, and the Earls of Shrewsbury
and Kent impowered to put it in execution. ho'
Davison denied all this, and with circumstances
which bear the flrongeft marks of truth and credi-
bility; though it can scarce be conceived that her
Privy-Council, composed of the persons in whom
the most confided, of her Ministers ad favourites
would assemble within the walls of her palace, and
venture to tranfa&t a matter of so much importance,
without her privity, and contrary to her inclination;
yet so far did he carry her dissimulation, that, with
all the signs of displeasure and of rage, he banish-
ed most of her Counsellors out of her presence;
and treated Burleigh, in particular, so harshly, and
with such marks of disgust, that he gave up him-
seif for loft, and in the deepest afflition wrote to
the Queen begging leave to resign all his places,
that he might retire to his own estate. Davison (he
instantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after March.
brought to a olemn trial in the Star Chamber;
condemned to pay a fine of io,ooo pounds, and to
be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure. He
languished, several years, in confinement, and ne-
ver recovered any degree of favour or of power.
As herjealouy and fear had bereaved the Queen of

N 2 Scots

B o o a Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of her

VIL conduc, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing
' g- the reputation and happiness of one of the moit vir-

7. tuous and able men in her kingdom*.

El;abeth THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name,
endeavours
t"ooth furnithed Elizabeth, however, with an apology to
Jamn. the King of Scots. As the profpe of his mother's

danger had excited the King's filial care and con-
cern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and refrntment. His fubjeds felt the dishonour
done to him, and to the nation. In order to sooth
both, Elizabeth instantly dispatched Robert Carey,
one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter expref-
sing her extreme afBliaion on account of that miser-
able accident, which, as Ihe pretended, had happen-
ed far contrary to her appointment, or intention.
James would not permit her messenger to enter
Scotland; and with tome difficulty, received a me-
morial he sent from Berwick. It contained the tale
concerning Davison, dressed up with all the circum-
stances, which tended to exculpate Elizabeth, and
to throw die whole blame on his rashness or treach-
ery. Such a defence gave little fatisfation, and
was confidered as mockery added to insult; and
many of the nobles, as well as the King, breathed
nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely so-
licitous to pacify them, and neither wanted inftru-
ments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leicester wrote
to the King, and Walsingham to secretary Mait-
land. They represented the certain deftruaion, to
which James would expose himself, if with the

* Camd. 536. Srype, 3. 370.
. forces

forces of Scotland alone, he hould venture to at- B oo o
tack a kingdom, so far superior in power; that the VII.
history of pas ages, as well as his mother's fad ex- --
perience, might convince him that nothing could be 5
more dangerous, or deceitful, than dependance on
foreign aid; that the King of France would never
with to fee the British kingdoms united under one
Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince so
nearly allied to the house of Guise, with such for-
midable power; that Philip might be a more ac-
tive ally, but would certainly prove a more danger-
ous one, and under pretence of affifing him, would
alert his own right to the Englilh Crown, which
he already began openly to claim; that the fame
statute, on which the sentence of death against his
mother had been founded, would justify the ex-
cluding him from the fucceflion to the Crown; that
the English, naturally averse from the dominion of
itrangers, would not fail, if exasperated by his hof-
tilities, to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth
was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother
had suffered, by her tenderness and affection towards
the son; and that by engaging in a fruitless war, he
would deprive himfelfof a noble inheritance, which,
by cultivating her friendship, he muit infallibly ob-
tain. These representations, added to the confci-
oufnefs of his own weakness, to the smallness of his
revenues, to the mutinous spirit of tome of the no-
bles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that faction, which was entirely at Eli-
zabeth's devotion, convinced James that a war with
England, however jus, would in the present junc-
ture be altogether impolitical. All tihele conlide.

N 3 rarioni

B o o K rations induced him to stifle hiq rcfentment; to ap-

VII. pear atisfied with the punithment inflicted on Da-

87 vifon; and to preflrve all the cmblanccs of friend-

ship wi.i the English court*. In this manner did
the cloud which threatened such a torm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, re-
mained unavenged by any Prince; and whatever
infamy Elizabeth might incur, flle was exposed to
no new danger on that account.

Dtfrraeeof MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the
tIe Mafler
ofGray. Master of Gray, and loft him the King's favour,

which he had for some time possessed. He was be-
come as odious to the nation, as favourites, who
acquire power without merit, and exercile it without
discretion, usually are. The treacherous part, which
he had aCted during his late embafly, was no secret,
and filled James, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers ob-
served the symptoms of disgust arising in the King's
mind, his enemies seized the opportunity, and Sir
William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy with
which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain James,
May 0o. publicly accused him before a Convention of no.

bles, not only of having contributed, by his advice
and fuggelliuns, to take away the life of the Queen,
but of holding correlpondeice with Popilh Princes,
in order to subvert the religion eftablilhed in the
kingdom. Gray, unlupported by the King, de-
ferted by all, and conscious of his own guilt, made
a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual
banifliment, a punishment very unequal to his crimes.

* S;,ctfrv. Strype, 3. 377.

But

But the King was unwilling to abandon one, whom B o o K
he had once favoured o highly, to the rigour of VII.
justice; and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and ' 8
the other nobles who had lately returned from exile, 7
in gratitude for the zeal with which he had served
them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

HAVING thus accomplished the deftru&ion of one

of his enemies, Captain James thought the juncture
favourable for prosecuting his revenge on them all.
He singled out secretary Maitland, the most emi-
nent both for abilities and enmity to him; and of-
sered to prove that he was no less acceflary than
Gray to the Queen's death, and had even formed
a design of delivering up the King himself into the
hands of the Englilh. But time and absence had,
in a great measure, extinguished the King's affecion
for a minion, who so little defcrved it. All the
courtiers combined against him as a common ene-
my. And instead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of Chancellor confer-
red upon Maitland, who, together with that dignity,
enjoyed all the power and influence of a prime mi-
nifter.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this

year, the fame hatred to the order of Bilhops, and
the fame jealousy and fear of their encroachments,
appeared. But as the King was now of full age,
and a parliament was summoned on that occasion,
the Clergy remained satisfied with appointing Ibnme
of their number to represent their grievances to that
court, from which great things were expe&ed.

N 4 PARE

B o o r Parvious to this meeting of parliament, James

VII. attempted a work worthy of a King. The deadly
' 8 _' feuds which fubfited between many of the great fa-
1587.
The ing milies, and which were transmitted from one genc-
attempt, ration to another, weakened the strength of the
unite the
sobin. kingdom ; contributed, more than any other cir-

cumRfance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous fpiric
among the nobles; and proved the occasion of
many disasters to themselves, and to their coun-
try. After many preparatory negociations, he in-
vited the contending parties to a royal entertain-
ment in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe; and partly
by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained
their promise to bury their dif/enfions in perpetual
oblivion. From thence he conducted them, in so-
lemn proceflion, through the streets of Edinburgh,
marching by pairs, each hand in hand with his ene-
my. A collation of wine and sweet-meats was pre-
pared at the public Cross, and there they drank to
each other, with all the signs of reciprocal forgive-
ness, and of future friendship. The people, who
were present at a fpeacle so unusual, conceived
the most sanguine hopes of feeing concord and tran-
quillity eablilhed in every part of the kingdom,
and tetifed their fatisfa&ion by repeated acclama-
tions. Unhappily the effects of this reconciliation
were not correspondent either to the pious endea-
vours of the King, or the fond wishes of the people.

THE first care of the parliament was the security

of the Protestant religion. All the laws padled in
its favour, since the Reformation, were ratified
and a new and fcvcre one was enacted against semi-

nary

nary Priests and Jesuits, whose refilefs industry in B o o
making proselytes brought many of them into Scot- VII.
land about this time. Two aas of this parliament -.'
deserve more particular notice, on account of the 587.
consequences with which they were followed.

TH one refpcted the lands of the Church. As cenmal

the public revenues were not sufficient for defray- of Chulh.
ing the King's ordinary charges; as the adminiftra- lands.
tion of government became more complicated and
more expensive; as James was naturally profuse,
and a tranger to economy; it was necefflary, on
all these accounts, to provide ome fund propor-
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum
could be levied on the Commons, who did not en-
joy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The
nobles were unaccustomed to bear the burden of
heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
were the only source whence a proper supply could
be drawn. Notwithstanding all the depredations of
the laity since the Reformation, and the various
devices which they had employed to seize the Church
lands, ome considerable portion of them remained
Rill unalienated, and were held either by the Bilhops
who poffiefed the benefices, or were granted to lay-
men during pleasure. All there lands were, in this
parliament, annexed, by one general law *, to the
Crown, and the King was impowered to apply the
rents of them to his own uie. The tithes alone
were reserved for the maintenance of the persons
who served for the cure, and the principal mansion-
house, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe,

Parl. Jac. VI. c. 29.

allot1

B o o K allotted for his residence. By this great accefllon

VII. of property, it is natural to conclude, that the King

8 imuft have acquired a vast increase of power, and
1587. the influence of the nobles have suffered a propor.

tional diminution. The very reverse of this seems,
however, to have been the cafe. Almof all grants
of Church-lands, prior to this a, were thereby
confirmed and titles, which were formerly reckon-
ed precarious, derived from thence the fan&ion of
parliamentary authority. James was likewise au-
thorized, during a limited time, to make new alie-
nations; and such was the facility of his temper,
ever ready to yield to the solicitations of his ser-
vants, and to gratify their molt extravagant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his whole reign, he was continually em-
ployed in bestowing, and his parliament in ratifying
grants of this kind to his nobles; hence little ad-
vantage accrued to the Crown from that which
might have been so valuable an addition to its re.
venues. The Bishops, however, were great sufferers
by the law. But at this juncture neither the King
nor his Miniters were solicitous about the interests
of an order of men, odious to the people, and per-
ifcuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted
the law with the utmost zeal. The profpe& of
sharing in their spoils induced all parties to content
to it; and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and
power of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult
matter to introduce that change in the government
of the Church which soon after took place*.

* Sotfw. 36;.

THE

THE change, which the other Statute produced B o o K

in the civil constitution, was no less remarkable. VII.
Under the Feudal system, every Freeholder, or vas- -

1587.

fal of the Crown, had a right to be prelent in par- Lesser Ba.
liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few ",', ad
in number, but poffelied of great and extensive pro- to paria-
perty. By degrees, these vast pofellions were di- their ,re
vided by the proprietors themlelves, or parcelled prierNt4
out by the Prince, or tplit by other accidents. The
number of Freeholders became greater, and their
condition more unequal: beides theancient Barons,
who preserved their etates and their power unim-
paired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were
far inferior. But, in those rude ages, when the
art of government was extremely impelfe&, when
parliaments were seldom afiembled, and deliberated
on matters little interesting to a martial people, few
of the Lesser Barons took their feats, and the whole
parliamentary jurisdiction was exercised by the
Greater Bercns, together with the Ecclcfiaftical or-
der. James I. fond of imitating the forms of the
English constitution, to which he had been long
accustomed, and desirous of providing a counter-
poise to the power of the great nobles, procured an
ad in the year 1427, dispensing with the personal
attendance of the leler Barons, and impowering
thole in each county, to chufe two commiffloners
to represent them in parliament. This law, like
many other regulations of that wife Prince, pro-
duced little effet. All the King's vassals continued,
as formerly, ponefed of a right to be present in
parliament, and, unle's in some extraordinary con-

juntures,

B o o junures, none but the greater Barons attended.
VII. But by means of the Reformation, the constitution
~ had undergone a great change. The aritocratical
1587' power of the nobles had been much encreafed, and

the influence of the Ecclesiastical order, which the
Crown usually employed to check their usurpations,
and to balance their authority, had diminished in
proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had
been erected into temporal peerages; and the Pro.
teftant Bishops, an indigent raceofmen, and odious
to the nation, were far from pofefling the weight
and credit, which their predecefibrs derived from
the exorbitant wealth, and the superstitious reve-
rence of the people. In this situation, the King
had recourse to the expedient employed by James I.
and obtained a law reviving the Ratute of 1427;
and from that time the Commons of Scotland have
lent their reprefcntatives to parliament. An at,
which tended so visibly to abridge their authority,
did not pass without opposition from many of the
nobles. But as the King had a right to summon
the lesser Barons to attend in person, others were
apprehensive of feeing the house filled with a multi.
tude of his dependants, and consented the more wil-
lingly to a law, which laid them under the reftric.
tion of appearing only by their representatives.

1588. THI year 1588 began with an universal expefta.

The p-. tion throughout all Europe, that it was to be dif.
iroach of tinguifed by wonderful events and revolutions.
the Spanill
Armadi Several astrologers, according to the accounts of

cotemporary hiRorians, had predited this; and the
Situation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms of

t Europe

Europe was such, that a sagacious observer, with- B o o K
out any supernatural intelligence, might have ha- VII.
zarded the prediction, and have firefien the ap- "i
proach of some grand crisis. In France, it was evi-
dent from the atonilhing progress of the league,
conduted by a leader whose ambition was restrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
surmounted all difficulties; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councilsof Henry III.
that either that Monarch must submit to abandon
the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by some
sudden and daring blow, cut off his formidable rival
Accordingly, in the beginning of the year, the
Duke of Guile drove his Makter out of his capital
city, and forced him to conclude a peace, which
left him only the hadow of royalty ; and before the
year expired, he himself fell a victim to Henry's
fears, and to his own security. In Spain, the ope-
rations were such as promiscd something fill more
uncommon. During three year, Philip had em-
ployed all the power of his European dominions,
and exhausted the treasures of the Indies, in vast
preparations for war. A fleet, the greatef that had
ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from
Lilbon, and a numerous land army was alembled
to embark on board of it. Its destination was dill
unknown, though many circumstances made it pro-
bable that the blow was aimed, in the sird place,
against England. Elizabeth had long given fecrec
aid to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly afforded them her protection. A
numerous body of her troops was in their service;
the Earl of Leiceter commanded their armies ; ie

had

B o o K had great sway in the civil government of the repub.

VII. lic; and ome of its most considerable towns were

8i. in her pofieflion. Her fleets had insulted the coafs

of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the Weft
Indies, and threatened the colonies there. Roused
by so many injuries, allured by views of ambition,
and animated by a superstitious zeal for propagating
the Romifli Religion, Philip relblved not only to
invade, but to conquer England, to which his de-
cent from the house of Lancaster, and the donation
ot Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his own opinion, a
double title.

Condua of ELIZABLTI saw the danger approach, and pre-
J.,mes on
that occa- pared to encounter it with the utmost intrepidity.
son". The measures for the defence of her kingdom were

concerted, and carried on, with the wisdom, and
vigour, which diftinguiihed her reign. Her chief
care was to secure the friendship of the King of
Scots. She had treated the Queen his Mother with
a rigour unknown among Princes; she had often
uled himself harshly, and with contempt; and
though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his re-
fentment of there injuries, he did not believe it to
be altogether extinguished, and was afraid that in
her prelent situation, it might burlt out with a fatal
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprize, court-
ed James with the utmolt assiduity. He excited
him to revenge his Mother's wrongs; he flattered
him with the hopes of lharing his conquests; and
offered him in marriage his daughter the Infanta
libella. At the fame time, Scotland swarmed with

prielts

priests his emissaries, who seduced some of the no- B o o K
bles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes VII.
and promires. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were 588
the heads of a fation, which openly espoused the
interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving from
that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spa-
niards. In order to counter-balance all these, Eli-
zabeth made the warmest professions of friendship
to the King; and Afhby, her ambaflador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promises.
He assured him that his right of fucceflion to the
Crown mhould be publickly acknowledged in Eng-
land; that he hould be created a Duke in that
kingdom; that he ihould be admitted to some hare
in the government; and receive a considerable pen-
sion annually. James, it is probable, was too well
acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on
these promises. But he underifood his own in-
terest in the present jun&ure, and pursued it with
much steadiness. He re&ed an alliance with
Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit into his
pretence an ambassador from the Pope. He fcized
Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma.
He drove many of the traffiquing Priests out of the
kingdom. He marched suddenly to Dumfries, dif-
perled Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a Convention of the nobles he declared his refo-
lution to adhere inviolably to the league with Eng-
land; and, without liflening to the fuggeflions of
revenge, determined to at in concert with Eliza-
hcth, againfl the common enemy of the Proteitant
faith. I Ie put the kingdom in a polture of lecfence,

6 and

B o K and levied troops to obftrut the landing of the Spa-

VII. niards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's
'~' laffitance, and told her ambaflador that he expected
588. no other favour from the King of Spain, but that

which Polyphemus had promised to UlyfTes, that
when he had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his last morsel*.

A national THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was
dcfe" of not inferior to that of the King; and the extraordi-
Rnaigion. nary danger, with which they were threatened, fug-

gested to them an extraordinary expedient for their
security. A bond was framed for the maintenance
of true Religion, and the defence of the King's per-
son and government, in opposition to all enemies
foreign and domestic. This contained a confeflion
of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the modt olemn promises,
in the name, and through the trength of God, of
adhering to each other in supporting the former, and
contending against the latter, to the utmost of their
power t. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and
the people subscribed with equal alacrity. Strange
or uncommon as such a combination may now ap-
pear, many circumstances contributed, at that time,
to recommend it, and to render the idea familiar to
the Scots. When rouzed by any extraordinary
event, or alarmed by any public danger, the people
of Israel were accustomcd to bind themselves, by a
solemn Covenant, to adhere to that Religion, which
the Almighty had eftablilhed among them this the

Camd. 544. Johnl. l)39. Spotfw. 369.
t Dunlop's Collet. of Coacn. Vol. 2. io .

Scots

Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it be- B o o K
came them to imitate. In that age, no confider- VII.
able enterprize was undertaken in Scotland, with- 588
out a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned
reckoned necessary for their security. The form of
this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from
those political ones, of which so many instances have
occurred; the articles, itipulations, and peculiar
modes of expression, are exacly the fame in both.
Almost all the considerable Popih Princes were
then joined in a league for extirpating the Reform-
ed Religion, and nothing could be more natural, or
seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a coun-
ter-affociation, in order to oppose the progress of
that formidable conspiracy. To these causes, did
the Covenant, which is become so famous in history,
owe its origin. It was renewed at different times
during the reign of James e. It was revived with
great solemnity, though with considerable altera-
tions, in the year 1638. It was adopted by the
English, in the year 1643, and enforced by the civil
and ccclefiaftical authority of both kingdoms. The
political purposes to which it was then made subser-
vient, and the violent and unconstitutional measures
which it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at the juncture, in
which it was first introduced, we may pronounce it
to have been a prudent and laudable device for the
defence of the religion and liberties of the nation;
nor were the terms in which it was conceived, other
than might have been expeced from men alarmed

Cald. 4. 129.
VOL. II. O with

B o o K with the impending danger of Popery, and thrca-

VII. tt ned with an invasion by the most bigoted and most

88' powerful Prince in Europe.

PHIL P'S eagerness to conquer England did not

infpi c im either with the vigour or dispatch necef-
fary to ensure the success of so mighty .n entcrprize.
His fleet, which ought to have failed in April, did
not enter the English channel till the middle of July.
It hovered many days on the coast, in expe&ation
of being joined by the Prince of Parma, who w.s
blocked up in the ports of Slanders by a Dutch

The Ar. squadron. Continual disasters pursued the Spaniards
madode. during that time; fucceflive storms and battles,
feated.

which are well known, conspired with their own ill
conduct, to disappoint their enterprize. And by
the blessing of Providence, which watched with re-
markable care over the Protestant Religion, and the
liberties of Britain, the Englilh valour scattered and
destroyed the Armado on which they had arrogant-
ly bestowed the name of Invincible. After being
driven out of the English seas, they were forced to
steer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and
Ireland. Many of them suffered hipwreck on there
dangerous and unknown coasts. Though James
kept his fubjeas under arms to watch the motions
of the Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in an
hostile manner, he received with great humanity
7C0 who were forced aihore by a tempest, and after
supplying them with neceflaries, permitted them to
return into their own country.

ON

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth ent B o o

an ambaflador to congratulate with James, and to V.
compliment him on the firmness and generosity, he 5S8
had discovered during a conjunture so dangerous.
But none of Aflby's promises were any longer re-
membered; that Minister was even accused of hav-
ing exceeded his powers, by these too liberal offers;
and conscious of his own falsehood, or alhamed of
being disowned by his court, he withdrew secretly
out of Scotland*.

PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own 1580.

rashness in attempting the conquest of England, by Pilip's in.
a naval armament, equipped at so great a distance, Scotland.
and fubje&ed, in all its operations, to the delays
and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas
and winds, resolved to make his attack in another
form, and to adopt the plan which the Princes of
Lorrain had long meditated, of invading England
through Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagin-
ed, might be easily wafted over from the Low Coun-
tries to that kingdom, and if they could once ob-
tain footing, or procure ailtance there, the fron-
tier of England was open and defenceless, and the
northern counties full of Roman Catholics, who
would receive them with open arms. Mean while,
a descent might be threatened on the southern coast,
which would divide the Englilh army, diftraf their
councils, and throw he whole kingdom into terrible
convullions. In order to prepare the way for the
execution of this delign, he remitted a considerable

JoIli.n. 134. Camd. 4g.

0 a fium

B o o K fur of money to Bruce, a seminary priest in Scot-

VII. land, and employed him, together with Hay,
'58 'Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottish Jeluits, to gain over
Popilh no as many persons of diitintion as poflible to his in-
byes con-
epre" teretl. Zeal for Popery, and the artful insinuations
tgainft the of these emissaries, induced fvt ral of the nobles to
K"ns. favour a measure, which tended so manifestly to the

deflruaCion of their country. Hur,tly, though the
King had lately married him to the daughter of his
favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warmly
attached to the Romish Church. Crawford and
Frrol were animated with the zeal of new converts.
They all engaged in a correspondence with the
Prince of Parma, and in their letters to him, of-
sered their service to the King of Spain, and un-
dertook with the aid of 6000 men, to render him
maTler of Scotland, and to bring so many of their
vjatls into the field, that he should be able to en-
ter England, with a numerous army. Francis
Stewart, grandson of James V. whom the King had
created Earl of Bothwell, though influenced by no
motive of religion, for he still adhered to the Pro
tefant faith, was prompted merely by caprice, and
the restlessness of his nature, to join this treasonable
correpondence.
'cb. 7. ALL tefe letters were intercepted in England.

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threatened
her own kingdom, ent them immediately to the
King, and reproaching him with his former lenity
toward the Popish party, called upon him to check
this frmidable conspiracy, by a proper severity.
But James, though firmly attached to the Protel'

tant

tant religion, though profoundly versed in the theo. B o o K
logical controversics between the Reformers and the VII.
Church of Rome, though he had employed himself, 5.S
at that early period of life, in writing a Commen- The King's
tary on the Revelations, in which he proved thewithregad
Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted, to 'opry.
already, those maxims concerning the treatment of
the Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through
the reft of his life. The Roman Catholics were at
that time a powerful and active party in England;
they were far from being an inconsiderable facion
in his own kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain
were ready to take part in all their machinations,
and to second every effort of their bigotry. The
opposition of such a body to his fucceflion to the
Crown of England, added to the averseness of
the Englith from the government of strangers,
might create him many difficulties. In order to a-
void thee, he thought it necessary to ooth rather
than to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to recon-
cile them to his fucceflion, by the hopes of gentler
treatment, and ome mitigation of the rigour of
those laws, which were now in force against them.
This attempt to gain one party by promises of in-
dulgence and a&s of clemency, while he adhered
with all the obflinacy of a difputanr, to the doc-
trines and tenets of the other, has given an air of
mystery, and even of contradiction, to this part of
the King's charaLter. The Papilts, with the credu-
lity of a fee struggling to obtain power, believed
his heart to be wholly theirs; and the Proreftants,
with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al-
ready in pofleflion, viewed every at of lenity, as a

0 3 mark

B o o K malk of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy.

VII. And in order to please both, James often aimed at
z 5-'. an xcefive refinement, mingled with d;iimulation,
5 9' in which he imagined the perfection ot government,

and of king-craft, to consist.

His ccecr. His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to
to !l coY. there general maxims. Notwithitanding the folici-
(tirators. tations of the Queen of England, enforced by the

zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a (hort
imprifonnment was the only punishment he inflicted
on Huntly and his afiociates. But he soon had rea-
son to repent an at of clemency, so inconsistent
with the dignity of government. The first use which
the conspirators made of their liberty, was to at:
femble their followers, and under pretence of remov-
ing Chancellor Maitland, an able Minister, but
warmly devted to the English interest, from the
King's councils and pretence, they attempted to
seize James himself. This attempt being defeated,
partly by Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their
own ill condut, they were forced to retire to the
North, where they openly ereced the standard of
Rebellion. But as the King's government was not
generally unpopular, or his ministers odious, their
own vassals joined them lowly, and discovered no
zeal in the cause. And the King, in peron, ad-
vancing ,gainll them with such forces as he could
fuddu:!y levy, they durst not rely so much on the
fidelity of their troops, which, though fiperior in
number, followed them with reluaance, as to ha-
zard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they
furrendcred to the KinLe and threw themselves on

his

his mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Both- B o o c
well were all brought to a public trial. Repeated VII.
a&s oftreafon were easily proved against them. The -
King, however, did not permit any sentence to be
pronounced; and after keeping them a few months
in confinement, he took occasion, amidst the pub-
lic festivity and rejoicings, at the approach of his
marriage, to set them at liberty *.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient The King's

Monarchs of Scotland, in the direct line; as all mth'inc
hopes of uniting the crowns of the t.vo kingdoms of Dcn-

- & ° mark.

would have expired with him; as the Earl of Ar-
ran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was luna-
tic ; the King's marriage was, on all there accounts,
an event which the nation wified for with the ut-
most ardour. He himself was no less desirous of
accomplilhing it; and had made overtures, for that
purpose, to the eldest daughter of Frederick II.
king of Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous of every
thing, that would render the acceflion of the house
of Stewart more acceptable to the English, endea.
voured to perplex James, in the fame manner she
had done Mary, and employed as many artifices to
defeat or to retard his marriage. His ministers,
gained by bribes and promises, seconded her inten-
tion; and though several different ambassadors
were lent from Scotland to Denmark, they produ-
ced powers so limited, or insisted on conditions lb
extravagant, that Frederick could not believe the
King to be in earnest; and suspecting that there was

Spotrw. 373. Cald. 4. io3.

0 4 some

B o o R fme design to deceive, or amule him, gave his

ViI. daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brunswick.
159'S Not discouraged by this disappointment, which he

imputed entirely to the condu& of his own mini-
fters, James made addrefis to the princess Anne,
Frederick's second daughter. And though Eliza-
beth endeavoured to divert him from this, by re-
commending Catherine the King of Navarre's sifter,
as a more advantageous match; though she pre-
vailed on the privy council of Scotland to declare
againll the alliance with Denmark, he perfiRed in
his choice. And despairing of overcoming the ob-
ftinacy of his own miniters, in any other manner,
he secretly encouraged the citizens of Edinburgh to
take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the
Chancellor, whom they accused as the person, whose
artifices had hitherto disappointed the wishes of the
King, and the expetations of his people. In con-
sequence of this, the Earl Marshal was sent into
Denmark at the head of a splendid embassy. He
received ample powers a:d in'trucions, drawn with
the Ki:lg's own hand. The marriage articles were
quickly agreed upon, and the young Queen let fail
towards Scotland. Jamnes made great preparations
for her reception, and waited her landing with all
the inipatience of a lover when the unwelcome
account arrived, that a violent tempelt had arisen,
wshich drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condi.
tion lt fattered, that there was little hope of its
putting again to tea bfoc the 1'pring. This un-
expt:ced dil.ppointtmcnt he felt with the utmolt
lfnfibility. 1 le inllantly fitted out lome hips, and
without communicating his intention to aIny of his

coun-

council, failed in person, attended by the Chancel- B o o
lor, several noblemen, and a train of 300 persons, VII.
in qucft of his bride. He arrived safely in a small . n

1589.

harbour near Uplo, where the Queen then resided. oa. ,,.
There the marriage was solemnized. And as it Nov. s.
would have been ralh to trust those boisterous seas,
in the winter leafon, James accepted the invitation
of the court of Denmark, and repairing to Copen-
hagen, pasSed several months there, amidst conti-
nual sea'.ing, and amusements, in which, both the
Q.uecnl and hinilmlf had great delight .

No event in tl; King's life appears to be a wider

deviation from his gcneral character, than this fud-
den lally. His son Char'ls I. was capable of that
exccffive admiration of te other fix, which arises
from great sensibility of heart, hightened by ele-
gance of taite; and the romantic air of his jour-
ney to Spain suited such a disposition. But James
was not lulceptible of any refined gallantry, and al-
ways exprefied that contempt for the female cha-
ra&er, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted
with po!itentfs, is apt to inspire. He was fretted,
however, at the many obstacles, which had been laid
in his way. He was anxious to secure the political
advantraes, which he expeted from marriage; and
fearing t!;at a delay might afford Elizabeth, and his
own minilers, an opportunity of thwarting hi by
new intrigues, he suddenly took the relblution of
preventing them, by a voyage from which he ex-
pced to retiurn in a few weeks. The nation seem-
ed to appl.ul his conduft, and to be plealed with

Mcrlv. :~3. Cpofhw. 377

this

Bo o K this appearance of amorous ardour, in a young

VII. Prince. Notwithstanding his absence so long be-

yond the time he expeced, the nobles, the clergy,
and the people, vied with one another in loyalty and
obedience; and no period in the King's reign was
more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free from
any eruption of those factions, which so often dif-
turbed the kingdom.

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOO K VIII.
O N the sirs of May the King and Queen ar- B o o

rived at Leith, and were received by their VIII
fubjeEts, with every polfible expreflion ofjoy. The'- '

1590.

solemnity of the Qeen's coronation was conduced Th King
with great magnificence; but so low had the order 3nd Qtse-l
of Bilhops fallen, in the opinion of the public, that Scotland.
none of them were present on that occasion, and
Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Miniter of great
reputation, set the Crown on her head, adminittred
the sacred unction, and performed the other cufto-
mary ceremonic

THt

B o o K THE zeal and success, with which many of the
VIII. clergy had contributed towards preserving peace and
55o0 order in the kingdom, during his abfcnce, recon-

ciled James, in a great degree, to their persons,
and even to the Presbyterian form of government.
Ausut 4. In presence of an assembly, which met this year, he

made high encomiums on the discipline as well as
the doctrine of the church, promised to adhere in-
violably to both, and permitted the assembly to
frame iuch as as gradually abolified all the re-
mains of episcopal jurifiiilion, and paved the way
for a full and legal efiablilhment of the Prefbyte-
rian model *.
^59i. AN event happened soon after, which afforded

the Clergy no small triumph. Archbilhop Adam-
son, their ancient enemy, having fallen under the
King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in consequence of the at of an-
nexation, and being opprefed with age, with po-
verty, and direafes, made the meanest fubmiflion to
the clergy, and delivered to the assembly a formal
recantation of all his opinions concerning Church
government, which had been matter of offence to
the Presbyterians. Such a confeflion, from the molt
learned person of the order, was confidered as a
testimony, which the force of truth had extorted
from an adversary t.

Riorderl MEANWHILE, the King's exceiTive clemency to-
in the ing.
doa. wards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, and

encouraged fucll ats of violence, as brought his

CalJ. +. :o.. t Sotsw. ."i . Cu:l, 4. 4.

rIi-

government under contempt, and proved fatal to B o o K
many of his subje&s. The hiory of several years, VIII.
about this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly
quarrels between the great families, and of murders 59.
and assassinations perpetrated in the most audacious
manner, and with circumstances of the utmot bar-
barity. All the defers in the feudal ariflocracy were
now felt more sensibly, than at any other period in
the history of Scotland, and universal licence and
anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce confidfent with
the preservation of society. While the King, too
gentle to punish, or too feeble to act with vigour,
suffered all these enormities to pass with impunity.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witch- An attempt

of Both-

craft, which is commonly an imaginary one, en- well's a-
grofied his attention, and those fufpeted of it, felt pins the
the whole weight of his authority. Many persons Kin.
neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which
were usually held to be certain indications of this
crime, but masters of families, and matrons of a
decent rank, and in the middle age of life, were
seized and tortured; and though their confecions
contained the most absurd and incredible circum-
stances, the King's prejudices, thofl of the clergy,
and of the people, conspired in believing their ex-
travagancies without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of thee un-
happy sufferers accused Bothwell of having consult-
ed them, in order to know the time of the King's
death, and having employed their art, to raise the
fRorms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and
had detained James so long in Denmark. Upon

t this

B o o K this evidence, that nobleman was committed to pri-
VIII. son. His turbulent and haughty spirit could nei-

s- ther submit to the restraint, nor brook such an in-

dignity. Having gained his keepers, he made his
escape, and imputing the accusation to the artifices
of his enemy, the Chancellor, afiembled his follow-
ers, under pretence of driving him from the King's
councils. Being favoured by some of the King's
attendants, he was admitted by a secret paflage,
under cloud of night, into the court of the palace
ofHoly-rood-houfe. He advanced diretly towards
the royal apartment, but happily, before he entered,
Oc¢. . the alarm was taken and the doors hut. While

he attempted to burst open ome of them, and to
set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh had
time to run to their arms, and he escaped with the
utmost difficulty; owing his safety to the darkness
of the night, and the precipitancy with which he
fled*.

I
HE retired towards the North, and the King hav-

ing unadvisedly given a commission to the Earl of
Huntly, to pursue him, and his followers, with fire
and sword; he, under colour of executing that
commiflion, gratified his private revenge, and fur-
rounded the house of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to
Feb. e the ground, and flew Murray himself. The mur-

der of a young nobleman of such promising virtues,
and the heir of the Regent Murray, the darling of
the people, excited universal indignation. The ci-
tizens of Edinburgh role in a tumultuous manner;
and though they were restrained, by the care of the

* Mclv.S3. Sictvw. j,6.

magi.

magistrates, from any aft of violence, they threw B o o K
aside all refpe& for the King and his ministers, and VIII.
openly insulted and threatened both. While this
mutinous spirit continued, James thought it pru-
dent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
dence for some time at Glasgow. There Huncly
surrendered himself tojuftice and, notwithftand-
ing the atrociousness of his crime, and the clamours
of the people, the power of the Chancellor, with
whom he was now clo&'ay confederated, and the
King's regard for the memory of the Duke of Len-
nox, whose daughter he had married, not only pro-
teted him from the sentence which such an odious
action merited, but exempted him even from the
formality of a public trial *.

A STEP of much importance was taken, soon as- Prefdbyri

n Church

ter, with regard to the government of the church. sa,,er'n
The Clergy had long complained of the encroach- ment ela.

bliihed by

ments made upon their privileges and jurifdiAion, aw.
by the ats of the parliament 1584, and though
thee laws had now loft much of their force, they
resolved to petition the parliament, which was ap-
proaching, to repeal them in form. Thejunture
for pulhing such a measure was well chosen. The
King had loft much of the public favour, by his
lenity towards the Popish fation, and still more by
his remissness in pursuing the murderers of the Earl
of Murray. The Chancellor had not only a power-
ful party of the courtiers combined againlt him, but
was become odious to the people, who imputed to
him every sale ftep in the King's condut. Both-

* Spotlw. 397.

well

B o o K well fill lurked in the kingdom, and being secretly

VIII. supported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini-

Itration, was ready, every moment, to renew his
s591. audacious enterprizes. James, for all there reasons,

was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy in their
request, and not only consented to a law, whereby
the ats 1584 were rescinded or explained, but he
carried his complaisance fill further, and permitted
the parliament to eflablifh the Presbyterian govern-
ment, its General Affernblies, Provincial synods,
Prefbyteries and Kirk sessions, with all the different
branches of their discipline and jurifdicoion, in the
molt ample manner. All the zeal and authority of
the Clergy, even under the adminifiration of Re-
gents, from whom they might have expected the
mor partial favour, could not obtain the fandion
of law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclefi-
aftical government. No Prince was ever less dif-
posed than James to approve a system, whose re-
publican genius inspired a passion for liberty, so re-
pugnant to his exalted notions of royal prerogative.
Nor could any aversion be more inveterate than his,
to the austere and uncomplying charater of the
Presbyterian Clergy in that age; who, more emi-
nent for zeal, than for policy, often contradited
his opinions, and censured his conduc, with a free-
dom equally offensive to his dogmatism as a Theo-
logian, and to his pride as a King. His situation
however obliged him frequently to conceal, or to
diflemble his sentiments; and as he often disgusted
his fubjets, by indulging the Popilh facion more
than they approved, he endeavoured to atone for
this, by conctflions. to the Presbyterian Clergy,

more

more liberal than he himfclf would otherwise have B o o Kr
chosen to grant*. VIII.

IN this parliament Bothwell and all his adhe- 5'

rents were attainted. But he soon made a new at-
tempt to seize the King at Falkland; and James,
betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly de-
fended by others, who wilhed well to Bothwell, as
the Chancellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to
the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert Melvil, and
to the irresolution of Both well's associates t.

SCARCELY was this danger over, when the nation A ncre

was alarmed with the discovery of a new and moreof C,. P1
formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the Lord pin'L''d-
Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was ready
to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were
found in his custody, and among these, several
blanks signed by the Earls of Angus, Huntly, and
Errol. By this extraordinary precaution, they
hoped toefcape any dangerof discovery. But Ker'
resolution shrinking when torture was threatened, he
confessed that he was employed by thefc noblemen,
to carry on a negociation with the King of Spain
that the blanks subscribed with their names were to
be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were
inltruadc to offer the faithful service of the three
Earls to that Monarch; and to solicit him to land
a body of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the
mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the first place, to eftablith the Roman Catholic Re-
lision in Scotland, and then to invade England,

* Cld. 4, . 3, 2,z. Sotiv. 388. q1 Mcl'. 402.
VOL. 11. P with

B o o K with the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David
VIII. Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland, whom
- he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were
J592

t.tken into culldy, and confirmed all the circum-
itances of his confcffion*.

1593. THE nation having been kept for tome time in
zeal of he continual terror and agitation by so many fuccelive

conspiracies, the discovery of this new danger com-
pleated the panic. All ranks of men, as if the
enemy had already been at their gates, thought
themselves called upon to stand forth in defence of
their Country. The Ministers of Edinburgh, with-
out waiting for any warrant from the King, who
happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commiflion,
assembled a considerable number of Peers and Ba-
rons, in order to provide an instant remedy against
the impending danger. They seized the Earl of
Angus, and committed him to the catle; they exa-
mined Ker; and prepared a remonstrance to be laid
before the King, concerning the state of the nation;
and the neceflity of prosecuting the conspirators with

And po. becoming vigour. James, though jealous of every
thed;^K f encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with
-ain' fubjetls, who instead of petitioning, Ieemed to pre-

scribe to him, found it neceflfry, during the vio-
lence of the ferment, not only to adopt their plan,
but even to declare that no consideration hould ever
induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty
of to odious a trealbn. He summoned tl:e Earls
;. s. of Huntly and Errol to surrender themifelves to

* Rymcr, 16. 1zo.

justice.

justice. Graham of Fintry, whom his peers pro- B o o K
nouncel to be guilty oftreafon, he commanded to VIII.
be publickly beheaded; and marching into the North "<
at the head of an army, the two Earls, together
with Angus, who had escaped out of prison, retir-
ed to the mountains. He placed garrisons in rhe
castles which belonged to them; compelled their
vassals, and the Barons in the adjacent counties, to
subscribe a bond containing professions of their loy-
alty towards him, and of their firm adherence to
the Protestant faith; and, the better to secure the
tranquillity of that part of the kingdom, conltituted
the Earls of Athol, and Marshal, his Lieutenants
there

HAVING finished this expedition, J ames returned March '.

to Edinburgh, where he found Lord Borrough, an f.Ic.its h.in
extraordinary ambafador from the court of Eng- tthem ith
land. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of atisour.
conspiracy, which he confidered as no less formi-
dable to her own kingdom, than to Scotland, re-
proached James with his former remifhnes, and urg-
ed him, as he regarded the preservation of the Pro-
teftant religion, or the dignity of his own Crown,
to punish this repeated treason with rigour; and if
he could not apprehend the persons, at leat to con-
fillate the estates of such audacious rebels. She
weakened however the force of these requests, by
interceding at the fame time, in bchal of Both-
well, whom, according to her uual policy in nou-
rishing a fcious spirit among the Scottili nobles,
fie had taken under her pro;eation. Ja;nes ablu.

* jpSti;v 3¢1. Cald. 4 2ctl.

1 a lutely

B o o K lutely resiled to liften to any intercelffon in favour

VIII. of one, who had so often, and with so much out-
h- - rage, insulted both his government and his person.

93 With regard to the popilh conspirators, he declared

his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but
that he might be the better able to do so, he de-
manded a small fum of money from Elizabeth,
which fhc, distrustful perhaps of the manner in
which he might apply it, shewed no inclination to
grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his
own fubjeds obliged hint to call a parliament, in
order to pass an ad of attainder against the three
Earls. But before it met, Ker made his escape out
of prilbn, and on pretence, that legal evidence of
;i;cir guilt could not be produced, nothing was con-
cluded againit them. The King himself was uni-
vcrlally lualpetted of having contrived this artifice,
on purpose to elude the requests of the Queen of
iEngland, and to disappoint the wishes of his own
j:eople. And therefore in order to sooth the Clergy,
who exclaimed loudly against his condu&, he gave
way to the passing of an a, which ordained those
who obifinately contemned the censures of the
Church, to be declared outlaws*.

Rotilhwell WHILE th' terror excited by the Popish confpi-
t.s'1,'~ racy pofl'L'd the nation, the court had been divided

by two rival factions, which contended for the chief
dirldion oi altairs. At the head of one, was the
t Lanncllor, in whom the King reposed intire con-
fhlc.iit. F'or tlint very reason, perhaps, he had fal-
1l: catl y under the (Qiccn's diipleafure. The Duke

of Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree, B o o K
and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, VIII.
and widened the breach. And James, fond no less J
of domestic tranquillity, than ofpublick peace, ad- 9
vised his favourite to retire, for some time, in hopes
that the Queen's resentment would subside. But
as he stood in need, in the present juncure, of the
afifiance of an able Minister, he had recalled him
to court. In order to prevent him from recover-
ing his former power, the Stewarts bad recourse to
an expedient no less illegal than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame
surname, they brought him back secretly into Scot- J"ly 24.
land; and seizing the gates of the palace, introduced
him into the royal apartment with a numerous train
of armed followers. James, though deserted by all
his courtiers, and incapable ofrefiftance, discovered
more indignation than fear, and reproaching them
for their treachery, called on the Earl to finish his
treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refuse his
demands. And a few days after he signed a capitu-
lation with this successful traitor, to whom he was
really a prisoner, whereby he bound himfelfto grant
him a remiflion for 311 pafl offences, and to procure
the ratification of it in parliament; and in the mean
time to difinifs the Chancellor, the mater of Gla.
mi, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
!i councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part,
onllcnted to remove from court, though he lcfc
there as many of his albciates, as he thought sus-
;ici:lt io prevent the return of the adverse faiion.

P 3 Bur

B o o K BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the King
VIIl. under the fame kind of bondage, to which he had
`---' been often fubje& during his minority. He disco-
Heerver.vered Ib much impatience to shake off his fetters,
hlslbeity. that thole who imposed, durst not continue, the

reftrainr. They permitted him to call a Convention
of the nobles at Stirling, and to repair thither him-
lelf. All Bothwell's enemies, and all who were
desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing
to be so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced
the inful offered to the King's person and authority
to be high treason, and declared him absolved from
any obligation to observe conditions, extorted by
force, and which violated so eflentially his royal pre-
rogative. James, however, flill proffered him a
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an a of
mercy, and promise to retire out of the kingdom.
Thtl' conditions Bothwell rejected with disdain,
and betaking himfeif once more to arms, attempted
to furprize the King, but finding him on his guard,
fled to the borders *

SrfpPRn. T IE King's ardour against Bothwell, compared
i-.;, *,..' v'h is flow and evasive proceedings against the
ptl LuIdJ. P-o;if Lords, occasioned a general disgust among

his ,ILb: ls; and was imputed either to an excessive
at.;.c;:1lenr to the perifns of those conspirators, or
to a . cret partiality towards their opinions; both
.h:ich g.v: ril! to no unreasonable fears. The
Cikrtry. as the immediate guardians of the Pro-
tc'Ln Religion, thought themselves bound, in
!-l; a jun:ture, to ake extraordinary fleps for its

*Ca;d. 4. 33. Spt:.w. 395*

pre-

preservation. And the provincial fynod of Fife B o o Kt
happening to meet at that time, a motion was made VIII.
to excommunicate all concerned in the late con!pi- . '
racy, as obstinate and irreclaimable Papists. And spt. ,.
though none of the conspirators resided within the
bounds of the fynod, or were subjet to its jurililic.
tion, such was the zeal of the members, that, over-
looking this irregularity, they pronounced against
them, the sentence of excommunication, to which
the a of las parliament added new terrors. And
left this lhould be imputed to a few men, and ac-
counted the a of a small part of the church, de-
puties were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,
and to desire their approbation and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which is lenity

increased the people's suspicions of the King. As' thm.
he was marching on an expedition against the bor- a. 17.
derers, the three Earls coming suddenly into his
presence, offered to fubnit themselves to a legal
trial; and James, without committing them tocuf-
tody, appointed a day for that purpose. The con-
fpirators prepared to appear with a formidable train
of their friends and vafl'Is. But, in the mean time,
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons,
assembling at Edinburgh, remonstrated against the
King's extreme indulgence with great boldness, and
demanded of him, according to the regular courie
ofjutfice, to commit to lure custody, peribns charg-
ed with the highest as of treason, who could not
be brought to a legal trial, until they were abo:lve.i
from the censures of the Church; and to call a
Convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the

P4 nis

B o o K method of proceeding against them. At the fame
VIII. time they offered to accompany him in arms to the
^93 place of trial, left such audacious and powerful cri-

minals should overawe justice, and di&tate to the
judges to whom they pretended to submit. James,
though extremely offended both with the irregula-
rity cf their proceedings, and the presumption of
their demands, found it expedient to put off the
day of trial, and to call a Convention of efates, in
order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people.
By being humoured in this point, their suspicions
began gradually to abate, and the Chancellor
managed the Convention so artfully, that he him-
self, together with a few other members, was im-
powered to pronounce a final sentence upon the con-
,ov. 6. fpirators. After much deliberation, they ordained

that the three Earls, and their associates, Should be
exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution,
on account of their correspondence with Spain;
that, before the first day of February, they hould
either submit to the Church, and publickly renounce
the errors of Popery, or remove out of the king-
dom ; that, before the first of January, they hould
declare which of theie alternatives they would em-
brace; that they hould find surety for their peace-
able demeanor for the future; and that if tley
tailed to signify their choice in due time, they (foould
oii the benefit of this act of abolition, and remain
-xpofdl to all the pains of law *.

B' this lenity towards the conspirators, James
incurrced much reproach, and gained no advantage.

* C,!..;. 3o. ofv..^pe.

pc-

Devoted to the Popish fupertition, fubmifive to B o o
all the dictates of their priests, and buoyed up with VIII.
hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls ' - '
refused to accept of the conditions, and continued 594
their treasonable correspondence with the court of
Spain. A Convention of estates pronounced them jan. ss.
to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which
were offered; and the King required them, by
proclamation, to surrender themselves to justice.
The presence of the Englilh ambassador contributed,
perhaps, to the vigour of there proceedings. Eli-
zabeth, ever attentive to James's motions, and im-
puting his relucance to punish the Popish Lords to
a ecret approbation of their designs, had sent to
Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger
to which he exposed himself, by this false modera-
tion; and to require him to exercise that rigour,
which their crimes, as well as the posture of affairs
renderedneceflary. And though the steps now taken
by the King silenced all complaints on that head,
yet Zouche, forgetful of his character as an ambaf-
fador, entered into private negociations with such
of the Scottish nobles, as disapproved of the King's
measures, and held almost an open correspondence
with Bothwcll, who, according to the usual artifice
of malecontents, pretended much solicitude for re-
forming the dilbrders of the commnonwealth; and
covered his own ambition with the specious veil of
zeal aair.st those Counsellors, who rcftrained the
King t'itni pirfl:ing the avowed nrmies of the
Protel'ant aitli. Zouche encouraged him, in the
n.um-i. of lis i.'is, to take armis ,gainft his o%.
vereigrA.

MClA--

B OO K MEANWHILE, the King and the Clergy were
VIII. filled with mutual distrust of each other. They

L5vJ were jealous, perhaps, to excels, that his affetions
1594..

A new at- kaned too much towards the Popish fa&tion; he
Bonipel fulpcl'ed them, without good reafun, of prompt-

ing Btiiwell to rebellion, and even of supplying
him with money for that purpose. Little initiga-
tion indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent
spirit as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprize. He
appeared suddenly within a mile of Edinburgh, at
the head of 400 horle. The pretences, by which
he endeavoured tojuftify this infurreaion, were ex-
tremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Po-
pery, concern for the King's honour, and for the li-
berties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, ,and was
accompanied only with a few horsemen of Lord
Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to
encourage them to at with zeal, he promised to
proceed against the Popish Lords with the utmof
rigour of law. Animated by their Ministers, they
ran chearfully to their arms, and advanced, with the
King at their head, against Bothwell; but he, not-
withltnding his success in putting to flight Lord
Honme, who had rashly charged him with a far in-
ferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith with-
out daring to attack the King. His followers aban.
doned him oon after, and discouraged by so many
fucceflive dilappoincments, could never afterwards
be brought to venture into the field. He betook
himself to his usual lurking places, in the North of
England; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the

King's

King's remonstrances, obliged him to quit that re- B o o .
treat . VIII.

No sooner was the King delivered from one dan- 1594.

Frelh dan-

ger, than he was called to attend to another. The sera from
Popilh Lords, in consequence of their negociations Lords.
with Spain, received, in the spring, a upply ofApri 3.
money, from Philip. What bold designs this
might inspire, it was no easy matter to conjeture.
From men under the dominion of bigotry, and
whom indulgence could not reclaim, the most
desperate ations were to be dreaded. The ailembly
of the Church immediately took the alarm; remon-
ftrated against them with more bitterness than ever;
and unanimously ratified the sentence of excommu-
nication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife. James
himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only
be generally displeasing to his own fubje6ts, but
give rife to unfavourable suspicions among the Eng-
lifh, exerted himself with unusual vigour. He cal- June s.
led a parliament; laid before it all the circumftan-
ces, and aggravations of the conspiracy; and
though there were but few members preient, and
several of thcfe conne&ed with the conspirators by
blood or friendship, he prevailed on them by his
influence and importunity, to pronounce the molt
rigorous sentence the law can inflict. They were
declared to be guilty of hhl treason, and theireltaces
and honours forfeited. At the fame time, fatutes,
more severe than ever, were enacted againit the
profefors of the Popish Religion.

Spotfw. .;o3. Cald. 4. 359.

How

B o K How to put this sentence in execution, wasa mat.
VIII. ter of greater difficulty. Three powerful Barons,
! -j' cantoned in a part of the country almost inacceflible,
159¢.
at.l of surrounded with numerous vassals, and supported
G.ivat. by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an

;.ermatch for a Scottith Monarch. No intreaty
could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the money,
rnceffary for defraying the expences of an expedi-
tion againf them. To attack them in person, with
his own forces alone, might expose him both to
disgrace and to danger. He had recourse to the
only expedient which remained in such a situation,
for aiding the impotence of Sovereign authority; he
delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll, and
Lord Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity
with the conspirators; and gave them a commission
to invade their lands, and to seize the castles which
belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all
his high pretensions of zeal for the Protestant Re-
ligion, having now entered into a close confederacy
with them, the danger became every day more urg-
ing. Argyll, fblicited by the King, and rouzed by
the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7000
rr.en. lHuntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat,
with an army far inferior in number, but composed
chicfly es gen tlemen of the low countries, mounted
rn hlorlb.:cl.:, and who brought along with them
co . a train cf ticldlpieces. Th.y encountered each

(t.icr with all t;e tTry. which hereditary enmity
andil ancientr ri'.a;tlip ad.! to undisciplincd courage.
J;,;. the i.;!;la;id:., (i:>o,'icc!tel by the irlt dii-
. !!:c.C (;,n' 'i.e c.':;I;, t;. , whit h they were little ;t.

cavalry, were soon put to flight. And Argyll, a B o o K
gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his VIIL
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation
at their disgrace, and calling on them to Rtand, and 594
to vindicate the honour of their name *.

ON the sirs intelligence of this defeat, James,

though obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raise
money t, assembled a small body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys, Forbeses, and other
clans at enmity with Huntly and Errol, who hav-
ing loft several of their principal followers at Glen-
livat, and others refuting to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James wafted their lands; put garrisons in
some of their castles; burnt others; and left the
Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that part of
the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to re-
firain them from gathering to any head there, or
from infesting the low country. Reduced at last
to extreme distress, by the rigour of the season, and
the desertion of their followers, they obtained the
King's permifilon to go beyond seas, and gave fe-
curity that they hould neither return without his Por;i,
licence, nor engage in any new intrigues againt c.od,
the Protestant Religion, or the peace of the king the kinr.
dom dom.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-established in
the North of Scotland; and the firmness and vi-

Cld. 4. 43. t Birch, Mem. . 186.
.S tf.v. 404.o C.a!J. .'l,
c.

7 gour,

B o o K gour, which James had displayed in his last proceed.
VIII. ings against them, regained him, in a great degree,

'w °the

confidence of his Protestant fubjets. But, he

1595.
The Ro- funk, in the fame proportion, and for the fame rea-
,n, ,- son, in the esteem of the Roman Catholics. They
tholics inT
cened a- had aferted his mother's right to the Crown of
gaints
Je,. England with o much warmth, that they could not,

with any decency, reject his. And the indulgence,
with which he affeeted to treat the profeflors of that
religion, inspired them with such hopes, that they
viewed his accefion to the throne as no undesirable
event. But the rigour with which the King pur-
sued the conspirators, and the severe statutes against
Popery to which he had given his content, con-
vinced them that there hopes were visionary;
and they began to look about in quest of some new
successor, whose rights they might oppose to his.
The Englilh Papists turned their eyes towards the
Earl of Effex, whose generous mind, though firmly
cftablifhed in the ProteRant faith, abhorred the fe-
verities inflited in that age, on account of religious
opinions. Those of the fame fe&, who were in
exile, formed a bolder scheme, and one more suit-
able to their situation. They advanced the claim
of the Infanta of Spain; and Parsons the Jesuit
publilhed a book, in which, by faire quotations
from history, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd
arguments, intermingled with bitter inveaives
against the King of Scots, he endeavoured to prove
the Infanta's title to the English Crown to be pre-
ferable to his. And Philip, though involved al-
ready in a war both with France and England, and
icarce able to defend the remains of the Burgun-

dian

dian Provinces against the Dutch commonwealth, B o o K
easily grasped at this airy projeet. The dread of VIII.
a Spanish Pretender to the Crown, and the oppo- 159.
fition which tihe Papilts began to form against the
King's succession, contributed not a little to remove
the prejudices of the Protestants, and to prepare the
way for that event.

BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often men- Bothwell

forced to fly

tioned as the disturber of the King's tranquillity, into spai.
and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen of
England, on account of his confederacy with the
Popish Lords; excommunicated by the Church for
the fame reason and deferred, in his di'trefs, by
his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safety
to France, and thence to Spain ani Ialy, where,
after renouncing the Protestant faith, he led, many
years, an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. The King,
though extremely ready to sacrifice the strongest re-
fentment to the slightest acknowledgments, could
never be softened by his fubmiflion, nor be induced
to liften to anly intercelion in his behalf*.

THIS year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an

able Minilter, on whonm he had long devolved the
whole weight of public aairs. As James loved
him, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of veres, which, when compared
with the compositions of that age, are far from Ib-
ing incleganc --.

* V\'in.. .'em. . Sopn'v.. .irc. ft IJ. 411.

2 SooN

B OO K SOON after his death, a considerable change wa
VIII. made in the administration. At that time, the an-

5966 nual charges of government far exceeded the King's

A change revenues. The Queen was fond of expensive
ithr a. amusements. James himself was a firanger to ceco-
t.or nomy. It became necefiary, for all these reasons, to

levy the public revenues with greater order and ri-
gour, and to husband them with more care. This
important trust was committed to eight gentlemen
of the law *, who, from their number, were cal-
led Ocfavians. The powers vested in them were
ample, and almost unlimited. The King bound
himself neither to add to their number, nor to sup-
ply any vacancy that might happen, without their
consent: And knowing the facility of his own tem-
per, agreed that no alienation of his revenue, no
grant of a pension, or order on the treasury, should
be held valid, unless it were ratified by the fubfcrip-
tion of five of the commiflioners; all their afts and
decisions were declared to be of equal force with the
lentences ofj udges in civil courts; and in concq uence
of them, and without any other warrant, any perlbn
might be arreled, or their goods seized. Such ex-
tenrive jurili'iic'on, together with the absolute dif-
poil l (;f the piuL;lick minicy, drew the v. I.ol execu-
tive part cf' tie o'c rnmncnt into their i^rid. IJnit-
ed an.on thci:;ls, tlht!l- gr.;i Uv

lll ,r: l'.i.' ncdl

thile rt: ctfthc Kilii's MliillP'r, and !i:. .! ci cv'ry
luirati.v or l;o:;l..iu,)e osic. 1Th ;incl;ent i. rvan:

· .l!ex.T!dcr Sc.ton I'rrfiic nl f tlhc S-'ilqi, ^V,'l:er S-wai:a

Cornm r'ni'aor of Li;art,: c 1 (c.rdl !,iy S.,!, UlJD id Ca'-rc!'y,
John .i l!.',

d .s;,y 1 ,

ml,ct '.:l, i' l.r- :;. 1 :: .: . l.l.n

Skci:c Clik c.;filtcr, a; d 1. . . ,. !:'.':

'. :.
'' .

o(f

of the Crown repined, at being obliged to quit theirB o o K
fiations to new men. The favourites, and young VIII.
courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality 1"96.
stinted by their prelcriptions. And the Clergy ex-
claimed againll obme of them as known apoftares
to Popery, and fufpe'ed others of secretly favour-
ing it. They retained their power, however, not-
withstanding this general combination i-.linlt them;
and they owed it intirely to the ord;:r and ceconomy
which they introduced into the adlninift-ration, of the
finances, by which the necessary expences of govern-
ment were more ealily defrayed, than in any other
period of the King's reign *.

THE rumour of vast preparations vhich Philip violence of

was said to be carrying on at this time, fil!cl both t'ainil,
England and Scotland with the dread of a new in- 'orih
vafion. James took proper me3fures for the de-
fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the
zeal of the Clergy, whole ffpicions of the King's
sincerity began to revive; and as he had permit-
ted the wives of the baniffed Peers to levy the
rents of their eltatcs, and to live in their houses,
they charged him with rendering the a;lt of forfeit.
ure ineffelual, by flupporting the avowed enemies
of the lrotcteant faith. The afembly of the Church March 4.
took under conlideration the state of the kingdom,
and I;ving appointed a day of public fasting, they
f;lemnly renewed the Covenant, by which the na-
tion was bound to adhere to the P'rotcftant faith,
and to defend it againlt all aggressors. A commit-

* Sprtfw. 413, 43{.
VOL. II. Q tee,

B o o K tee, ccnfifling of the mol eminent Clergymen, and
VIII of many Barons and gentlemen of diftin&ion, vait-

0-ó cd on the King, and laid before him a plan for the

security of tie kingdom, and the preservation of
religion. They urged him to appropriate the estates
of the banilhcd Lords, as a fund for the mainte-
nance of soldiers; to take the ftrideft precautions
for preventing the return of such turbulent fubjets
into the country; and to pursue all who were sus-
pced of being their adherents, with the utmost ri-
gour.

The King's No'rTiiioG could be more repugnant to the King's
rmli:ncr;fs -
vilregirdl fcencs, or more dilagreeable to his inclination,
totltn. thin thcl. propoEtions. Averse, through his whole

life, to any coureii, where he expececd opposition or
danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the
characcr of m;lderation, and by the arts of policy,
lie observcd with concern the prejudices againfl him,
which were growing among the Roman Catholics,
and rfolved to make some atonement for that part
of his condu&, which had drawn on him their
indig^:tion. Elizabcth was now well advanced in
y .ir s; her life had lately been in danger; if any
l'oi !h competitor fliould aril to dliflute his rigllt
o)f ilcccflion, a faction, so powecri'Ll as that of the
b.aiihtd l.ord, might be extrmely, formiabile;
and ;:iy divlion aingu lhis ownl J.jc..s tilgiilt

l\'v i;t;al, a a it nlT re,

u vlich v.i l ouli rcq,.:irc t!l'ir
urj,itcd :);md IlloT viG.roLs ci. r t:. Illfci, tl.Lrc-

i(;;(; l'rl-.'.i.U tui-. '-'c iii^ ..i~n tis AH n

as they were surrounded, during their residence in B o o K
foreign parts, by Philip's emifisaries; as refcntment VIII.
might dispose them to liften more favourably than 1j59
ever, to their suggestions; as cleltair mig'-t drive
them to still more atrocious acions; he relblved to
recall them, under cerrain conditions, into rheir na-
tive country. Encouraged by thrf: ltntimr nts of
the King in their fvour, of which they did not
want intelligence, and wearied alrcady of the de-
pendant and anxious life of exiles, they vcntured to
return secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they pre-
sented a petition to the King, begging his periiif-
sion to reside at their own houl. s, and otffring to
give security for their peaceable an.d cdutiiul bcha.l
viour. James called a Convention ofr ctfates to ck-
liberate on a matter of uch importance, and by
their advice he granted the petition.

So soon as they were informed of this, the mem 'r'n. t

her of a committee, aappoint:d by the last a' n :b cy,,' ,'
met at Edinburgh, ani with all the precipit.l.ncv o'Cery ":'
fear, and of z al, took fuich reliluons as they
thought ncccli'rv for te tafety of the lingdt;m.
They wrote circular lttcs to all the I ci'ytries ;!l
Scotland; they warned them of the avproachin
danger; they exlhorrcd tlcm to I' u[. tir pc.; Ile
to the :ief:nce or thcir j: rights; hey coIT' man;cd
them to publilh, i ali thteir pulpi:,r the a · o cxy-
coinmmunicatinr ti.he !'pih Lo:'I ; alln cioiriwd
the ;i to l.y ail t';W,i wli. were lil:l'.:ed of , ivouL;-
ing Ppcery under the Ili;';wl ccnliinc, by a un',maiy
sentence, ;!nd withour o(i:crvng tlihc luaul f':;, li-
ties of trial. And as the d(tancr klcmed too ,rcli',f

YQ . t .

B o o K to wait for the stated meetings of the judicatories of
VIil. the Church, they made choice of the most eminent

ó.,- clergymen in diitfrent corners of the kingdom, ap-

pointed them to resi:le constantly at Edinburgh, and
to meet every day with the Ministers of that city,
under the name of the Slanding Council of the Church,
and veiled in this body the fuprcme authority, by
enjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Roman
form, to take care that the Church hould receive
no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no les unconstitutional than

unprecedented, were manifet encroachments on the
royal prerogative, and bold lteps towards open re-
bellion. The King's condut, however, justified in
some degree such excesses. His lenity towards the
Papists, bo repugnant to the principles of that age;
his pardoning the conspirators, notwitht;;nding re-
peated promises to the contrary; the respect he paid
to Lady Huntly, who was attached to the Romish
religion no less than her husband; his committing
the care of ris daughter, the Princels Elizabeth, to
Lady Levingfton, who was infected with the fame
superstition; the contempt with which he talked, on
all occasions, both of the character of Minillers,
and of their function; were circumstances which
might have filled minds, not prone by nature to
jealousy, with ome lufpicions; and might have pre-
cipitated into rash councils, those, who were fr re-
moved from intemperate zeal. Bur, however power-
ful the motives might be which influenced the
Clergy, or however laudable the end they had in
view, they conducted their mr.eafures with no adlrefs,

*·wsi~~ ~and

and even with little prudence. James discovered aB o o K
strong inclination toavoi arupturewith the Church, \VIl
and jealous as he was of his prerogativ, would wil- -
lingly have made many concefions for the fake of
peace. By his coilmand, iome of the Privy Coun-
fillors had an interview with the more moderate
among the Clergy, and enquired whether Iliuncly
and his associates might not, upon making proper
acknowledgments, be again reco iv-d into the bosom
of the Church, and be exempted from any furthier
puniihment, on account of their past apoilacy and
treabons. They replied, that though the gate of
mercy stood always open for thole who repented and
returned, yet as thele nob!emen had been guilty of
idolatry, a crime de'erving death both by the law of
God and of man, the civil magiilrate couid not le-
gally gr.nt them a pardon; and even though tl:'.
Church flhould absolve them, it was his dutv to in-
fliAt punifiment upon then:. This inflexibility in
those, who were reckoned the niot compliant of
the order, filled the King with indignation, which
the inprudence and obttmincy of a private Clergy-
man heightened into ra.ge.

MR. DAVID B3LACK, Minilfer at ".. Andrew's, Steditrus

difcouriilg in one of Ihs fcrn-ons, acco!rding to cul- du,'tby
tom, concerning the ltate of the nation, afirmed iB1k.
that the King had permitted the ;opifh Lords to re-
turn i tr.) Scutand, and by that action, hd d.tco-
vered the tre achery of his own hrar; ti.ht all Kings
were the Devil's children; that Satan had now tile
guidance of the court; that the QC(een ot England

Q.3 W3s

B o o K was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and
VIII. bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the
-.'ó Privy Counlellors cormorants, and men of no reli-

gion; and in his prayer for the Queen, he used these
words, We must pray for her for fahion-fake, but

wov. o. we have no cause, she will never do us good. James
The Clergy
crpoufc hi commanded him to be summoned before the Privy
defence. Council, to answer for such seditious expreflions;

and the Clergy, intead of abandoning him to the
punishment, which fucn a petulant and criminal at-
tack on his superiors deserved, were so imprudent as
to espouse his cause, as if it had been the common
one of the whole order. The controversy concern-
ing the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to titify against vices of every kind,
which had been agitated in 1584, was now revived.
It was pretended, that, with regard to their sacred
function, Ministers were subject to the Church
alone; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical
superiors to judge of the truth or falsehood of doc-
trines, dlivered in the pulpit; that if, upon any
pretence whatever, the King uurped this jurif-
diAion, the church would, from that moment, fink
under fcrvitude to the civil magistrate; that inflead
of reproving vice, with that honest boldness which
had often been of advantage to individuals, and ai-
lutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the passions of the Prince, and to connive at
the vices of others; that the King's eagerness to
punifi the indiftrction of a Protestant Minister,
while he was bo ready to pardon the crimes of Po-
pi.h confpiratcrs, cllcd on them to fland on their
guard, arnd that now was the time to contend for

their

their privileges, and to prevent any encroachment B o o :;
on those rights, of which the.church had been in VIII.
poflelfion ever since the reformation. InfluencedC "-
by these considerations, the Council of the Church 56
enjoined Black to decline the urifdition of the Pri-
vy Council. And he, proud of such an opportu-
nity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that
purpose, and with the utmost firmness refused to
plead, or to answer the questions which were put to
him. In order to add greater weight to these pro-
ceedings, the Council of the Church transmitted the
declinature to all the 'reibyteries throughout the
kingdom, and commanded every Minilter to sub-
fcribc it, in teltimony of his approbation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour

than they were attacked. Sensible of the contempt
under which his authority niuft fall, if the clergy
lhould be permitted, publickly, and with impunity,
to ca!umniate his mliniittrs, and even to censure
liimltlf; and knowing, by former examples, what
unequal reparation fr such oflfnces he might ex-
le&t fom! the jdicatories of the church, he urged
on the inquiry into B'lack's condud, and iflied a
proclamation, commanding the members of the
council of the thurch to leave fldinburgh, and to
return to their own parifihcs. Black, iniad of sub-
rnitting, renewed hlis declinature and the Council,
in dleii.:lce of the proclamation, dIclrcd, that as
they nct by the authority of the Church, obedience
to it ws a duty 1tll more fiacreJ, than that whiich
tley owed to the King himflf. The Privy Coun-
cil, noithl.!ld:11 E l:c!k:'s rcfrinr t :la, pro-

Q 4 ccci4'

.B e n K ccedxi in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry,

X\ I'. pr!, rjunced him guilty of the crimes of w:,ich he
; il'lhad L.-cn acculcd; but referred it to the King, to

i' jipint what pu nifinnent he fhluld susser.

MEAt; while, many endeavours were used to

bring matrers tr) accnmmcdati.:n. Almost every
day produced some new fchicme of reconcilement;
but through the King's fickleness, the obfcinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they
all proved inBc.'ctual. Both parties appealed to the
people, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accufa-
tions, endeavoured to render each other odious.
In'bol.nc-, Ifcdition, trcalbn, were the crimes with
wh. ich James :iarged the Clergy ; while they made
the p;u!pirs rcibund with complaints of his exceflive
lcnity tov.ards Papists, a:l of til no less excessive
rigour, with which he o ppreh-d the eabliflied
Church. Exas)perated by their bold invecives, he,
at lit, f;r.icnccd Black to retire beyond the river
Spey, an ! t rcfi.e there during his pleasure; and
on:ce nc:re comm.n. ndi the ncmnbers of the tland-
i;'; c(!cl:n'ii to depal-t from Edinburgh, he requted
aiii =,:. 3i'i:l ers; in tii;-: Iin.id:.m to !ifubcribe a bond,
o: 'i!: t.:nij ;v-'s to fi;Lnlt, in the lame manner
a, tl;'r !:I)cis, t; the juriliLdion of the civil
LOI;r:3, in In;attter of a civil nature.
, inrurln; T:rTs ldciive mcffi ure excited :1 the iolnt pas-

', lt'o,, v !h;ch p,.flcfi' dif.ppoi .tcd is:',n.s , artd d' eds

n, Icls vi, clIe t in:' t iml I '

t( l, c J. l'hc2 1

i lihf

.I iirCed 'n iparr to the .rt.lilcs oi' line cour-
tiers, wvlu exi;excic t reap advain:iC :rom the ca-

lami:ics

lamities of their country, or who hoped to lefien the B o o K
authority of the Oftavians, by engaging them in VI11.
holtilities with the church. On one hand, they in- 159'
formed the King that the citizens of Ld'.inbur.h
were under arms every nighr, and had planted a
Rfrong guard round the houses of their ministers.
James, in order to put a flop to this imnginary
inlult on his government, ifued a proclamation,
commanding twenty-four of the principal citizens
to leave the town, within !ix hours. On tle other
hand, they wrote to the Miniit'rs, advising them to
lo(,.l to their own fhfety, as I-Huntly had beln itcret-
ly admitted to an interview with the King, and had
been the author of the severe proclamation a ainfl
the citizens of Edinburgh *. They doubled no
more ot the truth f this intelligence, than the
King hid done of that which he received, and fell
as blindly into tile snare. The Ietter came to tlhir
hands, jull as one of their number was goin; to
mounc the pul:;i t. They relblvtd that h fl;;;u:e Dcem. 7.
acquaint t!.e people of their danger; and I.e pi;int-
ed it, with all the trong colours, which nm.n r;.tu-
r.lly employ, in tic!-ribing any dreadful zind i;ant
calamity. Whena the frr;n wvas over, heliit irctld
the nobles antd gnctlemen to amible in tle Li..',

Tho gh l .:ttcr3 were indu!lrinrlfl , .n, rr:ivacil b' pcrtC.nf,

wh:o i(hc;! botih p;:.ies to pur;uc vi,,!i.t I.:.!ur- ; n'iticr f
thlc;c rcp.rts wvr' :. i -,tlihr dllinLl e

r (i iii, iu tion. A; th:ir

i; ,, ,Irs v.cr: liuppe d to be in iang, r, i ,:tc of the mnr z1.
lous citizen :id Ccterl;;nc'! :o dc'ini! :lir, lv it,. (:',. rmns.
Pn rc. IMe ii. ll

;a. .l rri'.:i c i, l'.i ' :

v.'l:rc , i il ! ;,n

ihle rvAi.L',
i f not 'i i li :c Jir., ;:t 1 .:1i. ,;:.I

B o o K Church. The whole multitude, terrified at whac
VII[. they had heard, crowded thither; they promised

56 and vowed to and by the Church; they drew up

a petition to the King, craving the redress of those
grievances, of which the Clergy complained, and
beseeching him to deliver them from all future ap-
prehensions of danger, by removing such of his
Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the
Protestant Religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen,
two Burgeffcs, and two Ministers, were appointed

The King to prcfcnt it. The King happened to be in the
a clsr. great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of fef-

sion was fitting. The rmar.ncr in which the petition
was delivered, as xv.cl as its contents, offended him.
Hle gave an haughty reply; the petitioners insisted
w ith warmth ; and a promiscuous multitude pressing
in:o the room, James retircd abruptly into another
apartment, and comrmanded the gates to be shut be-
hind him. The d.puries returncd to the multitude,
who were fill afiiembled, and to whom a minister
hadl been racdinr, in teir ab:cnce, the Itory of Ha-
man. When they reported that the King had re-
fu;tc to lillcn to their petiions, the Church was
iilke in a inlo;nctlt wtl; inifc-, thrctnings, execra-
tions, and :ll the uutra , and co;tuLiion of a pouplar
tiiiUtlr. Son;e clled i their arm.;, ifo:ne to bring
(;Li;u il viickeLl lanlliul; Others cried, the t'wvord cr
the .1 'rJ and cf idJ;tn; a l ruihir. out with the
tllol furious impet:-,i(' 7; , luirlruroItd lite 'Tlbootlh,
ti::',.:rti in t lt I ll!; I' n' i ltl, iandl ll:uin:i uding lme of
11: ', Cuiliitllu ' \1; . ill tl 'y' n .i c', tlh.it tlt'y ' iig t
trar tc irii icccs, '1 h

i .i. .';ui'a' tlthe cit, part-
ly by atlihoi'ty, p:I-L'y l!y '. ;r, cncaIcvourcd to q(ucll

the

the tumult; the King attempted to sooth the male. B o o K
contents, by promising to receive their petitions, VIII.
when presented in a regular manner; the Minifess, -I
sensible of their own ralhnefs in kindling luch a 59
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the popu-
lace, subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all
dispersed, and the King returned to tie palace; happy
in having escaped from an insurrection, which,
though the instantaneous and unconcerted effee of
popular fury, hadexpofed his lite to imminent dan-
ger, and was confidered by him as an unpardonable
affront to his authority *.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecon-

tents affenbled, in order to prepare their petition.
The punilhment of the Popilh Lords; the removal
of those Counfcllors, who were fulpected of favour-
ing their perlbns or opinions; the repeal of all the
late as of council, subversive of the authority of
the Church; together with an ad approving the
proceedings of the fLanding council; were the chief
of their demands. But tie King's indignation was
still Ib hil, that the deputies, ciolcen for this pur-
pol, duri not venture, that night, to prelcnt re-
quetis which could not fail of kinlling his rage a-
new. Before next morning, James, with all his
attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the iefIon, Fe iel:r
and other courts of justice, were req.uired to leave a l,)usi''
city, where it was no longr confilcnteither with their eedis iti

.. . i * r * * 1 1 srres-crily a-

fat ty, or their igility to remain; ant the noblemen gaint the
and barons were commaniaded to return to their own''it'"'"

SFO 'fw. ,17, &,. C'i. . 54, &c. Birch. Mcm. z. .:.

houl.cs,

B o o K houtes, and not to reafmrnble without the King's
VIlI. permifilon. The vigour, with which the King at-
'L - ed, fruck a damp upon the spirits of his adverfa-

5 ries. The citizens, fcnfible how much they would

fuffcr by his absence, and the removal of the courts
ofjuffice, repented a!ready of their conduct. The
Miniflers alune retolved to maintain the contest.
They end'avoured to prevent the nobles from dif-
perfing; they inflamed the people by violent invec-
tives against the King; they laboured to procure
fubfcr:ptions to an association for their mutual de-
fence; and conscious what luifre and power the
jun:ioin of io re of the gre.,ter nobles would add to
their caul'e, tlie Miniftc3 of Edinburgh wrote to
Lord ktLtuloton, ti.it the people, moved by the
word of God, anl irovoked by the injuries offered
to th' Church, had. tl; n a:nms; that many of the
nobles h.,d dctermined to p:-orcf t!he Pro.ftant Re-
ligion, which owed its eflabliflinent to the piety
adcl vlour cf their antce!lors; that they wanted only
a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeil for the good caufl-, no less
than his noble birth, entitled him to that honour:
They conjured him therefore not to dithppoint their
h. les and winses, nor to refuse te fffring Church
th.t aid, which flie so much needed. Lord Ha.
n il.on, it:ed of complying with their desire, car-
ried the litter irctdly to the King, whom this new
insult irritated to such a degree, that he commanded
the magiflra:es of Edinburgh inflantly to seize their
Minillers, a minifeft incendiaries, and encouragers
of rbeilion. The magitlrates, in order to regain
the King's ftvour, were preparing to obey; and

the

tl;e Ministers, who saw no other hope ot ffct, fled r, o o R
towards England . VIII.

THIS unsuccessful infurreaion, inf;cadil.fovcrrurn- '.
I 7

T1 Kings

ing, eablifled the King's authority. 'I hie con- i-:.,t
cerned in it were confounded and ditperfd. An 'oc
the reft of his lillujc¶ts, in order to avoid utif i.. ion, Clh'ch.
or to gain his favour, contendtl.d vwhil) ould bc moi' a

i '

forward to execute his vengeance. A Cnvention
of eltates being called, pronounced the la-e infiir-
rection to be high treafun ; o;d.-;incd every Minifttr
to fubfcribc a declaration ,f iis f;lbmn;;on to the
King's juri!licion, in all matters civil and crimi-
nal; impowered rr.agitr.ltcs to c3i;,lmit, inlan.ly,
to prison any Miniaer, wv.o, in hisi ftrmons, should
utter any indecent retflctions ior thi: King'scondu?;
prohibited any Ecclefiallical judicatory to mer,
without the King's licencc; commanded that no
person nhould be elecled a t lii'ratc of l:dinburgh,
for the future, without the King's alppob:tion; and
that, in the nean tinme, the prci"nt miitritcs
should either dilcovcr, and 'nf:ct co!n:ign punifi.
menton the ;oitl':ors of the late tumult, or th. city
itiielft;lould bc- llbjeclcd t all the penalties of that
treaflnablc aition -.

ARM ztE wViththeaiutlority of thcl:1 .icr'Ts, James Arid,

resolve.: to cruni entirely the m iu inuis lfiric of his S, l',, Io '.,,
fubjeas. .-s the clkrgy had , ltt, iveC il''- .
theiir cief crcdit and ilrcngth fl oii the f'vour and ":"l'*
ztal of the citizens of Edinbu!,h, i l'l-l care W;IS

*S 'ti. ;t. CaJ. 5
. 1:a! . . C!' j. '47.

to

B o o K to humble them. Though the magistrates submits
VIII. ted to him in the most abjet terms; though they

7 vindicated themselves, and their fellow citizens,
l 97. from the noft distant intention of violating his roy-

al person or authority; though after the ftri&eft
scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix on them
the ful)icion of premeditated rebellion had been
discovered; though many of the nobles, and such of
the clergy as still retained any degree of favour, in-
terceded in their behalf; neither acknowledgments,
nor intercessions, were of the leaf avail *. The
Feb. . King continued inexorable, the city was declared to

have forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to
be liable to all the penalties oftreafon. The cApital
of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deferred
by its minifers, abandoned by the court ofjuftice,
and proscribed by the King, remained in deflation
and despair. The courtiers even threatened to raze
the city to the foundation, and to ere a pillar
where it sicod, as an everlafling monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guiltof its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who inter-
poifd in their favour, and moved by the continual
M.ir;! 1. blicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-

rizcns fiom the penalties of law, but, at the fame
time, he ftripptl them of their most important pri-
vile:cs; they were neither allowed to elec their
own Magitlrutcs, nor their own Minilters; many
new burlc.s were imposed on them; and a great
Ium of money was xated by way of peace-offer-

* C:,;J. i 14. t Spotfv.434, 14.t

JAMES

JAMES was, mean while, equally afliduous, and B o o K

no less successful, in circumscribing thejurifdiion VIII.
of the Church. Experience had diicovered that to' '

1597.

attempt this, by acts of parliament, and sentences N.ew egu-
of privy council, was both inefrie&ual, and odious. lations wit,

regard to»

He had recourse, now, to an expedient more artful, the church.
and better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclefiatical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the clergy were extreme-
ly indigent, and unprovided of legal stipend; the
ministers in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, not-
withstanding the parity established by the Prefby-
rian govcrnment, had assumed a leading in the
Church, which filled their brethren with envy;
every numerous body of men is uLfceptible of fud-
den and ifrong impressions, and liable to be influ-
enced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by there
considerations, James thought it poflible to gain
the Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to sub-
due. Proper agents were set to work all over the
kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were cm.
ployed; the usurpations of the brethren near the ca-
pital were aggravated; the jealousy of their power,
which was growing in the diatant provinces, was aug-
mented; and two different General Aflemblies were
held, in both which, notwithstanding the zeal and
boldness, w tcir .vith a few leadingClergymen defend-
ed the privilct:,c of the Church, a majority declared
in favour or thl '.l measures which were agreeable to
the King. ;:;r. practices, which had continued
Iince the iordbnmaion, were coindcrnedc; many
points of diciw:lil: :, vwhich had hitherto been reckon-

ed

B o o ed sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the
VI I. licence, with whch ministers difcnurfed of political
~-.a' matters. was restrained; the freedom, with which
I597 they inveighedagaini particularperfons, censured;

fcntences of summary excommunication declared
unlawful; the convoking a General A\ ffLmbly, with-
out the Kini's permiflion, prohibited; and the right
of nominating miniflers, to the principal towns,
vefied in the Crown. Thub, the Clergy themselves
furrcndercd privi'egcs, which it would have been
dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted to
a yoke, more intolerable than any James would
have entured to impo'e by force; while those who
continued to oppose his measures, intlead of their
sor!ner popular topic of the King's violent encroach-
ments on ajurifdi&ion which did not belong to him,
were obliged to turn their outcries against the cor-
ruptions of their own order*.

popih BY the authority of there assemblies, the Popifil
Ld.id par- Earls were allowed to make a public recantation of

their errors; were absolved from the sentence of ex-
communication ; and received into the bosom of the
Church. But, not many years after, they relapscd
into their former errors, were again reconciled to
the church of Rome, and by their apoftacy jufti-
sied, in bome degree, the fears and scruples of the
Clergy with rcgard to their ablblution.

TIrE Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the intcr-
ccfslon of thelf: arciniblics, the liberty of rturniIn

Spotfiv. 43;. Ca.!1 ia, :;.

to

to teir charges iL1 tlxc city. But t i: r%, ?as D o o K
C log'ed in itIch a minner s guslccly .:V.i 2'd t.Ir
POWc:r. InC city w asdv;ded intu Uiit ;X~rl.S

;id

n

th nimibcr o 1

Mn cr s c! oib2 nciu c1~YP

fideity the Kin- c.uld rely vary: : i1el nc w
Pri~l~s ; nd~ thsclc circc~l; ns, atriU~ld LO ;.e .a-
thoricy of the late decrees o tbe C.c:1, corlzi-

j

buted to consirrn that abl'()ItUte dumjinin in

i i-

aslical aairs, which Jaines poldi u ~ the
remainder of his rean.

TiHE King was b intent on nicnv mociing the

Church, thlat t ie othr trazrsaJ(ons of

of is priod

scarce detirve to be r ' OCt v re:
envied by the. other courliers, and sjiitii into fc-
tions amon- thesl1ivCs, rcigncdi zhcir cnimiil1 ;
and the adniniitraition of t'ihe revenue c tm-ig in:.,
its former channel, bc tIe i;, in; nd theic
were deprived of zei benefit o thei rUl. .
frugal oiOV.

held in oriu~(r to i5Thc 1zud d is ad:it
to thce r c' 1tite5 ,.~. 1djr(5 .v rL!"ai::t e 0

~o tel:s ncpil:L I! vgiiP them:. ~ ;.:~?·tb rit u· 3

tis I.p ecourt w: ~cw e O dt,) int1 a
diuce !r i(
,v"r iuvatiC)sl into tbe Church ; but Cn;l-

jrm~'t') t e i'~t1'' i v lc;~&i t',-,e JK iiirs h n II':

V.U~~ittc nIluuon~ Z,

~ n:o tO!i it; rJ;' r:<

lrcn the CAI.;i7 them vct.
arisl':x:ilol:l, a1iI that t.h'e

B o o K pofTefed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere lay-

VIII. men, .;nd many of them temporal Peers, few or
598' none cf the Ecclefiatical order remained to vote in

parliament, and by means of that, the influence of
the Crown was considerably diminished there, and
a proper balance to the power and number of the
nobles was wanting. But the prejudices the nation
had conceived against the name and character of
Bishops, were so violent, that James was obliged,
with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a
design to revive that order. He prevailed therefore
on the commission appointed by last Assembly to
complain to the parliament, that the Church was
the only body in the kingdom drl:itute of its repre-
fentatives in that fpreme court, where it fb nearly
concerned every order to have foine, who were bound
to defend its rights; and to crave that a competent
number of the Clergy hould be admitted, accord-
ing to ancient cultom, to a feat there. In compli-
ance wvith their requelf, an a& was passed, by which
those Miniftcrs, on whom the King hould confer
tie vacant ilhoprics and Abbeys, were intitled
to a vote in parlia::,cnt; and that the Clergy might
ccnaccivC c j. ia;aly on any encroachment on their
I:-;ivi!,:.,s, i i;.s I.ittcd to the General Afitmbly,
to det'riii:l: v.'ha: fpiriiiial jurii(flieion or authority
in ti:e guvernn,.llt of t!ie Church thefi: persons
lioul d iolll'i "'.

''iL;l 1:il-. ; , \ c

, ttilidl it i )o c.irfv matter to

obtain tlhc c' ;n:illrt. !,c. (f the L. cctuiii.llical judica-
torics, in v.!i: h t!lc ai ol parl.lanla;Ci mnet with a

;* Si: .,: . :,
: ' l'.,!. ::'i. Jac, \ I. c. :j

fierce

fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived B o o K
how much lustre this new privilege would reflet VIII.
upon their order; though they were not insensible *8'
of the great acceflion of personal power and dig- 5
nity, which many of them would acquire, by be-
ing admitted into the supreme council of the nation,
their abhorrence of epilcopacy was extreme; and
to that, they sacrificed every consideration of inter-
eft or ambition. All the Ki.ng's profcflions of re-
gard for the present conllitution of the Church did
not convince them of his finceritv; all the devices
that could be invented for rcldraini:;g and circum-
scribing the jurifdiclion of thot:, who cie to be
raited to this new honour, did not dinmirifh their
jealousy and se.r. l' heir o :n experience ha;l taughtr
them, with what infnuating progrcis the I/.carchy
advances, and though admitted at firli with mode-
rate authority, and under specious preternes, how
rapidly it extends its doiinion. " Varniilh over
this cheme, said one of the leading Clergymen,
with what colours you plcail; tclc the intruder
with the uttmof ar:; under all this difuic, I fee
the horns of his mitie." lThe ilnme sentiments pre-
vailed among many of his blctlhretn, and induced
them to rject power, and lionour;, with ai1 mlluch
zeal, as e;er thole of their order courced thlcm.

lany, however, were allured by te hopes of prc-
ferment; the King him.fif and his Mini lers cn-
ployed the fame arts, which hcy had tried f, fiuc-
celsfuil/ lJaft year; and Jfier long dclates, and
much ppolition, the General Alicmbly declared Maroh
that it va:, lawful for Minifcrs to acc.ep of ; iat
n parialnent; that it would be hig!i!y bencfi.i;il ;o

R a tbe

B p o K the Church, to h1':e its ti;

tIII. preme cou:rt; and tlia' i:y- '
I9J nearly equal to t.!c c(,l ;!l I-.cc c.

anciently callecd to triil,hiC r, (l;
from aong the ClrIy fur t' ,

"

manner of their elicion, toel,:cr v ;;, :
to be veRsed in them, were lItf uncecic:c ,
present, and furnified matter of future dl...
ticn *.

1599. As the profpeca of fuccecding to the Crown of
'""e ue"- England drew nearer, Jamcs mu!tiplied precat ons
wi'ti ruc- in order to render it certain. As he was ai.id to
c.e(¢ o ain
a p.ity in many of the Princes of Germany by his marriage,
Li'land. he ent ambassadors extraordinary to their fcvcral

courts, in order to explain the juftnels of his title
to the Englifl throne, and to desire their affilance,
if any competitor should arise to dilpute his un-
doubted rights. Thele Princes readily acknow-
ledged the equity of his claim; but the aid they
could afford hinm was distant and feeble. At the
fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of Kinlofs, his
ambassador at the English court, fblicited Eliza-
beth, with the utmol: warmth, to recognize his
title by some public deed, and to deliver her own
subjects from the calamities, which are occafi'nd
by an uncertain or disputed fuccefl.on. lut ae
had strengthened all the passions, which had, hi-
therto, induced Elizabeth to keei this great quef'-
tion obscure, and udecidecd; and a general a
evalive answer was all that James could obtcin. As
no imprefion could be made on the (C!en, tlic a:n-

Spotfiv. 4. C:,d . 278.

b , ': io-

baflTadr was commanded to found the disposition B o o K
of her l!ibjc&s, and to try what progress he could VIII.
make in ainin them. Bruce poffcffed all the ta- T

Z.:1 . .1~

. ~L599.

lents of icrcfy, judgment, and address, requilite
for conducting a negociation, no less delicate than
importan:. A Miniler of this charaEcer was inri-
tled to the confidence of the Englifl. Many of
the highell ran!: ubofomed themselves to him with-
out reftrve, and gave himn repeated assurances of
their rrluticn to afirt his master's right, in oppo-
fition to cvery pretender *. And as flveral pamph-
lets were cdipei-ed, at this ime, in England, con-
taining objections to his title, James emplyed lome
learned men in his kingdom to answer these cavil-
lers, and to explain the advantages which would
relu.t to both kingdoms, by the union of the
Crowns. These books were eagerly read, and con.
tributed not a little to reconcile the English to that
event. A book published this year, by the King
himself, produced an effect till more favourable.
It was intit!ed Baflicon Doron, and contained pre-
cepts concerning the art of government, addreiicd
to Prince Henry his ton. Notwithiltanding the
great alterations and refinements in national tafle
since that time, we must allow this to be no con-
temptible performance, and not to be inferior to the
works of most cotemporary writers, either in pu-
rity of (lyle or justness of composition. Even the
vain parade of erud.ition with which it abounds,
and which now dilguits us, railtd the admiration of
that age; and as it was lilled with those general
rules, which speculative authors deliver for render-

* Johnitl. z..

R 3 ing

B o o K ing a nation happy, and of which James could dif.
VIII. courfc with great plausibility, though often incapa.
'-" - ble of putting then in practice; the Englilh con-

399. ceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expeced

an increase of national honour and prosperity, under
a Prince so profoundly skilled in politics, and who
gave such a specimen both of his wisdom, and of
his love to his people *.

THE Qpeen of England's sentiments, concerning

James, were very different from there of her sub-
jets. His excelfive indulgence towards the Popish
Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popilh
Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scot-
land at the time of the Reformation, to the poflef-
sion of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap-
pointing him his Ambassador at the court of France;
the applaufc he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doron,
on those who adhered to the Queen his mother,
Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of a
mind alienated from the Protftant religion; and
fufpetcd that he would fuon revolt from the pro-
fecfion of it. These suspicions seemed to be fully

Aecure confirmed, by a dilcovery which came from the
rl'pu.:ir,: Maticr of Gray, who refideg at that time in Italy,
,ll 'hl and who, raither than fiffer his intriguing spirit to

be iile, demeaned hilnlmclf so f.r as to act as a spy
for the LngliTfh court. -le cnveyed to Elizabeth
the copy i. ettecr, written by James to Pope Cle-
ment Vil. in which the King, after many expref-
sions of regard for that pontiff, and of gratitude

* CaJ. >potr. 457.

so

bfr his favours, declared his firm resolution to treatB o o
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in or- VIII.
der to render the intercouri between the court of'
Rome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he59
solicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bilhop
of Vailbn, a Scotfinan, to the dignity of a Cardi-
nal*. Elizabeth, who had received, by another
channel t, some imperfect intelligence of this cor-
refpondence, was filled wihi ju furprize, and im-
mediately dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to in-
quire more fully into the truth of the matter, and
to reproach James for an ation so unbecoming a
Protellant prince. He was no less altonihe:l at the
accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing
but the consciousness of innocence could inspire, a-
firmed the whole to be a mere calumny, and the
letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpo!e
to bring his sincerity in Religion to be lulieilcd.
Elphingfton the Secretary of State denied the mat-
ter with equal solemnity. It came to be known by
a very singular accidcnt, which happen~-l some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth
had received was well founded, though at the fame
time the King's declarations of his own innocence
were perfectly contfinnt with truth. Cardinal Bel-
larmine, in a reply which he published to a contro-
vcrfial treatile, of which the King was the author,
acculed him of having abandoned the favourable
1tniments which he had once entertained of the
Roman Catholic religion, and as a proof of this
quoted his letter to Clement VIII. It was impoffi.
b;e, any longer, to believe this to be a fiction; and

L'aC!d. 333. t ',i;nv. Mirm, vol. i. 37, 52,

: 4 'it

B o o K it was a rmatter too delicate to be passcd over w'.th-

Vii- o'ut li:'ic inquiry. Jam-es immediately examined
-.-. hlihingPLon, and his cont;ion unraveiled thecwhole

m i'ery. Ie acknowlccied that he had fhufiled in
this iett'-r a!.ong olher papers, which he laid before
the )i:l:; to be signed, who i:Lfp.cting no such de-
ceit, ii:!i:r;ic ic tog..hcr with the rcil, and wih-
out l;nowing what it contained; tlht he had no
orth'r moive, ho\vcvr, to tis a.ion, but zc' or
hi's Majc-ivy's lfr:ice ; an.d, by flatterilng the Roman
Cat;oiics v;hill -Io, 0 '..;;:'-nce under t!.e ing's
govcrrnmlent, he in; agr.ncd that he w'as paving the
vw'. fcr his more cal' accfion to the English throne.
Ti': PrIvy Council oai England entertained very dif-
fcrci:c t ntimncnt;s of the Secretary's conduc. In
th..ir opinion, not only the King's reputation had
blcn expofd to reproach, but his lite to danger,
by this rain impoLlure; they even imputed the gun-
pv.ier trcaifun to the rage and diiappointment of
thmi'e ilii'ls, upon finding that the hopes which this
lc;:cr i;:i ,iie'l werc truftrat!ed. The Secretary was
lent a priilbnr in;o Scotland, to be tried ibr high
tre-;'l, . I ; ..e;.L i fjtund hi:n guilty, but, by the

tC.C:1'S i:rcciI' con, he obtained a pardon '.

A' co;!:;; to the account of other hilorians,

J..'i !i;;,,;' :.a;ls no firanger to this corrcfpond-
cl :C v.i.- r',c i'eix:e; and, if we believe them, El-

i:-':I;i :'in; intimidcated by the threats of the

1-. !-,.;:1 C;;:!'il, and deceived by the artifices of
t l'.I' ' 1 ' I u;;,jar, concealed bome circuni;ltancce
inl l;i .l.i'i/ of this tranlftion, and falfilied

' ',:.. ..'. .r; ', 5'7. Johnit. .+,.

others;

others; and, at the expcnce of his own fame, and Bo o K
with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a VIII.
veil over this part of his malter's conduct *. c

1599.

BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter James at

to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's ogaitPs
command, it is certain, that, about this time, James Roman
was at the utmcoi . pains to gain the friendlhip of
the Roman Catholic princes, as a ncceffry precau-
tion towarlds facilitating his accession to the L.nglifh
throne. Lord Home, who was hiifelf a 'apiit,
was entrusted with a tfcret cc;i million to the Pope t;
the Archbiflhcp of Glafguw was an aive inllru-
1ment with thole of his own rligion t. The Pope
cxpreifed such favourable sentiments both of-tiic
King, and of his right to the Crown of England,
that James thought iin)i-!f bound, Ibme years as-
ter, to acknowledge the obligation in a public man-
ner§. Sir James Lindsay nmade great progreis in
gaining the Eng'iilh l';pifts to acknowledge his Ma-
jeity's title. (Js 11 thel intrigues Elizabeth re-
ceived oblcure hints, from di:;ziernt quarters. The
more imperfttly he lknc;w, the more violently fie
liilectcd tlie Ki. g's del;gns; and the natural jca-
louly of her temper increaling with age, ihe oblcrv-
cd his condu_- wi h greater llicitude than ever.

T'LE qu ,J.ioL)n with regard to the leaion and i ,oo.
po;,cr o te rlrclrcentativcs of ih curch, were M'.,' :;.

I'i, rc; ula-

linally deciJctd tlls:; year', b the Cneral Atibly,,. ,,
which met at Montrl. T t a.ic -s c;I lc ,.", ..

* C:'!. .',l. v. , :.V;. i. v .'iIV. ' . . :. 5 .

+ L : . (' . V!. tt7. '?

\\ .' ,, '
. G' D .

B o o K as most convenient for the minitiers of the north,

VIII. among whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And
CrAó although great numbers resorted from the northern

provinces, and the King employed his whole inte-
reft, and the authority of his own presence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with dif-
ficulty agreed on. That the General Aflembly (hall
recommend fix perions to every vacant benefice,
which gave a title to a feat in parliament, out of
whom the King ihall nominate one; that the per-
Jon so elected, aer obtaining his feat in parliament,
Ihall neither propo:i, nor content to any thing there,
that may adtt the inrereit of the church, without
special inftru&ions to that purpose; that he hall
be answerable for his conduct to every General As-
fembly; and submit to its censure, without appeal,
upon pain of infamy and excommunication; that
he fhull difelarge the duties of a Pastor, in a parti-
cular congrega;tion; that he ilall not usurp any ec-
clcliaftical juriiUl itcn, fiperiir to tat of his other
hbethren; that it the church intli': on him the cen-
lirc of dcrrivi,::.,, he fi;ll, therebcy, foricit his Icat
in i'ariiamen ; ia.t bic lli1ll annually rlcgn his com-
rnlilTion to the (cr.:r.il Afti:mbly, whiich may be re-
tc!'- to hi;rx ,

or i, the A fi;nibly, wi htlie Kin's

approb.:ation, i;.l e n.oil:- (Xl'!ie;t iobr the
')rd o the Ci'tc '*. Nothling could be moic
rc)pugnl;t to tlhe idea of eiilo,-),l gvcsnitc.!r,
than the.' r:uiairons. It vwa.; not in coJrl.t ectc
(:f ri;:h':; cti;:;': i ;'i,,:) r!ctir ofiu-e, but of powers
c.intir.dl Iy ;a ton ,'ai ;;i(il, th.t c.:c liliical per-
i'nls were to ) a8;.';:,l cd t) a l;';t in ,'li.* m::st;

"*iey~t(^. ,~^, wy * .-1~. 1.. . , :', ,.

t:,cy

tey were the fepfefentatives, not the superiors of B o o K
the clergy. Destitute of all spiritual authority, even VIII.
their civil jurifdi&ion was temporary. James, how- 6oo
Ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able
to ihake off these fetters, and gradually acquire all
the privileges which belonged to the episcopal order.
The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he con-
tended for, and they opposed the nomination of these
commissioners, not so much on account of the
powers then veifed in them, as of those, to which
it was believed they would soon attain *.

DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an oowry's

unusual tranquillity. The clergy, after many ftrug- con"rpracy*
gles, were brought undergreat fu bjeaion; the Popish
earls were restored to their estates and honours, by
the authority of Parliament, and with the consent
of the church; the ret of the nobles were at peace
among themselves, and obedient to the royal au-
thority; when, in the midst of this security, the
King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by
a confpi'acy altogether unexpeted, and almost in-
explicable. The authors of it were John Ruthvcn,
Earl of Gowry, and his brother Alexander, the
sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
I584. Nature had adorned both these young men,
especially the elder brother, with many accomplifn-
ments, to which education had added its molt ele-
gant improvernents. More learned, than is usual
amongperons of their rank; more religious, than
is common at their age of life; generous, brave,
popular; their colntrrymen, far from thinking them

' ypo;f. 54.

capable

B o o K capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the most
VI1I. sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwith-
L'1o. fianding all these noble qualities, some unknown

motive engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we
adhere to the account commonly received, must be
traninitted to potteriry, as one of the mot wicked,
as well as one of the worst concerted, of which his-
tory makes any mention.

ON the fis:h of August, as the King, who re-

sicdd uring the hunting feaibn in his Palace of
i'aiil.nd, was going out to his sport early in the
mc-rning, he was accofld by Mr. Alexander Ruth-
yen, v;ho, v.ith an ir of great importance, told the
King, ttla the evening before he had met an un-
known nan, of a fuflicious afete&, walking alone
in a by-path, c-" '., brother's house at Perth; and
on lii'i::!l:.'n lim, hd found, under his cloak, a
po :i::. iliA a vast quantity of foreign gold; that
he i.d in.lGi.ately icized both him and his trca-
frc, ,..;:t. \: :iout communicating the mI.tter to any
F-':Jii, iai kt hi;n confirned and bour.nd in a soli-
i, ) i;.i' lic; ;l tihat e thought it his duty to i:n-
par" I!i a ti;gular event, irit of all to his Ma-
jtil . j:i:. *s i:;:c.i!iatcly iulieclcd this unknown
p(r;oi.i i :j : :.- ;i..:i;; g :Frielt, supplied withl so-
reign ci;, i; ori'c:' ti cxcitc new commotions in
the iiJ;:-;; ,..:-i riulvcdt to irnpower the Magi-
lias c i'. r

i call :he person before them, and

i.;.'t-i .r t ,;ii L.I .c .;:culmfrcncs of the s'tory. Ruth-
v;n vi;

A ,i .'ii. t l.l t ;is i L' blu:ion, and with many
ar ,u;ui'; ..: ;:'! ,'-cl ;hs; i; . to ride irccliy to Pcrth,

.. ::
I ' :.. ..:.:: .:-;C.'; v,\ 'li uwn eyes. Mean-

while

while the chace began; and James, notwikh!llnd- e o
ing his paflion for that amusement, could not helip 'i .
ruminating on the strangeness of the tale, and cn 6 oo

t:':.'en's importunity. At last, he called ;im,
:.:d promised when the sport was over, to ftt out:
for Perth. The chace, however, continued long;
and Ruthven, who all the while kept close by tlic
King, was still calling on him to make haste. At
the death of the Buck, he would not allow Janes
to flay till a fresh horse was brought him; and cb-
serving the Duke of Lennox and the Earl of Mar
preparing to accompany the King, he intreated him
to countermand them. This James refulfed; a.d
though Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well
as the apparent prerurbation in hiswhole behavicur,
railed some suspicions in his mind; yet his own cu-
riofity, and Ruthven's folicitaticns, prevai.ed on
him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of
the town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his bro-
ther of the King's arrival, though he had already
dispatched two messengers for that purpose. A a
little diffance from the town, the Earl, attended by
several of the citizens, met the King, who had
only twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and ;rmbarraffed, and was at ns,
pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for
the bad fare with which he treated his gueffts. When
the King's repast was over, his attendants were ltd
to dine in another room, and he being left almost
alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
time to go to the chamber where the unknown
person was kept. James commanded him to bring

si~~ ~~Sir

B o o K Sir Thomas Erikine along with them; bur, infltad
VIII. of that, Ruthven ordered him not t follow: And
6-' conducting the King up a stair-case, and then
6. through several apartments, the doors of which be

locked behind him, led him at last into a small
study, in which there flood a man clad in ar-
mour, with a sword and dagger by his fide. The
King, v.h) expe&ed to have found one disarmcd
and butlnu, startcd at the fight, and enquired if this
was the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagger
from the girdle of the man in armour, and holding
it to the King's breast, "Remember, laid he, how

unjustly my father suffered by your command,

« you are now my prilbner; submit to my disposal
, without refillance, or outcry; or this dagger
" fball inrfantly avenge his blood." James expos-
tulated with R uthven, intreated, and flattered him.
The man, whom he found in the study, stood, all
the while, trembling, and difiayed, without cou-
rage either to aid the King, or to second his ag-
greiFor. Ruthven pro elted that if the King raised
no outcry, his lilt should be safe; and moved by
fomc unknown ralbn, retired in order to call his
brother, leaving to the man in armour the care of
the King, whom lie bound by oath, not to make
any noise during his abelncc.

VWHIlt the King was in this dangerous situation,

his attendants growirg impatient to know whither
he had retired, one or Gowry's attendants entered
the room lhflily, and told them that the King had
juil rode away -towards Falkland. All of them
raihc.l out intv the flrec t; and the Earl, in the ut-

mot;

most hurry, called for their horses. But, by this B o o &
time, his brother had returned to the King, and VIII.
flearing that now there was no remedy, he behoved 6'
to die; offered to bind his hands. Unarmed asJames
was, he scorned to submit to that indignity; and
closing with the assassin, a fierce struggle ensued.
The man in armour flood, as formerly, amazed and
motionless; and the King dragging Ruthven to-
wards a window, which during his absence he had
persuaded the person with whom he was left, to open,
cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Treason
Treason! Help! I am murdered !" His attendants
heard, and knew the voice; and saw, at the window,
a hand which grasped the King's neck with violence.
They flew with precipitation to his aliftance. Lennox
and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the prin-
cipal stair-case, where they found all the doors ihut,
which they battered with the utmost fury, endea-
vouring to burst them open. But Sir John Ramsey,
entering by a back-ftiir, which led to the apartment
where the King was, found the door open; and
rulhing upon Ruthvcn, w ho was still frugglingwith
the King, Itruck him twice with his dagger, and
tlruft him towards the Ilair-cafe, where Sir Thomas
Erskine and SirHugh Herreis met, and killed him;
he crying with his lalt breath, Alas! I am not to
blame for this ation." During this fcuffie, the man,
who had been concealed in the itudy, escaped un-
oblerved. Together with Ranifey, Erikir.e, and
Herreis, one Willon, a ootman, entered the roomn
where the King wvas, and before they had time to
shut the door, Gowrie rulhed in with a drawn sword
in each hand, followed by ven of his attendants

well

B o o K well armed, and with a loud voice threatened them
VIII. all with instant death. They immediately thrult
..'1. ' the King into the little tutiy, and Ihutting the door

upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwithstanding
the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced
Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having re-
ceived several wounds, immediately fled. Three of
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the con-
flict. A dreadful noise continued still at the opposite
door, where many persons laboured in vain to force
a parEge; and the King being aflured that they were
Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened
on the inside. They ran to the King, whom they
unexpectedly found safe, with transports of congra-
tulation; and he, failing on his knees, with all his
attendants around him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, how-
ever, was not yet over. The inhabitants of the
town, whose Provofl Gowrie was, and by whom he
was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the
hloulc, threatening revenge, with many insolent and
opprobrious speeches against the King. James en-
dcavoured to pacify theenraged multitude, by speak-
ing to them from the window; he admitted their
magiltrates into the louse ; related to them the
n hole circumllances of the facR; and, their fury ub.
filing by degrees, tl.ev dispersed. On searching
the Earl's pockets, ibr papers, that might dilcovcr
his dlefigns and accomplices, nothing was found but
a finall parchment bag, full of magical characters,
and worus of incl:antment; ant if we may believe

the

the account of the conspiracy published by the King,B o o
4 while there were about him, the wound of which VIII.
" he died, bled not; but as soon as they were ta-' ..
" ken away, the blood guffied out in great abun-
,' dance." After all the dangerous adventures of
this buly day, the King returned in the evening to
Falkland, having committed the dead bodies of the
two brothers to the custody of the Magistrates of
Perth.

NOTWITHSTANbDIN the minute detail which the The motis.

of ile cor.-

King gave of all the circumstances of this confpi-rrriators
racy against his life, the motives which induced the e, fiy
two brothers to attempt an acion so detestable, the
end they had in view, and the accomplices, on
whose aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
The words of Ruthven to the King gave rome
grounds to think, that the desire of revenging their
father's death had instigated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it
is scarce probable that they could impute them to
the King, whose youth and fubjestion, at that
time, to the violence of a fation, exempted him
from being the obje& of resentment, on account of
afions which were not done by his command.
James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs
which the father had suffered, by benefits to his chil.
dren and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour,
acknowledged it with the warme exprefflons of
gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being
convited of alitting him in this afault on theKing's
servants, were xecuteo at Perth; but they could
give no light into the motives, which had plronmp-

VOL. 11. S ed

B o o K ed their matler to an ation so repugnant to thee
VIII. acknowledgments. Diligent earch was made for
ó00h the person concealed in the study, and from him

great discoveries were expeced. But Andrew Hen-
dcrfon the Earl's steward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as
much a firanger to his maPter's design as the reft
and tho' placed in the study by Gowrie's command,
he did not even know for what end that fation had
been assigned him. The whole tranfa&ion remain-
ed as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two bro-
thers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme
without either confident or accomplice, with unex-
ampled secrecy as well as wickedness.

S'rot'se5 AN accident, no less strange than the other cir-
.Jicoveries contcrlning cumftances of the fiory, and which happened nine

years after, discovered that this opinion, however
plausible, was ill founded; and that the two bro-
thers had not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among fe-
veral persons that he knew ome secrets relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought the
matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be fcized. IIs confefion was partly voluntary,
and partly forced from him by torture. According
to his account, Logan of Reftalrig, a gentleman of
an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was
privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. IRuthvcn, he l.id, had frequent
interviews with him, in order to concert the plan of
their operations; the Farl had corresponded with
him to the e ur,:ol; and one Bour, I.oan's

i.[-in

confident, was trusted with the secret, and car ied n o o K
the letters between them. Both Logan and our v Ir
were now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had 6oo
read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan, (;n
that occasion; and in confirmation of his telimo-
ny, several of Logan's letters, which a curofity fa-
tal to himlflf hau prompted Sprot to eal fr)m
among Bour's papers, were produced *. Thcfe
were compared, by the privy cou,.cil, with pa-
pers of Logan's hand writing, and the refem-
blance was manifest. Perons of undoubted credit,
and well qualified to judge of the matter, examined
them, and swore to their authenticity. Death itself
did not exempt Logan from prorecution, his bones
were dug up, and tried for High Treaibn, and by
a sentence, equally odious and illegal t, his lands

vwerc

Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, anot:cr

to Gowrie, and three of them without any directirn; nor coil
Sprot discover the name of the peifon to whom they were wiit.
ten. Logan gives him the appellation of Right IloucurIa/c
It appears from this, however, and from other words ii, the h t-
ter, Crora. 9;. that there were 'cveral persons privy to the con-
fpiracy. The date of the fill letter is July igts . Mr. Ruth.
ven had communicated the ma:ter to Logan o;l!y five d.yi I1e
fore. Ibid. It appears from the origi:al .fm,:olsf I ,.;"r.:'ir,'l
againlt Logan's heirs, that Bour, though h had cettcis ad-
dressld to him with regard t a conljfiracy eq.!;;i da.; rous
ant important, was (b illiterate that he cou;it I::;: cid. "J i-
" cobus Bour, litcrarum prorlils inalu, diit GcoPii npcra in
" legendis omnibus fcriptis ad em n;idi, vel p rrileitils,
* utebanur." ''his is atogcther llrir ge: and nttliinf t:ut rhe
capricious charader of Logan can account fur l:ii cliufinl fiuch a
cunfident,

t By the Rotnn law, persons guilty of the crme of Hi ::,
Treason mright be tried even after death. T'i;s p.ra&ice was

S A uprQpt.

B o o Kwere forfeited, and his posterity declared infamous;
VIII. Sprot was condemned to be hanged for misprision

6 of
trafon. He adhered to his confefllon to the last,

and having promised, on the scaffold, to give the
fpcators a sign in confirmation of the truth of

adopted by the Scot:, without any limitation, Parl. 1540 . 9c. 9
But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper rcteritions,
by an aft A. D. 42z. which has never been printed. The
words of it are, " And because the said Lords (i. e. the Lords
of Articles) think the said .tt (viz. in 15;o) too general,
ard prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore ftatutea
and ordains that the aid a flall have no place in time coming,
but againa the heirs of them that noterioufly commit or hall
commit lefe maj( fy againit the King's person, againl the realm
for averting the fame, and againl them that hall happen to be.
tray the King's arm: allenarly, and being notcurly known in their
time; and the heirs of thcfe persons to be ca!led and judged
within five years after the dcceafe of the fail persons committers
of the aid crimes; and the siid time being bypall, the said
heirs never to be pursued for the fame." The sentence against
Logan violated this flatut in two particular?. He was not no-
tourly known during his life to be an accomplice in the crime
for which he was tried; and his heir was called in question
more than five years atter his death. It is remarkable, that this
i2ttute seems not to have been .atended to in the parliament
which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumnifiince deserves
notice. As it is a maxim of jultie that no pcrlon can be tried
in absence; and as lawyers .re always tenacious cf tiher fornns,
and often ablurd in their devices for preserving them, ti.cy con
trived that in any proccfs again.! a dead person, his cc;pl or
bones iha!l be preented at he bar. Examples cf his occur fre.
quently in the Scottilh hillury. After the battle of Cor;ichi.e,
the dead body of the I'.rl of liuntly was icfcteJ in larlia.
ment, before sentence of Jirfaatlu; was pronounlced aga;ill
him. 'or the fame realon the bodies of Goo'rie a;d ilis brc-
ther were preterved, in order that thly might be Fproduccd is
parliament. Logan's bone., in compliance with tile fame rule,
were dug up. Mackenz. Crimn. Lv. Book . Tit. (S. . a.

whiat

what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands,B o o K
after he was thrown off the ladder by the execu- VIII.
tioner *. t O

z 600.

* It appears that Archbilhop Spotfwood was prfeent at the

execution of Sprot. Cram. 1 t 5: and yet he eems to have given
no credit to his difcovcries. The manner in which he speaks of
him is remarkable, " Whether or not I hould mention the ar-
" raignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at
" Edinburgh, I am doubtfill. His confefion, though volun-
' tarv and conllant, carrying Imall probability. The man de-
' poed, &c. It seemed to be a very fition, and a mere in-
' vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he hew the
" letter, nor could any wile man think that Gowrie, who went
' about the trcalon so ecretly, would have communicated the
" matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 5o8.
Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which
Logan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
ticity of his letters. He himself was probably present in par-
liament at the trial. The Earl of Dunbar, of whom he always
speaks with the highet refpea, was the person who directed
the process against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against
the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithstanding all there circum-
ltances, is furpriling. Sir Thomas Hami:ton, the King's advo-
cate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, repre.
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convin-
cing; and in an original letter of his to the King the 2 ft of June
:0o9. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the manner in
i hich the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on.

" When the probation of the summons was referred to the

Lords of Articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one voice,
th. (aid fammons to be so clearly proved, that they fecmed to
contend who hould be able most zealously to cxprefs the ftif-
taction of his heart, not only by the moRt pithy words, but by
te:lrs of joy; diverse of the b t rank contcflng, that that here.
of they doubted at their entry into the houle was now to ma-
iiif'.l, that they behoved to efleem them trnitors, who should
ally longer refute to declare their auIrcd rcfalution of the truth
of that trealcn."

S 3 Bur

I o o K BUT though it be thus unexpecedly discovered

VI! 1'. that Gowrie did nor act without associates, little ad-
Co. ditijr.! ighr is thron, by this dilcovery, on the

mo'v:-s and intention of his condt&. It appears
ainmo; incredible that two young men of such dif
tin,u:lhe I virtue, flhuld revolt all at once, from
their dut, ad attempt a crime so atrocious, as the
mur'er of their Sovereign. It appears fill more
im 'ib.,ble, that they hould have concerted their
in;cirtaking with so little foresight and prudence.
f tihcy intended that the deed hould have remain-
e.t concealed, they could not have chosen a more
i nproper fctne for executing it than theirown house.
If they intended that Henderson should have struck
the blow, they could not have pitched on a man
rore dellitute of the courage, that must dire& the
hand of an affallin; nor could they expect that he,
unoiilirited, and unacquainted with their purpotc,
would venture on such a desperate action. If Ruth-
ven meant to lab the King w.th his own hand, why
did he withdraw the dagger, after it was pointed at
his breast ? How could he leave the King, after such
a plain declaraion of his intention ? Was it notpre-
polter.)us to commit him to the keeping of such a
timid and false associate, as Henderlbn ? For what
pur; o!e di.i he wate time, in binding the hands ofan
u:;3r:ned n.n, whom he might ealily have dispatched
with ihis swor-d ? Had Pr,)vidence permitted them
to c 1rbrue their hands in the blojd of their Sove-
rci.n, whati. a.vantage coldd have accrued to them
by ; is dItilh ? ar:d what clinis or prcteniions
cuUtd L:cy lavc opposed to the rights of his chil.

7 drcn ?

dren * ? Inevitable and instant vengeance, together B o o K
with perpetual infamy, were the only consequences VI.
they could expea to follow such a crime. 6 -

1 6oo.

ON the other hand, it is impoflible to believe that

the King had formed any design against the life of
the two brothers. They had not incurred his in-
dignation, by any crime; and were, in no degree,
the obje&s of his jealousy or hatred tt; nor was he of

a

* It has been affirted, that, in consequence of the King's

death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
of England, as the son of Dorothea Stewart daughter of Lord
Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce from
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third hulband.
Burnet HiR. of his own times. But this afertion is ill-founded.
It appears, from undoubted evidence, that Lord Methven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen
Margaret, but of Janet Stewart, Lord Methven's second wife, a
daughter of John Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though
Gowrie had really been descended from the blood royal of Eng.
land, the King at that time had a son and a daughter; and be-
fides them, Lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of Charles Earl of
Lennox, had a preferable title to the Crown of England.

t Sir Henry Nevillc, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, im-

putes the death of the two brothers to a cause not mentioned by
any of our hillorians. " Out f Scotland we hear that there
is no gcod agreement, but rather an open diffidence betwixt the
King and his ile, and many are of opinion that the discovery
of C.me affettion betcen I: er .rnd the Earl of Gowrie's brother
(who was l.lild wht ihini) wa, the trucst caulk and motive of
that tragedy." Wins. MLnt. vol. i. 274. Whether the follow-
in, p;,ln'ah in N ihich:i;,'s Ic:;'r be any confirmation of th;it
suspicion, i fubniit:cd to the reaJer. In his letter Sbpt. 2z,
1602, he mentions the return of Gowric' to younger brothers
into Scotl;;nJ, ::J a., "* The coming it. of thfcu two, and

b 4 i.c

B o o K a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for rah and des.
VIII. perate valour, as to have attempted to murder them
1oo. in their own house, where they were surrounded

with many domestics, he only with a slender and
unarmed train; where they could call to their assist-
ance the inhabitants of a city, at the devotion of
their family, while he was at a distance from all aid;
and least of all would he have chosen for his aflo-
ciates, in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and
the Duke of Lennox, the former connected in close
friendship with the house ofGowrie, and the latter
married to one of the Earl's sifters.
A conjee. WHICHSOEVER of thee opposite systems we em-

.rin the brace; whether we impute the intention of murder

iltetion of to Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficulties
fator. arise, and we are involved in darkness, mystery, and

contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole
conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by
deriving it from a more remote cause, we may dif-
cover it to be less criminal.

the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and
furnishing M s. Beitrix [h:ir ; ] with luch information as
Sir Thomas Er i c has given, hth bred great suspicion in the
Kin; ot Sco s :hat :rey come not in but upon some dangerous
plot." In ;rnother letter. Ja uarv , 1603. "' The day of
writing my lall, ;rs. bcltrx i:uthi en was brought by the Lady
Pa l;, and Mrs. of Angus. a one of their gentlewomen into
the court in the evn.,li. ain;.! llowed in a chamber prepared for
her by the Qjern'; dri':ion, where the Queen had much time
an c nfeence with her. Of this the King got notice, and
hewt. rd his d in e tir-r.of to the (Q2en, gently reproving her
for it, and ex;iinirig q(uieily of the (.ueen's fcivants of the
fame, and of ,,tjrr inaters thereunto betlunging, with such dif-
ctetian and iccrccy as requires such a matter."

To

To keep the King of Scots in continual depen- B o o K

dance, was one great obje& of Elizabeth's policy. VIII.
In order to this, he sometimes oothed him; and 'L,
sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites;
and when he failed of attaining her end by these
means, he encouraged the Clergy to render any ad-
ministration he diftrufled unpopular, by decrying
it, or stirred up some fac.ion of the nobles to op-
pose, and to overturn :t. They, unacquainted with
the arts of u .u.cminin a Minitry by intrigues,
had recourse to the ruder pratice of rendering
themselves mnarers of the King's person, that they
might thereby obtain the directions of his councils.
Thote nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of
Ruthven, were instigated, and supported by her.
Bothwell, in all hi. wild attempts, enjoyed her pro-
tecion, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
con.iecions which James had been forming of late
with the Roman Catholic princes, his secret nego-
cia:;on. in England with her fubjeds, and the max-
ims by which he governed his own kingdom, all
contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded
some great revolution in Scotland to be approach-
ing, and it was her interest t prevent it. The
Ear! of Gowrie was one of the molt powerful of the
Scottish nobles, and descend,. J from ancettors warm-
ly attached to the Englilh intcreft. He had adopt-
ed the fame system, and blieved the welfare of his
country to be in1cparably connected with the ubfif-
tence of he alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his residence at Paris, he had contracted an
intimate friendship with Sir Henry Neville, the

Queen's

B o o K Q3ueen's ambaflador there, and was recommended
VIII. by him to his court, as a person of whom great
_.,.. use might be made *. Elizabeth received him, as

he passed through England, with diftinguiihed
marks of refipea and favour. From all these cir-
cumftances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of
the conspiracy againit the King was formed at that
time, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevail-
ed in that age, and from the letters of Nicholson,
Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to be
delfitute f foundation. An English ship was ob-
Iervcd hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the
frith of Forth. The Earl's two younger brothers
tied into England, after the ill success of the confpi-
racy, and were proteced by Elizabeth. And James
hinfelf, though he prudently concealed it, took
great umbrage at her behaviour. None, however,
o)f Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt
the King's person, but only to circumscribe his au-
thi.rity, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the furcti safe-guard of her own, and restrained the
Popish pretenders to her Crown, and their abettors,
from dcllcrate ttempts, to which their impatience
and b!igotry might, otherwise, have urged them on.
To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sove-
IrLin, would, on her part, have been an a of the
u;moit imprudence. Nordoes thisliem to have been
the intcntion of the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven,
firit of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
w:ti:out any attendants. When thei proved more
snlierouc .i;xl was cxpcJed, the Earl employed a

* Vinw. i . '.ra-

firatagem in order to separate them from the King, B o o K
by pretending that he had rode away towards Falk- VIII.
land, and by calling hastily for their horles, that" "
they might follow him. But hutting James up,
nean while, in a dillant corner of the house, and by
attempting to bind his hands, their defin teems to
have been rather to fieze, than to assassinate him.
And though Gowrie had not colletctd his followers,
so as to have been able to detain him long a prifo-
ner, in that part of the kingdom, by open force,
he might soon have been conveyed aboard the Eng-
lifh hip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and
he might have been landed at Faft-Cattle, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many oblcure
hints in his letters, tome rendezvous of the confpi-
rators was to be held. Amidt the furprize and ter-
ror, into which the King must have been thrown by
the violence offered to him, it was extremely natu-
ral for him to conclude that his life was fought. It
was the interest of all his followers to confirm him
in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
to add to the importance and merit of their own
services. And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid-
ed by the credulity and wonder, which the con-
templation of any great and tragical event, when
not fully understood, is apt to ipire, augmented
the whole tranfation. On the olhic hand, the ex-
travagance and improbability of tie c;rcuml!anccs,
w'icli were a:idcd, detra&ed from the recl;t (,i
thole, which really happened; and cen fiirillcd
pretences for calling in qucflion the truth of the
v.lholc conlpiracy.

THE

B o o K THE account of what had happened at Perth
VIII. reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy
60 council commanded the Ministers of that city in-

Many dif- ftantly to aflemble their people; and after relating
believe the to them the circumstances of the conspiracy formed
account
published againlt the King's life, to return publick thanks to
by thc
King. God, for the protecion which he had so visibly as-

forded him. But as the first accounts transmitted to
Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and while the cir-
cumftances of the confpir:cy were but imperfetly
known, and the paflions which it excited firongly
felt, were indiftint, ex .gerated, and contradictory,
the Ministers laid hold of this; and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's
lafety, they refused to enter into any detail of par-
ticulars, or to utter from the chair of truth, what
appeared to be still dubious and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edin-

burigh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the publick cross, in which he recited all the circum-
lances of the conspiracy; though James himflf, in
their hearing, conlirmeld l.is account; though he
commanded a narrative of the whole tranlfaion to
be publiflbed; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, Itill continued incredulous,
and unconvinced. Their high esteem of Gowrie,
theirjealoufy of every part of the King's conduct,
added to ome falle and many improbable circum-
flances in the narrative, not only led them to fil'-
pecl the whole, but gave their iufpici,)ns an air of
credibility. But at length, the Kin, partly by

iarz1-

arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of B o o t
them, ecpt Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they VIII.
were convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He 6g.
could be brought no further than to declare, that
he reverenced the King's account of the tranfation,
but could not lay that he himself was persuaded of
the truth of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a
single man would have been little regarded, but as
the fame fpiric of incredulity began to spread among
the people, the example of one, in so high reputa-
tion for integrity and abilities, was extremely dan-
gerous. The King was at the utmost pains to
convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it impof-
fible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his
benefice, and after repeated delays, and many at-
tempts towards a reconcilement, banished him the
kingdom *.

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded Proceed-

r. ings of ar-

by any scruples of this fort. The dead bodies ofliae,,,.
the two brothers were produced there, according to ,rpir
law, an indictment for High Trealbn was preferred tor.
against them; witnesses were examined; and, by
an unanimous sentence, their estates and honours
were forfeited; the purniflment due to Traitors
was inflicted on their dead bodies; and as if the pu-
nifhment hitherto in use did not exprels sufficient de-
teftation of their crimes, the parliament enacted that
the surname of Ruthven fliould be abolilhed; and
in order to preserve the memory of the King's mi-
raculous escape, and to declare the sense which the

* Spots. 461, &c. Ca!d. S. 39, &c.

nation

B o o K nation had of the divine goodness, to all future ages;
VIII. appointed the firth of August to be observed, annu-
'00' ally, as a day of publick thanksgiving .

THOUGH

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King

published a dicourje of thcir v.:le and wunatural cofpirary again/
his life. In the year 1713, George Earl of romcrtie publilh-
ed an " H:forical account of the conspiracy by the Earl of
" Gowrie, and Robe t Logan of Realrig, againR King James
" VI." He seems not to have seen the account which
the King himself had given of that matter, and borrows the
whole hiltorical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but
he has extracted from the public records the depositions of the
.itnefres produced by the King's Council, in order to make
gcod the charge againll the two brothers, and Logan their ao-
&iate. From these two treati(es our knowledge of all the mate-
rial crcumftauces of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence
\vhi'l they contain, one would exipce to be authentic and de-
cii've. An account of a fat, lill recent, published by royal
au;hority, and the original depofi:ions of persons examined in
prc:nace of the highett court in the nation, ought to convey a
degree of evidence seldom attained in hillorical relations, and to
e.xclude all lemaini:g doubt and uncertainty. But as every thir.g
\; i'.h rct:rd to this tranfaaion is dark and problematic:l, the
Kin''s account and the depositions of the witnefies not only vary,
bu: contraldii each other in o many circumllance, that much
rc't:: is lill left for hesitation, and hiltorical fcepticifhi. Thc
tciimonv of' Ienderfon is the fuller and nmotl important, but in
'.' Trai rarticulars lle King's account anid is are contradictory.
i. A;.crd.ii:g to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was
'. :'.i:,- :',e (!.. er at his breall, " the fcl:wv in the tudyv 'lond
r'.:;r arnnd tcmblin,." Disc. 17. Bujt llenderfn sys that

.c i'n,elf srcliled the a-.er out of Mr. Ruthven's hiands. D;fc.

C

;. :: !'. 5 '. Hnderiun likewise boalitl to his w f that he
lh..,d t.it 'il.' tc l the I;ing from tcing llabbcd. ifc.
-:. Ci,.'r... ;. 11. The I;ing arilrts th;:t lcnderfon opened
:.: .* Uil,:ov du'ir' Mr. Ruilive,'s abfencce. I. l)fc. 3. Hcrilr-
. ..c)!: :';:;!: h; was ony at.empti)g to open it when r.

Kuthv.

THOrGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden B o o K

and a great alarm, it was followed by no confe- VIII.
quences of importance; and having been concerted 6
by the two brothers, either without any aflociates, EIl:'scon-

or firr- a-

gaint Eii.
za!:ctl.

Ruthven returned, and that during the firuggle between the
King and him, he opened it. Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 5:.
111. If we may believe the King, the fellow in the ludy lloo,'.
during the firuggle, behind the King's back, inative and treml'-
ling all the time. Dic. 27. But Henderson affirm , that he
fna:ched away the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to
bind the King; that he pulled back Ruthven's hand, hile ;ce
was endeavouring to flop the King's mouth, and that he opcnce
the window. Disc. S4. Crom. 5z. IV. By the King's account,
Mr. Ruthven left him in the lludy, and went away in crdcr to
meet with his brother, and the Earl came up te riir for :;c
fame purpose. Dire. z3. Hcnderfon depoes, that whten !Mr.
Ruthven left the King, " he believes that he did not pals fro m
the door." Crom. 5 . It is apparent both from the it.a:iin c,:
the house, and from other circumitances, that there cou!.l nr.
pofibly have been any interview between the bLcillcrs a this
time. Disc. z3.

Henderson was twice examined, firll at Falkland before ti:e

privy council in Augulr, and next at Edinburgh bfore the par-
liament in November. Not to mention tome lcllr variations
between there depositions, we hall point out two which re r-
markable. In his firl deposition Mr. Henderfl relates t!:e mclt
material circumllance of the whole in tcefe words. " MNr. Rut!h-
,y ven pulled out the deponent's dagger, and held the rime to
4' his Majelly's breafl, faying, rcecmlcr rfrwlfather's ;,::,-
" de/r; you t/iall ncv die for it, ;ai;d miingii to .is Iliilcfi's
" heart, wi:h the dagger, t!he dclronnt threw thie fame out of
" IMr. Ruthven's hands, ad (wore that as (;odl litnl judge his

boul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained :he c agr in hs
hand, the space a man may ;on si.\ I!p. he wou!i have llric.
ken the King to the hillt wi;il it." ilc. a' . at t iis f.
cond ex;minatin ' varied fr.: t!iis in tWU nma:viil c:r:rm

laq :iCs .

B o o K or with such as were unknown, and chose to remain

VIII. so, the danger was over. as oon as discovered. But
601 not long after, a conspiracy broke out in England

flances. Firfi, the words whiLh he at that tme Fut in Mr. Ruth-
ven's mouth while he held he dgger at the Kirg's breast are,
" Sr, you rntf le my rif/o;tr ; remnrem r ox myfatrer's diath."
Secondly, when he threatened him with death, it was only to de-
ter him from raking any noile, "' Holdjour tngue, or y Chris
"ycu' alall i." 2. In his :R deposition, the words of Mr.
Ruthven when he returned to the chamber where he had left the
Kin, are, '" Tsre is no r:.-;, ly God you maui die.' But in
his second deposition, " By God there is no remedy, and of-
" sered to bind his Majcity's hands." Crom. 5t. 'Ihe mate
rial wrds yu rzu d are omitted. The sirs deposition seems
plairly to intimate that i: was Ruthven's intention to murder the
King. The eccr.d would lead us to conclude that he had no
other design than to de:ain him as a prisoner.

There are likewfe ome remarkable contradiions in the tef-

timonies of the other witnefe. ;. In the dilcourfe publified
by authority, it is infinuted that the tumult of the inhabitants
was rifed aainft the King, and that it required ome art to
pacify them. Dire. 32. Ti:e Duke of Lennox confirms this id
hii dpofition. Crom. 44. An a of privy council fummona
ing the Magiltrates of Peril to anfrer for that riot is fill extant.
And vet Andrew Roy, one of the baillies of the town, depofet
that he himf-ii raised the peop!e, and that they took arms in
order to afiit the King. Cow. 66. a. Hcnderfon deposes that
he ave an evasive ani;,er to Mr. John Moncrief, who en-
qtired herb he had been thit morning, because the Earl had
cj..nn;ar,(cl ilmn not to let any man kow that he had been at
Fa'kln. Dicr. 5S. Moncrief dofoes to the fame purpose.
Cron. 64.. And yec George IHay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul,
and Char.CLllor of Scotland, and P'eter Hlay, depoli that the
Earl, in thlir preecnce, acd Ilei.dctin, Whom he found
wihh thl King a: Falkland"' Croin. 70, 71. Which question
fcnms to prove that he did r.: a: at k;ccping that journey a
lecret.

againc

against Elizabeth, which, though the firR danger B o o K
was inRfantly dispelled, produced tragical effects, VIII.
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal' 6*'
and unhappy. As James was deeply interested in
that event, it merits our particular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided

between two powerful factions, which contended
for the supreme direction of affairs. The leader of
the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Effex; Sir
Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the
mos accomplilhed, and the most popular of all the
Englilh nobles; brave, generous, affable; though
impetuous, yet willing to liften to the councils of
those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an im-
placable enemy; a friend no less constant, than
warm; incapable of disguising his own sentiments,
or of misrepresenting those of others; better fitted
for a camp, than for a court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the administration,
with a spirit which scorned the second, as below his
merit. He was soon diftinguilhed by the Queen,
who, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred
on him, even in his earlielt youth, the highest ho-
nours. Nor did this diminifli the esteem and as-
fecion of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity,
he was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and
the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a fa-
ther, deeply killed in all its arts, was crafty, infi-
nuating, indultrious; and though pofeflfed of ta-
lents, which fitted him for the highest offices, he

VOL. II. T did

B o o K did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
VIII. but availed himself of every advantage, which his
601 own address, or the mistakes of others afforded him.

Two such men were formed to be rivals, and ene-
mies. Eflex despised the arts of Cecil, as low and
bale. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared
to be presumption and folly. All the military men,
except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Most of the cour-
tiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners more nearly
resembled their own.

His corre- As Elizabeth advanced in years, the firuggle be-
pondcehee
with the tween there fations became more violnt. Effex, in
sioith order to strengthen himself, had early courted the

friendship of the King of Scots, for whose right of
succession he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correspondence both with him and with his
principal Ministers. Cecil, devoted to the Queen
alone, rose daily to new honours, by the afliduity of
his services, and the patience, with which he expect-
ed the reward of them. While the Earl's high fpi-
rit and impetuosity sometimes exposed him to checks
from a Mistress, who, though partial in her assec-
tion toward him, could not easily bear contradic-
tion, and conferred favours often unwillingly, and
always lowly. His own Solicitations, however, fe-
conded maliciously by his enemies, who wished to
remove him at a distance from court, advanced him
to the command of the army employed in Ireland,
against Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieute-
nant of that kingdom, with a commiflion almost
unlimited. His fucccfs in that expedition, did not
equal either his own promises, or the expectations

'of

ofElizabeth. The Queen, peevish from her difap- B o o K
pointment, and exalperated against Effex by the ar- VIII.
tifices of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full '6.
of accusations and reproaches. These, his impa-
tient spirit could not bear, and, in the first transports
of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part
of his army into England, and, by driving his ene-
mies from the Queen's pretence, to reinstate him-
self in favour, and in power. But upon more ma-
ture thoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and
setting fail with a few officers, devoted to his per-
son, landed in England, and postcd dire&ly to court.
Elizabeth received him, without any symptom either
of affection or of difplcaure. By proper complian-
ces and acknowledgments, he might have regained
his former ascendant over the Queen. But he thought
himself too deeply injured to submit to there. Eli-
zabeth, on the other hand, determined to subdue
his haughty temper; and though her severity drew
from him the most humble letters, he confined him
to the Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commit
fioners to try him, both for his contdua during his
government of Ireland, and for leaving that king-
dom without herpermiflion. ly their l:lnrence, lhe
was suspended from all his offices, except that of
Master of the horse, and continued a , rioncr dur-
ing the Queen's pleasure. Sarisfied with having
mortified his pride thus far, E!izabc:lh id: not ill-
ser the sentence to be recorded, and ifon after al-
lowed him to retire to his own louse. During these
tranfations, which occupied several months, Enfli.
fludtuated between the alle;ance he owed to his So.
vereign, and th dire of revenge; and sometimes

'1 * leaned

B o o K leaned to the one, and ometimes to the other. In
VIII. one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he
''6g sent a messenger into Scotland to encourage the King

to afferr his own right to the fucceflion by force of
arms, and to promise that, besides the affifance of
the Earl and all his friends inEngland, Lord Mount-
joy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join
him with 5000 men from that kingdom. But

James's James did not chufe to hazard the losing a kingdom,
.codu. which was juR ready to fall into his hands, by a

premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, de-
clined the enterprize, and Eflex adopted more duti-
ful schemes; all thoughts of ambition appearing
to be totally effaced out of his mind.

The wild THIS moderation, which was merely the effet of
tip Otf disgust and disappointment, was not of long conti-

nuance. And the Queen, having not only refused
to renew a lucrative grant, which he had formerly
bestowed, but to admit him into her presence, that
new injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and
now much fretted, to absolute despair. His friends,
inflead of soothing his rage, or restraining his impe-
tuofity, added to both, by their imprudent and in-
terested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he
determined to attempt to redress his wrongs by vio-
lence. And conscious how unpopular such an enter-
prize would be, if it appeared to proceed from mo-
tives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to
give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the King of Scotland's interest with his own. He
wrote to James, that the fation which now prcdomi-
nated in theEnglifh court, had resolved to support the

pre-

pretensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown; B o o K
that the places of the greatest importance in the VIII.
kingdom were put into the hands of his avowed el:e- o
mies; and that unless he sent ambassadors, without
delay, to infifR on the immediate declaration of his
right of succession, their measures were so well con-
certed, that all his hopes would be defp:.rate. James,
who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would
be to the Queen of England, was not wiiling raflh!y
to expose himself to her displeasure. But i'fex,
blinded by resentment, and impatient for revenge,
abandoned himself to thefc paflon:, and ated like
a man guided by frenzy or de!par With two or
three hundred followers inc:;:n;.i. tly armed. i.e at-
tempted to aault a throne, the bett el:t',li:hed in
Europe. Sallying at their head, out of hi own
house, he called on the c tizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wished to preserve the king-
dom from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take
arms, and to follow his ltandard. lie advanced
towards the palace, with an intention to drive Cecil
and his facion out of the Queen's presence, and to
obtain a declaration of the cottith King's right of
fucceflon *. But, though almolt adored hy the ci-
tizens, not a man would join him in ti's wild enter-
prize. Dispirited by their indifference, dtecrred by
some of his own attendants, and almost lurrounded
by the troops, which marched under d(ifferent lead-
ers into the city, he retreated to his own lioulc, and
without any bold effort, suitable to his prcfint con-

Bitch. Mcm. . 477.

T 3 dicton,

B o o K dition, or worthy of his former reputation for cou.
VIII. rage, he surrendered to his enemies.
1601. As oon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he

appointed the Earl of Mar, and the abbot of Kin-
loss, to repair as his ambassadors to the Court of
England. The former of there was the person, by
whose means Eflix had carried on his correfpon-
dence with the King. He was a paflionate admir-
er of the Earl's characer, and disposed to attempt
every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close friendlhip with Mar, was
ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the
purpole of the embnffy less friendly to Effex, than
the choice of his ambassadors; they were command-
ed t folic;t, in the warmest manner, for the Earl's
life, and if they found that the King, by avowing
his friends, could either promote their designs, or
contribute to their safety, they were impowered to
lay aside all difiuife, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due
to him by force of arms *. But before the ambaf-
fadors could reach London, Eex had suffered the
His death, punishment he merited by his treason. Perhaps the

fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his par-
don, haftcned his death. Elizabeth continued, for
fom time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could
not bring herself to consign into the hands of the
executioner, a man, who had once poflTefed her fa-
vour so entirely, wit: out a painful struggle between
her rcli ntment against his late mifcondut, and her
ancient affctlion towards him. The distress to

* John. 289. B::h. Mcm. a. 510.

which

which he was now reduced tended naturally to fof-B o o K
ten the former, while it revived the latter with new VIII.
tenderness; and the interceflion of onefaithfulfriend, .60
who had interest with the Queen, might perhaps
have saved his life, and have procured him aremif-
sion, which, of herself, Ihe was ahamed to grant.
But this generous nobleman had at that time no
such friend. And Elizabeth, solicited incefrantly
by her Miniters, and offended with the haughtiness
of Effex, who, as she imagined, scorned to sue for
pardon, at last commanded the sentence to be put
in execution. No sooner was the blow struck, than
ihe repented of her own ralhnefs, and bewailed his
death with the deepest sorrow. James always con-
fidered him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his
service, and after his accession to theEnglifl throne,
restored his son to his honours, as well as all his as-
fociates in the conspiracy, and diftinguilhed them
with his favour *.

THE Scottilh ambaf/adors, finding that they had James con-

tinues his

arrived too late to execute the chief business corn- intrigue in
mitted to their charge, not only concealed that part England.
of their infrutions, with the utmost care; but con-
gratulated the Queen, in their MaRer's name, on
her happy escape from such an audacious confpira.
cy. Elizabeth, though no stranger to the King's
correspondence with Effex, or to that nobleman's in-
tentions of aferting James's right to the Crown, was
not willing that thele should be known to the peo-
ple, and, for that reason, received the congratula-

*Camd. Spotfw. 464.

T 4 tions

B o o K tions of the Scottish ambafladors with all pollble
VIII. marks of credit, and good will; and in order to
<' -' sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of

union between the two courts, increased the fublidy
w'iicl hepaid him annually. The ambaff'dors re-
fided for some time in England, and were employ-
ed, with great success, in renewing and extending
the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly entered in-
to with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advanced
in years, the English turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
each other in courting the favour of their future
Monarch. Aflurances of attachment, profeltions
of regard, and promises of support, were offered to
James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil
himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had founded
on the friendship of the Scottish King, and what
advantages he might have derived from it, thought
it prudent to htand no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might fQ soon become his malter. But
being fnf;ble, at the fame time, how dangerous
such an intercourse might prove, under a Mistress
naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew ltronger
with old age; t ough he entered into a corrcftond-
ence with him, he carried it on with all the fecrefy
and caution neceflary in his situation, and peculiar
to his characer. And James, having gained the
man whole opposition and infu nce he had hitherto
chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfett ecurity, till that
event (houlJ happen, which would open his way to
the throne of England. It was, with ibme diffi-
culty, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who, labouring to di-

tinguifh

flinguilh themselves by that officious zeal, with R o o
which a Prince, who has a near profpe& of mount- II.
ing the throne, is always served, urged him to al- 1o.
low a motion to be made in parliament for declar-
ing his rigi ; of ucceflion to the Crown. James
prudently discouraged that design; but it was with
no small fatisF-acio, that he observed the ascendant
he was quiring in a court, whose dictates he had
been so long obliged to obey; and which had ei-
ther prescribed or thwarted every ftep he had taken
during the whole courl: of his reign *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the 16o,.
political facions whith divided the court, and the Atnir'p

(o Ci vZ¢

frequent revolutions which had happened there, nilis:.-
since the King first took the reins of government in t and
his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tran-
quillity, being undisturbed by any foreign enemy,
and free from any inteltine commotion of long con-
tinuance. During this period, James endeavoured
to civilize the Highlands and the Ifies, a part of his
dominions almost totally negleEted by former Mo-
narchs, though the reformation of it was an objtct
highly worthy of their care. The long peace with
England had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of refrain-
ing their depredations, often no leTs ruinous to their
countrymen, than to their enemies. The inhabi-
tants of the Low Country began, gradually, to for-
get the use of arms, and to become attentive to the
artsof peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
natural fierceness, averse from labour, and inured

* Spotfw. +67, 47 Birch. Mem . 514.

to

B o o K to rapine, infefied their more industrious neighbours,
VII. by their continual incursions. James, being folici-

. J
', tous not only to repress their inroads, but to render

them useful subjes , had at different times enated
many wife laws extremely conducive to there ends.
All landlords, or Chiefs of Clans, were enjoined to
permit no persons to reside in their estates, who
could not find sufficient surety for their good beha-
viour; they were required to make a lift of all sus-
picious persons under their jurifdicion, to bind
themselves to deliver them up to justice, and to in-
demnify those, who hould uffer by their robberies;
and, in order to ascertain the faithful performance
of these articles, the chiefs themlelves were obliged
to give hostages to the King, or to put pledges in
his hands. Thrc e towns, which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts
and commerce, were appointed to be built in diffe-
rent parts of the Highlands; one in Cantyre, ano-
ther in Lochabar, and a third in the ille of Lewis;
and, in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all
the privileges of Royal Borot.ghs were to be con-
ferred upon them. Finding it, however, to be no
cafy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those coun-
tries with the love of indufiry, a relblution was
taken to plant among them, colonies of people from
the more indufirious counties. TIle first experi-
ment was made in the Ife of Lewis; and as it was
advantageously situated for the sis ting trade, a ource
from hich Scotland ought naturally to derive great
wealth, the colony transportcd ti;hlier was drawn
out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well

* Bail. Dcr. 1,9.

skilled

gkilled in that branch of commerce. But before B o o v
they had remained there long enough to manifest VIIL
the good effeds of this institution, the islanders, en- 16:
raged at feeing their country occupied by thole in-
truders, took arms, and furprizing them in the
night time, murdered some of them, and compel-
led the ref to abandon the fettlemenr. The King's
attention being oon after turned to other objects,
we hear no more of this salutary proje&. Though
James did not purfuc the design with that steady
application and perseverance, without which it is
impolible to change the manners of a whole peo-
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of hav-
ing first conceived the thoughts, but of having sirs
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the Island *.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good Rfate ofel;zateth

iaft ine's

health, the effet of a found constitution, and the and deh.
reward of uncommon regularity and temperance,
Elizabeth began this winter to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old
age. Having removed on a very stormy day from
Westminster to Richmond, whither he was impa.
tient to retire, her complaints increased. She had
no formed fever; her pulse was good; but he cat 603.
little, and could not Ilep. Her distemper seemed Janu"ry3
to proceed s.-on a deep melancholy, which appear.
ed both in her countenance and behaviour. She
delighted in folltude, he sac constantly in the dark;
and was okcen drowned in tears.

Parl. 5 87, lS94 ij,7. Spotrw. 468.

No

B n o K N': Goner was the Queen's indisposition known,

VIII. than ri!brs of all rinks, and of all different sets
"160. and part i, redoubled their applications to the King

of Scots, and vied with each other, in profefllons
of attachment to his pcrfon, and in promifs of
fubmiflion to his government. Even some of her
own fervanms, weary of the length of her reign,
fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of the burthen
of gratitude for past benefits, and expecting to share
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to desert
her. An! crowds of people hurried towards Scot-
land, eager to pre-occupy the favour of the fuc.
ceffor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

MEANWHILE, the Queen's disease increased, and

her melancholy appeared to be fettled and incurable.
Various conectures were formed concerning the
causes of a disorder, from which she seemed to be
exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper.
Some imputed it to her being forced, contrary to
her inclination, to pardon the Earl of Tyronne,
whole rebellion had for many years created her
so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose
from observing the ingratitude of her courtiers, and
the Icviry of her people, who beheld her health de-
clining with most indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the acceflion of the Scottilh King, with
an impatience which they could not conceal. The
mofl common opinion, at that time, and perhaps
the mofl probable, was that it flowed from grief for
the Earl of Efflx. She retained an extraordinary
regard for the memory of that unfortunate noble-

i~* ~man;

man; and though he often complained of his ob- B o o K
ftinacy, seldom mentioned his name without tears *. VIII.
An accident happened blon after her retiring to 6c
Richmond, which revived her affretion with new
tenderness, and imbittered her sorrows. The
Countess of Nottingham, being on her death-bed,
desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal Ibme-
thing to her, without discovering which, he could
not die in peace. When the Queen came into her
chamber, he told her, that while Effex lay under
sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen hertelf had
prescribed, by returning a ring, which during the
height of his favour she had given him, with a pro-
mise that, if in any future distress, he sent that back
to her as a token, it flould intitle him to her pro-
tection; thatLady Scroop was the person he intended
to imploy in order to present it; thtr, by a mriltake,
it was put into her hands instead of Lady Scroop's;
and that she having communicated the matter to
her husband, one of Efiex's molt implacable ene-
mies, he had forbid her either to carry the ring to
the Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The
Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged
the Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now
saw both the malice of the Earl's enemies, and how
unjustly she had fufpeced him of inflexible obfti-
nacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I ne-
ver can ;" and left the roam in great emotion t.

From

* Birch. Icme. . ;e5.
I- Tlis anecdote concerning Elizabeth was sirs publ:.icd by

Oilor,!c, Mern. of Liiz. p. 2 ; is confirmed by tle e!limnonv
of de M!auricr, Mem. 260, a.d by the traditional evidiwnoe .f

LaJy

B o o Ic From that moment, her spirit funk entirely; lhe
VIII. could scarce tafe food; ihe refused all the medicines

' prescribed by her physicians; declaring that ffihe

wished to die, and would live no longer. No in-
treaty could prevail on her to go to bed; he fat on
cushions, during ten days and nights, pensive, and
silent, holding her finger almof continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground.
The only thing to which Ihe seemed to give any at-
tention, were the as of devotion, performed in
her apartment, by the Archbilhop of Canterbury;
and in there she joined with great appearance of ser-
vour. Wafted, at lat, as well by anguih ofmind,
as by long abstinence, he expired, without a frug-
gle, on Thursday the 24th day of March, in the

Lady Elizabeth Spelman published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. ao6.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Esex'; death as one of
the causes of her r.elancho'y. Some original papers remain
which prove that this was commonly believed at the time. Birch.
Mem. 2. o6. Ex, however, had been beheaded two years
before her death, and there fIems to have been no other reason,
but that which we have assigned, why her sorrow Ihould revive
with so much violence at o great a distance of time. As the
death of the Counters of Nottingham happened about a fort-
night before the Queen's death, the coincidence of there events,
together with the other evidence mentioned, adds so much pro-
bability to the fRory related by Ofnorre, as will entitle it to a
place in hiltory. The olly .;hjerion to the account we have
given of Elizabeth's attachment to EiTex, arises from her great
age. At the age of 68, the morous plions arc commonly
abundantly cool, and the viLleirce of all the palons, except one,
is much abated. But the ifrce cf this objecion is entirely re-
moved by an Author who ilts iiludrated many palfages in the
Englilh H.Rory, and adorned more. Catalogue ot Royal and
Noble Authors. Article Etfe.

70th

70th year of her age, and in the 45th of her B o o c
reign . VIII.

FoaE ICxon s often accuse the English of indiffe- 1603.

Her chao

rence and difrefpe& towards their Princes. But with- cr.
out reason; no people are more grateful than they to
those Monarchs, who merit their gratitude. The
names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the Englilh of this age, with the fame warmth,
as they were by thof, who lhared in the bleflings
and splendor of their reigns. The memory of Eli-
zabeth is Rfill adored in England. And the hifto-
rians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of
her people; her sagacity in discerning their true in-
terest; her steadiness in pursuing it; her wisdom in
the choice of her Ministers; the glory he acquired
by arms; the tranquillity fOe secured to her sub-
jets; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of
commerce, which were the fruits of all these;
justly rank her among the most illultrious Princes.
Even the dcft4s in her charater, they observe, were
not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her ex-
ceflive frugality was not accompanied with the love
of hoarding; and though it prevented ome great
undertakings, and rendered the success of others
incompleat, it introduced oeconomy into heradtni--
ninration, and exempted the nation from many
burdens, which a f;oa;rc!:, nmore proful: or more
enterprifirir, must ih ;v im'cd, Her slowness in
rewairdlin lier frvaiits l; ;. ti:.css dilcouraged useful
merit; but it prcvcilrc, t.ci undeii:rving from ac-

" Cand. . Mijcl . :.. . j ;il. i .c'. , zo6. S:rype,
4. 373.

ciring

.4-

B o o K quiring power and wealth, to which they had no

.lilV title. Her extreme jealousy of those Princes, who
C-?- pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led her
0 3- to take such precautions, as tended no less to the

pulick safety, than to her own; and to court the
affedions of her people, as the firmest support of
her throne. Such is the picture the Englilh draw
of this great Queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the History of

Scotland finds himself obliged, frequently, to view
her in a very different, and in a less amiable light.
Her authority in that kingdom, during the greater
part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which
The pofrfied in her own. But this authority, ac-
quired at firfl by a service of great importance to
the nation, he exercised in a manner extremely per-
nicious to its happiness. By her industry in foment-
ing the rage of the two contending factions; by
supplying the one with partial aid, by feeding the
other with false hopes; by balancing their power
so artfully, that each of them was able to distress,
and neither of them to subdue the other; she ren-
dered Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion,
and blood(shed: And her craft and intrigues, effet-
ing what the valour of her ancestors could not ac-
complifli, reduced that kingdom to a state of de-
pendance on England. The maxims of policy, of-
ten little consonant to those of morality, may, per-
haps, juiify this conduct. But no apology can be
ofl-cred for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene
of diflimulation without necefiry; and of lieverity
bryond xanple. In alinoll all her other naions,

Iliza-

Elizabeth is the obje& of our highest admiration ;B o o
in this, we must allow that he not only laid aside VIII.
the magnanimity which became a Queen, but the ó03.
feelings, natural to a woman.

THoucHElizabeth would never permit thequeflion James pro.
concerning the right of fucceflion to the Crown to Kingof
be determined in parliament; nor declare her own En£land.
sentiments concerning a point, which he wished to
remain an impenetrable mystery; he had, however,
formed no design of excluding the Scotti.h King
from an inheritance, to which his title was undoubt-
ed. A short time before her death, Ihe broke the
silence, which she had lb long preserved on that sub-
jcq&, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, "( That
her throne was the throne of Kings; that ihe would
have no mean perlbn to ascend it, and that her Cou.
fin the King of Scots hould be her fucceflor."
This she confirmed on her death-bed. And as soon
as fie breathed her last, the lords of the Privy
Council proclaimed James King of England. All
the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
the Infanca, all the cabals formed within the king-
dom, to lipport the ti:les of Lady Arabella, and
the Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment ;
the nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof
tilities with Scolani, and their averiion for the do-
minion of rangers, telified their facisdfaion with
louder acclamations, than were usual at the accefcfon
of their native Princes. Amidf this tumult of joy,
a motion nlade by a few patri.ts, who proposed to
'rell ribe some onditions to tlie fuccffor, and to
c:ia;c friom him the redrels of lbin, grievances, be-

VOL. II. V fore

B o o K fore they called him to the throne, was scarce heard
VIII. and Cecil, by tifling it, added to his stock of me-
'-'"- rit with his new matter. Sir Charles Percy, bro-
603. ther of the Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas

Somerset, the Earl of Worcester's son, were ds-
patched to Scotland, with a letter to the King,
signed by all the Peers and Privy Counsellors then
in London; informing him of the Queen's death,
of his acceflion to the throne, of their care to re-
cognize his title, and of the universal applause,
with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utmost haste to deliver
this welcome melrage; but were prevented by the
zeal of Sir RobertCarey, Lord Hunfdane'syoungeft
son, who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's
death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night,
just as the King had gone to bed. He was imme-
diately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneel-
ing by the King's bed, acquainted him with the
death of Elizabeth, saluted him King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token of
the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented him a ring, which his sifter Lady Scroop, had
taken from the Queen's finger after her death. James
heard him with a decent composure. But as Carey
was only a private mefenger, the information he
brought was not made public, and the King kept
his apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somer-
Iet. Then his titles were solemnly proclaimed;
and his own fubjets exprefed no less joy, than the
English, at this increase of his dignity. As his
pre'ence was ablolutely necefary in England, where
the people were extremely impatient to fee their

new

htew Sovereign, he prepared to set out for that king- B o o
dom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to VIII.
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the - #
government of Scotland to his Privy Council. He
intruded the care of his children to different noble-
men. On the Sunday before his departures he re-
paired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing
a sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the great-
ness of the divine goodness in raising him to the
throne of such a powerful kingdom without oppo-
fition or blood(hed, and exhorted him to express
his gratitude, by promoting to the utmot, the hap-
piness and prosperity of his subje&s; the King role
up, and addressing himself to the people, made
many profellions of unalterable affetion towards
them; promised frequently to visit Scotland; as-
Cured them that his Scottih subje&s, notwithftand-
ing his absence, hould feel that he was their native
Prince, no lets than when he resided among them;
and might still trust that his ears mhould be always
open to their petitions, which he would answer with
the alacrity and love of a parent. His words were,
often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audi-
ence; who, though they exulted at the King's prof-
perity, were melted into sorrow by these tender de-
clarations *.

ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, T.kesPo-

0Z>,,, ' 'feson of

with a splendid, but not a numerous train; andthe tlirone,
next day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came,
immense multitudes were aflembled to welcome him;
and the principal persons, in the diffrent counties

* SpQtfw. 476.

U a through

B o o a through which he pafied, displayed all their wealth
VIII. and magnificence in entertainments prepared for
'60' hilm at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so long

in England, that most of her fubjeas remembered
no other court but her's; and their notions of the
manners and decorum suitable to a prince were form-
ed upon what they had observed there. It was na-
tural to apply this standard to the behaviour and
actions of their new Monarch, and to compare him,
at sirs fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he
was to be placed. James, whose manners were ex-
tremely different from her's, uftered by the con-
parison. He had not that flowing affability, by
which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her peo-
ple and though easy among a few whom he loved,
his indolence could not bear the fatigue of render-
ing himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no less a stranger to that dignity, with which
Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And instead
of that well-judged frugality, with which he con-
ferred titles of honour, he bestowed them with an
undiftinguifhing profusion, that rendered them no
longer marks of diftin&ion, or rewards of merit.
But these were the relecions of the few alone; the
mulitude continued their acclamations; and amidst
there, James entered London on the 7th of May,
and took peaceable poflefion of the throne of Eng-
land.
Conclugion. THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from

the earliest accounts of time, but destined, by their
situation, to form one great monarchy. And by
this junciun of its whole native t'rce, Great Britain

hath

bath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe B o o g
which England and Scotland could never have at- VIII.
gained.

£603.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs A view o

as next heirs to the Engliih throne, that they had h"^eio
full leisure to reflec on all the consequences of their he confti.
being advanced to that dignity. But, dazzled with scotIan
the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful .
enemy, relying on the partiality of their native ameuv.
Prince, and in full expecation of haring liberally
in the wealth and honours he would now be able to
bestow, they attended little to themotobvious con-
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his
acceion to the throne of England, as if it had been
no less beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable
to the King. They oon had reason, however, to
adopt very different sentiments; and from that pe-
riod, we may date a total alteration in the political
constitution of Scotland.

THe feudal Aristocracy, which had been subvert-

ed in most nations of Europe by the policy of their
Princes, or had been undermined by the progress of
commerce, still subsisted with full force in Scotland.
Many causes had contributed gradually to augment
the power of the Scortifl nobles; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it
prevailed added to the authority of the Monarch,
had increased their wealth and influence. A King,
possesl:d of a small revenue, with a prerogative ex-
tremely limited, and unsupported by a anding
army, could not exercise much authority over lucli

U 3

B o o K potent fubjets. He was obliged to govern by ex.
VIII. pedients; and the laws derived their force not from
"v'-his power to execute them, but from the voluntary

submission of the nobles. But though thisproduced
a species of government feeble and irregular beyond
example; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was
really fubje& to an Aristocracy, the people were not
altogether unhappy; and even in this wild form of
a conititution, there were principles, which tenq4
ed to their security and advantage. The Kig,
checked and overawed by the nobles, durst venture
upon no aft of arbitrary power. The nobles, jea-
lous of the King, whofeclaims and pretensions were
many, though his power was small, were afraid of
irritating theirdependents by unreafonableexa&ions,
and tempered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny,
with a mildness and equality to which it is naturally
a firanger. And while the military genius of the
feudal government remained in vigour, the vasals
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not.only
free from oppreflion, but courted by their superiors,
whose power and importance were founded on their
attachment and love,

BUT, by his acceifon to the throne of England,

James acquired such an immenfeacceffionofwealth,
of power, and of splendor, that the nobles, afto-
nifhed and intimidated, thought it vain to struggle
for privileges which they were now unableto defend.
Nor was it from fear alone that they submitted to
ite yoke; James, partial to his countrymen, and
willing that they flould partake in his good for.

ture,

tune, loaded them with riches and honours; and B o o K
the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of VIII.
his power, in taming their fierce and independent 'v"
spirits. The will of the Prince became the supreme
law in Scotland; and the nobles strove, with emu-
lation, who Ihould mos implicitly obey commands,
which they had formerly been accustomed to con-
temn. Satisfied with having fubje&ed the nobles
to the Crown, the King left them in full poieflion
of their ancient jurifdiaion over their own vaffls.
The extensive rights, vested in a feudal Chief, be-
came in their hands dreadful instruments of opprel-
sion, and the military ideas on which these rights
were founded, being gradually loft or disregarded,
nothing remained to corre& or to mitigate the ri-
gour with which they were exercised. 1 he nobles,
exhaufing their fortunes by the expence of frequent
attendance upon the Engliih court, and by attempts
to imitate the manners and luxury of their more
wealthy neighbours, multiplied exactions upon the
people, who durst scarce utter complaints which
they knew would never reach the ear of their Sove-
reign, nor move him to grant them any redress.
And, from the union of the Crowns to the Revo-
lution, in 1688, Scotland was placed in a political
situation of all others the moR singular, and the
mos unhappy; fubjeaed at once to the absolute
will of a Monarch, and to the oppreffivejurifdition
of an AriRocracy, it fuffcred all the miseries peculiar
to both these forms of government. Its Kings were
despotic; its nobles were naves and tyrants; and
the people groaned under the rigorous domination
of both.

U 4 DURlIN

B o o K D.'TRIiO this Ie:.oi. . l - .,-

VIII. one effort to (h.ke o t . c- i,
-- 'ancient independency. At, . . s

the Scottish nation was no lEr.gr vit., .
Monarchs with any partial affe&tin. C!';
educated among the English, discovered no pec- .;
attachment to the kingdom of which he was a r.
tive. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be
now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a Prince
with whom they had little connetion, and over
whole councils they had little influence, no longer
libmitted with the fanm implicit obedience. Pro.
voked by forne encroachments of the King on their
order, and apprehcnfive of others, the remains of
their ancient spirit began to appear. They com-
i!lained, and remonstrated. And the people being,
at the ame time, violently digufted at the innova-
tions in Religion, the nobles secretly heightened
this difgutt; and their artifices, together with the
ill condu& of the court, raised such a spirit, that
the whole nation t;k arms against their Sovereign,
with an union and animosity of which there had
formerly been no example. Charles brought against
them the forces of England, and notwithilanding
their own union, and the zeal of the people, the
nobles must have funk in the struggle. But the
difaffe&ion, whith was growing among his English
subje&s, prevented the King from aing with vi-
gour. A civil war br;ke out in both kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are
well known, the Scottith nobles, who first began
the war, were involved in the fme ruin with the
throne. At the Restoration, Charles II. regained

full

full pofefflon of the royal prerogative in Scotland; B o o R
and the nobles, whose estates were wafted, or their Vlll.
spirit broken by the calamities to which they had '"-
been exposed, were less able and less willing than
ever to resist the power of the Crown. During
this reign, and that of James VII. the dicates of
the Monarch were received in Scotland with most
abjet fubmifion. The poverty to which many of
tile nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
fla-ea, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The
people, always negleced, were new odious, and
claded with every injury, on account of their at-
tachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into

the government of Scotland. To increase the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole object
of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfare of the people. By the claim of right, their
liberties were secured. And the number of their
reprelentatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in parliament.
As they came to enjoy more security, and greater
power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and
of police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which still
predominated, together with many other accidents,
retarded the improvement and happincfs of the
nation.

ANO-

B 0 0 K ANOTHER great event completed what the revro
VIII. lution had begun. The political power of the no-
L'-~ bles, already broken by the union of the two Crowns,

was almost annihilated by the union of the two
Kingdoms. InRead of making a part, as formerly,
of the supreme afifmbly of the nation, instead of
bearing the most considerable sway there, the Scot-
tifh nobles are admitted into the Britilh parliament
by their representatives only, and form but an in-
considerable part of one of those bodies in which
the legislative authority is vested. They themselves
are excluded absolutely from the house of Com-
mons, and even their eldest sons are not permitted
to represent their countrymen in that august affm-
bly. Nor have their feudal privileges remained, to
compensate for this extinction of their political au-
thority. As commerce advanced in its progress,
and government attained nearer to perfection, these
were insensibly circumscribed, and at last, by laws
no less salutary to the public, than fatal to the no-
bles, they have been almost totally abolished. As
the nobles were deprived of power, the people ac-
quired liberty. Exempted from burdens, to which
they were formerly subjef, screened from oppref-
sion, to which they had been long exposed, and
adopted into a constitution, whose genius and laws
were more liberal than their own, they have extend-
ed their commerce, refined their manners, made im-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated
the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political slate of Scotland,
in which events and their caufcs have been mention-

ed

ed rather than developed, enables us to point out B o o K
three aras, from each of which we may date some VIII.
great alteration, in one or other of the three diffe- *
rent members of which the supreme legislative as-
fembly in our constitution is composed. At the
Arccefion, the Kings of Scotland, once the most li-
nited, became, in an instant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic autho-
rity, which their Parliaments were unable to con-
troul, or their nobles to resist. At the Union, the
feudal aristocracy, which had iubfifted ib manyages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and
the Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and
pre-eminences, peculiar to their order, and reduced
themnelves to a condition, which is no longer the
terror and envy of other subjects. Since the Union,
the Commons, anciently negleed by their Kings,
and despised by the nobles, have emerged into dig-
nity; and, being admitted to a participation of all
the privileges, which the English had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, must now be esteem-
ed a body not less considerable in the one kingdom,
than they have long been in the other.

THE church felt the effeEts of the absolute pow'

er which the King acquired by his acceflion; and
its revolutions too, are worthy of notice. James,
during the latter years of his administration in Scot-
land, revived the name and office of Bilhops. But
they poTheeti no eccleiiaftical jurilfic&ion or pre-
eminence; their revenues were inconsiderable, and
they were liarce dillinguifhed by any thing, but by

their
t

B o It their feat ii p ;.an n .; ..:_: '.'

,:- i:- .: -ii ': of

VIII. the clergy's jealouly, and :h pc;.; .'. -.- :a. he
'-"' King, delighed with the splendor and authority

which the Engliih Bilhops enjoyed, and eager to
effte an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attemptedin the civilgovernment, resolved
to bring both Churches to an exac conformity with
each other. Three Scotsmen were confccrated Bi-
shops at London. From them, their brethren were
commanded to receiveorders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed. And though the Clergy,
less obsequious than the nobles, boldly opposed thefi
innovations, Jantes, long pra&ised and well fkiled
in the arts of managing them, obtained at length
their compliance. But Charles I. a superstitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots,
imnprudent and precipitant in all the measures he
pursued in that kingdom, prefling too eagerly the
reception of the Englilh liturgy, and indiscreetly
atempting a resumption of church lands, kindled
the flames of civil war and the people being left
at liberty to indulge their own wihe,, the Episcopal
church was overturned, and the 1'refbyterian go-
vernmentand discipline were re-established with new
vigour. Together with monarchy, Episcopacy was
t itored in cotland. A form of government, so
od.ous to the people, required force to uphold it;
and though the whole rigour of authority, and all
the barbarity of perfecuton were employed in its
fuppcrr, the averion of the nation was infurmount-
able, ald it subsisted with dilficulty. At the Revo-
lution, the inclinations of the people were thought

wor.

worthy the attention of the legilature, the Prelby- B o o t
terian government was again cftablifhed, and being VIII.
ratified by the Union, is still maintained in the '"
kingdom.

NOR did the influence of the Acceffllon extend to

the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the
genius of the nation, its taste and spirit, things of
a nature till more delicate, were sensibly affeaed by
that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages
were in a fate equally barbarous, devoid of ele-
gance, of vigour, and even of perspicuity. No
author thought of writing in languages so ill adapt-
ed to express and embellih his sentiments, or of
erefing a work for immortality, with such rude
and perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
original effort of the human mind, but was excited
by admiration of the ancients, their compositions
were esteemed not only the standards of tafe, and
of sentiment, but of stile; and even the languages
in which they wrote were thought to be peculiar and
almof consecrated to learning and the mutes. Not
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied; and, extravagant as the at-
tempt may appear to write in a dead tongue, in
which men were not accustomcd to think, and which
they could not speak, or even pronounce, the fuc.
cess of it was aftonifhng. As they formed their
Rile upon the purest models, as they were uninfe&-
ed with thole barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of

*s, s~~~~~~~imi-

B o o K familiar conversation, the affetation of courts, in-
VIII. tercourfe with strangers, and a thousand other causes
'- rintroduce into living languages, many moderns have

attained to a degree of elegance in their Latin com-
potitions, which the Romans themselves scarce pof-
fefed beyond the limits of the Augustan age.
While this was almost the only species of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common lan-
guage, could be brought to a nearer aomparifon,
the Scottilh writers were not inferior to those of any
other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed to excel in prose and in verse, more
various, more original, and more elegant, than that
of almoR any other modern who writes in Latin,
reflecs, with regard to this particular, the greatest
lufire on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead

tongue was irksome; the unequal return for their
industry which authors met with, who could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of
walling half their lives in learning the language of
the Romans, began to refine and to polish their
own. he modern tongues were found to be sus.
ceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal
to those of the ancient ones, were at least more at-
tainable. And the Italians having firlf set the ex-
ample, Latin was no longer used in the works of
taste it was confined to books of science; and the
politer nations have banished it even fiom these.
The Scots, we ay presume, would have had no

cause

cause to regret this change in the public tafe, and B o o K
would still have been able to maintain some equa- VIII.
lity with other nations, in their pursuit of literary '
honour. The Englith and Scottish languages, de-
rived from the fame sources, were, at the end of
the sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, dif-
fering from one another somewhat in orthography,
though not only the words, but the idioms were
much the fame. The letters of several Scottih
fatefmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the English Minilters with
whom they corresponded. James himself was ma-
fter of a stile far from contemptible; and by his
example and encouragement, the Scottif language
might have kept pace with the English in refine.
ment. Scotland might have had a series of authors
in its own, as well as in the Latin language, to
boast of; and the improvements in taste, in the
arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the
other polished nations of Europe, would not have
been unknown there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were

beginning to drop the use of Latin in works of
talle, and to make trial of the ilrength and com-
pass of their own languages, Scotland ccrafed to be
a kingdom. The tranliports of joy, which the Ac-
cession at first occasioned, were loon over; and the
Scots, being at once deprived of all the objedts that
refine or animate a people, of the presence of their
Prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the splendor
and elegance of a court, an universal dejetion ,f

jpiirit

B o o i spirit seems to have seized the nation. The Court

VIII. being withdrawn, no dometic tandard of propriety
---' and correctness of speech remained the few com-

positions that Scotland produced were tried by the
English flandard, and every word or phrase that
varied in the leat from that, was condemned as
barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had conti-
nued difti:t, each might have retained idioms and
forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these ren-
dered fashionable by the example of a court, and
supported by the authority of writers of reputation,
would have been confidered in the fame light with
the varieties occasioned by the different dialects in
the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beau-
ties, and, in many cafes, used promiscuously by the
authors of both nations. But, by the Accefflon,
the English naturally became the sole judges and
hwgivers in language, and rejeted as solecisms,
every form of speech to which their ear was not ac-
customed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse
between the two nations was inconsiderable *, and

*A rem;;rl'lt e pr::of f the little intercourfg between the

Englilh ard Sc.t!, hctre rti union of the Ciow.s, to I e
found in tv.o curious papir., o.c jiubiiilcd by llayncs, tie
other by Strype. In alih y)c:.t I 6, li.izabeth cormanded the
Bilhop of London t tke a lurvcy of all the Itrangers x ihii
the citict of Londn ai d Wtlm.iniler. By his rport, which is
veiy miutc, It appear, that the whole numbecr o' Scuts at that
time w 53. HIayncs .S. A fir:ey of tlt fiine kind w1s
made by Sir Thomas R:,v, I.ord Mlayor A. D. ij;''. The
number of Scots had then in:I;.d to 1S. Strype . Suppl -
ment No. . On the accrfion of James, a co.ilidrab'e nuimb r
of Scots, clpecially of the higher rank, rrtcd to Engand;
but it was no till the UL'i. Lt the intcrcour: Letwcen the
two kingdopi became ;rt. a

anclenc

ancient prejudices were still so violent as to prevent B o o x.
imitation, poflefs the means of refining their own VIII.
tongue according to the purity of the Englilh stand- ' -
ard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scot-
land, in that age, were more eminent for piety than
for learning; and though there did not arise many
authors among them, yet being in poflfelion of the
privilege of discoursing publickly to the people,
and their sermons being too long, and perhaps too
frequent, such hasty productions could not be ele-
gant, and many slovenly and incorrect modes of
expreflion may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccu-
rate, and that profeflion having furnished more au-
thors, and the matters of which they treat mingling
daily in common discourse and business, many of
thole vitious forms of speech, which are denomi.
nated Scotticisms, have been by them introduced
into the language. Nor did either the language or
public taste receive any improvement in parlia-
ment, where a more liberal and more correct elo-
quence might have been expected. All bufincfs
was tranfaded there by the Lords of Articles, and
they were so servilely devoted to the court, that
few debates arose, and none were conduted with
the spirit and vigour natural to a popular aembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the

Englifi were gradually refining their language, and
their taste; in Scotland the former was much de-
based, and the latter almost entirely loft. In the

VOL. II. X be-

B o o K beginning of that period, both nations were e.
VIII. merging out of barbarity; but the distance between

c3""r them which was then inconsiderable, became, be-

fore the end of it, imwenre. Even after science
had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to
be finking back int; ignorance and obscurity; and
active and intelligent as they naturally are, they
continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of lan-
guor and ftupefatin. This, however, must be
imputed to the uhappinefs of their political situ-
ation, not to any defrd of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other
began to display ifelf. The at abolishing the
power of the Lo'rds of Articles, and other salutary
laws paed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottilh Parliament,
eloquence, with all the arts that accompany or
perfet it, became immediate objets of attention;
and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is
sufficient to shew that the Scots were still capable
of generous lentinents, and, notwitlftanding fume
peculir idicms, were able to express themselves
with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the

two nations, and rendered them one p ople, the
diftindions which had lfubifted for many ages gra-
dually wear away peculiarities dfappear; the
fame manners prevail in both parts of the finand,
the fame authors are read and admired; the fame
entertainrnnts are frequented by the elegant and

polite :

iolite; and the fame standard of taste, and of pu-B o
rity in language, is stablished. And the Scots, VIII.
after being placed during a whole century, in a' -
situation no less fatal to the liberty than to the
taste and genius of the nation, were at once put
in pollfflon of privileges more valuable than those
which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and
every obftru&ion that had retarded their purfuir,
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
totally removed.

X . APPl N-

# APPENDIX.

A P P ENDI X.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. a o.)
A MEMORIAL of certain points meet

for refloring the realm of Sco TLAND
to the antient weak.
IMPRIMIS, it is tobe noted, that the bes worldly fell- th Augpu,

city that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a 559, cot-
perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to ton. Lib.

be made one monarchy with England, as they both make foi.;7.From
but one ifand, divided from the reft of the world. a eCpy in fe-

IF the sirs is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace creatry Co.

with England, then must it neceflarily be provided, that
Scotland be not To fubje& to the appointments of France,
as is presently, which, beingan antient enemy to England,
feeketh always to make Scotland an instrument, to exer-
cife, thereby, their malice upon England, and to make
a foot-fool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland shall come into the hands

of a mere Scottilh man in blood, then may there be hope
of such accord, but as long as it is at the commandment
of the French, there is no hope to have accord long be-
twixt these two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French King's corn.

mandment by reason of his wife, it is to be confidered for
the weale of Scotland, that until the have children, and
during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to
the crown, being the hou'e of the Hamiltons, should have
regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown be imposcd
nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobility and com-
monalty ought to force that the laws and the old customs
of the realm be not altered, neither that the country be not
impoveribhed by taxes, empreft, or new impolts, after the

X 3 mn-

manner of France; for provision wherein, both by the law
ps God and man, the French king and his wile may be
moved to reform their mi(governance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility

and commons joined with the next heir of the crown, to
feck due reformation of such great abuses as tend to the
ruin of their country, which mull be done before the
French grow too firong and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the

three ellates of theland, that the land may be free from all
idol.,try like as FEngtand is, for justification whereof, if
any free general council may be had where the Pope of
Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may offer' to
.hew their cause to le most agreeable to Christ's religion.

N :XT, to provide that Scotland might be governed, in

all ruls and offices, by the antient blood of the realm,
without either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all
pther Princes govein their countries, and especially that
the forts might be in the hands of mere Scottiih men.

THIRDLY, that they might never be occasioned to

enter into wars against Englandi except England hould
give the first caule to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, that no nobleman of Scotland hould re-

ceive pension of France, except it were whili he did serve
in France, for otherwise thereby the French would hortly
corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, that nooffice, abbey, living, prcommodity,

be given to any but mere Scottish men, by the ffent of
the three estates of the realm.

SIxTrh, that there be a councel in Scotland appointed

in the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in
those cafes not to be dirested by the French.

SIVIENTILY, That it be by the said three etates ap-

pointed how the queen's revenue of the realm hall be ex-
pended, how much the queen hall have for her portion
and efate during her ablence, how much shall be limited
to the governance and defence of the realm, how much
yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN thelie and such like points if the French king and

the queen e found unwilling, and will withfland there
prov;fions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
cftates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to
the said king and queen their humble requefis; and if the
·lare be not effectually traltecd, then humbly they may

corn

commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the
crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and an-
ticnt rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen hall beunwilling to this, as it is

likely ihe will, in refpet ofthegreedy and tyrannous assec.
tion of France, then it is apparent that Almighty God is
pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for
the weale of it, and this time miRf be used with great cir-
cumfpeaion, to avoid the eccipts and tromperies of the
French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being

once made free, what means may be devised by God's
goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for time to
come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whole hands
the hearts of all princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 220.)
A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus dir

redted.
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.
I UNDERSTAND by th, la1 letter I received from yow, 2oth J.

th.t diccourfing with zour countrymen u,,on the mat- nua"y
ter of Scotland, and commoditeys may ensew t that ,9 6.

realm, hereJftcr giffze prcfently afif ws with zour firces, cal. B. i.
zefind anomhre of the contrary advise, doubt ing that we fall Fram the
not at length be found trusty friends, nor mean to conty- inla
new in constant ametye, albeit we promise, but only for hand.
a/oyding the prefcnt danger make zow to fcrve our turne,
and after bcingdelivere , becum enemies as of btefre. For
prose quhare.f, they alledge things have pall betwixt ws
h-retofore, and a few prclumpriones tending to the .m
en J, all grounded upon m rust; quhilks, at ther firt si ht,
have foi;e (heweof aparence, gifmen wey not the. ircum-
Rances of the matter; ut gif they will confer the tyme
palt wiih the pr, ent, confider the. nature of this cau,
and es ,ite of our contrny, I dctu!bt n.,t b:itjugement fal be
able to bani(h mif uft. And sirs. I wad wish ze fb;huld
exa'Tyne the caues off the old inmitye betwixt he
lcalms of England and Scotland, and quhat movcd our

X 4 anctioura

anceftours to enter into ligue with the F:einche; quhilks
by our storeys and regftrcs off' antiquiteys ppe r to be
thele. The princes ot Enland, fme tyme, alledginga
certain kynde of overaintye over this realm; some tyme
upon hye courage, or incited by incurliGns off our bor-
dourares, and emblable occafins, mo:y tymes en;erpri-
fed the conquet of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force
off armes, that we wer dryven to great xtramiteys, by
lols of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part ot our
cuntrey, fa that experience taught .'.s thatourowne firength
w s fcaife sufficient to ithit.ini he frce of England.
The Frenche zorr auncient enemies, confidering well iow
nature had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na na-
tion was able fa to annoye England as we being enemyes,
foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that
meine to detourne zour armyes fronm the invasion off
France, and occupy zow in the delencc of zour counry
at hame, offering for that cffcA to beltowe fo:nie charges
upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purp :s, choyied a
tyme to propone the matter, quhen the frefche memory of
injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely pren-
ted on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how
to be revenged, and arme ourlelfes with the powar off a
forayne prince againfl zour enterprises thereafter.

THIS wes the beginning oft'ourconfederacywith France.

At quhi!k tyme, our cronicies m;:ks mention, that romeoss
the wyfeit foref.w the perril, and (mnall frute should re-
dound to us thereof at lentil: zit had affection fa blinded
jugemcnt, that the advise of the maift part owercame the
Pelt. The maift part of al querells btwixt ws since
that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came en our
fyde, hes ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather
than any one aus off our fe! fes: and quhenfaever we brack
the peace, it come partly hy theyr intyfements, partly to
ofchew the conquest intended by that realm. But now
hes God's providence fa altered the caf, zea changed it
to the plat contrary, that now hcs the Frenfche taken zour
place, and we, off vcryjugement, becum defyrous to have
gow in theyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we espy how
uncareful they have been of our weile at all tymes, how
they made ws ever to frve theyr turne, drew us in maift
dangerous weys for theyr commodite, and nevertheless
wad not ftyck, oft tymes, against the natour of the liguc,
$Q coptrak peace, leaving wa in weyr. We fee that their

support,

support, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affiefion
they bare to ws, for pytie they had off our eRLte, fr re-
compenfe of the iyke friendship fchawin to theym in tyme
offtheyr affiaiones, but for ambition, and inlacible cu-
pidite to reygne, and to mak Scotland ane acceflary to the
crown of rance. This was na friendly office, but mer-
cenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of
theyr deserving; a hale realm for the defence of a part.
We fee theymn manifestly attempt the thing we fufpcae
off zow; we feared ze ment the conquelt off Scotland,
and they ae planely fallen to that work; we hated zow
for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we
love theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about
to bring ws in maift vile ervitude? Gif by zour frendly
support at this t me, ze fall deciare that not only suite ze
no: the ruync of our country, but will prcferve the liber-
tie thereof from conquet by firangeares, fall not the oc-
cafion off all inimitie with zow, and ligue with theym,
be taken away ? The cauf:s being removed, how fall the
effeaes rem.mbe ? The fear of conquest made us to hate
zow and love theym, the cais changed, quhen we fee theynx
planely attempt conquelt, and zuw fchaw ws friendfllip,
fall we not hate theym, and favour zw ? Gif we have
fchawne fa great constance, continuing fa mony zeares in
amity with theyrn, ;fs quhome we had fa small commo-
dite, quhat fall move us to breake with zuw, that off
all nation:s may do ws grcateft picfour?

BUT ze will fy, .this mater may be reconcyled, and

then frends s off before. I think weill peace is the end
of all weyr, but off this ze may be allured, we will never
fa far trua that reconcilition, that we wil be content to
forgo the ametye of England, nor do any thing may bring
ws in fulpicion with zow. Giff we old, at any tyme
to please theym, break with zow, ihould we nt, befydes
the loffc off efimation and ditcrediting off ourself-s, per-
petuallyexp:'ne our com'non wcill to a n.iif mani'tll dan-
ger, and becum a pray to theyr tyralny ( hais aid.
could we implire, bcin. dLfitute of zour fiiendlhip, gif
they off new wald ..ttcni,,t t yr former cnierprile ? ,iihat
nation myht help ws gif they wald, or wld ift they
might ? and it is lIke encuch, tha wi'l not fitk hcecaf-
ter to tak theyr tyinl us' \ , quhicni diflpcfour ;;n( gudge
hes taken depe rute on baith i d's, iecin aibir:on has '
impyrit ower thcyr caron, that btfbre we had ever d :ne

ally

any thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary plea.
fed theym by right and wrang, they did not flick to at-
tempte the subversion of our hale Rate. I wald ze hould
not efteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot
foresee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will not
iudy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may be
ourtafetye; quhilk confihes in all the relaying of zour
fricndlhips. I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the
days of zour princes off mnaid noble memory king Henry
the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes were opened off
amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the
difference of religion the onley flay they were not em-
braced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
thecr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort ?
But now has God off his mercy removed that block furth
of the way: now is not theyr pratice lyke to tak place
any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off dofirine,
and protes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to
be the flrayteft not off amitye can be deviscd. Gif it
*may be alledged, that Ibme of our countrymen, at ony
tvme, violated theyr promis ? gif ze liss to way the cir-
cumftances, ze all fynd the promis is rather brought on
by necefite, after a great overthraw off our men, then
comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great in-
commodite and decay off our haill state, at leift fa taken.
But in this cafe, fall the preservation of our libertie be
infeperably joined with the keping off promefre,. and the
violation of our fayth cast ws in maift miserable fervi-
tude. Sa that giffncythe the feare off God. reverence of
man, religion, othe, promise, nor warld!y boneftyc wes
fufficicnt to bynd us, yet fall the zeale of our native
countrey, the m:intenance off our own cftate, the safety
of our wyffes and hildrene from flavcry, compell ws to
kere promise. I am assured, it is t:ewly and sincerely
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametye with
zow; it fall be uttered by our proccedinos. Giff ze be
as defyrous of it as we ar, airuranccs may be dvyfed,
quharby all partyes will be out of doubte. There be
gode meanes to do it, fit inflrunients for the purpos, ryme
serves weill, the inhabitants of baith realms wiih it, God
hes wrought in the peoples harte's on b;ayth parties a cer-
taine still agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, fT
mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the dirpo-
fition off a w, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may malk

3 up

up t4 hale. I hope he quha hes begun his wor, and
mnainteyned it quhile now, by the expecation of nam,
fall perfyte it.

I PRAY zow, let not zour men dryvetyme inconfulta.

tion, quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seyng the nater
fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence
off our caus, gitf ze have any refpec for zour awne weill.
Their preparatives in France, and levying of men in Ger-
many, (quheyruff am lately advertised) ar not altogyd.
der ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at; they
feke our realme, but for ane entrey to zours. Giff they
jhould directly chaw hoftilite to zow, they knaw zo wald
mak redy for theyme, therefor they do, by indirec meanes,
to blind zow, the thing, they dare not as zit planely at-
tempte. They fern to invade us to th' end that having
assembled theyr hayle forces fanere zour bordours, theymay
unlok it to attack zow: It is ane of theyr aid fetches, mak-
ing a (chew to one place, to lyghton ane other. Remem-
ber how covertly zour places about Boulougne were afl-
zeit, and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How
the enterprise of Calais was fynely difembled, I think ze
have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent
theyr policy by prudence. Giff ze fe not the lyke difpofi
tion presently in theym, ze fe nathing. It is a grofle igno-
rance to mifknaw, what all nations planely fpeks of. Tak
hede ze zay not hereafter, " Had I wis ;' ane uncomely
sentence to procede off a wyfe man's mouth. That is on-
wares chanced on to zow, quhilk zow commonly wiffed,
that this countrey myght be divorfcd from the F rcnche,
and is fa comme to pass as was mait expedient for
zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpeled we would
have been untrufty frends, and na langer continued
ftedfate, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen
of our self, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked
by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing with
ws hes deserved ur inimitye, let no man dobte but
they fall fynde ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungent-
ly hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands
we can look for nathing but all extremitye, giff ever
they may get the upper hand. Let not this occasion,
fa happely offered, escape zow: giff ze do, neglecting the
present opportunitie, and hoping to have ever gode luk
comme ceaping upon zow, it j to be feared zour enemye

waxe

waxe to great, and fa irang, that afterwards quhen ze
wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to
zour smart, after the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour
error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat harme cometh
of oversight, and truting to zour eremyes promtffe. We
offer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour former lofls may
be repayred. Quhilk gif ze let over flyde, suffering ws
to be overrun, qha then, I pray zow, fall flay the
Frenfche, that they fall not invade zow in zour own
boundes, ick it is their lust to reygne, that they can nei-
ther be content with theyr fortune present, nor eft and be
satisfied when they have gode luck, but will fill follow on,
having in theyr awne brayne conceaved the image of fa
great a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end Is ther
any of fa small jugement, that he doth not foresee al-
ready, that theyr hail force fall then be bent againit
zow ?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the

Fraefche be presently. Theyr estate is not always fa
calme at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it
wes not theyr great redines for weyr made theym to tak
this mater on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayne trust
in theyr awne policy, thinking to have found na resist-
ance, their opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes
them now amafed. The estates off the empire (as I
heare) has uted restitution off the' Imperial towns Metz,
Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynes;
and all thing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey,
the lers fit they be prcfently for weyr, the mareopportune
efteme ye the time for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were
offtred to the Frenfihe against zow, wey, how gladly
wc(uld they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour
fl,,th, to spare theym that hes already compaed zour
deflruition, giff theym wer able ? Confider with zour
self hilk is to be choyled ? To weyr against them out
with zour realme or within? Giffquhill ze fleape, we
fal be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to su:e zow in
zour awne countrey, and ule ws as a fote tole to overloke
zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they mene it not.
It i foly to think thty wald not ilF they wer able, quhen
befoie hand they flick not to gift zour armes, and ufurpe
the flyle of zour crown. 'Ihen quhat difference there is to
camp within zowr awne bounds or without, it is manifefi.
Gifi twa a:mycs Ihould camp with in zowr country, but a

moncth;

moneth; albeit .ye received na other harme, zit ihould
sowr loife be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede to
beflow on our support will draw to, befydes the dilho-
nour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not

for particular refpe&s weill affeteed to the caus, move zow
to fubtrad zour helping hand, by alleging things not ap-
parent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, un-
possible that we may receave conditiones of peace; but I
lee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer w. si as
will remove all mifiruf, and giff we wald have accepted
others, the mater had bene lang or now compounded.
Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles,
and diffames our just querell with the name of conspiracy
against our foverayne. It is hir hyenes right we mane-
tayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we fudy to pre-
serve, with the hazard of our lyves. We are not (God
knaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as
men impacient of rewll, or willing to chake of the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by necef-
site, to avoyde the tyranny of (trangeares. feaking to
defraude ws of lawful government. Giff we should
fuffcr frangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all
the ftrenthes of our realme, fortify the feyportes, and
maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquefi,
now in the minoritie of our foverane, beyn frth of the
realme, should we not be thought ocareful off the com-
mon weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill
fubjets to hir najeite ? Quhat other opinion could fche
have off ws ? Might she not jultly hereafter call ws to
accompt, a.; negligent ministeres ? Giff ftrangeares hould
be thus suffered t broke the chefe offices, beare the hail
rewll, alter and pervert our lawts ald liberty at theyr ple-
four; mght not the people efcem our nobleme:n unwor-
thy the place of counfalours ! We mean na wyf' to sub-
trak ou, obedience trum our foverane, todefraud hirhye-
nes off her dew reverence, rents and revenues cff hir
crown. We teke nathin, but that Scotland may remanc,
as of before, a fre rcalme, rewlit by hir hycncs and hi-
minifleres borne men of the fim; andi that the fucceflion
of the crown may remane wilh the lawful blode.

I WAID not e Ibuld not fa lyttil efteie the fricndihip

of Scotland, that ze juged it not worthy to be crnbraced.
It fall be na finall commodite for zow to be dc'i:ecred off

. *it

the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may
iore trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfs
as puiflant, not lyeng dry marche with zow. efydes that
ze fail not nede to feare the invasion offany prince lackyng
the commodite to invadezow by land, on our land. Con-
fider quhat superfluous charge ze beflowe on the fortifi-
catfon and keping of Barwick; quhilk ze may reduce to a
mean fowme, having ws to frendes. The realme of Ire-
and being of riatour a gode and fertill countrey, by rea-
son off the continewalld unquietnes and lak of policy, z.
knaw tb be rather a burthen unto zow then great advan-
tage; nd gilfit were peaceable may be very commodious.
For pacificatioi quhayroff, it is not onknowne to zow
quhat service we ar abill to do. Refuse not theyr conm-
moditeys, besides mony na quben they aroffred. Quhiks
albeit I itudv not to amplify and dilate, yet is na othe'r
countrey able to offer zow the Iyke, and are the rather to
be embraced, for that zour auincetoars, by all meanes, maift
ernefily futed our amity, and yet it was not theyr hap to
come by it. The mater hes almaift carryed me beyond the
boundes of a lattre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zowo
after I havegeven you this note. I wald wis that ze, and
they that ar learned, fould rede the twa former orations
of Demoithenes. called Olynthiaca, and confidere quhat
counfall that wyfe oratourgave to the Athenians, his coun-
trymen, in alykecafe; quhilk hes so great affi.ite withthis
cause of ours, that every word theaof myght be applyed
to our purpos. There may ze learne ot him quhat ad-
vise is to be followed, when zour nyghtbours hous is on
fyre; Thus I bid zow heartily fareweill. From Sant An-
drews, the 20th of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 28.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, from the camp before Leith, 29th
of April, 56o.

An Or;^Ti I W LL only, for this time, discharge myfrlf of my
Ofice. promise to the earl of Huntly, who so defyrcth to

be recommended to you, as one, who with all his hea'rt
favoureth this cause, to the lttcrmol of his power. Hilf
the worJs that cnmc out of his mouth were able to per-
fuadc an nexpcricn:cd man to fpcak farther in his be-

half,

half, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your ho-
nour tojudge of him, as of a man not unknown to you,
and will myself always measure my thoughts, as he lhall
deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great
persuasion, he hath iubfcribed with the ref of the lords
to join with them in this action; whatfomever he can in.
vent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath pronifed to
do, with olemn protestation, and many words; he trust-
eth to adjoin many to this cause; and faith surely that no
man hall lie where he taketh part. e hath this day sub-
fcribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith,
that there was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 242.)
Randolph to Cecil, oth August 1560. From

Ldinburgh.

SINCE the 29th of July, at what time wrote lat An,,I
to your honour, I have heard of nothing worth the dieP

reporting. At this prefint it may please you to know, that Of
the most part of the nobles are here arrived, as your ho-
nour hall receive their names in writing. The earl of
Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chofea
speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker as there men
term it. 'The firfi day of their fitting in parliament will
be on Thursday next. Hitherto as many as have been
prefcnt of the lords have communed and devised of certain
heads then to be propounded, as, who shall be sent into
France, who into England. It is much easier to find them
than the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved upon
that for England the Maficr of Maxwell, and laird of
,idington. For France, Pitarrow and the Justice Clerk.
Also they he consultcd whom they think mectet to
name for the 7XIV. of the which the XlI. counsellors
nuft be chosen. They intend very ihorly to fend away
Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of thote
they (hall chufe; and also to rcquire the Ikng and queen's
content unto this parliament. They have I!evifed how to
have the contrat with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of tne agree.
meat between them and their king and queen ratified.

Tbhel

These things yet have only been had in communication.
For the confirmation of the contraa with England I
have no doubt; for that I hear many men very like the
fame, as the Earl of Athol, the Earl of Sutherland, the
L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with L. James. The
Lord James requefled me this present day to bring the
contrac unto him. I intend also, this day, to speak un-
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he pro-
nifed in my hearing to subscribe, and then presently
would have done it, if the contrat could have been had.
For the more aflurancc against all inconvenients, I would,
besides that, that I trust it hall be ratified in parliament,
that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and
set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monu-
ment, tho' the aa of parliament be hereafter difannulled.
If it might, therefore, fland with your advice, that the
lords might be written unto, now that they are here pre-
sent to that effea, or that I might receive from your Hon',
ibme earned charge to travel herein, I doubt not but it
would serve to good purpolc. If it might be also known
with what fubfantial and effeAiouswords or charge you de-
lire to have it confi: ned, I think no great difficulty would
be made. The Earl Marfial has oft been moved to sub-
scribe, he ufeth mo delays then men judged he would.
His on told me yesterday, that he would Ipeak with me
at leisure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to what
purpose: I havecaufed L. James to be the earnester with
the L. Marshal, fur his authority's fake, when of late
it was in consultation by what means it might be wrought,
that the amity between these two realms might be
perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion, one said
that he knew of no other, but by making them bth
one, and that in hope of that mo things were onc,
than would otherwise have ever been granted ; the earl
of Argyll advised him earncfily to stick unto that, that he
had promised, that it hould pars his power and all the
crafty knaves of hiscounfel, (I am bold to use unto your
H. his own words) to bleak so godly a purpose.
This talk liked well the assisters, howfomcver it
pleated him to whom it was spoken unto. The barons,
who in time past have been of the parliament, had
yesterday a convention among themselves in the church,
V1 very honest and quiet fort; they thought it good to
iequire to be reflored unto their acient liberty, to have

voice

Viece in parliament. They presented that day a bill
unto the lords to that effet, a copy whereof haill be
sent as oon as it can be had. It was answered unto
gently and taken in good part. It was referred unto the
lords of the articles, when they are chosen to resolve
thereupon. --- Here fllows a long paragraph concern-
ing bfrti feations of Dunbar, &c. --- This present
morning, viz. the 9th, I underfood, that the lords
intended to be at the parliament, which caused me ome-
what to flay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn
worth the reporting unto your Hon'. The lords, at ten
of the clock, aflembled themselves at the palace, where
the duke lieth; from whence they departed towards the
Talbooth, as they were in dignity. Each one being set
in his feat, in such order as your H. hall receive them
in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were
laid in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the L.
of Lidington began his oration. He excused his infuffici-
ency to occupy that place. He made a brief discourse of
things palt, and of what neceilitv men were forced unto
for the defence of their country, what remedy and support
it pleased God to fend them in the time of their necelit-
ty, how much he were bound heartily to acknowledge it,
and to requite it. He took away the persuasion that was
in many men's minds that lay back, that miideemed other
things to be meant than was attempted. He advised all
eflates to lay all particulars apart, and to bend themselves
wholly to the true service of God and of their country.
He willed them to remember in what slate it had been
of long time for lack of government, and excrcife ofjufiice.
In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity and hearty
friendship, and to live with one another as members all
of one body-He prayed God long to maintain this peace
and amity with all princes, especially betwixt therealms of
England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended.
The clerk of register immediately flood up, and aked
them to what matter they would proceed: It was thought
necessary, that the articles of the peace fliould be confirmed
with the common consent, for that it was thought neccfli-
ry to fend them away with specd into France, and to re-
ceive the ratification of them as oon as might be. The
articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day
was appointed to have certain of the nobles subscribe un-
to them, and to put to their sea's, to be Icnt away by a

Vol. II. Y herald,

herald, who Dall aso bring the ratification again with
him. The barons, of whom have above written, re-
quired an answer to their request, somewhat was said un-
to the contrary. The barons alledged for them custom
and authority. It was in the end resolved, that there mhould
be chosen it to join with the lords of the articles, and
that if they, after good advisement, should find it right
and necefiry for the commonwealth, it Ifould be ratified
at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceed-
ed immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the
articles. The order is, that.the lords piritual chufe the
temporal, and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgefes
their own. There were chosen as in this other paper I
have written. This being done, the lords departed and ac-
companied the duke, all as far as the Bow, (which is the
gate going out of the high fireet) and many down into the
palace where he lieth. The town all in armour, the trum-
pets founding, and other mufick such as they have. Thus
much I report unto your honour of that that I did both
hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been used saving
in times long palt the lords have had parliament robes,
which are now with them wholly out of use.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and
temporal as are afembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erikine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Atiole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawford. Somervill. The bilbop of the Ifes.
Calils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors, I
Marlhall. Hume. know not how many.
Morton. Livingston.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Cathnefs. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fleming.
Monteith. Glamis.

Gray. Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons eleced to be

of the Articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Iies. Argyll. 'iillibardine.
Lord James Marlhall. Cunninghamhead.
Arbroath. Athole. Lochenvar.
Newbottle. Morton. Pittarrow.
Lindoris. Glencairn. Lundy.
Cowpar. Ruthvcn. Ten Provofls of the
Kinross. Erskine. chief towns, which
Kilwinning. Boyd. allo are of the Ar-

Lindsay. tides.

So that, with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole
is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the

disposition, and chiefly the affecions of there men, that are
at this time chosen lords of the articles. May it satisfy
your Honr. for this time to know that, by the common
opinion of men, there was not a fibftantialler or more sus-
ficient number of all forts of men chosen in Scotland these
many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good
to ensue. T'his prefcnt morning, viz. the oth,, the L.
of Lidington made me privy unto yourletter; he intend-
eth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some
hard points there are. He himself is determined rot to
go into France. He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh
lear of that, that moveth him molt, which is the ex-
ample of the las, that went on a more grateful mefnage
than he shall carry, and flood on other terms with their
prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth what
the whole world judgeth.
Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament,

held Aug. 1560.
M Y lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and ncloed n

h Iows, we the barons and freeholders of this Randolph'*

realm, your brethren in Christ, That whereas the causes of ,:tr ce
true religion, and common well of this realm, are, in this Aug. ,i6o.
prefcnt parliament, tu betreated, ordered, and eabli/h-

Y a ed,

ed, to the glory of God, and maintenance of the common
wealth; and we being the greatest number in proportion,
where the said causes concern, and has been, and yet are
ready to bear the greatest part of the charges thereuntil,
as well in peace as in war, both with our bodies and
with our goods; and feeing there is no place where we
may do better service now than in general councils and
parliaments, in giving our bes advice, and reason, vote
and councell for the furtherance thereof, for the mainte-
nanceof virtue, and punishment of vice, as use and cuRom
had been of old by ancient ads of parliament observed
in this realm; and whereby we understand that we ought
to be heard to reason, and vote in all causes concerning
the commonwealth, as well in councils as in parliaments;
otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and fa-
tutes be made concerning us and our estate, we not being
required and suffered to reason and vote at the making
thereof, that the famefhould not oblige us to stand there-
to. Therefore it will please your lordships to take con-
fideration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be born
by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this
present parliament, and all counfells, where the common
well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, coun-
fell and vote, o that, without the fame, your lordships
would uffer nothing to be paled and concluded in par-
liament or councils aforesaid; and that all ats of par-
liament made, in times pafl, concerning us for our place
and estate, and in our favour, be at this present parlia-
ment, confirmed, approved and ratified, and a of par-
liament made thereupon. And your lordships answer
humbly beseeches.

Of the /uccfs of ths petition, the followin. account is given

by Randolph; Lett. to Cccil, l9. Aug. 156o. The matters
concluded and pas by common content on Saturday last,
in fch olemin fort as the sirs day that the) aflimbled, are
these. Firif, that the barons according to an old a of
parliament, made in the time of James I. in the year ot
God 1427, hall have free voice in palliamcnt, this at
palled without any contradicfion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 252.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the English refi.

dent, to the right worlhipful Sir William Cecil,
km. principal fccretary to the queen's majesty.

Have received your honour's letters of the sirs of this A.
month, written at Ofyes in Efiex, and also a letter un- 5s6 Cotr.

to the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come out of ib.. ;o.
France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland
is nothing changed of her purpose in home coming. I
assure your honour that will be a stout adventure for a
sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may
happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily hec
may be received when the cometh to land of a great num-
ber, who are utterly persuaded that the intendeth their
utter ruin, come when the will; the preparance is very
small whenfcever that he arrive, scarcely any man can be
persuaded that the hath any such thought in her head. I
have lhown your honour's letters unto the lord James, lord
Morton, lord Ledington, they with as your honour duth,
that he might be flayed yet for a fpacc, and if it were
not for their obedience fake, ome of them care not tho'
they never saw her face. They travel what they can to
prevent the wicked devices of these mischievous purpof'cs
of her ministers, but I fear that that will always be found
that filij hjus feculi, they do what they can to stand with
the religion, and to maintain amity with their neighbours;
they have also need o look unto themselves, for their ha-
zard is great, and that they fee there is no remedy inor
safety for themselves, but to repose themselves upon the
queen's majesty, our sovereign's favours and lupporc.
Friends abroad they have none, nor many in whom they
may trust at home. There are in mind hortlyto try what
they may be aured at of the queen's majelty, and wh.t
they may afiuredly perform of that they intend to ofr :o:
their parties. This the queen of Scotland above all other
things doubteth; thi; he eeketh by all means to pre-
vent; and hath cauld St. Conie, in her name, earneftl} :,
write to charge him that no such things be aemp:cid !--
fore her coming home; for that it is said, that tidv u.,,
already arrived here out of England for the purpl(l', w!.,t
Ltmblant fomcvcr the noblemen do make, tli.; tl1.Y .1;

Y 3 .

grieved with their queen's refusal, that cometh far from
their heart. They intend to expostulate with me here-
upon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If she
thrust all Englishmen out of this country, I doubt not
but there will be some of her own that will bear us Come
kindneft. Of me she lhall be quit, o oon as it pleafeth
the queen's majesty my mistress no longer to use my service
in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had, with
the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that
they are of mind that immediately of the next convention,
I shall repair towards you with their determinations, and
resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice
is earnestly required, and shortly looked for. Whatfom-
ever I desire my'elf, I know my will ought to be fubje
unto the queen my sovereign's pleasure, but to content
mnyfelf, would God I were o happy as to serve her majefiy
in as mean a ate as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit
of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of
her majesty's service, but because my time and years re-
quire some place of more repose and quietness than 1 find
in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when other
troubles in this country arise, or ought shall be required of
me to the advancement of her majefly' service, that ei-
ther my will is not able to compass, or my credit fuffi-
cient to work to that effect, as perchance hall be looked
for at my hands. As your honour hath been a means of
my continuance in this room, o I trust that I flall find
that continual favour at your hands, that so oon as it shall
stand with the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this
place unto some far worthier than I am myself, and in the
mean season, have my course directed by your good ad-
vice how I may by my contrivance do some such service,
as may be agreeable to her majesty's will and pleasure.

THeE few words, I am bold to write unto your ho-

nour of myself. For the reft, where that is wilhed that
the lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I assure
your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old
and accustomed manner of doing, and feeing that they
have brought that unto this point, and hould now prevail,
they were unworthy of their lives.

Ifind not that they are purposed so to leave the mat-

ter. I doubt more her money than I do her fair words;
and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her

own
4

own here I know there is no ure or ready means to get
it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this time
unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to satisfy your
desire, in knowledge of the present fate of things here.
Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever bes, that
lie come not; but if the do come, to let her know, at
the first, what he mhall find, which is due obedience,
and willing service, if he embrace Christ, and defre to
live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you
have lat received, your honour omewhat underfiandeth
of Mr. Knox himself, and also of others, what is deter-
mined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus to-
gether with what comfort fomever it will please you to
give him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth not
utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he
is so fore charged with by his own queen, that her majesty
will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a
great comfort unto him, and will content many others;
his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with Eng-
land, and that God will never susser men to be so ungrate,
as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deftruaion
of them, that have saved their lives, and reflored their
country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble
your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between
these two realms that God may he glorified to them of
thi world.-At Edenbourg the gth of August, 561.

No. VI. (Vol I. p. 262.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefi,

our right dear and well-beloved filter and cousin the
queen of Scotland.

our right dear and right well-beloved siser and cou- p U,'.

n,we greet you well. The Lord of St. Cofme brought (;c, tfror. a
to us your letters, dated the 8th of this prcfent at Ab- coly.
bevile, whereby ye signify, that although by the answer
brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might have had
occasion to have entered into (ome doubt of our amity, vet

Y after

after certain purposes palred betwixt you and our ambaf-
fador, you would aflure us of your good meaning to live
with us in amity, and for your purpole therein ye require
us to give credit to the laid St. Colme. We have there-
unto thought good to answer as followeth. The fame
St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on yourpart,
for your excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself
made to our ambaflador, and we have briefly answered to
every the fame points, as he can hew you: and if he
ihall not so do, yet lealf in the mean season you might be
induced to think that your reasons has satisfied us, lomer-
ally we assure you, that to our requests your answer can-
not be reputed for a fatisfat ion. For we require no be-
nefit of you, but that you will perform your promise where-
unto you are bound by your eal and your hand, for the
refusal whereof we fee no reason :lledged can serve. Nei-
ther covet we any thing, but that which is in your own
power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words
and speech doth cons:';, that which your late huband's
our good brother's ambaladors andl you concluded, that
which your own nobility and peop'e were made privy un-
to, that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us,
yea that, without which, no perfect amity can continue
betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt
not but ye will perceive, allow and accomplilh. Never-
thelefs, perceiving by the report of the bringer, that you
mean furthwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the advice of your council in Scotland, we are content to
suspend our conceipt of all unkindness, and do assure you
that we be fully rcfolved, upon this being performed, to
unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood
with you as quietly, friendly, yea as assuredly in the knot
of friendship, as we be in the knot of nature and blood.
And herein we be o earneily determined, that the world
ihould fee if the contrary hould follow, (which God for-
bid) the very occasion to be in you and not in us; as the
story witnefleth the like of the king your father, our uncle,
with whom our father fuught to have knit a perpetual
bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of which
matter we know there remain with us, and we think
with you, sundry witnefeis of our father's earnest god
meaning, and of the eror vwhereunto divers ril council-
lors induced your father; or finally where it teemeth that
report had been made unto you, that we had lent our

admiral

admiral to the eas with our navy to empeache your pas-
sage, both your servants do well understand how false
that is, knowing for a truth that we have not any more
than two or three mall barks upon the seas, to apprehend
certain.pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost com-
pelled, by the earnest complaint of the ambassador of
our good brother the king of Spain, madeof certain Scot-
tifhmen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of
letters of marque, of which matter alfowe earnefily require
you at your coming to your realme, to have ome good
consideration, and the rather for refpea that ought to be
betwixt your realme and the countries of us, of France,
of Spain, and of the house of Burgundy. And so, right
excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend
as to you with molt earnell rcqucst, not to neglet these
our friendly and fifterlv ofrers of friendthip, which, before
God, we mean and intend to accomplifl. Given under
our signet at Henyngham the 6th of Augut, in the third
year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 295.)
A letterof Randolph ro the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's majesty.

F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had rth of
nothing worth the writing unto your honour.-Be- May, 563.

Paper Ot-

fore his coming we had so little to hint upon, that we fice, from
did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, the Origi-
matkinlg, and running at the ring, and such like. He "al
brought with him luch a number of letters, and such abun-
dance of news, that for the spice of three days, we gave
ourselves to nothing elle but to reading of writings, and
hearing of tales many lb truly reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris
narrationibus. Among all his tidings, for the mo(l as-
fured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is that the cardinal o Lorraine, at his being with
the emperor, moved a marrrige between his youngest son,
the duke of Altruchr, and this queen; wherein he hath
so far travailed, that it bath alrc.ily come unto this point,
that ifhc find it good, the laid duke will out of hand fend

hither

hither his embaffador, and farther proceed to the confumr
mation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be and
to the intent her mind may be the better known, la Croch
is ent unto her with this message from the cardinal, who
bath promised unto the emperor, to have word again be.
fere the end of May and for this cause a Croch is ready
for his departure, and his letters writing both day and
night. This queen being before advertized of his toward-
ness, by many means, hath fought far off, to know my
lord of Murray's mind herein, but would never so plainly
deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is,
or how the is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but only
this man's th.t laR arrived, and alfuredly until the L. of
Lidington's return, (he will do what he can to keep
that secret, and because resolution in his absence cannot be
taken, she will, for this time, return la Croch with requefi,
to have longer time to devise; and after, with the most
speed the can, he fully purpofeth to advertize him, I mean
her uncle the cardinal, of her mind. Of this matter the
L. of Lidington is made privy. I know not whether by
some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since
his arrival in France, divers letters have pafled between
her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some,
as much as was written in sypher, is kept unto themselves.
Whether also the L. of I.idington hath had conference
with the Spanish ambafiador in Enrland of this matter,
or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means,
to get true knowledge thereof. Guesses or furmizes in
so grave matters, I would be loth to write for verities.
This also your honour may take for truth, that the em-
peror hath offered with his on, for this queen's dower,
the county of Tyroll, which is said to be worth 30,000
franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote
a letter unto this queen, out of France not long since.
This is all that prefcntlv I can write unto your honour
hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your ho-
nour (hall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scot-

tih man, that last came into there parts, he brought alob
letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of France.
I perceive, divers ways, that Ncwhaven is forre cloed,
but 1 am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know

they

they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not ray as
the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' From
hence I do afiure them, what means fomever they make,
or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to re-
ceive but mall comfort, for all their long allie. We
fiand daily in doubt what friendhip we lhall need our-
self, except we put better order unto our miruled papifis,
than yet we do, or know how to bring to pass that we
may be void of their comber.

To morrow, the i5th of this inflant, the queen de-

parteth of this town, towards Edenborough. If my hap
be good, you flall thoroughly hear ome merry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next he
{hall be arraigned, and five other prierts, for their mafling
at Easter last. Thus most humbly I take my leave; at
St. Andrews the I5th of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 304.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the
queen's majesty.

M nAY it please your honour, the 7th of this instant, loth of
Vl Rowlet, this queen's secretary, arrived here; he April, i56l.
reporteth very honeitly of his good usage, he brought frP theoff
with him many letters unto the queen that came out ofriginalinhis
France, full of lamentation and frrow. She receih'cd uwn hand.
from the queen mother two letters, the one contained
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the
Rate of France as then it was, as in what fort things were
accorded, and what farther was intended for the appeasing
of the discords there, not miftrufling but that if rcafon
could not be had at the queen of England's hands, but
that the realm of France hould find her ready and will-
ing to upport and defend the right thereof, as by friend-
ihip and old alliance between the two realms he is
bound.

How well there words do agree with her doings, your

honour can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
unto this queen, (which I aflure you honour is true) you
may afluredly know, that nothing hall be left undone

of

of her part, that may move debate or controverfie be.
tween this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much muled at by the queen herself, how this

new kndnefs came about, that at this time he received
two long letters written all with her own hand, faying, all
the time since her return he never received half so many
lines, as were in one of the letters, which I can myself
testify by the queen's own faying, and other good afu-
rance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can
also farther aflure your honour, that this queen hath fayed
that she knoweth now, that the friendship of the queen's
majefiy my sovereign may itand her more in lead, than
that of her good mother in France, and as Ihe is defir-
ous of them both, so will he not lore the one for the
other. I may allo farther anure your honour, that what-
fomever the occasion is, this queen hath omewhat in her
heart that will burst out in time, which will manifefi that
some unkindness hath passed between them, that will not
be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, The faith
that the queen mother might have used the matter other-
wile than Mhe hath done, and doth much doubt what ihall
be the success of her great dcfire to govern alone, in all
things to have her will. Seeing then that presently they
fland in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better
to confirm her in that mind, (this queen I mean) than
to speak any word that might cause her to conceive bet-
ter of the other. And yet I am aflured e shall receive
as friendly letters, and as many good words from this
queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the
queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Ly-
dington of that purpole, {he did write unto this queen
., 1I know not, but if he do, I think it hard if your ho-
lnour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I per-
chance by some means here. It may, perchance, be writ-
ten only by that queen, to try what answer this queen
will give, or nderitand what mind he beareth unto the
queen's majesty our sovereign. The queen knoweth now
that the earl Bothewell is lent for to London. She cau-
ied a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I anwvcred
that I knew none other, but that his takers were in con-
troverfy who took him, and that it hould be judged
there. I know that he thinketh much that he is not lint
into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were
lcrt, he would be refrved for an evil instrument. If

the

the Lord of Lidington have not been plain with your ho-
nour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his
friends here, but most of all to himself. There comes
a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into
credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 33.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Le-

thington, younger secretary for the time, in the
parliament holden by our sovereign the king's
mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
time of the rellitution of Umquile Matthew
Earl of Lenox.

M Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be
V1M that it has pleated her majesty mft graciously to
utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuflici-
ently conceived the cause of this your present aflembly;
yet having her majesty's commandment to supply my
Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee de-
ceased, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more
at large.

NOTOUR it is, how in her Highness's minority, a

process of forfaltour was decreed against my Lord of Len-
nox, for certain offences alledged committed by him,
specified in the dome and cenfement of Parliament gi-
ven thereupon; by reafnn whereof he has this long time
been exiled, and abfcnr forth of his native country, how
grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
by divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her Ma-
jeity's knowledge, not only containing mot humble and
due fubmiflion, hut always bearing witnces of his good
devotion to her Majesty, his natural princess, and earnest
affetion he had to her highncfe most humble service, if
it hould please her Majesty of her clemency to make him
able to enjoy the benefit of a t;uhject; mny refpers
might have moved her Highness favourably to incline to
his request, as the anciency of his houlc, and he fir-
name he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her
maiefty by affinity, by rcalon of my l.adv Margaret her
highnclf's aunt, and divers other his good confidera-
tions, as alfl the c*l'tlou rqucft of her good fiflcr the

(, ucCc:'s

Queen's Majety of England, whole earnest commendation
was not of leaf moment, besides that of her own natu-
ral, her majesty has a certain inclination to pity the de-
cay of noble houes, and as we heard, by her own report,
has a great deal more pleasure to be the infrument of
the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antient
blood, than to have matter minifired of the decay or
overthrew of any good race. Upon this occasion, her
majesty the more tenderly looked upon his request, and
her good filer the Queen of England's favourable letter,
written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration
whereof not only has ihe granted unto him her letter of
reffitution, byway of grace, but also licensed him to pur-
sue, by way of redu&ion, the remedies provided by the
law for such as think themselves grieved by anyjudgment,
unorderly led, and to have the process reversed; for exa-
mination whereof, it has pleased her majesty presently to
aflemble you the three eates of this her realme, by
whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her majesty's
mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and pracice ob-
served in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
proceedings at this time, beingby thatwe have heard, thus
as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter
we have in hand give me not occasion to fay a few more
words, not far different from the fame subjea, wherein
I would extend the circumstances more largely. If I
feared not to offend her highness, whose presence and
modet nature abhors long speaking and adulation, and
so will compel me to rpeak uch things, as may seem to
tend to any good and perfet point; and least it hould
be compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I hould
omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may ac-
cept this, and the like demonfirations of her gentill na-
ture; whose gracious behaviour towards all her subje&s,
in general, may serve for a good proof of that felicity,
we may look for under her happy government, o long
as it hall please God to grant her unto us; for a good
harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be-
tween the prince and the fubjcts mufl be reciproque;
as by her majesty's prudence wc enjoy this present peace
with all foreign nations, and quietness among yourselves,
in such fort, that I think justly it may be affirmed Scot-
land, in no man's age that prefcntly lives, was in greater

trail-

tranquillity; so is it the duty of all us her loving fubjeic
to acknowledge the fame as a mod high benefit, proceed-
ing from the good government of her majesty, declaring
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to herma-
jeity such due obedience, as a juR prince may look for
at the hands of faiiiful and obedient fubjeas. I mean
no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her
nature does detef, but such as proceeds from the con-
templation of her modest kind of regiment, will for love
and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good proof
have we all in general had of her majesty's benignity
there three years, that he has lived in the government
overyou, and many of you have largely tailed of her large
liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her high-
ness has had large appearance of your dutiful obedience,
so it becomes you to continue, as we have begun, in con-
fideration of the many nora. le examples of her clemency
above others her good qualities, and to abhor and detest
all false bruites and rumours, which are the most pestilent
evils that can be in any common weil, and the owers and
inventors thereof. Then may we be well aliured to have
of her an most gracious princefie, and the most faithful and
loving fubjeAs; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of
the politic bodies, whereof I made mention before, as
the glory thereof hall partly appertain to her majesty,
so iliall no small praise acid unspeakable commodity re-
dound therethrough to you all universally l;.r subje&s.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 324.)
The perils and troubles that may prefenrly ensue,

and in time to come follow, to the Queen's ma-
jefly of England, and state of this realm, up-
on the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the
Lord Darley.
I'IRST, the minds of such as b aff'clec! to the Queen

of Scotts, cither for herinlf or for the opinion of

her pretence to this crown, or for the dfire t have
change of the forme of religion in this realm, or for the
difcontentation they have of the Queen's majesty, or her
fuccclioni, or of the fuccfilon of any other beside the

(QuClen

Queen of Scotts, hall be, by this marriage, ereed,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring
their desires to pa(s; and to make some eflimate what
persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the dan-
ger may be weighed; the fame may be compafled in those
forts either within the realm or without.

THE first are such as are specially devoted to the Queen

of Scotts, or to the Lord Darley, by bond of blood and al-
liance; as first all the house of Lorrain and Guise for her
part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such in
Scotland as be of their blood, and have received difplea-
fures by the Duke of Chatelherault and the Hamiltons.
The second are all manner of persons, both in this realm
and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
of Rome, and mislike of the religion now received; and
in these two forts are the substance of them comprehended,
that {hall take comfort in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be confidere4what perils and troubles
these kind of men Ihall intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their desires

is, and always shall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to
have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devisees may vary amongst themselves for the
compafing hereof, according to the accidents of the times,
and according to the impediments which they {hall find by
means of the Queen's majefly's ations and governments,
yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and pratices, {hall
wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts queen of
this realm, and todeprive our sovereign lady thereof; and
in their proceedings, there are two manners to be confider-
ed, whereof the one is far worse than the other; the one
is intended by them, that either from malicious blind-
nets in religion, or for natural affection to the queen of
Scotts, or the lord Darley, do persuade themselves that the
said queen of Scotts hath prsefntly more right to the crown
than our sovereign lady the queen, of wh.ch fort be all
their kindred on both fides, and all Iuch as are devoted to
popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-
where; the other is meant by them, which, with less
malice, are petfuaded that the queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to fuccced the queen's majesty
and her iue, of which fort few are without the realm,
but here within, and yet of them, not To many as are of
the contrary, and from thcfe two forts fiall the peril de-

vifcs

vires and pracices proceed. From the first, which ima-
gine the queen of Scots. to have perpetually right, are to
be looked for there perils. First, is it to he doubted the
devil will infect ome of them to imagine the hurt of the
life of our dear sovereign lady, by such nleans as the de-
vil hall suggest to them, although it is to be afluredly
hoped, that Almizhty God will, as he hath hitherto, ra-
cioufly protet and preserve her from such dangers. Se-
condly, there will be attempted, by perfuaions, by bruits,
by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of ool
fubjeds from the queen's majelly, and to counciliate thnem
to the queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers
and the north will be much solicited and labored. Third-
ly, there will be attempted causes of tome tumults and
rebellions, elpeciallv in the north towards Scotland, so as
thereupon may follow fume open enterprize lit by vio-
lence. Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's coun-
cil and friends, a new league made with rance, or Spain,
that shall be offensive to this realn, and a furtherance
to their tite. And it is also very likely, that they will
fct a foot as many pr..ticcs as they can, both upon the
frontiers and in Ireland, to occafiun the queen's majesty
to increale and continue her charge thereby, to retain her
from being mighty or potent, and for the attempting of
all there things, many devilss will be imagined, from ti:ne
to time, and no negligcnce will therein appear.

FROM the second ort, which mean no other favour to

the queen of Scotts, but that fie hould succeed in title
to the queen's majety, is not much to be feared, but
that they will content themselves to fee not only thequeen's
majesty not to marry, and o o impeach it, but to hope
that the queen of Scotts ihall have iflue, which they will
think to be more pleafible to all men, bccaure thereby the
crowns of England and Scotland {hall be united in one,
and thereby the occasion of war hall cease ; with which
persuasion many people mav be reduced, and abused to
incline themrelves to the part of t!le queen of Scot;s.

THE remedies against there perils.
VOL. II. Z A DJ-

A Duplicat.

411h f Ju1e A 1iimmary of the consultation and advice given
JrSS. Cott.
Lib. C. by the lords and others o the privy council.
I. si. s Colleeted out of the undry and several 'peechcs

of the laid counsellors.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain

Derby. Mr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Leicester, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

Queflions propounded were these two.
1. TIRST, what perils might ensue to the Queen's

J majesty, or this realm, of the marriage betwixt
the Queen of Scots, and the Lord Darnley.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy
the fame.

To the First.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced
by rome counsellors into only one.

1. First, that by this marriage, the Queen of Scotts,

(being not married) a great number in this realm not of
the worst fubjeas might be alienated in their minds from
their natural duties to her majesty, to depend upon the
success of this marriage of Scotland, as a mean to eitablifh
the fucceflion of both the crowns in the iflue of the fame
marriage, and so favour all devises and praticcs, that
should tend to the advancement of the queen of Scots.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of

them, which furthered the marriageof the Lord Darnlev,
was laid upon the trust of such as were papifis, as the
only mean,; left to rcftore the religion of Rome, it was
plainly to be fecn, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papitls would molt favour, maintain, anti fortify this
marriagc of the Lord Darnley, and would for furthLranitc
of fation in ligi on, devire all Incans andl practice ti

kut;:

could be within this realm, t (!infhrb the c;ttte of the
queen's majcfty, and the peace of the realm, ..;: confc-
quently to tchieve their purpofs by f;rcc, r;at:ir than
tail. By some other, theic perils havingi indecd manv
branches, were reduced, though fome-/.rh::t otherwifi, in-
to two forts, and thefc were in nature such as they ctuil
not be easily levered the one from the other, but wer:
knit and linckcd together, na:uii'.Ilv fr m'int:iinin the
one with the other. The fihrt f(s thicle fort of pris w .'s
that, by this marriage with the Lnrti Darnlev, t:lnec W'.s
plain intention to further the prctreni;ed title of tihel ;l n
of Scotts, not only to succeed the Quzeen's m;jcrty, a; in
her best amity he had profcfl'J, but th:at to occupy tih
queen's cftate, as whn Ihe was in p')w, r, Ihc lid nia:il-
fitly declare.

T'HE second wns, that hereby tie Rom;lh rcliion

flould he ercEtacd, :indtl inicr;llad d.i; :n tlhi.s rea m, :uil
thele two were thus knit ro:rcthcr. tli.:t the urtheraince
and maintenance of the itle al ld, in lithe:i:: of the re-
ligi, n of Rome within this realm ; r::i in like manner tlhe
furtherance cf the mrne religion Itooi by the titlc, tor
otherwiic the title hal no ftildation.

Proves of the firRf.) And to prove that the intention to

advance the title to diturb the queen's mcfty, mutl
needs ensue, was confidered that always the intention and
will of any pcrfon is molt manifcft, when their po'vcr is
grcatet, and contrary when power is lh.ill, then the in-
tention and will of every pcrlbn is covered ;nill lets I.cn.
So as when the qen of Scotts power vwa; grrc:tcit, by
her marriage with the dolphin of Franceli, being afrer-
wards French king, it manifefllv appeared of what mi(l
file, and all her friends were, iiiim then manitcltiv all
the meais that could be devili;d to impcach and tliiioi;i:1
the queen's inajcftv, firfl by writing? and puhlifhin;l her.
flt' in all countries queen of Engrland ; hn r:an',?in chlar.
ters, patents, and commiiilion, wi th tt ;:ilc, an. with
:he arms of England, both illh French ;ainl ;icort, wliich
charters remain still unlel'accd ; ;Uid t |)i)lt.'cute iit with
':ffcct, it is known what pre;::r:itilns of v,'.r weIre i.le,
::nil fLnt into Scotland ; anl wlih r fcr fr :tc.. 't fl lc.l-
lCledl in lureiii coiltnrilc ; c., ill wi,;:t rn:lner .a lhala'
tfl pea;ce was lm.lic by the r"reci , W'tli k:l I 'i l'liP t ., cil-
jily all the f.)rces of Ir ,. '

., !', aii the ril!t'; I',
iorce which byv GodJ pvni'v,,i a,: ..a.J .. ,.!' i m'-

7 .i ity

jelly contrary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by
her hulband's death, her fortune and power being chan-
ged, the intention began to hide itself, and although by
the Scottish queen's commissarys an accord was made at
Edenbiough, to reform all those titles, and claims, and
pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations,
the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And
so now, as soon as the shall feel her power, she will set
the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such errors
as were committed in the firef, her friends and allies will
amend the fame, and proceed substantially to her purpose.
By ome it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a subjet
of this realm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for
by this, he being of this realm, and having for the cause
of religion, and other refpeds, made a party here, should
encreafe by force with diminution of the power of the realm,
in that whatsoever power he could make by the sac-
tion of the papist, and other discontented persons here,
aiould be as it were deducted out of the power of this
realm; and by the marriage of a firanger, he could not
be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage he
should have a portion of her own power to serve her turn,
and a (mall portion of adverfariesat home in our own bow-
els, always eem more dangerous than treble the like
abroad; whereof the examples are in our own stories ma-
ny, that foreign powers never prevailed in this realm,
but with the help of ome at home. It was also remem-
bered, that teeing now before this attempt of marriage, it
is found, and manifft:ly fcen, that in every corner of the
realm, the faction that most favouteth the Scnttifh title,
i.s grown flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this courr,
both in hall and chamber, it could not be but, (except
good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage,
and by the pr.Aice of the fautors thereof, the fame fc-
tion would shortly encreafe, and grow so great and dang.' -
ous, as the rcdrcfs thereof would be anmor delperate. And
to this purpose it was rmmhbercd, how of l.te in per-
utin- of the fuhifancc of the jliices of the peace, in all
the countrys of the ralm, cantily a third was found fll;
anfured to be trultcd in the m.tttCr ofrel;inon, upon whicil
onily firing the queen of S s title Ruth hllg, andl forne
doubt might be, th.t thl frlicii., ol the earl of Lennox,
and hbi had more knos.edlc hc:e f than was thought,and

ther's,'

thereby madeavant now in Scotland, and their party was
so great in England as the queen's majesty durst not at-
tempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was
the um of the perils declared, being notwithstanding more
largely and plainly set out, and made so apparent by ma-
ny sure arguments, as no one of the council could deny
them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

THE question of this consultation was what were meet

to be done to avoid these perils, or else to divert the
force thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there were
a great number of particular devises propounded, and
yet the more part of them was reduced by some into three
heads.

1. THE firfi thought necefary by all persons, as the

only thing of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy
all these perrils, and many others, and such as without
it, no other remedy could be found sufficient, and that
was to obtain that the queen's majesty would marry, and
make therein no long delay.

2. THE second was to advance, eablifh, and fortify

indeed the profeflion of religion, both in Scotland and in
England, and to deminifli, weaken, and feeble the con-
trary.

3. THE third was, to proceed on sundry things, either

to disappoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the
hIcal, thereby to procure the Ifme not to be so hurtful to
this realm, as otherwise it will be.

'IHE sirs of these three hath no particular rights in

it, but an earnest and unfeigned dfire and luite, with all
liumblenefs, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majesty, that he would differ no
more time from marriage, whereby the good f'uljets of
the realn might tay their hearts, to depend uon her ma-
j.tly, and the issue of her body, without which no surety
can be devised to ascertain any person of continuance of
their families or pofleritie., to enjoy that which otherwise
should come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein

both truth and policy were joined together, had thefi
particulars.

Z 3 FIRST,

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in

the realm have taken occasion to comfort and incre.l
their lacion, both in England, Scotland, and abroad, with
a rulnour anl expecttion that the religion shall be hort-
l] chang.ed in this realm, by means that the bishops, by
the (i.rcen's aiety conmmandal ent, have of late dealt
Itrcig htly w itlh one pcr itns of good rcligion, bccaure they
had torblio; to wear cc tain apparel, and such like things,
i-cinii nlorw i form an:d accidents, than of any fubftar.cc,
i r. t.att is well kn:.vw. t:t her m.jelty had no meaning
to com;;rt the ai.lvi li.<ies, but only to maintain an uni-
s.,iijit) as wcll in tings extzrnal, as in the substance, nor

at; h.uh yi intcntin to make any change of the reli-

_',i'!n, as it is tiatillhed by Ilaws. It was thought by all
i',n i.c:y Ilcl.eti :l\, for the lU'pprelling of the pride and
;(.ro:.. :k V' tlce a,'vcrtLri.rs, i:t'hitlly hereby to notify,
by i li'.ciail tirnt'ls ta the two archbishops, that her
.or';- an;i;:;landljll):I was only to retain an uniformity,
;; ;.l ipt to n\ a ny t;cc alion to any permn to nrrsjudge of
l;cr In:i;c.:i y, V111 :c i h.lrn

c of any part of religion, but that

Illc di(i tertcrmi: : firlv to maiitain the form of her reli-

io,:, a, it wai. cia'It:Cd, aidt to punish such as did
th;cl!in \io'atc hIr laws-. Aiid in thcft points, some also
v:iihld t:'.it it ii:lht r!cal- her archbishops, that if they
h'i;l;f. i: c that thle I . rrlaics continued in taking occa-
i-n to t,:';iiy Ichir f.cilien, that in that cafe thcy should
>. a o. cration t.crciil, uitil the next parliamcnt, at
v:hich ti;l.e, Lmc tc!od, uniform, and decent order might
he ':eviici, and citablifhed, for uci ceremonies, so as
both u;;ii;)rllity and gravity might be retained amongit

1 'Itlh ;co:nd means was, that the quondam lifliop'.,

.:!. otlcrs, which h:id 'rciuled to acknowledge the quleen's
in;ljt i s power er r them, according to the law, and were
,,. iatc tdii;c rid in the ,I'.l:Tu time to filn(iry places
:II.;,.d, \;.lt' it i. I;l tlwnI thIlr ce'le not to advance their
ts.;i;..: , ,i1lt be r' r;lne toi til tower, or Iblnll othcr
I i;',: , \l;. : ,ly

h ;; iht inot have such liberty to seduce

,id vw'ci:C the ueii.ill' Iiajcfit's iubljcdts, as they diiy

Till. tl,iril !:,ctLn' was, that wv!icre the bifliop do

c.*mpl:l ll; t'. :t the t.ilre not .xtI cutc the ccclefiatfi ;l laws,
,, tic hiLtl i. ' L r. -!ii.o , t, l' fear of the premul( et
v.i;Lrcw:;il tihe ;:d c,
. .a. l w.iw) Cr'. ut thi :ca!: , bil 1 ir

LtCi;

befl asseted in religion, do threaten them, and in many
cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
cafes opened, some convenient authority mitht be given
them, from the queen's majesty, to continue during her
pleasure.

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudi-

cious ad unlawful books in English brought from beyond
seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and efpeci-
ally in the north, leducing of great numbers of good sub-
jedts, the like boldness whereof was never suffered in any
other princels's time, that ome ftreight order might be
given to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by
the judges, what manner of crime the lame is, to maintain
such books, made directly against her majesty's authority,
and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of
the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks,

fryers, and such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland,
and do fcrvein England, especially in the North, as curates
of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest
and conformable, may be banished out of the realm, for
that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the realm, in
many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings,

are on the other fide the ea, and from thence maintain
sedition in the realm; that livings may be better bestowed,
to the commodity of the realm, upon good fubjets.

THE eventh is, that the judges of the realm, having

no fnmall authority in this realm in governance of all pro-
perty of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's ma-
jefty, according to the laws of the realm, and o thereby
they hould for conscience fake maintain the queen's ma-
jelty's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and
avoid this marriage, or to divert the perrils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can

likely do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by
some that these means following might occasion the breach
of the marriage.

1. THAT the carl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. T1HA'r the works at Hcrwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrilon be there increaled.

Z 4 4. That

4. THAT al! the wardens put their frontiers in order
with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. THAT fonme noble person, as the Luke of Norfolk,

or the earl of Salop, or such other, be ent into York-
fhi:e, to be lieutenant general in the North.

6. 1'1IAT preparations be made of a power, to be in

readiness to fervc, either at Berwick, or to invade Scot-
land.

7. THAT p'efently lady Lennox be committed to some

place, where fle may be kept from giving or receiving
of itelligel.ce.

9. TIHAT the earl of Lennox and his son may he ent

for, and required to be sent home by the queen of Scots,
according to the treaty; and if they halfiiot cme. then
to denounce to the queen o;' Scots t.:e breach f the trea-
ty, and thereupon to enter with hoii'ity ; by which pro-
cceding, hope is conceived (o the fame be done in deeds
and not in (hews) t:ilr he marriage wil! be avoided, or
at the leai that it may be qua!ilcd from many perils; and
whatfoevir is to be done herein, is to be executed with
speed, whilfl he has a party in Scotland that favoureth
not the marriage, and before any league made by the
quetn of Scots with France or Spain.

SOME o:her allows well of ail rhefe proceedings, saving

of proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft,
and also to there particularities following.

o. T. AT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's

rcfuing, (lould be seized, and bestowed in gift or custody,
as shall please her majcfiy, upon good subjes.

11. ITHAr all manieltt favourers of the earl, in the

North, or elsewhere, be enquired for, and that they be,
by fundr means, well looked to.

A 2. TH A'r enquiry be made in the North, who have the

fiewardlhip of the queen's majesty's lands there, and that
no perfin, deserving mniftruft, be suffered to have gover-
sance or rule of any of her fubjecs or lands in the North,
but on!y to retain their fees, and more trusty person have
rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. THATr all fequient pandiages into this realm, to and

fiom Scotland, be retlrained o all Scottish men, saving
fulch as have falc conduct, or be especially recommended
fioin Mr. Randolph, as favouiers of the realm.

14. 'THAT fume intelligence be used with such in

Scot-

Scotland, as favour not the marriage, and they comforted
from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majefly's houlhold, chamber,

and pensioners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and
uncomely peech used by sundry against the late of the
realm.

16. THAT the younger son of the Earl of Lennox, Mr.

Charles, be remembered to some place where he may be
forth coming.

17. THAT confidering the faaion and title of the queen

of Scotts, hath now of long time received great favour,
and continued, by the queen's majesty's fvour herein to
the queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Ca-
tharine, whom he laid queen of Scotts accompted as a
competor unto her in pretence of title, it may please the
queen's majefly, by tome exterior a, to hew Come re-
miflion of her displeasure to the lady, ad to the earl of
Hartford, that the quten of Scotts thereby may find some
change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceed-
ing therein.

18. THAT whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North,
Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be
committed to a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that these advices being confidered by

her majcfty, it may please her to choose which of them
she liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and not
to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use

all means to put their intention in execution. Some by
praice, some by force, when time (hall serve, and no
time can serve so well the queen's majefsy to interrupt
the perils, as now at the first, before the queen of Scotts
purpolcs be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 335.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edin-

burgh the 3 ft of July 1565.

A Y it pleare your lordship, I have received your Cot. lib.

MV l lordship's letter by my servant, fufticient teftimo- f'. 9
ny of your lordship's favour towards me, whereof I think An Origi.

my nal.

my self always so aftured, that what other miflap soever
bcfal mr, 1 have cniough to conmfor my lflf with
thourh I have not at this time received neither according
to the need I t;nd, nor the necefity of the service that
a:n enploytd in, I will rather pals it, as 1 may with pati.
tricc, t trotule your lordship to be further futer for
me, when th. re is so little hope that any good will be
done fr le. I coubt nt but your lorjihip hath heard
by fich in.'urilaon as 1 have givrn from hence, what
the prelent iate of this country is, how this queen is now
bec r. a nmarried wife, and h;cc hufb:lnd, the sie!t fame day
of his marr;a-c, made a king. In their dtfires, hitheno,
they have found so much t: their contentnment, that if the
reft succeed and plolpcr accoi; nglv, they may think them-
lelves much happier, than there is ;ipp arance that they
(hall be, so many discontented min i, f n;much mifliking
of the lubjcids to have these mni'tcrs thus . rdcred, and in
this fort to be brought to pal:s; I never heard of any
marriage, so little hope, so little c mfort as menl do talk,
was never seen, at any time, when m.n hould most have
(hewed themlelves to rejoice, if that consideration of her
own honour and well of her country had been had as ap-
pertained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the
i,.'rthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with the
quecn's mjeflv, and the dellruCtion of as many of the no-
blitv a;s flie hth miliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
iairerAl uto. To Ife all these inconveniencysapproach-
:i:., there arc a ::od number that may sooner lament
with themfclves, and complain to their neighbours, than
hc abile to find rmei!ic to help them, some attempt with
all the torce the: h.vc, but are too weak to do any good,
what is requilcd otherways, or what means there s made
,'our i.;rnlip k n.)v, cth; what will be anifveared, or what
wil lie dole, t!i ri. i, we arc in great doubt, and though
(mir i:cn;t I' , vc L.r It good unto uts, yet do we so much
: r..r y ,ur (:l.l.'\, thait our rin (hall picvclnt your support
v.'h'en cIci! is once taken. Nothing so ncedful, as speedy
t..':Cui' . Upion the queen's mi;jcety, we whoily de-
pend, in her naicltly's hands it standeth to save our lives,
o; it) :;t: r us to pcrifh; greater honour her majesty can-
i;'', I..a , t hli; in tihat which lyeth in her niajcly's power to
!Jo) fr us; the fulnis are not greut, the numbers of men
.,re not many that wc (clire ; many will daily be found, tho'
:l;.s; wili tbe I;nc clirc; mniii grow dayly, thouih, iat

this

this time, I think her majcfly hall loose but few; her
friends here being once taken away, where will her ma-
icfy find the like; I peak least of that whi'h I think is
molt earnefily intended by this queen, and hr h:ifbiind,
when by him it was lately said, that lie ccd more for
the papists in England, than he did for the motetlants in
Scotland; if therefore, his hopes be so grena in the papifis
of England, what may your lordship believe that he think-
eth of the protestants there; for his birth, I;r his n:rri-
tour, for the honor he bath to be of kine to the qtluc,
my mistress, if in preferring those that are thequcen's ma-
jefties worst fubjeEts to those that are her bect, he declareth
what mind he beareth to the queen's niajcfties self, any
man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil
forgotten; he would now fCem to be indifferent to both
the religions, she to use her nroafs, and he to come some-
times to the preaching; they were married with all the
solemnitics of the popili time, IUving that he heard not
the mass; his speech and tllk argueth his mind, ;:nd yet
would he fain seem to the world that he were of ome re-
ligion ; his words to all men, against whom he conceiv-
eth any displeasure how unjust soever it be, o proud and
fpitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of the world,
than he that, not long since, we have seen and known
the lord Darnleyv; he looketh now for reverence of many
that have little will to give it him; and rome there are
that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All ho-
nour that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, he
hath it wholly and fully; all praises that may be lp"ken
of him, he lacketh not from herfl!f; all dignities that
she can indue him with, which are already given and grant-
ed; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not himn; and
what may 1 fay more, Ihe hath given over to him her
whole will, to be ruled and guided as himfilf hetl liketi;
The can as much prevail with him, in any thing that ii
agaillt his will, as your lordship may with me to perliade
that I should hang myself; this last dignity out of hand
to have been proclaimed king, file would have it de-ferri
untill it were agreed by parliament, or he had been him-
elf z2 years of age, that things done in his name ini;gh
have the better authority. He would, ill no cal:, I L.
it deferred one day, and either then or never ; wheretpln,
this doubt is risen amonift our men of !;aw whether Ih:
being clad with a husband, and her huf,.ntl not tw'nty

o;>>;

one years, any thing without parliament can be of
flrength, that is done between them; upon Saturday at
afternoon, there matters were long in debating. And be-
fore they were well resolved upon, at nine hoursat night,
by three heralds, at found of the trumpet he was proclaim-
ed king. This was the night before the marriage this
day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that
were in the toun, wereprefent at the proclaiming of him
again, where no man said so much as Amen, saving his fa-
ther, that cried out aloud God save his queen. The man-
ner of the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the
morning between five and fix, she was conveyed by divers
of her nobles to the chapell; ihe had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourn-
ing hood, not unlike unto that, which she wore thedoul-
full day of the burial of her husband : he was led into
the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there
was fle left untill her husband came, who also was con-
veyed by the fame lords, the minister priests, two, do
there receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and
an ifrument taken by a Notour that no man said against
them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not
proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were
three, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her fin-
ger; they kneel together, and many prayers fid over
them, flie tarriezh out the mass, and he taketh a kifs, and
leavcth her there, and went to her chamber, whither with-
in a space fhc followeth; and being required, according to
the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those
lorrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant
life, after ome pretty rcfufall, more I believe for manner
fdkc than grief of heart, flie filffcreth them that flood
by, every man that could approach, to take out a pin,
and ft bein. committed to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but wtnt not to bed, to lignifie to the world, that
it was not lull that moved them to marry, but only the
ecefity of hercountry, not, if God will, long to leave it
dcftitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given
of a:l things to make the worst, would that it should be
be 1 eved, that they knew each other before that they came
there ; I would not your lordflip should so believe it, the
likelihoods are so great to the contrary, that if it were
pc;-ible to fee f.. h an a done, I would not beleve it.
After the marti.:gc followeth commonly great cheer and

dancing;

dancing: to their dinner they were conveyed by the whole
nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried; mony
thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as
were happy to get any part; they dine both at one table,
she upon the upper hand, there serve her these earls Athole
Sewerj Morton Carver, Craufoord Cup-bearer; these serve
him in like offices, earls Eglington, Cassels, and Glen-
cairn; after dinner they danced a while, and then retired
themselves till the hour of supper; and as they dined o
do they sup, ome dancing there was, and o they go to
bed; of all this I have written to your lordship I am not
Oculatis testis, to this, but of the verity your lordship
shall not need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was
sent for to have been at the supper, but like a currilh or
uncourtly carle I refued to be there; and yet that which
your lordship may think might move me much, to have
had the fight of my miitrefs, of whom there eighteen days
by jufl account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by
all that fort as a very evil person, which in my heart
do well allow, and like of myself the better, for vet can
I not find either hones or good that liketh their doings.
I leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, crav-
ing pardon for my long silence, I have more ado than I
am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad by night
than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of
that which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your
lordhip, I am sure, is partaken of such letters as I write
to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he Ihall be to this,
to save me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most
humbly I take my leave at Edingburgh, the la' a'.y of
July 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 339.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable

Sir Williart Cecil knt. her majefly's principal
secretary, and one of her highnels's privy coun-
cil.

FTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon , o st

A captain Brickw.ll came hither, who brouht with m.6;.
him the queen's majesty's letters containing her full re- i'apTofic:
solution, and pleasure for all things he had in ch.Arge to .il .
give information of, favinl that or the aid of the lords

cf

,f the. congregation, there is nothing determined, or at
the lealt c.:prejied in the fame letters, and for that pur-
pose received 1, this morning, a letter subscribed by the
Juke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving
to be holpen with 300 harquebufyers out of this garri-
son, for their better defence. And albeit, I know right
well the go dnefs of their cause, and the queen's majesty
our sovereign's good will, and care towards them; and
do also undcrfhand that it were very requilite to have them
holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner
decided, and that it now standeth upon their utter over-
throw and undoing, since the queen's part is at the least
5000, and they not much above 0ooo; besides, that the
queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do
yet want the power that the earl of Arguyle hould
bring to them, w.ho is not yetjoined with theirs; I have
thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her m.ijefty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how,
1 shall anfwcr them, or otherwise deal in this matter,
now at this their extreme neceflity. For, on the one
fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow,
.nd the miserable fubvcrfion of religion there; and, on
the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty a mat-
ter as this is, (albeit it he but of a few soldiers, for a small
time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, per-
advcnture, upon our heads Come wilful warrs, and in the
mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the
whole but 8'o) without any grant of new supply for the
fme ; and by that means also, to leave the marches here
the more fulject to invasion, while in the mean eafon
new helps me p;eplrilg ; to this know not I what to fay
or how to do. And so much more I marvel thereof, as
that having fl many times written touching this matter,
iio rolutc determination cometh. And lb between tec
writing, ;nd looking for answer, the occalon cannot pass,
b.! muit net

n s roceed and hA;ve fucccfs. *God turn it to

Iij S.lory; bt iurelv all mens reason hath great cause to
t'f;ir it. Such a piih it is nnw comn unto, as this little
lu 'ply would do munch gno'l to advance God's honour, to
coniiiinuc her majelvy'. great ;and careful memory of them,
anln t prcl.re: a great mnatiy noblemen and gentlemen.
It it b not now hlpcin. it is gone for ever. Your good
wil ajs!d .fl',1 o!;nt i!hat way, do nnthing mifirlif, and

:.i; :i 1:l ;..' fihch ,>; advice as by iv mcans I can.

r -

I received from these lords two papers inclosed, the effct
whereof hall appear unto you.. For those matters that
captain Brickwell brought, I lhall answer you by my next,
and herewith fend you two letters from Mr. Randolph,
both received this day. By him you (hall hear that the
proteflants are retired from Edenborough, further off.
So as I hope your resolution for their aid hall come in
time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now
so presently need them; and so with my hearty thanks
commit you to God. From Berwick, this d of Sept.
1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 339.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.
U PON the advertisements lately received from you, ; ':t,

with such other things as came also from the lord ;6.

Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole mat- ip'.prOtce.
ter well confidered, we have thus determined. We will,
with all the speed that we can, fend to you 300ol. to he
thus used. If you shall certainly understand that the ea.rl
of Murray hath such want of money, as the imprefring to
him of Ioool. might stand him in flead for the help to
defend himself, you ihall presently let him secretly to un-
derldnd, that you will, as of yourself, let him have i
much, and o we will that you let him have, in the mnft
secret fort that you can, when the said urnm hall come to
you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him
tome part there beforehand.

THE other ocoi. you hall cause to be kept whole,

unspent, if it be not that you {hall fee necclsary cause to
imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen and oo horsemen; or to the caRingout of
wages of such workmen, as by fickncis, or otherwise
ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnest requeRt of the said e.irl of
Murray and his affociatcs, that they might have, at the
leaR, 30o of our foldicrs, to aid them. And that you al >
write, that tho' we would not command you to give thcm
aid, yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and
seem to blame you for attempting such things, as you
with the help of others siould bring about, you doubt

not
5

not but things would do well; you hall underfand for a
truth, that we have no intention, for many refpeas, to
maintain any other princes fubjets, to take arms against
their sovereign; neither would we willingly do any thing
to give occasion to make wars betwixt us and that prince,
which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any
power to let them be aided with a: y men. But now,
confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwith-
itanding their humble submission, nd offer to be ordered
and tried by law and juflice, whih being refused to them,
they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our weft
marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and
adding thereunto the good intention that presently the
French king prctendeth, by fending one of his to join
with ofme one of ours, and jointly to treat with that
queen, and to induce her to forbear this manner of vio-
lent and rigorous proceeding against her fubjecs, for
which purpose, the French ambalfador here with us has
lately written to that queen, whereof answer is daily
looked for, to the intent in the mean time the said lords
ihould not be opprefled and ruined, for lack of some help
to defend them, we are content and do authorize, if you
shall fee it necefflry for their defence, to let them (as of
your own adventure, and without notifying that you have
any direction therein from us) to have the number of 300
soldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to be
drawn outof all your bands, as you fhali fee cause. And
to cover the matter the better, you (hall fend there num-
bers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time that such powers are on the
other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence
as you fliall fee caufc to direct of, the fame numbers or
any of them may most covertly repair to the said lords,
when you ihall ex prefsly advertize, that you fend them that
aid only for their defence. and not therewith to make war
against the queen, or to do any thing that may ofFend her
perlbn, wher in you (hall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it lhould
otiherwi!e appear, your danger hould be To great, as all
the friends you have could not be able to save you towards
us. Ad so we aflure you our conscience moveth us to
charge you, so to proceed with them; for othcrwie than
to prefcrve them from ruin, we do not yield to give them
aid of money or men: And yet we would not that either

of

of there were known to be our at, but rather to be co-
vcred with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 350.)
Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

1565-6.
M Y humble duty confidered; what to write of the An O;ii.

present fate of the country I am so uncertain, by nal.

reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it
maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within
these few days, there was some good hope, that this queen
would have shewed some favour towards the lords, and
that Robcrt Melvin hould have returned unto them with
comfort, upon some conditions. Since that time, there
are come out of France Clernau by land, and Thorneton
by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the
bishop of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither can there
be good word gotten, nor appearance of any good in-
tended them, except that they be able to perfwade the
queen's majefy our sovereign to make her heir apparent
to the croun of England. I write of this nothing less
than I know, that he hath spoken. And by all means
that he thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pass.
There is a band lately devised, in which the late pope, the
emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpe&ed to
be of the fame confederacy to maintain papiflry through-
out Chrifliandom; this band was ent out of France by
Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy
thereof remaining with her, and the principal to be re-
turned very hortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon, a
fit minifier for such a devilish dcvife; if the coppie here-
of may be gotten, that {hall be ent as I conveniently may.
Monficur Rambollet came to this toun upon Monday, he
spoke that night to the queen and her husband, but not
long; the next day he had long conferences with them
both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any whereof
they intrcated. I cannot speak with any that hath any
hope that there will be any good done for the lords by
him, though it is said that he hath very good will to do so
to the uttermost of his power. He is lodged near to the
court, and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sun-

VOL. II. A a day

day the order is given, whereat means made to many to
be present that day at the mas. Upon Cand'emaa day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband,
the earl of Lenox, and earl Athol ; divers other lords
have been called together and required to be at the mas
that day, ome have promised, as Caflels, Mongomerie,
Seton, Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fleming, Le-
vingfton, Lindsay, Huntley and Bochel; and of them all
Bothel is the flouteft, but worst thought of; it was
moved in council that mars lhould have been in St. Giles
church, which I believe was rather to tempt men's minds,
than intended indeed: She was of late minded again to
fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such as she trufteth
in amongst the queen's majcfty's fubjeas, of whose good
willis this way I truRf that the bruit is greater than the
truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not
in time to be ware, and provide for the worst; ome in
that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, where of I am fuic
there is some things, tho' perchance of all I have not
heard the truth; in this court divers quarles, contentions,
and debates; nothing To much fought as to maintain mif-
chief and disorder. David yet retaineth fill his place,
not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly
refused to do any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is
said that hall be the first voyage that (he will make after
lhe is delivered of being with child; the bruit is com-
mon that she is, but hardly believed of many, and of this,
I can aure you, that there have of late appeared Come
tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 359.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr.

Tho. Randolph to the lords of the council of
England from Barwick, 27th of March, 1566.
An Original in the Cotton Library, Cigula B.
so. fol. 372.

SAlay it pleafi y:tr lon.ni,

' TJTI EAR IN(G of o may nie matters as we do, and
N'.c!, H n fyndinge such varietic in the rports, we have
;' nc1Clic ado to dsecrne the veritie which maketh us the

floecr

flower and loother to put any thing in wryting, to the
entente we wold not that your honours, and by you the
queen's majefiie, our fovereigne, hfould not be advertised
but of the verie trothc as we can pofiible. To this end
we thought good to fend up captain Carcwe, who was in
Edinbourge at the tyme of the last attemptate, who spoke
there with diverse, and after that with tie queen's self
and her husband conforme to that, which we have learn-
ed by others, and know by this reporte, we fend the fame,
confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
afljyfers unto these that were executors of the ade.

THIS we fyndc for certain, that the queen's husband

being entered into a vehement Iufpicion of David, that by
hym omethynge was committed, which was moftagaynfie
to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte,
fyrfRe communicated his mynde to George Duglas, who
fynding his sorrows so great fought all the means he
coulde to put tome remedie to his griefS; and communi-
cating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's com-
mandment, no other waye coulde be found then that
David hould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he
was so earnef and daylye pressed the fame, that no refte
could be had untyll it was put in execution. To this
that was found good, that the lord Morton, and lord Lind-
faye hould be made privie to th' intente that theie might
have their fiends at hande, yf ncade required; which
caused them to aflemble so mayny, as theie thought sus-
ficient againfi the tyme, that this determination of theirs
flould be put in executione; which was determined the
ixth of this inftante 3 daies afore the parliament should
bvgyne, at which time the fayde lords were assured that
the eries Argyle, Morraye, Rothcs and their complyces
fholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not be per-
fuaded through this means to be their friends; who for
the defyre he had that this intent hould take effct th'
one waye, was content to yielde, without all dificult;e
to t'other, with this condition, that thcie hould give
their consents, that he might have the crowne matrimo-
nial. He was so impatient to Iee these things he saw, and
were daylye brought to his eares, that he dayly press d
the aid lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer dc-
laye; and to the intent that myght manifefle unto the
world, that he approved the ae, was content to be at
the doing of that himself.

A a 2 Uron

UPON S:.turdaye at night n ire unto vl It of the clock

the kinll convcyeth hirmitlf, the lord Ruthen, George
Duglafs, and two others, throwe his own chamber by
the privy slayers up to the queen's chamber going to
which there is a cabinet about xii foot square in the
lame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady Ar-
gile, and David with his capp upon his head. Into the
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who
willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place
for him. The queen said, that it was her will. Her
howfland anfwerede, that yt was against her honour.
The lord Ruthen said, that he flould lerne better his
dcutie, and offering to have taken him by the arm, David
took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and put
hinfclf behind the queen who wolde gladice have aved
him: But the king having looted his hand, and hold.
ing her in his arms, David was thrust out of the cabi.
net throw the bed chamber into the chamber of pre-
fens, whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who in-
tending that night to have refezved hym, and the next day
to han him, o mane being about him, that bore him
evil will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger,
and after hym a great many others, so that he had in his
bodie above wonds. It is told for certayne, that
the kings own dagger was left flicking in him. Whea-
ther he stuck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He
was not flayne in the queen's prefcns, as was said, but
going down the itayrcs out of the chamber of prefens.

THERE rcmayned a long tyme with the queen her howl-

hand and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great
intcrceffin, that he shold have no harm. She blamed
grcatlec her howfband that was thee actor of so foul a
deed. It is said, that he did answer, that David had
mo;c companie of her boddie than he for the fpacc of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own con-
tentment he gave his content that he fflould be takcn
away. "It is not," (faythe (he) the woman's part to fc.k
" the husband," and therefore in that the fault was his
cwn. He said that when he came, she either wold not
or made herself ick. Well," faythe she, " you have
" taken your last of me and your farewell." Then were
pi:y, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majeily's hus-
b.ind and must yield dutie to each other. "' Whv nIav

4

" not," faythe ihe, leave him as well as your wife
*" did her hubfan ?" Other have d,:ne the like. The lord
Ruthen laid that he was lawfully divorced from her hu'-
band, and for no such cause as the king found himrelf
greve. Befydes this man was mean, bfle, enemie to the
nobility, ihame to her, and deftruion to herself and
cou try. " Well, faith the, that shall be dear blude to
" ome of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the
lord Ruthen ; for the more your grace ihowe yourfllf of-
fended, the world will judge the worse.

HER hband this tyme Ipeaketh litle, herself conti-

nually weepeth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and
weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This I must do
"' with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in
the heft fort he could, that file would pacify herself.
Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there roie a nombre in the court;

to pacify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who
went ftrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl to
quiet them, and to aure them from the king that no-
thing was intend against them. These notwithfianding
taking fear, when theie heard that my lord Murray
wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Hunt-
ly and Bothwell bth get out of a window and o depart.
Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and (landorcs
(who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to
go where they wold, and bring concordie out of the court
by the lord of Lidington. Theie went that night to such
places, where they thought themselves in moR fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the her-

ing of the lord Ruthen he was contents that he should lie
with her that night. We know not how he * * himle ,
but came not at her, and excuscd hymfelf to his ficrtts,
that he was so ficepie, that he could not wake in due
feafun.

THERE were in this ompanie two that came in with

the king; the one Andrewe Car of Faw2.Cenide, whom
the queen fiyth would have ftroken her wilh a dagger, ;and
one Patrick 1lalentine, brother to the justice clerk, whI:
also her grave iayth, offcred a dag againt her belly with
the cock do.'wn. WVe have been carncetlv in hand with
the lord Rutcn to know the varitic ; but he :rli lrcth u'
of the contraiic. There were in the qucc:n's chambcr
the lord Robert, Arthur Arlkin, one or to fciher:.

A a ;; '1 ii,'y

They at the firfi offering to make a defence, the lord
Ruthven drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that
were not drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this
lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight

to Dunbar Castle, whither retorted unto the lords Huntley
and Bothwcll: That the earl of Morton and lord Ruth-
ven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promises,
bonds and subscriptions. That he had protested before
the council, that he was never consenting to the death of
David, and that it is fore against his will: " That of
A the great substance David had there is much spoken,

some fay in gold to the value of i m £. His apparel

"' was very good, as it is aid, 28 pair of velvet hole.
" Iis chamber well furnilhed, armour, dagger, pyflo-
" letts, harquebuses, 22 swords. Of all this nothing
" fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the
A cultody of all th queen's letters, which all were deli-
"' vered unlooked upon. We hear ofajuill, that he had

hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be
' heard of. He had upon his back, when he was fllyn,
" a night gown ofdamafk furred, with a fatten doublet, a

hofc of rufflt velvet."

No. XVI. (Vol1. .p. 368.)
Part of a Letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16,

I565.6.
- T CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there

hath been between her grace and her husband,

he prcffith earnestly for the matrimonial crown, which
lhc is loth hastily to grant but willing to keep somewhat
jn flore, until flie know how well he is worth to enjoy
such a fovereinity : and therefore it is thought that the
parliament for a time hall be dcferned, but hereof 1 can
write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to fccretary Cecil.

April, ' H E jufticc.cclrk in hard terms, more for his bro-
5S6. PA: ther'b caulk than any delert, and as far as I can hear
P'r ru the the king of .ll other in woli , for neither hath the queenl
so>: n.l, ,'1

good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that
was against her will, nor the people that he hath denied
so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himlelf to be the accuser and pur-
suer of them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
was executed, and Murray that was yefierday arreigned,
were both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
tain, by one, that upon Monday aft spoke with the queen,
that fie is determined that the house of Lennox hall
be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continu-
eth tick, fore troubled in mind; he faith in the abby,
his on hath been once with him, and he once with the
queen, since he came to the cattle. The queen hath now
seen all the covenants and bands that passed between the
king and the lords, and now findeth that his declaration,
before her and council, of his innocency of the death of
David, was faife; and grievously offended that, by their
means, he hould seek to come to the crown matrimo-
nial.
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Ber-

wick, 25 April, 1566.
---. HERE is continually very much speech of the

J discord between the queen and her husband,

so for that, that is commonly said and believed of himlelf,
that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a
divorce between them. It is very certain that Malevafier
had not poken with him within there three days. He is
neither accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman:
attended upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or
seven of the guard; at liberty to do, and go where and
what he will, there have no hope yet among Liheal'elves of
quietness.

-DAVID'S brother named Joseph, who came this

way with Malevafier, unknown to any maln her:, is be-
come fecrctary in his brother's place.

A . 4 No XVII.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 372.)
Theearl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 1566.

HE queen and her husband agree after the old man.
ner, or rather worse. She eateth but very seldom

with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him, nor
loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her books,
as at her going out of the Castle of Edinburgh, to re-
move abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot for mo-
defty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported
what hefaid of him. One Hickman, anEngliih merchant
there, having a water spaniel which was very good, gave
him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the plea-
sure, which he saw the king have in such kind of dogs,
gave him to the king. The queen thereupon fell marvel-
loufly out with Melvill, and called him dissembler and
flatterer, and said he could not truf one, who would give
any thing to such one as fle loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, August 8.

HE disagreement between the queen and her hus-
band continueth, or rather increafeth. Robert Mel-

vill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of Edin-
burgh, could not tell where to find the queen; sith
which time he is come to Edinburgh, and had not twelve
horses attending on her. There was not then, nor that I
can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in
her company. The king her husband is gone to Dum-
fermling, and pafieth his time as well as he may; having
at his farewell, such countenance as would make a hut-
band heavy at the heart.

Sir John Softer to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.
T H E queen hath her husband in small effimatien,

and the earl of Lcnnox came not in the quccI's
fight since the death of Davy.

Sir

Sir John Forftcr to Cecil, t ith Dec.

H E earl of Bothvell is appointed to receive the
ambassadors, and all things for the cihriftening

ate at his lordship's appointment, and the fame is scarce-
ly well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and
queen is presently at Craigmillar, but in little greater fa-
miiliarity than he was all the while past.
Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of

Bedford.
T HAT the king and the queen agreed well together Auguf,

two days, after her coming from- , and after 566. Paper

my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new Officefo
discord has happened. The queen hath declared to my thcoriil,
lord of Murray that the king bears him evil will, and
las said to her, that he is determined to kill him, find-
ing fault that he doth bear him so much company: and
in like manner hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere
it at the king, which he did a few nights since in the
queen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The
king confessed, that reports were made to him, that
my lord of Murray was not his friend, which made him
speak that thing e repented; and the queen affirmed,
that the king had spoken such words unto her, and con-
fefled before the whole house, that ihe could not be con-
tent that either he or any other flhould be unfriend to my
lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
fioutly, and used his peech very modestly, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that
the queen hould use familiarity either with man or wo-
man, and especially the ladies of Arguilc, Murray, and
Marre, who keep most company with her. My lord of
Murray and Bothwell have been at evil words for the L.
of Lcdington, before the queen, for he and Sir James Bal-
foure had new come from Lcdington, with his answer up-
on such heads or articles as Bothwell and he ihould agree
upon, which being rcported to the said carl in the queen's
presence, made nnfwcr, that re he parted with filch
lands as was dlired, he lhould.l part with his life. My

lord

lord of Murray said foutly to him, that twenty as hone
men as he hould lose their lives ere he reafte Leding-
ton. The queen spake nothing, but heard both; in there
terms they parted, and since, that I hear of, have not met.
The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
carryeth the prince thence to Stirling with her. This
last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruth-
yen's, who confessed that he was in the cabinet, but not
of council of the fast. The queen hath also opened
to my lord of Murray, that money was ent from the
pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for what pur-
pose it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. L . 389.)
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20,

569. A copy interlined by Cecil. It contains
an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bilhop of Ross.
-A FTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland]

-

how patiently did 1 bear with many vain de-

lays in not ratifying thetreaty accorded by your own com-
mifioners, whereby I received no small unkindness be-
fides the manifold causes of suspicion that I might not
hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice my fubjca and near
kinsman, the lord Darnly, under colour of private suits
for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to con-
clude the fame without my aflent or liking. And how
many unkind parts accompanied that fat, by receiving of
my fubjeds that were base runnegates and offenders at
home, and enhancing them to places of credit against my
will with many such like, I will leave for that the re-
membrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you.
And yet all there did I as it were Iuppre's and overcume
with my natural inclination of love towards you; and
did afterwards gladly, as you know, christen your son,
the child of my laid kinsman, that had before so unloyal-
ly offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other un-
dutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How friendly
also dealt I by inlcflgcs to reconcile him, being your hu'-

band,

band, to you, when others nourilhed dircord betwixt
you, who as it eimced had more power to work their pur-
poes, being evil to you both, than I had to do you good,
in refpef of the evil I had received. Well I will over-
pass your hard accidents that followed for lack of follow-
ing my council. And then in your mot extremity, when
you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from
your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was
the remembrance of any former unkindness you had ibew-
ed me. Nay how void was I of refpea to the designs
which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown,
and the security that might have ensued to my ate by
your death, when I finding your calamity to be great,
that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft
your life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threat-
ened ome as were irritated against you, that I only may
fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 408.)
Letter of Q Elizabeth to Q. of Scotts. Thus

marked on the back with Cecil's hand.-Copia
Literarum Regie Majeftatis ad Reginam Scotorum.
VIIIo. prilis.

MiXA D A ME, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de p,,

MV1 Crocq, je n'euffe eu si peu de consideration de vous ofi:.
falf her decette lettre, si les liens de charite vers lesruinez,
ct les pieres des miserables ne m'y contraignalrent. Je en-
tens que un edit a ete divulgue de par vous, madame, que
ung chafcun, que veult justifier que ons este les meurtriers
de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire
le xlume de ce mois. La quelle chore, comme c'elt plus
honorable et neceflaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, no
y eRaant cache quelquc miftere ou finefle, ainfi le pere et
amis du mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis,
que je vous priafe de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ilz
cognoilrent que les iniqucs fe font combines par force de
faire ceque par droia ils ne pourront pas faire; partant,
je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour de vous meme, a qui il
touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de
vous exhorter le leur conceder cette requete, la quelle, si
cllc les fcroit nie, vous tourneroit randcmetnt en foupcon,

de

de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volon-
tiers ouyr. Pour I'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de tellc
fincerite & prudence en ce cas qui vos touche de si pres,
que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in-
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes, feriez
dignement efbloye hors ile rancz de princefies, & non fans
cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable,
qu'une vie maculee; vous voiez madame, queje vous traite
comme ma fille, et vous promets, que si j en eulie, ne luy
fouhaiterois mieulz, queje vous desire, comme le Seign-
eur Dieu me porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon ceur
de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera plusa honneur, et
a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles
recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus
de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De Wet.
ce 8 jour de Janvier * en haste.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 423.)
A letter from England concerning the murder of

king Henry Darnley.

TAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark,

F. of '.:or- I tho't good to write a few words unto you. I have
chieves. recd. some writs from you; and some I have seen lately
Bundle B. sent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of
X 5 the 6th of May. I have participat the contents thereof to

such as I thought meet, this mekle I can aflure you; the
intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for
there was not one papist nor protestant which did not con-
Lent that jutice hould be done, be the queen my fovn". aid
and support, againfi such as had committed that abomin-
able ill murder in your country; but to fay truth, the lack
and coldncls did not rife from such as were called tocoun-
cil, but from such as hould give life and execution
thereunto. And further, I aflure you, I never knew no
matter of efate proponed which had so many favourers of
all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto you,
no man promoted the matter with greater affection, than

* A miflakc in the date corrcacd with Cecil's hand VIII0.
Aprilis.

the

the Spanish ambafflador. And Cure I am, that no man d.arc
openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that wholi,-
ever is guilty of this murder, handfasted with advoutrc,
is unworthy to live. I hall not need to tell you, which
be our letts, and flayes from all good things here. You
are acquainted with them as well as I. Nds I muds con-
fess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, ho-
nour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and
namely such as before, and after the murder, were deemed
to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword and jufRice
the punishment of those abominable aas, though we lend
you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both
honourable and honest, be well known to me, and fun-
dry others here, to be juflifiable in all their aions and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation
isblemished and infamit by the'e doings which lately pased
among you. What we shall do I know not, neither (d I
write unto you assuredly, for we e be itbjeA unto Ima1 r-
tations, and yet I think we shall either aid you, or ni.-
nue in the defence and safeguard of your prince, io as it
appear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not
to ruin the fortune of France, which will be your own
deftruaion, if you be unadvised. I know not one, no not
one of any quality or estate in this country, which does
allow of the queen your sovereign, but would gladly the
world were rid of her, so as the fame were done without
farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary justice. This i
fend the 23d of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 434.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton

to Cecil, xlth of July, 1567, from Berwick.
C-- IR, your letter of the 6th of July, I received the An Orig,-

10oth at Berwick, I am sorry to lee that the .

queen's majefy's disposition altereth not towards the 'iO'
lords, for when all i3 done, it is they which mutt hIand
her more in flead, than the queen her cousin, and will
be better infiruments to work Iine bencfite and qui::t-
ness to her majefly and her realm, tn the queen of Scot-
land which is void of good fame.

A let.

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil

from Faftcaftle, i2th of July, 1j67.

3per Of- ( I R, as you might perceive by my letter of the x th
kcg. S July, I lodged at Faficaftle that night, accompanyed

with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and James
Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the
fate of that place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners than
folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is very strong.
By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington
I find the lords his aociates and he hath left nothing un-
thought of, which may be either to thir danger, or work
them surety, wherein they do not forget what good and
harme France may do them, and likewise they confider
the fame of England; but as farr as I can perceive, to
be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto
them through the queens majeflys dealing than either they
do by the French, or by any contrary faaion amongeft
themselves, for they allure themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though
they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them, as to
the realm of England by her majesty's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms
have received great fruit: vet upon other accidents which
have chanced since, they have ob(erved such things in her
majestys doings, as have ended to the danger of such as
the hath dealt withal, to the overthrow of your own design.
ments, and little to the fuerty of any party; and upon there
considerations and difcoures at length, methinketh I find
a disposition in them, that either they mind to make their
bargain with France, or else to deal neither with France
nor yow, but to do what they hall think meet for their
state and surety, and to utc their remedys as occasion hall
move them; meaning neither to irritate France nor Eng-
land, untill such time as they have made their bargain as-
furedly with one of yow; for they think it convenient to
proceed with yow both for a while pari palfu, for that
was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take the matter very unkindly, that no better answer is
made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her majcfty,
and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to their ia-
tisfaaion, I have answered as well as I can, and have al-
ldged their own proccedings so oblcu1ly with the queen,

an(d

and their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet hap-
pened, and therefore her majesty hath sent me to the end
I may inform her throughly of the state of the matters, and
upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such
purpoles as mhall be by me proposed on their majestys be-
half unto them, they hall be reasonably and resolutely an-
fwered. At there things the lord of Ledington smiled and
shook his head, and lsid it were better for us yow would
tel us alone, than neither to do us nor your selves good, as
I fear me in the end that will prove; S if their be any
truth in Ledington, la Crocq is gone to procure Ram-
boilet is coming hither or a man of like quality, and to
deliver them of their queen for ever, who shall lead herlife
in France in a abbay reclufed, the prince at the French
devotion, the realm governed by a council of their elec-
tion of the Scottish nation, the forts committed to the
custody of such as {hall be chosen amongst themselves, as
yet I find no great likelihood that I {hall have access to
the queen, itis objected they may not fodifpleafe the French
king, unless they were sure to find the queen of England
a good friend; and when they once by my access to the
queen have offended the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the
queens liberty, which was the firfi head that I proposed,
they aid that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it
was but folly to talk of them the liberty going before;
but said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for our selves. In the end they aid,
we hould refuse our own commodity, before they con-
cluded with any other, which I should hear of at my
coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the
band concluded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly, and that
faaion, not To much to the prejudice of the lords of Edin',
as that which was sent into France; thus having no more
leasure but compelled to leap on horseback with the lords
to go to Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from Fa.l-
cafle the 12th of July 1567.

6

To

To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland.

By the queen, the 4th July 1567.

TRUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though
1 we think that the caufs will often charge upon va-
riety of accidents, yet we think, for sundry relpets, not
amiss, that as yow hall deal with the lords having charge
of the young prince for the committing of him into our
realm, so shall yow also do well, in treaty with the queen,
to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be subject
to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it is
manifest) her son cannot be free, if The shall be contented
that her on may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this
our realm, being so near as lie knows it is; we lhall not
faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as
can be devised for any that might be our child born of
our own body, and ihall be glad to how to her therein
the trew effec of nature; and herein he may be by yow
remembered how much good may ensue to her son to be
nourished and acquainted with our country; and there-
fore all things confidered, this occasion for her child,
were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him,
than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
shall so deal with her, both to stay her indeed from in-
clining to the French practice, which is to us notorious,
to convey her and the prince into France, and also to
avoid any jus offence, that she might hereafter conceive,
if ihe hould hear that we should deal with the lords for
the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, i4th

July 567, from Edinburgh.

An original. T may pleafc your majesty to be advertised, I did figni
Pipeioffice. j fie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the I ith and

12th of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the
causes of my flay, my lodging at Faftcafle, a place of the
lord Hume's, where was met by the said lord and by the
lord Lidington, and what had paflcd in conference be.
twixt us, whilcft I was at the said Faltcaftle. Since
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and
with 4co horses by their appointment for my better con-

duct,

du&, I came to Ednr the 12th of this present. The 13th
being Sunday appointed for a folemne communion in this
town, and alio a folemne faf being published, I could
not have conference with the lords which be assembled
within this town as I desired, that is to fay the earls of
Atholc, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liding-
ton, Sir James Balfour captain of the castle, Mr. James
M'Gill and the president of the fellion.

NEVEIRTHELESS I made means by the lord of Liding-

ton that they would use no protrade of time in mine au-
dience, o did likewise to the earle of Morton, whom I
met by chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit
the day were defined to sacred exercises, such as were
there of the council would consult upon any moyen touch-
ing my access unto them and my conference with them,
and said also that in the afternoon either they would come
to me, or I hould hear from them. About 4 of the clock
in the afternoon, the said 3th day, the lord of Liding-
ton came to my lodgings, and declared unto me on the
behalf of the lords and others, that they required me to
have patience though they had defferrcd my conference with
them, which was grounded principally upon the absence
of the earles of Mar, and CGlencairn, the lords Semple,
Crighton and others of the council, faying also that they
did confider the matters which I was on your behalf
to treara with them of, were of great importance, as they
could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor
give me answer without the advice of the lords, and others
their associates; the lord of Lidington also said unto me,
that where he perceived, by his private conference with
me in my journey hitherwards, tlat I pressed greatly to
have speedy access to the queen theirfovereign, h perceiv-
ed, by the lords and others which were here, that in that
matter there was great difficulty for any rcfpcas, hut
specially becauie tney had rcfu.ed to the French amba.ae-
dor the like access, hich being granted unto me, rright
greatly offend the French, a mattr whicnh tvy ,'e!ircd
and ir.tended to efchgw; for they did not fin' by your ma-
jeftys dca!ings with themn hithcr:o, that it behoved them to
irritate the rc;lch kinz, and t loof h favour and good
intelligence with hin I anfsvcred that as to their refusal,
made unto the French nrnbaTfaor, monsieur de Ville
Royc was difpatciicd orth of rance hefora there acti-
den:. here happc;J, a:i; hi; s'nceial errand was to inpcach

VL,,. II . b the

the queens marriage with the earleof Bothel, (for so in-
deed since my coming hither I learned his corr.miffion ten-
ded to that end, and to make offer to the queen of an-
other marriage) and as to monsieur dc Crocq, he could
have no order forth of France concerning tht-i matters
since they happened; and therefore they might very well
hold them fufpceed to haveconference wi h thequeen, le.;ft
they might tcate f matters in this time withcut infirtfi-
ons, and so rather do harm then good; but your majefly
be:ng advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent
me hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm,
for the conservation of their honors and credit, and for
their surety ; ani I might boldly fay unto him, that your
majefly had better elerved than the French had. He
said, for his own part, he was much bound unto your ma-
jefly, and had always found great favour and courtely in
England, but to be plain with you, Sir fayed he, there is
not many of this assembly that have found so great obliga-
tion at the queen your f. vereigns hands, as at the French
kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be the only
persons which took benefit by the queens majeflys aid at
Leith, the reft of the noblemen were n t in the aaion,
and we think, said he, the qucens majesty your sovereign,
by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotland,
or any particular person; and not to ta'k with yow as an
ambalrador, but with fir Nicholas Throgmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie,
found but cold favour at the queens majellys hands, when
they were banished fc;rth of their own country; but I
would all our whole company were as well willilg to ac-
comiplilh the queen your ovcrci n intents and desires as
I am ; fr mine own part, I am but one, and that of the
meancil iort, and they be m:nmy noblemen and such as
have reat interest in the matter, mary cw fla!l be aflured
I will imploy mvf!f to imploy my credit, and all that I
may do, to fati.fic the qci your miltrts, as much as ly-
cth in me, and for ycur o-7,' part you have a great many
ficends in this ainSTbly, 'itih many oth.r good words.
But fr ccr:clufiun I rnl:ft t!e this tor .In ail'wer to flay
untill the other lords were comnn, and theretupon I thoughc
nimee to advcrtzu vour majctly whlt lat:i pahdl, iand how
far frth I have p.occcedd ; your cc;.ti. ;,l ing great
to hc'r from hence.

A N

AND now to advertize your majelfy of the hrate of all

things, as I have learned since my coming hither, it may
please your majefly to underfand as followeth.

T'HE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health In the

cattle ofLochleven, guarded by the lord Linfay and Loch-
leven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed in another commission, because he began to how
great favour to the queen and to give her intellizence. She
is waited on with 5 or 6 hdys, 4 or gentlewomen, and
2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. The
earle of Buchan, the earl of Murray's brother, hath also
liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the lords aforesaid,
which have her in guard, doe keep her very ttraitly, and
as far as can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their
order from there men, because that the queen will not by
any means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute
the murder, nor will not content by any perfwafion to
abandon the lord Bothell for her husband, but avoweth
constantly that the will live and die with him; and faith
that if it were put to her choice to relinqtuih her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, fTe would leave her
kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple darnfcll with
him, and that she will never content that he hall fare
worse or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her

detention is, for that these lords do ice the queen bring of
To fervent affection towards the earle Bothell as he is, and
being put at, as they should be compelled to be in conti-
nuall arms, and to have occasion of many hat:les, he be-
ing with manifest evidence notoriously dctceted to be the
principall murderer, and the lords meaning pro'ecution of
jultice against him according to his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and

him, as a marriage not to he fuft'rcd for many refpcEts,
which separation cannot take place if the queen bc at li-
berty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not allb forget their own perill, corjoin'd

with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceavc,
they intend not either to touch the queen in fiuerty or in
honor, for they do speak of her with relpeSt and reve-
rence, and do affirm, as I do learn, that the conditions
aforcfaid accomp!ifhed, they will both put her to liberty,
and rfture her t her cftate.

b . THRa

THiSE lords have for the guard oftheir town 450 Har-

qubuers which be in every good order, for the entertain-
ment of which companys, untillall matters be compound-
ed, they did sue unto your majety, to aid them with such
fum of money as hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary
by the lord of Lidingtons writing, amounting as I per-
ceive to ten or twelve thousand crowns of the

THEY were lately advertized that the French King

doth mind to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell des Ur-
fine, a knight of the French order, and always well assec-
tionate to the house of Guyfe, and howsoever la Forest, Vil-
laroy, and du Crocq have used language in the queens fa-
vour and to these lords disadvantage there, to your ma-
jefty; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as hall
be little to the queen's advantage; so as it is thought the
French King, upon his coming to his presence, will rather
fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they have
their party so well made, as the French will rather make
their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majety the las bond agreed

on, and signed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll,
Huntlv, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NIVERTHELESS, since my coming. to this town, the

Hamiltons have ent unto me a gentleman of their fur-
name named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the
bishop of St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbroth, the
copy whareof I fend your majesty and mine answer unto
them, referring to the bearer the declaration of some
things, as these did by him unto me.

THE earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, tent another

unto me with a letter and credit, I have used him as I did
the others, the copy of both which letters I fend your
majesty also. The lord Harrys hath also sent unto me
hut not written, and I have returned unto him in like
fort.

AGAINST the 20th day of this month there is a generall

afembly of all the churches, flires, and boroughs towns of
this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
thcre lords to this town, where it is thought the whole
flare of this matter will be handeled, and I fear me much
to the queen's difadvantagt and danger; unless the lord of
Lidington and ofme others which be best affeaed unto her
do provide some remedy; for I perceave the great num-
ber, and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,

which

which have assisted in these doings, do greatly dishonour
the queen, and mind ferioully either her deprivation, or
her dedrufion; I used the belt means I can (confidering
the furie of the world here) to prorogue this afembly, for
that appeareth to me to be the best remedy: I may not
speak of difiolution of it, for that may not be abiden, and
] Should thereby bring my self into great hatred and peril.
The chiefeft of the lords which be here present at this time
dare not how o much lenity to the queen as I think they
could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people.
The women be most furious and impudent against the
queen, and yet the men be mad enough; to as a stranger
over bufie may oon be made a sacrifice aongeft them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with

their adherents would put their force into the fields against
the 24th of this month, but I do not find that intent so
true, as the common bruit goeth.

THE earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there
is trouble among his own countrymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired

here, and I do believe your majesty may so use him, and
direc him, as he hall be able to promote your purpose
with these men.

THE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incom-

patible.--I do find amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and
the company two frange and sundry humours.

HAMILTONS do make (how of the liberty of the queen,

and prosecute that with great earnefnefs, because they
would have these lords destroy her, rather than he Should
be recovered from them by violence; another time they
seem to desire her liberty, and Bothwell's deRtrution,
because they would compals a marriage betwixt the queen
and the lord of Arbroth.

THE earle of Argyll doth assea her liberty, and Both-

well's deftruCion, because he would marry the queen to
his brother.

AND yet neither of them, notwithflanding their open

concurance, (as appeareth by their bond) doth difc,,ver
their minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox is
not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of the mi-
nifters will be here at the great assembly, whos austerity
against the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY 'some conferrence which I had with Come of this
councill, me thinkcth that they have intelligence that there

Bb3 is

is a difr.ofition in the queenof Scotland, to leave this realm,
and to retire herfelt into cither England, or into France,
but noa willingly into England, tor filch - and mif-
likeings as she kr.oweth hath been, and is meant unto her
in France, leaving the rcgiment eithe. to a nunber of
perfi n dlecagued, and authotized by her, or to foineuce
or more.

AND it plcafc your majefly, I think it not amis to

put ow in remembrance, h..t in cafe the aid queen come
into Enland by your ;:llovance, without the French king's
consent, (hc shall ofe her dowcrv in France, and have
little or noth:nz from hence to cntcrtaili her; and in cafe
{he do go in'o Frar. c it the king's contentment, flie
may be an ii'rumcnt (if she can :ccover favour, as time
will help to canccl ;r dli:race) eithcr by matching with
fornc hasand of go..d qul:;ty, or by fjincotilr devise, to
work n: urquic:r:cfi to hr own contry, and so conle-
quently to yurnaj. ty's.

TH-EnEFORE it may pleaif your majcfly to confider of

this rr.atter, and to Ict me know your p!cafure with con-
venient speed, how I hall anfwcr the fame, if it be
propounded nt) me, either by the queen, or by hecoun-
cili, as a piece of the end and compoiition. For I am sure,
of lte, hfn ath secmcd very dcfirous to have the mat-
ter brought t pals, that the might go into England,
r:.tairing her cit: andr jurifdicion in hcrilt;, though the
(o not cxe:i:;e it; and l:kcivilc ! unJcrflt.nd that some of
this ccuncl which be Icaft acacd to hcr faftty do think
there is ro othcr w:'y :o f.iv her. 1'l;us Almightv God
;,relfrvc yur majcfty in health, honour, and all liicity
At Edil, the 14' n July 1 :;7.
Sir Nic!:clas T !rogi;ortcn to qeen Elizabeth the

i8th of July 1567, fromn Edinburgh.
An ".i''l. I T ml pleafc your n:micil., vow inight pcrccave by my

raero- I.ctrers of thc 16th. ;;,w ;'.r had i roccJcd with hci:

I;Ards, aJd wvhat was tl:cir ;,rwecr; since which time I
ha:'e poken particularly with theearle .Vorton, the lrd
ofl.iiil:.lt,', and ' ir James I'i1four ca tain of this caft'c,
at wn'.fe la;i,;.l- I cavr. ct perccave that s ct access to the
qutccii t) L .:ihlc\ cn will ' c gr. :,. d mri,

:''.iyigi themli lv s

Itill h : a; ;lCi',c;a Ic f the loC !s an! (thr:o ;; cir ;il;ciatc::,
V,'hi1li (tlecy fay) tl.cy lok tor wiahi:; t.ov days; and to

that

that I find, by likelihood and apparent prefump:ians, that
mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have
thought good not to defer this dispatch untill I have a re-
solute answer in that manner.

MAY it thcrefore please your majefly, to und:rRand Ro-

bert lMelvin returned from thequeen in Lochlevin, to this
town tht- 6th of July. and brought a letter from her writ-
ten of her own hd to hefe lords, which doth contain as
I underflatid matter as followeth-A requelt unto them
to have consideration of her health, and if they will not
put her to liberty, to change the place of restraint to the
caft!c of S;irlilng, to the ced he might have the comfort
and company ot her fun, and if they will not change her
from Loclheven, FIie required to have some other gentle-
women about thr, naming n.ne.

To have her Apothecary, t havc ome modcfl minister.
.- o i:a.vc anl ilnroid- rer to draw fit; th such work as

she wou:d b occupied aboLus, and to have a varlet of the
chamber.--Touching the governmnr of the realm he
ma.eth two (,fe. s, which are but gen:rally touched in
her letter, the particuilaic,s be not liccified, but referred
to Robert Mel vin's credit, the one is to commit it only and
wh)iiv to the earle of M'rray ; the other is to the lords
whos. n.mes eniue, afliilte with fitic others, a they flall
call untIn then, tliat is to sav, the dikc of ChatteIrault,
the c-`:!s c;f .iortn, ;V!tr.rny. I'Iarr, an3 Glencl.irn.

SI:: : w; Vrit l nr.t thc:n that I might have accci

u:to i:- .;.-- S;l rquliireth further, tha: if they will not
treat ,: .:; r!.ail lher as tleicr qceen, yet to u!' her as
the kil.: t!hcir ibv'crcilli's Jaugl htcr, (v.(o:r mIny of them
knce,/ ..: as thci; prince's rnother.-She w:.ill by n;) mealr
vicil :) !andlon Bothll for her hb.nd, nr rclinquiifl
hin ; '.hi'h nat.cr w. II ('lhr mrit hairm ns all, and h.a-
denet!l th. ird., to gr;at fevrit,' ::i:'; : her.

'! vi '-,;:h i woltds to tlh: ,;rul,:c;:;:i cf 'th mur-
cr.

I I.'A:,'. t:! rnr.ins t,) It her kn'v til.t ::ur maijcf;

hat., i- ':
i :.; e ili'h fr lI h r ( lii' i.

1 SAV:E it: ') ; 'rl'v;ile.l Iher to co.o!t'.m hcsr'.lf to re-

n',:L;cc bt. !:.i !',r her hulbln ', ;n:,. t, b cnntcn:ed to
f:;.;':, a dv 'r.: t,) p: l', ! twixt tlini ; fne hatn sent me
wor.l hl;ai lic} iiil ii I J v..I ; c;)iilriit ulntn that, but ra-
t.cr. i . .'undJi. ic. tcrllf upon this realfl' tking lhr-
1.ls to be tl'-;i W-.ks glle witi) chiil, by r!no.ncinl

B 1b 4' Hohcll,

Bothell, the ihoild acknowledge herself to be with child
of a bastard, and to have forfeited her honour, which she
will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save
her own life and her child, to choose the least hard con-
dition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this

month, with whom I have had some conference, and with
Mr. Craig also, the other minister of this town.

I have perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad le-

nity, I find them both very auflere, in this conference, what
they fliall do hereafter I know not, they are furnished with
many arguments, fomc forth of the scripture, tome forth
of hifories, some groundtd (s they fy) upon the laws
of this realm, fme upon pratices utl in this realm,
$nd frn upon the conditions and o:h mLade by their
prince t her coronation.

THE biihop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley

hath sent hither to thece lords, that his nephew the earla
and some others of that fide may, at Linichgow or at Stir-
ling, have ibmn communication with foinc appointed on
this fide, ifiring them that there is a .od difpnfitiort
in the lords of the other party to conicuire ith these, as-
furing further that they will not diflnin for trifflcs or ur.-
ncccJiary things, and (as I am given to und-ifiand) thlev
can be pleasLd the queen's restraint be continued, untill
thc murder be pursued in all perfors, whereby the fepa-
ration of the queen and Bothell is implytd, the preferva-
tion of the prince, the fccurity for all men, arin a good
order taken for the guvernance of the realnm in tranquil-
lity.

CAPITAIS Clerk, which hath so long feived i; D.nmark

and serv.d at Newhaven, did the 6ch of thi, ni(nth (ac-
companyed with one of his ilidiers, or rather the soldier
as the greater fame goeth) kill one Wilron a aman, and
such a one as had great eliiinaion with thLfe lords both
for his fki'l, his hardvyzefs, honefly, and willingness in this
action; wheretupon Cle k hath retired himnielf; their
q;uariel was about the ship which took Blacketcr, which
flip w;s appointed by these lords to go to the north of
Scotland to impeach the paf'age of the carle Bothell, in
cafe he went either to the ides, or to any other place ; by
the death of this man this enterprize was dahced.

THE biflop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and
doth dcfire to Ifeak with the lord of Lidington.

T L..

Tht abbot of Kilwinning hath lent for Sir Jame* Bal-
four, captain of the castle, to have conference *ith him.

As I wrote unto your iajefty in miy lait, the Hamil'ton

now find no matter to difever these lords and theim afun-
der, but would concur in all things (yea in any extremi-
ty against the queen) so as that they might be aflured the
prince of Scotland were crouned king, and should die
without issue, that the earle of Lenox's son living ihould
not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his
nephew.

AND lthough the lords and councelors speak reverent-

ly, mildly, and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot
gather b. their speech any intention to cruelty or violence,
yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very
great pteil of her life, by reason that the people afliembled
at this co;vention do mind vehemently the deitruaion
of her

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and

amongst all etates, (saving of the counsellors) that their
queen hath no more iberty nor priviledge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither
by God's laws, nor by the laws of the realm.

THE earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and affocl-

ates, be put to the horn by the ordinary jultice of this
town, named the lords of the ellion; and commandment
given to all fhirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend
him, and all other his followers and receiptors-The earl
of Bothell's porter, and one of his other fcrvitors of his
chamber, being apprehended, have confefled such sundry
circumftanccs, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said
earl was one of the principal executors of the murder, in
his own person accompanyed with iundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
of them, that is to fy, two of the Ormiftons of Tivot-
dall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would be
glad that none of the murderers should have any favour
or recei;,t in England, and hereof their desire is, that the
officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell doth ill
remain in the north parts, but the lord Scaton and Fle-
ming, which have been there, have utterly abandoned
him, and do repair hi:!:erwards.-The intelligence doth
grow daily betwixt th::fe lords, and those which held of;
and notwithstanding there lords have Tent an hundred and
fifty harn qibuicrs to Stirling, to keep the town and pas-

sage

sage from furprize; and so have they done in like man-
ner to St. Johniton, which be the two paflages from the
north, and waft to this tcwn, I do undcrfianJ the captain
of Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do
ncrvile the carriages be not impeached o:t.cr ifc than
t!icy be.

C(F late this queen hath written a letter to the captain

c.f the faiJ c;,ile which t.ath been furprized; and there-
by n.attcr i difovercd which mikcli liitle to the queen's

a r'.'nta .

'I'T;s. ihavinll none oTr I:r. ;tcr v.worthy your rajefty's

k: .3..:.dc, I clietch (od to p:'

, .: y..;ij in.jcfty with

lc:'g life, pcrfiL .t .?.'t.., p.u picr,-oLj i;icity. At
il.;burgh the l'-hl..f j 'y, :j,;.
Letter of Sir Nichol 71t I 'r. r'::orcon to tie right

honourablc- the : c:l of' i :.I , cfl, I.:nt. iof the t.r-
tlcr, and one c the 'si.!> (j' er m;;ajy's n-it
honourable p ivy Co'urcil.

.. ' t.:- Y my formcr lirpatches si:nt to he;- majcy, and '.'r.
, :.:'. 5. } Sccretiny, fce the I2:! cf July, your ordihip

I r' :. ". : i:,iht have i*.rccivedl the f ':-: cn t:iLs count:v, and to
''''" ' v;ht end tliCe niaters e !i:c t cne so as not to

tri.'. ;ou!or l'ordfl:p ih many ..or:: ; this qeen is iike
v-ry Ih r:ly t, e. ucipriv'!d of tLcr rcya! cflate, bL-r !bn to
be crowncd kiing, ad fL; dciainc d in pifon withii this
rc:r!m, and the faa;e to be e)Vcer.cd, in the young king's
inmc, L a ouiCe;, confiltir. of c:iain of the nobility,
and thcr wil. micn of thi realim; io as it i easy to be
icen that tce p.,wcr and ability to do any thing to the
c-;nnmrrod;:v of tl;c uct-cn'- mjelty, and the realmr of Eng-
iandl, ill chi;td, anl in i;.inncr v;holly, reit in the
hadns of thefc loid, au lithers thcir affoiatc, airen;bled
at Edillbtrrh. Now ii'le qturten's nmajety vi'l till per-
(iti in her tor-mcr opinion twards the queen of Scot-
l.-id, (nt.) whiom (n e all be able to do no good) then
I do plaily fee that thcre lords and all their accnmj;liccs
will beconic as ,ood I.' Ci'i h, as the Freinch kic:: cn '. ifh,
to all intents a:d purpofl.. And s for Ilh H;ati :lt. i:.,
the earls of Artuile, -:l n:lje, and ih it factin, t!h'. lie
albcady lb far itnil-ntcd t!:.t way, as ihere ii.

c lh iittle

di:. i- tn di.iv lthe i t ti t l'rcilih dtvoil!. ''i i..u this
is the: sa;c u :' L . cL ;: to ials o; ti .,u 'liy, lI;it

I .tl.ncc

France has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them,
to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an infirument,
the young prince will prove, to unquiet England, I report
me to your lodfhips wisdoms, and therefore confidering
the weight of the matter, and all the circumltances, I
trust your lordships will well bethink you in timc, (for 'tis
high time) how to advise her majesty, to leave ntlhing un-
done that may bring the prince of Scotland t hee in her
pofleffion, or, at the least. to be at her devoti:n. And
amongst other things, that I can imagine, fnr the first
degree, nothing is more meet to bring this t, effict, than
to allure this company here aflembled, to bear her n ajcfly
their favour. Some talk hath pid between the lord of
Liddirnton and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I in;!. that when her m.,j-fty shall have
won these men to her devotion, the principal point that
will make them cn.formable to dilivcr their prince into
England, i!i rea upon the q<uten, ard the real!ms n-
abling him o the fucccflion of the crown of Enl.and,
for fault of iuc of the queen's majefly's boly, ome other
things will nil be required, as the chl.ic of the said prince
and his train, to be at the char. e of England. I do well
perceive th.t thcf- men will never be brought to uelivcr
their princ: into England, without the forimer condition,
for the fucceiion of England; lor (ith Liilington) that
taking place, the prince shall be a dear to the people of
Engldnd as to the people of Scotland ; and the one will
be as carefil of l:is prefcrvatiin as the other. Otherwise,
he sith, ail things confiiered, it will be reported that the
Sclttithnmc have put their prince to be kept in (.fetv, as
thof which commit the hecp to he e cpt by the wolves.
So s stir c(.crcliron, your ltr(lflips may pcrceivc here
will e-c the icel)e .f this itnitcr. As unto the delivering
of hila upon l.,.tfl;ges, nh I' v' th, lut no m: .i think, that
the conilition f the filccifli(,n rot being acconip!ifhid,
the nobility and the gentry will rever cnent to leave
theniflves defnitute f tl.eir fiverei r, upon any hr.ftaes,
neither upon any prini t.s, nor likelihood of uood to ifiue
in time to cme. It were not nol or vcurfilves (failh
he) tht te matter wvere t;,hanil::d; for then you flould
avciitu:'e all yolr gods in oe lhip, which might have
a d;n :cr'us fHclt, confidrring the un\villinnd,.fs of the
qucl.n yoir nuv criiin :o content to eftahlilhing any fuc-
C.l1i lto the crc',z,. And then, how unmcte were it, that

her

her majesty having in her poirelion already all such per-
fins a do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown,
to have our prince also in her custody. For so there
might follow, without good capitulations, a strange and
dangerous ifluc, tho' the queen your mifrels do think
that such imaginations could not proceed but from busy
heads, as you have uttered unto us on her behalf. What
is come to pa(s ince my last diipatch, and h:,w far forth
things are proceeded, refer your lordfip to be informed
by my letters lent unto her Rajefty, at this time. And
so I pray alrighry God, preserve vour lordihip in much
honour and felicity. At Edinburgh this 24th of July,
15b7.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord Stu-
ard partner of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.

t .* -. r RUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you
I)" j well, for as much a we do confider thit you have

now a long time rcin.ined in those parts, without expe-
itiotln in the chairge comlmitted unto you, we think it not
,cct sccing ihcle hath not foliowe, the good acceotation
a'.tl fruit of our vell mncasing towards that tlate, which
.*ci r(;! n vuoi'l have requi:cd, that you fioiold conti-
ii;,: t:;cr a longer, cur p};afurc, therefore, is, that you
ta.-l, inieirdia:ely upon tht rcc;i't hereof, fend your fCr-
vat.t Middclcrmore unto te lords :nd fitates of that realm,
that arc a. nib!ed together, willing him to declare unto
thcm, that it cannot but I'cm vciy firange unto us, that
*i.; h,.v ir.o a c: le nt frcn us, of uch good intent, to deal
:.i:h thc'!n, in matters tending o much to their own

;;tct, :nl t. the hcii. t of , te v:hol c: .e c f th::ir coun-
;', thc. hvc l;) far icr';:::en tlh :7!lvc.,, and si nfioh:-
1. ;car.;l us 1J .: i "'coJ ncall;in:g, n.lt only ill delay-
1,;, to har you, and icficrrin T yur acc:; to the qurcn
«'t.ir foerciign, tiit, altn, which s franccft :.1 all, in not
vouchfn lg tn i i.'.c aly anfvvwcr unto u:;. AJ ,itho'
i!cfc dclln. i:: such, 1II: iI, a1 .e7Cre nat :o be lookLd
ic- a: t.iCr i.;::sd , yet (J' . '- '. -d thei. ;i: ae andl pro-

..,-J....

ceeding towards their Soveraign and queen, to overpass
all the relf in o firange a degree, as we for our part, and
we uppofi the whole world bcfides, cannot but think
them to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of sub-
jeas, as must needs remain to their perpetual tauche for
ever. And therefore ye ihall fay, that we have tho't good,
without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you
to our presence, requiring them to grant you lifcence and
pafport so to do, which when you shall have obtained, we
will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as
convenient speed as you may. Given, &c.

Indorfcd 6th Auguff, 1567.
Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William

Cecil, knight, one of her majesty's privy coun-
cil and principal fccrctary, give thele.

SIR,
W H A T I have learned, ince the arrival of my trh Ag.

lord of Murray, and MAonf. d Linnerd, vou ' i'-

lall underltand by rmy letter to her maijelv, at this timre. P:?-r.' i
The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their :lo.;ai:
drink, put water totheir wine. As ! air able to fee into
their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
the queen sleep, whether tfl live or die, whether the be
at liberty or in prizon. The mark they hoot at, i, to
renew their old league; and can be a3 well contented e:
take it of this little kinj, (howlfevcr his tide be) and the
fame by the order of these lords, as othc! wife. Lv ncroll
came but yesterday, and mne thinlcch he will not tarir
long; you may guels how the French will seek to :'ii-
plealf these lords, when they changed t cominr of L.a
Chappelle des Ourrins for this man, bc!ufe they ds:.:::-
ed that de la ChAppelle houl! not h :;itc.;ul ta

t :.::,

being a papist. Sir, to speak more plain!.' to 'ou, ii :
I will do otherwise, me thinkcth the .:! ; j .
will run the course that those mn d.), ;::d bc p:.r-
taker of their fortune. I hear no n.an ;':i: rore :t-
ter!y aaiift the tragedy, and' :1h p!ayc:; t ;:i, : .,n
he, so little lke hei hath t ho:;;it!e tins. I rnar :: i!:-
l.ig that Ledington is o o into France, whlih I .o .;
much millike, s ;nv thing, for our puriol. 1 : i..
yu the whole pr;.itJn:s of Fr:n::c: w:ll iiv: .l:: .;.': ,,

t'h.;

these mens quarrels ; and, where there is bruit amongl
you, that aid hould be sent to the adverse party, and
that Martiguesfhould come hitherwith Come force; Mons.
Baudelot hath assured me of his honaur, that instead of
Martigues comin- againit them, he will come with as
good a force to succour them: And if that be ent under
meaner conduc, Robert Stuart shall come with as many
to fo;tify them. But the constable hath allured these
lords, that the king meaneth no way to offend them. Sir,
I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed you
to further it, for I a here now t no purpose, unless it
be to kindle there lords more aainft us. Tus I do
humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the 12th
of August, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.
T RUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well.

We have, within there two days, received three

sundry lctters of yours, of the 20ih, 22(, and 23d, of
this month, havingf nt before thole received any seven
days before; and do find, by these your letters, that you
have very diligently and largely advertised us of all the
hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we
nothing like, so we trust in time to fee them wax colder,
and to receive rome reforinFin. For we cannot per-
ceive, that they with whrom you have dealt can answer the
doubts moved by the Hailto!ls, who howocever they may
be carried for their private rcfpYits, yet tofe things which
they move, will be allowed by all rcafonablel'erlons. For
if they may not, being noblemcn of the realm, be suffercd
to hear the queen their fivereii declare her mind con-
cerning the reports which arc nade of her, by such as
keep her in captivitv, how floutld they believe the reports,
or obey them, which do reorr i ? and therefore our
meaning is, you flall let tlie llni!tins plainly under-
fland, that we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far
forth as the fame doth concern the queen their fovcreign
for her rlicf) and in such tilng as fliall appear reason-
able for us therein to do, for the (]ueen our fiftcr, we
wil be readv to pcrfr,:m tc fimc. And where it is so
requircd, th: upon yu; com.;iicc; thce th lord Scroope

ihould

should deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings
to us, and ours to them, we are well pleased therewith,
and we require yoa to advertize the lir.l Scroope hereof
by your letters, ard to will him to shew hm!e!favourab!e
to them in their aions, th.t may appear plainly to tend
to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. And as we willed our ecretary to write unto you,
that upon your mef3age done to the carl of Murray, you
might return, so our meaning is you (hall. And if theie
our letters fliall meet you on the way, yet we will have
you advertile both the lord Scroope, and the Hamiltons,
of our meaning.

Ind;rfed 29 Aug, 1557.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbitlo of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my good commen larions to your rood lord- 3'Ih A,;.

fh ips, this haill be to a.lvcrtize you, that the qucen's ,';r '-

majelty my iverein hving ent me hither her ambaffi- i, fr,,>,. a
dor to the (queen her filter your obvcrei::n, to communi- C' !Y wiCit
tate unto her such matter as ffh thouglit meet, confider- .inr t., !
ing the ood ;:mity anti intelliscnce b:twixt them, whoi .ceL,.
being rloained in captivity (s your loidliips know) con-
trary to the duity f all od fubjits, fr the enlarge;l-!t
of wholu pe;,. n, and the rlitui;on of her to her dijnitv,
her majesty gave me in chare to treat with thcfe lords
afllinbled at Eden!ur h, ofi'ring them all rea:fona!le cn-
ditions and means as might be, for the I'afeguaid of trh
younz prince, the puniifhment(, thc ate horrible mnurdtlr,
the dissolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the
earl of Bodwell, and lailly for their own sureties. In the
negotiation of which matters I have (as y)ur lordihips
well know) flent a long time to no pur,of, noc b:.ii:-
able to prevail in any thing wi;h those lords, to the q'icni
my f(,vcrcigi's IftisfaAion. Of which (trdll!ae procecd-
i:gs rowards her mjcety, and undutifiul hcha, iour towards
their lbvcrcigi, I have advertised the queen's majesty ; she
(not behin mind(ed to bear this indignity) hath given me
in charge to dclare her further pleasure iito them, in
sach Irt a thy imty well pctceive her mn;jelty doth difal-

low

low of their proceedingp, and thereupon hath revoked me.
And further bath given me in charge to communicate the
fame unto your lordihips, requiring you to let me know,
before my departure hence, (which ball be, God willing,
as soon as I have received answer from you) what you
and your confederates will assuredly do, to set the queen
your fovreign at liberty, and to refore her to her former
dignity by force, or otherwise, feeing these lords have re-
fused all other mediation, to the end the queen's majefy
my sovereign may concur with your lordtlips in this ho-
nourable enterprize.

AND in care, through the dispersion of your alfociates,

your lordihips can neither communicate this matteramongft
you, nor receive resolution of them all by that time, it
may pleare you to fend me the opinions of so many of you
as may confer together, within two or three days, o as
I may have your answer here in this town by Monday or
Tuesday next at the farthest, being the izth of this Au-
gust for I intend (God willing) to depart towards Eng-
land, upon Wednesday following. Thus I mors humbly
take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the 3th
of Aug. 1567.

Jndorfed the 3th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.
*4th Aug. OUR good lordihip's letter of the 13th of August

s567. 1J I have received the i9th of the fame. For answer

Pape, Pcic, whereunto it may like your lordship to understand, that I
which Sir will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already
Nichoiae thoroughly inllruled of the queen's majefsy my sovereign's
sent to - pleasure, concerning the detention of the queen your so-
c"re' vereign, and concerning her relief.

To the first her majsfty hath given in charge, to use all

kinds of pcrfuafion in her name, to move there lords assem-
bled at Edenburgh to defilt from this violent and undutiful
behaviour, which they use toward their overeign. And
in this part, besides the fllew of many reasons, and. un-
dry persuasions of amicable treaty with them, her maje-
fly hath willed me to use some plain and severe speech ull-
to them, tending so far forth, as if they would not be bet-
ter adviscd, and reform these their outrageous proceedings
excrcifed against their sovereign, that then thely might

be

be aflured her majefly neither-would nor could indure
such an indignity to be done to the queen, her good cou-
fin and neighbour.

AND notwithitanding there my proceedings with them,

they have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as
yet neither will they consent to the enlargement, neither
susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me,
it is fupedluous to treat any more wirh them after this
manner. Whereupon I have advertised the queen's ma-
jefly my fovercign, expecting daily her' majesty's further
order; and as I shall be advertised thereof, so will not
fail to signify the fame to your good lordship; and in the
mean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lord-
ihip hath written unto me. Thus with my due commen-
dations to your good lordship, I commit the fame to al-
mighty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and
service that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of AuguR, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 450.)
Account of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Par-

liament held December 15, 1567,
T HE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the Paper0ffi,

name of the duke and himself their friends and ad-

herents, (the duke bimfelf, the earl of Caflilles, and die
abbot of Kilwinning being also present) to persuade the
union of the whole realm in one mind. Wherein he did
not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise that part of
this nobility did defcrve, which in the beginning took
meanes for puniihment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing
the queen's inordinat affecion to that wicked man, and
that she could not be induced by their persuasion to leave
him, that in fequeftring her. perfoll within Lochlevin,
they did the duty of noblemen. That their honourable
doings, which had not spared to h;z:'rd their lives and
lands, to avenge their native country from the llanderous
reports that were spoken of it among other nations, had
well deserved that all their brethrenr lould join with them
in so good a caufc. That he and they, in whofp names
he did speak, would willingly, and withour any compul-
ion, enter thcnillvqs in the fame yoke, and put their
VOL. II. a ivcg

lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
cause. And if the queen hcrfelf were in Scotland, ac-
companied with o0,000 men, they will be of the fame
mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder
noblemen of their party, Huntley, Arguile, and others,
which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnest-
ly move them. And if they will remain obltinate, and
refute to qualify themselves, then will the dulce, he, and
their friends, join with us to correc them, that other-
wife will not reform thermfelves. So plausible an oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none of ourfelvei
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord re-
gent, by the name of regent, (there was no mention at all
of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at every word,
when his peeches were directed to him, accompanying
all his words with low courteRses after this manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 472.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

8th Aug. 1568, from Bolton.

An original. --' UT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not
Piper office. J only to favour the form, but also the chief ar-

ticle of the religion of the gospel, namely jufification by
faith only: and fLe heareth the faults of papefry revealed,
by preaching or otherwise, with contented ears, and with
gentle and weak replys, and fhedoth not seem to like the
worie of religion throw me.
Part of a letter fom fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

2 Sept. 568, from Bolton.
- I T came to this queen's ears of late that she was

. bruited to be lately turned to the religion of the

gofpell, to the great difikint of the papifs hereabouts,
which thing he herself confeied unt' me, and yelferday
openly in the great chamber, when the aembly was full,
and ome papists present, he took occasion to speak of
religion, and then openly nle profefied herfilf to be of the
papist religion, and took upon her to patronize the fame,
more carnfilly than he had done a great while afore, al-

tho'

tho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that the
effet of her peech was only to shew her zeal; and after-
wards to me alone, when I mifliked to fee her become
so confidently backward in religion, Why, said Ihe, would
you have me to lose France and Spain, and all my friends
in other places, by eeming to change my religion, and
yet I am not aflured the queen my good sifter will be
my aflured friend, to the fatisfacion of my honour and
expetation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 474.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

I G HT truify and right well beloved cousin, we p
greet you well. Where we hear fay, that certain F,m a copy

reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what- cortreed by
soever mhould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen clttc
of Scotts cause, in any proof to convince or to acquit the
said queen concerning the horrible murder of her late hus-
band our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mislike hereofi
as we cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and
therefore we have thought good to afture you, that the
fame is untruly devised by the authors to our dishonour.
For as we have been always certified from our said fiter,
both by her letters and mclliges, that she is by no means
guilty or participant of that murder, which we with to be
true, so surely if he hould be found jufflv to be guilty
thereof as hath been reporLed of her, whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it hould behove us to con-
fider otherwise of her cau!c than to latisfv her desire in re-
ititution of her to the government of th,:t Kingdom.
And so we would have you and all others think, that
lhould be dilolfed to co.;icive honourably of us and our
ations.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 5 68.

No. XXVJ.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 48 .)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of October

1568, from York.

An original. ^Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to
Paperoffice. Bolton, to attend upon him here Thursday

last, I made my repair hither accordingly, meaning to
stay here until Monday next; as touching the matters of
the commiflion, that his grace and the reit have from her
highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of all things
thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed,
and altho' the matters be too weighty for my weak capa-
city, to presume to utter any opinion of mine own there-
of, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious
accusations ; my lord of Ledington also faith to me, that
he could with these matters to be ended in dulce maner,
so that it might be done with safety; of the reft you can
conceive, by the advertisements and writings, sent up by
our cmmiflioners.
A letter from the bilhop of Ross to the queen of

Scots, from York, October 1568.

Cott. Lb. 1TLEIS your majesty I conferred at length with A.
Calig. C. i. ne great part of a night, who affirit me that he
copy, had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who

determinate to him that it was the D. determinit pur-
pose not to end your cause at this time, but to hold the
fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power, to make
the E. purlue extremity, to the effet F. and his adhe-
rents might utter all they could to your dilhonour, to
the effect to cause you come in disdain with the hail sub-
jets of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to
attempt ay thing to her disadvantage. And to this effcet
is all her intention, and when they have produced all they
can againf you, D. will not appoint the matter instantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you theru
till she think time to shew you favour, which is not likely
to be hastily, becaule of your uncles in I'rancc, and the

tc;l

fear Qle has of yourself to be her unfriend. And there-
fore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to the D.
meaning that ye are informit that your fihbjeds which has
ofendit you-This in effet that your ma.eity hear-
fig the eftateof your affairs as they proceed in York, was
informed that her majesty was informed of you, that you
could not gudely remit your fubjeas in such fort as they
might credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the
tay of this controversy to be ended. And therefore per-
fuading her D. effetuallv notto trust any who had made
such narration. But like as ye had rendered you in her
hands, as mos tender to you of any living, so prayit her
to take na opinionof you, but that ye wald use her coun.
fell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to
all others, as well uncles as others, and aure her to keep
that thing ye wald promise to your fubjets by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, v wald be glad to satisfy her
in that point be removing within her realm in secret and
quiet manner, where her G. pleased, until the time her
G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit re-
moved from her. So that in the mean time your realm
were holden in quietnefi, and your true fubjeas restored
and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things
tending to this effea. And affirs that they believe that
this may be occasion to cause her credit you that ye offer
so far; and it may come that within two or three months
ile may become better-minded to your grace, for now
Ihe is not well minded, and will not shew you any plea-
sure fr the caules foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the
following key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiffoncrs.
F. The earl of Murray.

Ccj No. XXVII.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 492.)
Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scot.

land, Dec. 2 , 1568.
bnprcfce. T HE bes way for England, but not theeafief, that

the queen of Scocs might remain deprived of her
crown, and the fate continue as it is.

THE fccond way bfr England profitable, and not so hard.

-- That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some
perfwafions, to agree that her son might continueking,
because be is crowned, and herfulf to remain alto queen;
and that the government of t:l realm might be commit.
ted to fucb persons as the quece of England hould name,
so as for the nomination of hem it might be ordered,
that a convenient number ofp'"-'!ls of Scotland ihould be
grft named to the queen of England, indifferently for the
queen of Scots, and for her son, that is to fay the one
half by the queen of Scots, and the other by the earle
qs Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the child; and
qut of those, the queen's majesty of England to make
Choice for all. the offices of the realm, that are, by the
lows. of Scotland, disposable by the king or queen of the
land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's majeRfy,

the government remain in the hands f the earle of Mur-
ray as it is, providing he hall not !:fpoli of any offices
or perpetuals to cutinue any longer but to these offered
of the premises.

THATr a parliament be fiimmoned in Scotland by f.-

veral commandmentls, both of the queen of Scots and of
the young king.

---TIIAT hostages I:e delivered unto England on the

young king's hehaif, to the nun er of twelve persons of
the carle of Murray's part as the queen of Scots hall
name; and likcwilf on the queen's behalfto the like num-
ber as the earle o' Alurray lll name the fame not to be
any that have by inh ritimlc or office (aufc to be in this
parliament, to rema;n from the beginning of the summons
of that prliamenr, untill three months after that parlia-
ment; which hostages hall be pledg., that the friends
*f itherp.trt ffiall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this

par.

parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
queen of England hall devise for the government of the
realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland,
nor contrary to the laws of Scotland fur any man's inheri-
tance, as the fame was before the parliament at Edinr. the
Decemr 1 567) shall be eftablifled to be kept and obeyed,
under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

-- THAT by the fame parliament also be established

all executions and judgments given against any person to
the death of the late king.

-- T'HAT by the fame parliament, a remiffon be

made universally from the queen of Scots to any her
contrarys, and also from every one subjed to another,
lfving that restitution be made of lands and houses, and
all other things heritable, that have been by either fide
taken from them which were the owners thereof at the
committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

THAT by the fame parliament it be declared who hall

be successors to the crown next after the Q of Scots and
her issue; or else, that such right as the D. of Chatelhe-
rault had, at the marriage of the Q of Scots with the
lord Darnley, may be conserved and not prejudiced.

THAT the Q. of Scots may have leave of the queen's

majesty of England, twelve months after the said parlia-
ment, and that he Ihall not depart out of England, with-
out special licence of the queen's majesty.

THAT the young king hall be nourihed and brought
up in England, till he be years of age.

IT is to be confidered, that in this cause the compoi-

tion between the queen and her fubjeas may be made with
certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the woild for
her honour, as though all the parts should comr. of her,
and yet for the surety of contrarys, that certain betwixt
her and the queen's majesty are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. 1. p. 494.)
The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan.

1568.9.

LIrF. greet you well, we mean not, at this point, Paper ofcei
VV by any writing, to renew that which it hath
(Ilefe,l G(od to make grievous to us and forryfull to yow;
bit forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having

C c 4 occa-

bccafion to command you in our service, and yow alio
whilelt you are to serve us. We require yow to con-
fider of this that followeth with like consideration and
diligence, as hitherto yow have accufiumate in our fr-
vile; at the time of our last lettes written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of
Scos, we had ui.drjilanding out of Scotland of certain
writtirgs sent by her from thence insr. Scotland, amongst
the which one is fund to contain great and manieft un-
truths touching us and others alfb, as ihall and may plain-
ly appear unto y-w by the copy of the fame, which
likewise we fend yow, ;.nd because at the fame time we were
advertised, that it ihoilld be shortly proclaimed in Scotland,
though then it was not, we thought good first to remove
the queen, before we would disclose the fame, and then ex-
pe& . ie i1;uP t:reof; and now, this day, by letters from
our ccufin .f iiunfdon we are afccrtained, that since that
time the fame matters contained in th- writing, are pub-
lilhcd in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have
thought it very meet, for the discharge of our honor, and
to confoun the falsehood contained in that writing, not
only to have the fame reproved by oen proclamation
upon our frontiers, the copy whereof we do herewith
fend yow, but also in conve:lient fort to charge that queen
therewith, so as fne may be moved to declare the athors
thercof, and pri'uadcrs of her to write in such slanderous
fort such untruths of us; and in the mean fIafon, we have
here layed her comnmiffioners, knowing o other whom
we may more probably prefiume to be parties hereunto,
than they, untill the queen shall name ome other, and
acquit them; who beiin generally charged, without ex-
prefling to them any particularity, do ufc all manner of
speeches to discharge themselves; wherefore our pleasure
is, that ye fbail, after ye have well perused the copy
of this writting fnt to yow, speedily declare unto her,
that we have good underitanding given us of diverse let-
ters and writtings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by
her own hand, amongst which, one luch writing is sent
With her commandment exprefy as now it is already
published, as we are much troubled in mind that a prin-
cef s

as he is having a cause in our hands so implicated

with difficulties and calamitys, should either conceave in
her own mirt, or allow of them that flould devise such
false, untrue, and improbable matters against us, and our

honor)

honor, and specially to have the aventure to have the fame
being known so untrue to be publiihed; and you hall
alio fay, becau!e we will not think so ill of her, as that it
bhould proceed of he; seif, but rather he hath been coun.
felled thereunto, or by abuse made to think some part
thereof to be true, we require her, even as he may look
for ony fvour at our hands, that {he will disburden her-
self as much as truly 1he may herein, and name them
which have been the authors and perfwaders thereof,
ar.J ,i the ,lnll make as great amends to us as the cafe
rr.a)y eqire. after you have thus far proceeded, and had
i:,. e a;tifef of her, whether he hall deny the writ-
ir. aFil:utev, *.,i name any that have been the advisers
thieref.f, vct hall fay unto her that we have flayed her
crr l- :siones here, until. we may have fomeanfwer here-
of, becL,' . we cno': but impute to them rome part of
th." evi .ealing, antill by her answer the authors may
be kn :1; and s loon as you can have direct answers
from I '1I. *'e pr'y you to r'cjrn us th. tIame ; for as the
cafe ft.ti, ed; v- cannot buw be much disquieted with it,
having our honcuf o dreply touched contrary to any in-
tention in us, ad f;: ay thing we know in our judg-
ment, the carl of M;i ray and others named in the fame
writing vc.i .fs thought for the matters, to them therein
imputed; v;, ! maiy impart o the qu::en of cots either
the contt:n:s of the fia;,der,,us letter, or hew her the co-
py to read it, aind you may alli impart this matter to the
lord Scroop, to join with you there as you hall think
meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from We-

therby the 2zth January, 1568.
*- T WILL ftipprefs my own ,7rieffs, and pars them AnOrigl.

over with llence, for the prelfeit learning of your nal.

majefiy-and for th.s queen's answer to t!ic coppie of her fPaper
supposed letter fcnt unto Scotland, I n:t dd this unto
my brother's letter, ent unto Mr. Secretary yeflernight
late; in procels vt time, lhe dd not deny but that the
first lines contained in the fan.- copie, was agreeable to
'a letter that he had fert unto Scotland, which touched
my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her on into your
najety's hands, and to avoid that the fame Ihould not be

done

done without her consent, made her, he faith, to write
in that behalf; he, faith also that he wrote that they
fhoulOd aufe a proclamation to be made to fir her people
to dei-.. 1 my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for
deliver in of her aid fbn, and impunge his rebellious go-
vernment, as he termed it, but he utterlydenyeth to
have written any of the other slanderous part of the aid
letter touching your majesty; the aid also, that he sus-
peed that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the
author of rome Scotch letters devised in her name, but ihe
would not allow me to write this for any part of her an-
fwer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 503.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honour-

able the Lord of Liddington.

=o!h of Ju. 7OUR letter of the 3d of July, I have received the
Si, ,5<9. Y isth of the fame. For answer whereunto you fall
From ne ,
Ogi;al. understand, that friends here to my lord regent and you

do with such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and
circumstances there arise no dissention, or at the least,
no more nor other than the difference of countries doth
neeffarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be used as may be, for the consumma.tion of the
matter in hand, which principally to advance, your al-
lowance, prosecution, and speedy romotion in Scotland,
is most requisite, for you are lb wile, and well acquainted
with tle ate of the world, and with all our humours, as
you know that fomc do allow and disallow for realon, ifme
for rIpea of multitude, Iome for refpedt of person., and
it) te cause is to go forward as men do like to iet it for-
ward. You are not to eek that ome will use cautions,
some neutrality, some delays, and Ibme will painly im-
pun.-e ir. And yet all and every of there forts will alter
thcir doings, when they hall fee the regent and his fa-
vourers ;ccord with the bcfi and greatest part there, and
aiicc with the wisest and firongef party here. Tho' the
matter h.s taken its beginning here, upon deepand weigh-
tv confideratior, forthe weil oi both the princes and their
realns, as well prcfentiv, as in tme to come, yet it is
thought mot cxpcdiL::, that t;e re;;.t and rei:l!n of

t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~g.te

Scotland, by you, ihould propose the matter to the queer
our sovereign, if you like to use convenience, good order,
or be disposed to leave but a scar, and no wound of the
hurts past. I would be glad that this my letter flould
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it
seems your queen's restoration and marriage to the duke
of Norfolk Ihould be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejeaion. To which proceedings, be-
cau£e you pray me to write frankly, I fy and reason thus,
me thinketh you use a preposterous order, todemand the
consent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds
to a good end hath rather been felt or prepared, and
therefore there must needs follow either a universal refu.
fal, or factious division amongst you, whereby a blou-
ftering intelligence mutl needs come to queen Elizabeth of
the intended marriage from thence, which ought to have
been lecretely and advifedlv propounded unto her high-
ness ; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing,
her majefly shall. be mde inexorable and o1 bring the
mater to such passe, as this which should have wrought
surety, quietness, and a stay to both queens and their
realms, hall augment our calamity, and throw us your
best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy divi-
sion amongst ou: elves; for you may not conjecture that
the matter is now in deliberation, but expe4teth good
occasion for executing; sure I am ou dlo not judge so
flandcrly of the managing this matter, as to think we
have not cast the worst, or to enter ther-in o far with.
out the assistance of the nobility, the ablest, the wisest,
and the mightirft of this realm except queen Elizabeth:
from whom it hath been concealed untill you, as the fittefi
minister, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the
regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far matter
Woddes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's
affections, and mailer ecretary's, to alift the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor is it not
material; but do assuredly think, that her majeftv will
prefer her furery, the tranquillity of her reign, and the
conservation of her people, before any device, which may '
proceed from vain discourse, or imperfetions of pafllons,
and inconsiderate affe&lions. And as for Mr. Secretary,
you aie not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fft
aforc, o he covctcth not to tarry too far behind, and fpc.
cially when the reliques be of no great value or power.

If

If I could as well allure you of his magnanimity, and
constancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay con-
fiently, you may repoie as well of him in this matter,
as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem-
broke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft of the
nobility all which d; embrace and protefte the accom-
plilhment of this cafe. I have, according to your ad-
vce, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame
zeal and care of his well doing that I owe to him, whom
I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath allured unto
him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion,
wherewith he feemeth to be well ':iisfy'd. If your cre-
dit be, as I trust, halten you: coming hither, for it is
very neceflary that you were aiere presently. Q_ Elizabeth
both doth write to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may
perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her majesty's affct:on
to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he
conjeAureth of him, the effect of which her ma'efly's let-
ter you hall un ierftand, by my lord Leicester's letter unto
you at this dispatch. At the court, 20th July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 504.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B.

probably Lord Burleigb.

tjg. .-- ECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken

tari. ..b. j on fmali occasions, and that the mention of the
7 B. 9g. marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother, and
'43 93 the D. of Norfclk, hath this while past been very frequent

in both the realms, and then 1 myself to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her
majelly's cars; I will, for fatisfa'tion of her highnefis
and the discharge of my duty towards her majesty, mani-
fest unto you my interest, and mcdling in that matter,
from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju-
dicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king
hiy sovereign, this his realm, and me. What confcrrences
was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able
to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that
pased betwixt him and me, either at that tilm, or since.
And to the end her M;.jclly may underiand how 1 have

been

been dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled to touch
some circumfitances, before there was any mention of her
marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commifion-
era, I found very-and neutral dealing with the duke. and
others her highness's commiflioners, in the beginning of
the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed in-
cerely, and so further. During which time, 1 entered
into general speech, flicking at our jus defence in the
matters that were objeted agai ft us, by the said queen'a
commissioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but
summary cognition in the cause of controversy, with a
small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to
Howard, what purpoe they had I cannot fay, but that
night Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence
with me upon the slate of our aaion, I was advised by him
to pass to the duke, and require familiar conferrence, by
the which I might have Come feeling to what iflue our
matters would tend. According to which advice, having
gotten time and place convenient in the gallery of the house
where the duke was lodged, after renewing of our first
acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the as-
size of Leith, and some speeches paired betwixt us; he
began to fay to me, how he in England had favour and
credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of many,
it was to be thought there could be none more fit inftru-
ments, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt
the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the
present slate of both, and how I was entered in that ation
tending so far to the queen's dishonour, I was willed by
him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inconvcnicncies her
defimation in the matters laid to her charge might hrced
to her poferity. Her rcfpeil was not little to the crowri
of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my
unfriends had the next re!pett, and th'it I flould elteena
the ifflie of her body would be the more affetionate to
me aind mine, than any other that could attain to that
crown. And so it hould be meetfl, that ilhe a.ffimeJ her
dimiffion made in Lochlevii, and' vwt to abstract t;e let-
ters of her hanl writc, that She ,iu;,!d not he tlc:,ind in
England. My reply to tat was, lhw the nmat:cr naJ p.l'-
fed in parliamnenr, and the letle s rft. to ianv, that tii
abltractlig of the fmr.e c(uld 4, ihi: arc isCu:c in: to any

p,:rpc., .

purpose, and yet hould we, in that doing, bring the i,-
nominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for us
that way to proceed, eeing the queen's majefly of Eng-
land was not made privy to the matter as dhe ought to be,
to be in refpedt we were purposely come in England for
that end, and for the-of the grants of our cause. The
duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle mat-
ters well enough at the court. After this, en the occa-
ion of certain articles, that were required to be resolved
on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very
ground of our action, we came up to the court where
sone new commifioners were adjoined to the former, and
the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parlia-
ment house at Westminster, in presence of which corn
missioners of the said queen, and--- through the-
rebuking of the queen of England's own commissioners, we
uttered the whole of the a&tion, and produced such evi-
dences, letters, and probations, as we had, which might
move the queen's majesty to think well of our cause.
Whereupon expeaing herhighnefsdeclaration, and feeing
no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given, but
daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean sea-
son, flanding in hazard and danger, we were put to the ut-
tcrmolt point off our wit, to imagine whereunto the mat-
ters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone
for justification of our causes, yet appeared no end, but
continual motions made to come to some accord with the
queen, and reflore her to whole or half reign. I had no
other answer to give them, but that I should neither do
against confcicncc or honour in that matter. Notwith-
standing feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor
dispatch to us, and that I was informed that the duke be-
gan to milike of me, and to speak of me, as that I had
reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her-
Jutwr. and murderer, I was adviscd to pass to him, and give

him good words and to purge myself of the things ob-
jecced to me, that I hould not open the sudden entry of his
evil grace, nor have him to our enemy -- conlider-
ing his grentncfs. It being therewithal whispered, and
Ihewed to me, that if I departed, he flanding discontented
and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble
in my way, as my throat might be cut before I cam to
Bcrrick. And therefore since it might well enoglh p-

pear

pear to her marriage, I liould notput him in utter despair,
that my good will could not be had therein. So few days
before my departing, I came to the park in Hampton court,
where the duke and I met together, and there I declared
unto him that it was come t. my ears, how Come mifre-
port Ihould be made of me to him, as that I hould
(peak irreverently and rafily of the aid queen my fove-
reign's mother, such words as before exprefled, that he Prosbly
might - thereby my aftfeion to be so alienale fromy/jjp.a.
her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her
preferment, howbeit he might persuade himfelfof the con-
trary, fr as Ith once was the person in the world that I
loved bell, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
having received iuch advancement and honour by her, I
was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wih her bo-
dy harm, or to speak of her as was untiuly reported of
me, (howfoevcr the truth were in the self) and as to th-
prefcrvation of herfon, now my sovereign, had moved me
to enter into this caule, and that her own prefling was prh ly
the occasion of that was uttered to her - whenl:)evri,/,,.r.
God fiould move her heart to repent of her bypatd beha-
viour and life, and after her known repentance, that he
Ihould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful mar-
riagm that she was entered in, and then afi were joined
with such a god;y and honourable a personae, as were
affectioned to the true religion, and whom we might trult,
I could find in my heart to love her, and to tfew her as
great pleasure, favour, and good will, as ever I did in my
life; and in caie, e ihould be that personage, there was
none whom 1 could betterlike of, the queen-in-
or England being made privy to the matter, and the allow-
ing tlh:reof, which being done, I hould labourin all things
that I could, to her honour and pleafuru, that were not
prejudicial to the king my fovcreign's claitc, and payLd
hiln not to think otherwiCe of me, for my affctioil wa:3
rathar buried and hidden within me, awaiting until G;Ad
should diret her to know hcrlcif, than utterly :.li:natcd
anJ abftraaed from Ir r; which he seemed to acc,'pt il
very good part, laying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me
thatthing, whrcuito I will m:kec non; in England orcot-
land privy, and thou hist Nortolk's lite in thy hanJs.
So dc.arting, I cinc to 1my lodging, anJ 1ly the wrv,
and all nig'r, I wv;is in continal thouri;t and ;:::;,.i n
of mind, tow to behave my'lf in that 'cl,.:!'y It.:t:Tr,

f hr.

first, imagining whereunto this hould tend, if it were at-
tempted without the queen's majesty of England's know-
ledge and good will, this realm and I myself in particu-
lar having received such favour and comfort at her high-
ness's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness,
since God poffefled her majesty with her crown. And on
the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
protesting, none other were or hould be privy to our
speech, I tho't I could not find in my heart to utter any
thing, that might endanger him; moved to the uttermost
with there cogitations, and all desire of sleep then remov-
ed, I prayed God to fend me rome good relief and out-
gate, to my discharge, and fatisfadion of my troubled
mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or with-
in a day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with
my lord of Leicefer, in his chamber at the court, where
he began to find firange with me, that in the matter I
made o difficult to him, standing so precisely on confer-
rence, and how when I had in my communication with
the duke, come so far- and there he made some dif-
course with me, about that which was talk betwixt us, I
perceiving that the duke had the matter to my lord

Probahly of Leicester, and thinking'me thereby discharged at the
doJiJd. duke's hands, therefore 1 repeated the fame cornmuni-

cation in every point to my lord of Leicefler, who desired
me to shew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I re-
sised to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her
highness any thing, that he as one - - by her majesty,
and for many benefits received at her hi2hnefs's hands is
obliged to wish her well, hould make declaration of the
fame to her majefly, as I underhand by some speech of
her highness to me, he did. This my declaration to the
duke was the onlycaufe, that staid the violence and trouble
prepared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways un.
deritand. The fame declaration I was obliged to re-
new since in writings of -- ent to my servant John
Wood. The ibum whereof, I trufi, he shewed the duke,
and something also I wrote tohimfe!f, for it was tho't this
honuld redeetm lome time, that the duke hould not fud-
denlv declare him our enemy, for his greatness was oft
laid bef,,re me, and what fricndflhip he had of the chief of
the nobility in England, i) that it might appear to the
quetecr's inajefty otlnlgldil-fo cold tuw.rds us, nd doing
niuthliii pub.,ikly t.,t night ifcc fcuiable for us, we

ha4

had fme cause to fufpea that her higanes dhould not be
contrarious to the marriage when it mIould be proposed to
her. The sharp meflge Cent by her majesty withthe lord
Boyd, who had the like coumniffin from the duke tending
so far to the aid queen's preferment, as it were proposing
one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that
her highness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and
that tie might be induced to allow thereof. But howbe-
it it was devised in England, that the lord of Lethington
should come as from me, and beak the matter to her
highness, as her majesty in a letter declared that he
looked for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of probbly
me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife ac- divOre.
cord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but
altogether mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great in-
conveniencies to the surety and quietness of this whole ile;
for our proceedings have declared our mifliking and difal-
lowance of the purpose from the beginning, and ifwe had
pleased, he was ready for the journey. And in likewise
it was devised to give content, that the -- between
the aid queen and Bothwell, should be sufFered to pro-
ceed in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boyd,
by reason we could not understand what was the queen's
majesty's pleasure, and allowance i that behalf
And whereas ye mean, that her highness was not made
privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me. The
firt motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord
of LeicefRer, and by him imparted to her majesty, so far
as I could perceive by bome speech of her highness's to me,
before my departing. Thus 1 have plainly declared how I
have been dealt withal for this marriage, and howjul ne-
ceffity moved me not to require diretly, that which the
duke appeared so - unto. And for my threatnings,
to aflent to the fame, I have expresSed the manner; the
persons, that laid the matter before me, were of my own
company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In con-
clufion I pray you persuade her majefiy, that fie let no
fpecches nor any other thing pafled and objected to my
prejudice, move her majefly to alter her favour-towards
me, or any ways to doubt of my aured constancy to-
wards her highiiefs; for in any thing which may tend

VOL. 11. D d to

to her honour and surety, I will, while I live, bestow
myself, and all that will do for me, notwithstanding my
hazard or danger, as proof should declare, when her ma.
jefy finds time to employ me.

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

4J

APPENDIX
TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 9.)

William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of
Leicester, March o2th, 1570, from Ledington.

T HE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, Anorigind.
T be the divisions thereof in dangerous factions, doth

press me to frame my letters to your lordship, in

other fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other
refpec, but only to maintain my private credit; therefore
I am driven to furnish them with matter, which I know
not to be plausible, whereupon my misconstruing my mean-
ing, ome there may take occaion of offence, thinking
that I rather utter my own passions, than go aboutto in-
form your lordship truly of the state; but I trust my plain
dealing hall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning;
to make the fame sensible, I will lay before your lordship's
eyes, the plat of this country ; which firR is divided into
two fations, the one pretending the maintenance of the
king's reign, the other alledging the queen to have been
cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly deprived of her date;
the former iscompofed of a good number of nobility, gen-
tlemen, and principal burroughs of the realme, who shall
have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the queen's
majefly your sovereign's allowance and protection; the
other hath in it some mos principall of the nobility, and
therewithall, good numbers of the inferior fort, through-
out the whole realm, which also look afruredly that all
kings do allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
ly. 'What confcquence this division will draw after it,
leave it to your lordship's consideration; there is fallen out
another division, accidentally, by my lord regent's death,
which is like to change the state of the other two fations,
to cacrcaec the one, and diminilh the other, which is

D d a grounded

grounded upon the regiment of the realm. Some num-
ber of noblemen aspire to the government, pretending
right thereto by reason of the queen's demission of the
croun, and her commiifon granted at that time for the
regiment during the king's minority; another facion doth
altogether repine against thatdivifion, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort
amongfl the earls, hall presume to challenge to themselves
a rule over the whole realme, the next of the blood, the
first in rank, the greatest alway both for the antientry of
their houses, degree, and forces, beingnegleckted; this
order they think preposterous, that the meaner fort hall
be placed in publick funtion to command, and the greater
lhall continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commiflion had in the beginning been valew-
able, (which the mobs part will not grant) yet can it not
bc extended to the prefcnt, for that the conditions there-
unto annexed are ceascd, and so the effe& of the whole
void; the latter part of this division hath many preten-
ces, for befidcs the queen's faction, which is wholly on
that fide, a great number of thefl that have heretofore pro-
sessed the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will
not yield to the government of the other, whose preferment
for refpeas they mislike, when the queen's fadion hall
be increased, with a part of the king's, and there not of
least substance, and yow mav judge what is like to ensue;
an other incident is like to move men to enter in further
dilcourfes, it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's
majesty is fctting forth rome forces towards the border,
which ha ll enter this realm, to countenance these, that as-
pire to the regiment, and upprefs the contrary fastion,
and bruts are pread, that the fame hall be here out of
hand; these that think themselves of equal force with their
contrary faction at home, or rather an overmatch to them,
yet not able to encounter with the forces of another prince,
rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take ad-
vice of neceflity, and evill councillors, and seek also the
maintenance of Ibme foreign prince, whereby her majesty
(altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) must be
driven to exceflive charges, and it would appear there
were a conspiracy of all the elements at one time to set
us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of
your forces coming towards the border is spread abroad,
even at the fame time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon

with

APPENDIX. 405

with a messenger ent exprefly from the king of France,
to that part of the nobility, that favours the queen, to
learn the fate of the country, and what flpport they lack
or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; assuredly this meflage will be well received,
and suffered accordingly, this is the present slate of Scot-
land. Now if your lordship would also know my opinion,
how to choice the best, as the cafe fandeth; I will in
that also fatisfie yourlordfhip, I am required from them to
deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge whether I do so
or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I imply utter
my judgment, and go not about to disguise my intents.
I trust the queen's majesty hath a desire to retain at her
devotion the realme of Scotland, which he hath gone
about to purchase, with beflowing great charges, and
the los of rome of her people; this deire is honourable
for her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and
of none to be disallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to
have the amity of the whole realm, for it is not a portion
of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove commo-
dious for her to suit the friendship of a facion of Scotland,
for in so doing, in gaining the best, he may lose the
more, and the fame would bring all her acions with us
in suspicion, if The hould go about to nourish fations
amongst us, which meaning I am sure never entered into
her majesty's heart; then if it be the friendship of the
whole ie doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one
part, go about to overthrow the remnant, which will not
be so faifable, as rome may give her to understand ; but
rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the
whole state, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all
by good means to an uniformity, so sh.ill he give us all oc-
cafion to think well of her doings, that he tendeth our
wealth, and provokes us universally to with unto her ma-
jefty a molt prosperous continuance; by the contrary, if
forthe pleasure of a few, he will fend forces to suppress
these whom they millike, and cinfcqucniily offend ma-
ny; men be not so faint-hearted, but they have courage
to provide for their own fafty, and nut only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will al!o procure further, at
the hand of other princes. This for ,mine own parr, I
do abhorr, and protest I desire never to fee forces of
strangers to ft foot within this land, vet I know nor what
point necefity may drive men i to, as if ncn in the middle

Dd3 otf

of the sea were in a (hip, which suddenly ihould be set on
fire, the fear of burning would make them leap into the
sea, and oon after the fear of the watter would drive them
to cleive again to the fired ihip, so for avoiding present evil,
men will many times be inforced to have recourse to an-
other, no less dangerous. Trust me forces will not bring
forth any good fruit to her majesty's behove, it must be
Ibme way of treaty hall serve the turn, wherein by my
former letters your lordship doth know already what is
my judgment; you fee how plainly I do write, without
consideration in what part y letters may be taken, yet my
hope is that such as will f vourably interpret them, hall
thinkthat I mean as well to her majesty, and that realme,
as there that will utter other language. I with the con-
tinuance of the amity betwixt the two contrys, without
other refpeE, and will not conceal from her majesty any
thing, to my knowledge, tending to the prejudice thereof;
if I hall perceave her majesty taking frank dealings in evil
part, I hall from thenceforth forbear; in the mean sea-
son I will not cease to trowble your lordship, as I hall
have occasion to write, and o 1 take my leave of your
lorJfhip.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffcks,

July d, 1570.

Calderw. ' I G H T trufiy and well beloved cousin we greet you
M. s. Hir- J[. well, this day we have received your letters of 28
tory, v. a. the last month, with all other letters, sent from Scot-
P. s82. land, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is

dcfired to be given before the tenth of this month; which
is a very lhort time, the weightiness of the matters, and
the diflance of the places confidered; nevertheless we
have, as the hortnefs could susser it, resolved to give this
aniwer following, which wc will that yow, by warrand
hereof, fh;ll caule to be given in our name to the earl of
Lennox and the reft of the noblemen conveened with him.
Whtrc it is by them, in their letters, and writings al-
ledge, that for lack of our refi lute answer, concerning the
tftablilhing of the regiment of the realm under their young
kinll, brcat inconvcaicncics have happened, and thc:efore

they

they have deferred now at their lafi convention to deter-
mine of the famine, who hall have the place ofgover-
nour, untill the 21 this month, before which time they
require to have our advise, in what person or persons the
government of that realm shall be eftablihed, we accept
very thankfull the goodwill and reputation they have of
us, in yielding o frankly to require and follow our advise
in a matter, that toucheth the tate of their king, their
selves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
our former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
taken ome discomfort, as though that we would not have
regard to their state and surety, ft on the other part, they
of their wisdoms ought to think, that it might be by the
whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form
of government, or agovernour by name, for that howfo-
ever we hould mean well if we hould do so, yet it could
not be without fomejealoufy in the heads of the eflate, no-
bility, and community of that realm, that the government
thereof thould be by me specially named, and ordained;
so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet miflikingmoft
that they hould take any discomfort by our forbearing
to how our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for
to proceed, confidering with ourselves how now that realm
had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their
king, and by reason of his base age, governed heretofore
by a very careful and honourable person, the earle of Mur-
ray, untill that by a mischievous person, (an evil exam-
ple) he was murdered, whereby great dilbrder and con-
fusion of neccflity had, and will more follow, if determin-
ation be not made of some other fpccial person, or per-
sons, to take the charge of governor, or superior ruler
fpeciall, for adminiitration of law and justice, we cannot
but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
special governor to be chosen; and therefore being well
allured, that their own understanding of all others is
belt to confider the slate of that realm, and to discern
the abilities and qualities of every perton meet and ca-
pable for such a charge, we hall better f:tisfic ourselves,
whom they by their common content shall firit choose,
and appoint to that purpoIe, then of any to be by us afore-
hand uncertainly named, and that bcaufe they hall per-
ccave that we have care of the person of their king, who
by ncarnels of blood, and in respec't of his so young years,
<uht to be very tender and dear to :;, we shall nut hide

D d 4 our

our opinion from them, but if they lhall all accord to name
his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be
governor alone, orjointly with others, (whom we hear to
be in the mean time by their common consent appointed
lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none
can be choren in that whole realm, that hall more desire
the preservation of the king, and be more meet to have
the government for his safety, being next to him in blood
of any nobleman of that realm, or elfewherc; and yet,
hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to them this choice,
except they shall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured,
that whatsoever reports of devies, are, or hall be spread
or invented, that we have already yielded our mind to
alter the state of the king or government of that realm,
the fame are without just cause or ground by us given,
for as we have already advertised them, that although we
have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not re-
fuCe, what the queen of Scots on her part lball fay and
offer, not only for her own aflurance, but for the wealth
of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be,
that hall be offered, we mean not to break the order of
law and justice, by advancing her cause, or prejudging
her contrary, before we mhall deliberately and assuredly
fee, upon the hearing of the whole, some place necef-
fary, and just cause to do; and therefore finding that
realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of
that realm, and thereof inveted by coronation and other
Solemnities used and requisite and generally so received be
the whole etates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the
complaints or informations of the queen against her on,
to do any at whereby to make conclusion ofgovernments,
but as we have found it, o to susser the (dme to continue,
yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we
may impefhe, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your
late ations hath manifetly appeared, un ill by ome justice,
and clear caule, we hall be direcly induced otherwise to
declare our opinion; and this we would have them to
know to be our determination and course that we mean
to hold, whereon we trust they for their king may fee
how plainly and honourably we mean to proceed, and
how little cause they have to doubt of us, whatsoever to
the contrary they have or hall hear; and on the other
part, we pray them of their wisdoms to think how unho-

nourable,

nourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us,
when the queen of Scotland doth o many ways require
to hear her cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in
the fame, as well for matters betwixt ourselves and her, as
betwixt herself and her Ton and his party of that realm,
against which offers no reason could move us to refute to
give ear, that we hould aforehand openly and direstly, be-
fore the caues be heard and confidered, as it were, give a
judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them
whom [he maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye [hall
admonish them, that they do not, by misconceiving our
good meaning towards them, or by indirect aertions of
their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in such fort, that our good meaning to-
wards them [hall not take such effec towards them, as they
!hall desire, or themselves have need of. All this our an-
fwer ye hall cause be given them, and letthem know, that
for the shortness of time, this being the end of the second
of this month, we neither could make any longer decla-
ration of our mind, nor yet write any everal letters, as if
time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
1570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
The bihop of Ross to secretary Lidington from

Chattifworth.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, '5th Jue
here at Chattifworth, the o of January, but on '570.

the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like as
the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which you
will be resolved of many points contained in your said
letter. I writ to you that I received your letter and cre-
dit from Thomas Cowy at London, and Cent to Leiceder
to know the queen of England's mind whether if you
should come here or not. He sent me word, that lhe will
no ways have you come as one of the commiflioners,
because she is yet offended with you; and therefore it ap-
pears good that ye come not hither, but remain where
you arc, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may beR
advance the queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and
safety depends thereon, in refpeft of the great eid and

cnni-

ennimity born againlf you by your Scots people, and the
great heirihip taken of your father's landi ; both were sure
demonstrations cf their malice. Yeti am encouraged by
your flout and deliberate mind. Allure yourself no dili.
gcnce hall be omitted to procure upports forth off all
parts where it may be had. We will not refute the aid
neither of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and
to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well pre-
pared. And feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into
Slanders, the queen thinks it very neceflary that he so do,
for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the
king of Spain to give support, and I am sure that there
he ihall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it
abides only on the coming of ome men of countenance,
to procure and receive the fame. He must needs tarry
there, on the preparations thereof, during the treaty,
which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. The
queen has already written to the duke D'Alva for this
effea, advertizing of his coming; there is certain fums
of money coming for support of the Englishmen, as I wrote
to you before, from the pope. Whereupon I would he
had a general commiflion to deal for them, and receive
such fums as shall be given. The means hall be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the furs you writ for, to be
difloint upon the furnilhing of the catle of Edenburgh,
so being some honest and true man were ent to Slanders
to receive it, as said is, which I would you prepared and
lent. Orders (hall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
Vc have proponit your avyce in entring to treat with the
queen of England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for
lack of aid. Your answers to the Englishmen are tho't
very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands,
in that cafe, efote prudentes ficut ferpcntes. You may
take experience with the hard dealing with me, how c
would be used if )e were here, and yet I am not forth of
danger, being in medio nationes pravae; always no fear,
with God's grace, hall make me ihrink from her majcfty's
lervice. Since the queen of England has refuscd that you
come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft Ifdata ma-
litia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Cathencs
mi ht b any means be procured to come, they werethe
mota i for the purpole, Rothes were allo meet, if he and
I were not both of one firname; so the treaty would get
the les credit itelr in Scutland or here. Therco; c av) s,

and

and fend the bell may erve the turn, and fail not Robert
Melvil come with them, whoever comes, for so is the
queen's pleasure; in my last packet, with James Fogo, to
you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of thequeen's
own hand writing to him, which I trust ye received. I am
sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to have had
by your presence, for you could well have handled the
queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont
to do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom, praying
God to fend you health. From Chattifworth the 15th
of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 30.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of

Grange and Lethington zoungare upon the 8th
dayof O&. 1571.
WV Hereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's

pleasure, what {he will do for appcafing of these

controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves to be
at her commandment, touching the common tranquility
of the whole ie, and the amity of both realms; her plea-
sure is in this behalf, that ye hould leave off the mainte-
nance of this civildifcord, and give your obedience to the
king, whom he will maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, file will deal with the regent and

the king's party, to receive you into favour, upon rcafon-
able conditions for security of life and livings.

ALSO he fays that the queen of Scotts, for that (he

has pracifed with the pope and other princes, and also
with her own subjes in England, great and dangerous
treasons against the fiate of her own country, and also to
the dfitrution of her own person, that he hall never
bear authority, nor have liberty while he lives.

IF ye refuse there gentle offers, now offered unto you,

{he will presently aid the king's party, with men, am-
munition, and all necessary things, to be had againfi you.

WHEREUPON her majefiy requires your answer with
speed, without any delay.

No. V.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 40.)
Articles fnt by Knox to the general Afembly,

Auguft5th, 1572.

C.rw. iJRRST, desiring a new a to be maderatifying all
MS. His- things concerning the king and his obedience that
nrv, Vol.. were enaaed of before without any change, and that the

ministers who have contraveend the former as be cor-
reaed as accordeth.

THAT fute be made to the Regent's grace and nobi-

lity maintaining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceed-
eth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be
not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they especially of
the ministers, that have been robbed of their poreflions
vwithin the kirk during the time of the troubles, or other-
wife dung and injured, may be reflored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bifloprick or

other benefice be given to any person, contrary to the te-
nor of the ats made in the time of the firfi regent of good
memory, and they that are given contrar the said aas, or
to any unqualified person, may be revoked and made null
be an a& of secret council, and that all bithopricks, so va-
tand may be presented, and qualified perfbns nominat
rhereunto, within a year after the vaking thereof, accord-
ing to the order taken in Leith be the commiifloners of
the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January last,
and in special to complain upon the giving of bifhoprick
of Rots to the lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, gret or small, be

given be simple donation of any lord regent, without con-
lnt of the poffef'or of the said benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admission of the superintendent or com-
niiliones of the province where this benefice lyeth, or of
the bishops lawfully eleced according to the aid order
taken at Leith; and desire an at of council to be made
thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein the famine
may be specially inaceJ, with inhibition to the lords of
(eflion to give ny letters or decreets, upon such simple
gifts of benefices or pentions not being given in manner a-
bove rehearfd, and that the kirk prefinily aflembled dc-
clare all fch gif's null Iv far as Iveth in thei. power.

THAT

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which

were in the first and second regent's time be not changed
as now it is commonly; but that this clause be contained
in the presentation, that if the persons presented make
not refidance, or be slanderous or found unworthy either
ih life or dotrine be the judgment of the kirk, (to which
alwife he shall be subjeCt) or meet to be transported to
another room at the fight of the kirk, the (aid prefenta-
tion and all that hall fall thereupon hlall be null and of
no force nor effe&; and this to have place also in the no-
mination of the biihops.

THAT an ac be made in this aflembly that all things

done in prejudice of the kirk's afumption of the third,
either by papifis or others, by giving of fews, liferents,
or taks, or any otherwise difponing the said aflumed
thirds, be declared null with a solemn protefiation the
whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an a* be made decerning and ordaining all bi-

lhops, admitted to the order of the kirk now received, to
give account oftheir whole rents, and intromiflions there-
with once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for filch
causes as the kirk may easily confider the fame to be most
expedient and neceffar.

ANENT the jurisdiction of the kirk, that the fame be

determined in this afembly, because this article hath been
long postponed to make fute to the regent and council for
remedy against mefTengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the

kirk, who procure againf miniflers and minifiry, and for
futting ofjuftice of the kirk's ations in the feflion.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 46.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 1572.
TE it known to all men, by there presents, that I

Henry Killigrewc, Efq; ambaflador for the queen's

majcy of England. Forasmuch as, at the earnet motion
and solicitation being made to me, on her highncrs's be-
half, there is accord and pacification of the publick troubles
and civil war within this realm of Scotland agreed and con-
cluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right

honour-
S

honourable George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon end Baid.
zenoch, and the lord John Hamilton, on to the duke's
Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of
Abirbrothock, for the surety of their lives, livings, honours,
and goods of them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and
partakers, now properly depending on them; in treating
of the which said pacification, the murders of the late earl
of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather,
late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm and
lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the
fru&is or moveable goods, which the said perlons have
taken fra perlbnis profeiling the king's obedience, or for
the damages done or committed by them, since the j 5th
day of Junij, 1567, and before the penult day of July
las by pafied, by reason of the common cause or any thing
depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commi-
saries matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king's
present regent could not conveniently, of himse!f, remit
or discharge the fame. Yet in refpe& of the necessity of
the present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and
common quietness of this realm and lieges, it is accorded,
that the matters of remifion of the said murderers, and
of the discharge of the aid fruais, moveable goods, and
other damages, moved by the persons deiring the said re-
milfions and discharge to the queen's majety my fove-
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habi-
tation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever her majefly
hall advise and councel touching the lid remiflion and
discharge, the laid lord regent, for the weil of the king
and universal quietness of the realm of Scotland, hall
perform, observe, and fullfil the fame. And i likewise,
the said earl Huntly, and commendatour of Abiilro-
rhot k, being urged to have delivered pledges and holaiges
tor obftrvation of the conditions of the slid accord and
pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her
majefly's name, by virtue of my commiflion, to promi'e
lor them that they hall truly and faithfully observe and
k.-ep the said pacification, ad all articles and conditions
thercof, for their parts, and that it would pleate her ma-
iecll t interpolt herself, as surety and cautioncr for them
to that tfFet, to the king's majelty of Scotland their so-
vlci n and his aid regent, which I have done, and pro-
niii: to do, by virtue of his majeflv's cnmmiffion, as by
the honourable iani plain dalii, oi' the liid earl and lord,

their

their intention to peace well appears, the fame being moll
agreeable to the mind of the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, which so long by her minmters hath travelled for
the said pacification, and in the end, at her motion and
solicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majefy's
desire, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that the
noblem::n and others now returning to the king's obedi-
ence hall have sufficient surety for their lives, livi;gs,
honours and goods. Therefore in her majety's name,
and by virtue of my commission, I promise to the atore-
said earl Huntly and commendator of Abirbrothock, that
by her majesty's good means, the aid remillion and dif-
charge shall be purchased and obtained to them, their kin-
folks, friends, ervants, and partakers, now properly de-
pending upon them, (the persons specified in the first ab-
Itinence alwavs excepted) as also that the said pacification
flall !,e truly observed to them, and that her majesty shall
interpose herfelfas confervatrix thereof, and cndeavour
herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in
all points and articles thereof accordingly. In witness
whereof, I have to this pretent subscribed with my hand,
and fealed the fame with mine own eal the 13th day of
Feb. Anno Domini 1572. And this to be performed by
me, betwixt the date hereof, and the parliament which
shall be appointed for their restitution, or at the furthest
before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen

of Scotland's dowry.
T HE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for ,..

her dowry, besides other pofleflions, the dukedom of 'ntt. .lb.

Turenc, which was olcmnly contraded and given to her Cali' B. 4.
by the king and eflates of parliament; which dukedom flie
poflefled peacefully till 1567, and then, upon the pacifi-
cation betwixt the king and Mons. his brother, to aug-
ment whoe appenage this dutchy was given, to which the
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who
were her near relations, provided te equivalent which
was promised her should he faithfully performed. So
that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that
dutchy, she had granted her the county of VcrmauJaife
with the lan s and bailiwicks of Sculeyand Vetry; lth,

t 'Lis

'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of
equal value with Turene, but was promised to have an
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confirm-
ed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court
of aids, chamber of the trcafury, and others necefary;
upon which The entered into poffefion of that county, &c.
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commiflioncrs of the
chamber of accompts, it was found, that the revenue of
that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene, by
3000 livres. But instead of making up this deficiency
according tojuftice, some of the privycouncil, viz. M. de
Cheverny, the prelidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay and
St. Boner, in the name of the king, xiotwithftanding of
her aforesaid Icffes, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
lis, and the dutchy of EtRaimpes, to Madam de Monpen-
ficr, from whom the king received money; of which sale
the counsellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guaran-
tees, which hath hindered the aforesaid queen to have
justice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfier hath
been put in poflefion of these lands of Senlis, contrary
to all the declaration, protestation, and aurances of the
king of France to queen Mary's ambafladors. So that the
queen of Scotland is difpoffleed of her dowry, contrary
to all equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 503.)
A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the re-

gent Mortoun.

3d Marh TT will please your grace, I receive your grace's let-
M7oun'° ter, and has confidered the fame. The parson of
AKhieves, Camsey was here at me before the receit thereof, direó-
und. B. ed fra my lord of Mar, and the master anent my last

written, which was the answer of the writing that the
maler fcnt to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given
my answer before the receit of your grace's letter, that I
behuiffit to be b'eyd Sant Androis, at ane friends tryst,
which I might not omit: I uderftand by my (aid cousin,
that the king' majcfly is to write to divers of the nobility
to come there, anciit vour lordlhip's trial, and that he

had

had written before his departing to my lord Monthrois.
I understand, likewise, he will write to your grace to
come there for the fame effe&, which I tho't good to
make your grace foreseen of the fmc, praying your
grace, for the love of God almighty, to look upon thc bcft,
and not to sleep in security, but to turn you with un-
feigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that
when the king's majefy was very young, God made him
the instrument to divest his mother from her authority,
who was natural princels, for offending of his divine ma-
jety, and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame
is as largely in you, except to that your grace condefcen-
ded not to the deftru&ion of your wife. For as to har-
lotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offend-
ed God, and far more in avaritioulielsc, which vycis God
never left unplagued, except peedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace
can never have the love of God nor man. I pray your
grace flatter not yourself; for if your grace believes that
ye have the good will of them that are the king's good
willers ye deceive yourself; for furcly I fee pcrfectly that
your own particulars are not contented, lat by the reft,
and that most principally for your hard dealing. I pray
your grace, beir with me that I am thus hamlie, for cer-
tainly it proceeds from no gru.dge, but from the very as-
fetion of my heart towards your grace, which has con-
tinued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, hecaufe
the matter tlands in your gracc's handling with the king's
majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, I sec not how ye shall meet hereafter; pray I your
grace to call to God, and look on the befl, and cast from
your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and avari-
tioufiefs. I am riding this day to San& Androis, and
trult to return on Wedncfday at the farthcft. If your
grace will command me in any offices that are honefi,
that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advcrtifi
of your grace's mind, and hall do to my power and
knowledge, and this with my heartlic, &c. c.

Vto. IT. E e To

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.

From li,- RUSTY cnufin, after our most hearty commends.
(.,,r . lr. 1 tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March,
tolln A.- and as we take your plainness therein in good part, as pro-
i ... cceding from a fiicnd and kinsman, in whose good as-
B'';. fction toward us \sc n,_vcr doubted, so ye may not thi:;

it firange that we purue ourlelf so far of your accusation,
as in conicience we find not ourlcif to have offcnicd
in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not to
excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition
surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in or
private cftate we could, and can live as well contented, as
any of our deree in Scotland, without further aspiring.
The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm,
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that hall occupy that
place, not sImply to refpca ourself, but his majesty's rowmec
which we supply, and therein not tranfccnding the bounds
of mcafure, as, we truf, it shall not be found we have
ilone, it ought not to be attributed to any ambition in us.
For as oon as ever his majesty shall think himself ready
and able for his own government, none shall more willing-
ly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think never
to set my face against him, whole honour, safety and pre-
servation has been o dear unto me, nor I will never be-
lieve to find otherwise at his hand than favour, althoughl
all the unfriends I have inthe earth were about him, to per-
fuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is
not thankfully acquit; as we trust yourself confiders,
butbecaufe the ambassadors of England, my lord of An-
gus, the chancellor, treasurer, and Come noblemen rides
weft this day to fee the king, we pray you heartily ad-
dress yourself to be there as oon as ye can, and as ye
lhall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alex'. Hay, whom we
have tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from
Sterling rides to Douglas. And to we commit you in the
protection of God. At Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March,
1577.

FoR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies

not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satis-
fy all cravers, nor never shall any bovcreign and native

horn
8

born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of
such, as thinks them judges to their own reward; in ma-
ny causes I doubt not to find the afiftancc of my friends,
but where my asions hall appear unhoneil, 1 will not
crave their afliftance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 97.)
The copy of the king of France his directions

sent to Scotland with Seineur de la Motte Fe-
nelon. Translated out of the French.
F IRST, on their majelfys molt chriflian part, hccleii,.

hall make the most honourable salutation and visit- M- S.- ir-

ing to the most serene king of Scotland, their good bro- 'tory, Vo"
ther and little son, that in him is poffable. 31 p. QS.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such

like as they have written to him with their hands, and to
show exprefly the perfect friendship and singular assec-
tion, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back
the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the molt

serene king, to the effet that his person may be in no dan-
ger, but that it may be most surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindered in the honest liberty that

he ought to have, and that no greater, or firaiter guards
be about him than he had before.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the autho-

rity, that God hath given to him of king and prince so-
vereign above his fubjeas, to the effect he may as freely
ordain and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of
his country, with his ordinary council, as he was used tv
do of before.

THAT his nobility, barons and commonality of his

country may have their free liberty to retort to his serene
majesty without suspicion of greater guards or more armed
men about his peron than the ue was, that they be not
affraid and hindered to resort; and further that the seg-
nicur de la Mottc Feneion fall liberally and freely speak
to the said serene king and council, requiring the re-elia-
blithing of that that may or hath. been changed or al-
tered.

E 2. AN

AN n that he may know if the principalls of the nobili-

ty, and other men of good behaviour of the towns and
commonality of the contry conveens, and are content with
the form of government presently with the said serene
king, to the end that if there be any miscontent he may
travaile to agree them together, and that he return not
without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may undertiand that there be any who have

not ue them so reverently towards the said serene king
their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this behalf of his majesty most
chriflian the said serene king his good brother, giving him
councill wholly to forget the fame, and exhorting them to
do their duty towards his majeft, in time coming, in all
rdeects with the obedience and true fubje6ion they ought
him.

AND if the aid seigneur de la Motte, perceves the said

fercne king to be in any manner constrained of his person,
authority, liberty, and disposition of his affairs, than he
used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as
the sovereignty of a prince does require, that he use all
moven lawful and hones to place him in the famine, and
that he imploy as much as the credit of his most christian
majcfty may do toward the nobility, and fubjels of that
contry, and as much as may his name, with the name
of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they were proper French-
men.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his

estates, of his conlent, and to all the nobility and princi-
pall pcrfonages of the contry, that his most Chriflian ma-
jeltie will continue on his part in the most ancient alli-
ance and confederacy, which he hath had with the said fe-
rcne king his good brother, praying his nobility and con-
try, with hisprincipall lubjects, to persevere in the famine,
in ll good underltanding and fricndhip with him; the
v.h;ch, on his part, he hall do, obfcrviin the famine molt
invoiable.

FuRTHER Iis most chriflian majeity underflanding

that thi !cerene king his good brother was co,,teited with
the duke of Lenox, and his ferviie, t e said lionieur De
la Motie had charged to pray his ferine rrajefty that he
nighit rmaine bfide him to his contntmtn-, blieving
that he hould more willing intertain th.; oints Js ov

andi

and confederace, betwixt their majcftys and their contrys,
because he was a good subjet to them both; and if he
might not remain, without some alteration of the tranqui-
lity of his estate, that he might retire him to his own
house in the aid contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to
return to France that he might surely- and if it pleases
his serene majesty, to cause cease and flay the impeach-
ments, that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the
effet that the natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into
the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor

no speech but honourable of the most Chriflian king, in
that contry, but such like as is spoken most honourably
of the serene king of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed

till a little before his departure, to wit, that the queen,
the king's mother, was content to receive her on in aso-
ciation of the kingdom.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 15.)
Lord Hunfdane to Sir Francis Walsingham, the

i4th of August, 584, from Berwick.

SIR,
A C C O R D I N G to my former letters, touching my Ciderw.

meeting with the earl of Arran upon Wednelday M. S. Fir.

last, there came hither to me from the carle, the justice tour. vl.
clerk, and Sir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, 3 P 37*'
both of the king's privie council, to treat with me about
the order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to ap-
point the hour, and the number we lhould meet withal;
bo as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to
be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be 13 of
a fide; and the reft of our troops to tand each of them a
mile from the town; the one on the one fide, the other on
the other fide, o as our troops were two miles asunder; I
was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen,
where I had oo shot on horse, but they were very near
500 horse well appointed: According to which appoint-
ment, we met yesterday, and after Come congratulations,
the earle fell in the like protestations of his good will and
readiness to frve the queen's majestys before any prince

E 3 in

in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto.
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnest
vows, as unless he be worse than a devil, her majesty may
dilpofe of him at her pleasure; this being ended, en-
tered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him,
and o near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, that I had
to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing toward
her majefly, according to my inftrutions, which without
any delay he answered presently, as ye shall perceive by
the said answers, sent herewith; but I replying unto him,
he amplified them with many moe circurmfances, but to
this cfel. Then I dealt with him touching the point
of her majefiy's fatisfa&ion, for the uttering such pracices
as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
majesty and her eliate, who thereof made fuindry discourses,
what marriages have been offered to his majesty by fundrie
princes, and by what means the earle has Ibught to divert
them, and for what causes; the one, for that be marriage
with Spain or France, he mut also alter his religion,
which as he is sure the king will never doe, so will hc
never fuffcr him to hearken unto it, so long as he has
any credit with him; he denys not but the king has been
dealt withal be practices to deal against her maje[ty, which
he has o far denied and refused to enter into, as they
have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king or he
knowetl therein there hall be nothing hidden from her
majefly, as her majesty hall know very hortly; surely it
seems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded
thereunto there had been no small company of French in
Scotland ere now to disquiet her majesty. T'his be-
ing ended, I dealt with him earnetly .for the flay of this
parli.ament, which now approacheth; or at the leaf that
there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice ot
these no'blemcn and others now in England, for the for-
faulting of their livings and goods; hereupon he made .
long discourse to me, irfi of the earl of Angus dealin,
about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwith-
standing of fundrie gracious offers the king had made him,
then of the road of Ruthven, how that prslently after they
had the king's majefy in their hands, they imprisoncd
himself, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out
of the realme, the king refused b6 to do, they told him
pGainly that if he would not he llould have the ear'!
cf Arran's head in a dilh the king alked what offence the

cal

earl had made? and they answered it must be o, and
Should be so; hereupon for the fafcguard of Arran's life,
the king was content to fend away the duke, and yet Ar-
ran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life; I alled-
ged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and
his as in council, that they had done nothing but for
his fervife, and with his good liking and contentnmnt,
who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not
do any thing but that which pleased them, with such a num-
ber of other their dealings with the king whileft he was in
their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if
they were true; I laid the king might have let the queen's
majesty's ambassador have known his mind secretly, and
her majesty would have relieved him; he answered, that
the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that
manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's practice, and thereby
durfi not impart so much to him, and yet the king was
content, and did give remiflion to as many, as would ac-
knowledge their faults, and ask remiflion, and such as
would not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further
loyalty, in which time they confpiied the king's second
apprehension, and the killing of the earle, and others,
and seduced the ministers to their faction, and yet not
satisfied with there conspiracies and treasonable dealings,
(as he terms them) are entered into a third, being in Eng-
land under her majesty's prote6ion, todilhonour her ma-
jefly as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king,
conceave some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring
of them; I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the
taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and
some others, the taki ng of the castle of Edin'. and bring-
ing home the earies, to take the charge of the king; ail
which (fays he) is by Drummond confelrff, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con.
stable of the castle thereupon fled; the earl brought Drum.
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay, to have
confelred the conspiracy before me, but having at his light-
ing, received a blow on his leg with a horse, so as he could
bring him no further, I replied that I thought verily they
would not work any such practices, in respect of the
qlueen's m;ijefty, abiding within her realme, and if the, c
be any such practices, they have proceeded from others,
and they nut pri i unto them: anl that if it be not up-
)a;cntly proced aiainfthem, that it will be thought to

Ee 4 be

be ome pracice to aggravate the fault, and to make them
the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it
should be proved so fufficicntly, that they should not be
able with truth to deny it, for their own hands is to be
fliowcd to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if
her majefcy should so press the king for them at this time,
that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty, nor
further it, and that since they reek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides
lie aflurcd me, that if he would, he dare not, this last
matter being fallen out as it is; and surely if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the rcftor-
ing of the earl of Mar very flortly, if her majetfy would
have cmp!oycd me thercin, but for the earl of Angus, I
pcrccice the king is pcrfuaded that both he, and the re-
of the 1)ouglaflis, have conceived so mortall an hatred
agaiinll him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the
earl ot' Morton, as if they were at home, to-morrow next,
they would not leave to pracice and conspire the death of
them both. and therefore a hard matter, to do any thing
'or him: finally, he concluded and required me to assure
her maiefty, from the king, that there shall nothing; be hid
from her, nor any thing left undone that may fait;fie her
majefly with reatbn, and that the king shall never do any
thing, nor consent to have any thing done in her prej udice,
lb long as he had any credit with him, or autho ity un-
der him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to ilow
me his commission, which is under the great fe:l, to him-
ief only, which is as large as may be, and yet funirie of
the priric conccl there with him, but not one in corn
minion, nor prefcnt, nor near us al this time having
lient almost fine hours in there matters; he presented to
me the maiter of Gray, who delivered to me a letter from
the king in his commen !ation, whom I perceive the
king means t) fend to her majesty, and therefore requires
a fife conduat for his pafage, which I pray yow procure,
and to fend it so soon as you may. I let him undertland of
the lord Seaton's negociation with the French king. He
swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave, and that it
v,.:s p:rtly againif his will, that he flould be lenit thither.
';ut his comniiflon and inftrusion being of no great im-
po t;nce, he yielded the fooncr; and if Seaton has eone
bevflid his infiruclions, which Arran drew himself, he
Wvill makeqeatun finart for it. Touching William New-

gatCe

gate, and Mark Golgan, he protested he never heard of
any such; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black
beard, come thither a begging, who said he was an ene-
my to Dcfmond, to whom be gave a croun, but never
heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into
Ireland, he fays there is no such matter; if there be,
these may be fme few rafkals that he knows not of; and
touching the coming of anyjefuits into Scotland, he savs
it is but the flandcrous devise of the kings enemys, and
such as would have the world believe the king were ready
to revolt in religion, who the world lhall well fee will
continue as contant thercin, at what prince soever pro-
feiled it most; and the earle himfelfdos protef to me,
that to his knowledgc, he never law a jesuit in his life,
and did aflure me if there was any i Scotland, they
should not do so much harm in Scotland, as their minitiers
would do, if they preach fch doidrine as they did in
Scotland; and touching one Hallanden, of whom I wrote
to yow, I heard from Mr. Colvil, the earle avows con-
ftantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any uch
man, but he would inquire at thejuiftice clerk, and would
inform me what he could learn of that; thus I have made
yow as hort a discourse as 1 can of so many matters, so
long discourscd upon, but there are the principal points
of all our talk, so near as can remember it, and for this
t;me I commit yow to the Almighty. At lJerwick, the
i4th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray )yw know her majflty's pleasure.

Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed
to the lord Hunfdane, ict clown in another torm.

S to the firait and feverc perfecutton of all such, as

A have been noted to h ve he n wc!l alrcted to the
ticueii's majefiy, it cannot a,pe;ar hey rc either for
thiat cause punished, or hardly dealt wiL., since his ma-
jc',y of late has been so careful and dilige bt to chnice out
good instruments to c.al betwixt her majesty a,,i him,
as his maje{ty has done in elcEtin!: of your ,irJthip and
n: ; bcfides that in all thcir accula;ions, tnelr good will

and

and aielaion born to her majetfy was, at no time, laid to
their charge, but capital actions of treason many way
tried now be the whole three estates, and more than ma-
nifeft to the world.

As for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation,

such as were banishcd, not to repair in England; the
bruits and whifpcrings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn the ac-
complifhed, so far as in them lay, moved his majeftv to
inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majeitv's
realm, left they flould have attempted these things, which
ihortly they did attempt, being farther off, and more diC-
tant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majefly's

fugitives, and not delivering them according to his po-
mise, as your lordship propones, his majesty would be most
glad that so it might fall out by your lordship's traviles,
that no fugitive of either lealme fhoull be received of ei-
ther, and when so shall be, it {hall not fail on his majeftyv'
part, albeit i every deed this time bygone his majesty has
been constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and
fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since her majtety
hath receipt, in effea, the whole and greatest rebells
and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had; as
for the agreement with his majefiy's mother anent their
aflciation, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of
your lordship's servant, to allure her majesty and your lord-
Ihip, in his majesty's name, that it is altogether false, and
an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majefly has also commanded me to aure your

lordship, that it is also false and untrue, that his majesty
has, by any means dire& or indiret, sent any mefage to
the popc, or received any from him; or that his majesty
has dealt with Spain or any foreigners, to harm her ma-
jefly or her realm, which his majefly could have no ho-
nour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope
in God it liall.

As concerning the contemptuous uage of her majesty's

minifiers, sent unto his majesty, his majcfty used none
of them so; and if his majesty had, futficient cause was
given by them, as fume of their own writs do wet teflify;
as I more pairticul.aiy hovwJ your lurdflip at Foulden at
our late Inceting.

No. X.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. 129.)

Letter of Q Mary to Q Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,
hM 'Afeurant que vous avez eu communication d' une Cott. Lib.

lettre de Gray que vofire homme Seier me livra Col.B.VIII;

hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoialint quasi de Fao. 47.
mot a mot Icfs mefmes raisons, que le dit Gray m'elctivit Anoii
en chifre eftant dernierement pres de vous defmontrant la
fuffifance & bonne intention u perfonageje vous prieray
feulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant inflan-
tement importune que vous me permettiez defclaircir li.
brement & ouvertement cc point de 'association d' entre
moy & mon filz & me deflier les mains pour proceder avcc
lui comme je jugeray efire requis pour son bien & le
mien. Et j'entrcprcndz quoy que l'on vous die & puiffe
en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit bruillon qui perfuadi
par aucuns de vos minifires a enterpris cette eparation
entre moy et mon enfant, & pour y commencer je vous
fupplie m'odroyer qui je puifit parler a ce justice cierk
qui vous a eite nouvellement envoye pour mander par luy
a mon filz mon intention fur cela, ce qui jc me promis qu-
ne me refuserez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demontrer
en effea la bonne intention que vous m'avez afleurce
avoira l'accord & entretien de natural devoir entre la mere
& I'enfant qui dit en bonnes tcrmes erc empefchc pour
vous me tenant captive en un defcrt ce que vous ne poirrtcz.
micux delinentir & faire paroitre voflre bon dlir ;a n..tie:
union que me donnant Ics inoyans d'y proceder, & nI'.r:
m'en retenir & emplefcher comme aucui, c de vus ,inif-
tres pretendent a fin dc laifir toujours lieu a Icur ml:l;:i
& finiftres praRiqucs cntre nous. La lettre porte tluic 'as-
fociation ne'st pas pl' .e, auffi ne luy i-jc j:,.iiis dir, bien-
que mon filz avoit accept ; & quc nous en iivions conventi
cnfemble, comme l'acte figne de 'a nmain, & ces lttrt.s
tant ;a moy, queen France en font to, avant dotilni e <
incme tcmoida c (]e fablouche prolpic a piluiiutrs niiiit-
deurs & I'eroniin de credit, s'excul !nt tic le 'ofil fi;Ce
publier pr craint Id vous fu uleiTit, lcn:illdanlt f;rccs
pour vous ri(t- r d'avant de ce dccl ;er si oureitcncit
c(t:;it jeurn l'.i eUl t p crluaJc au coniti ie l':r v ; I liiil-

tl t

tres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck
le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand
mon enfant feroit fe malheureux que de s'opiniaftrer en
cctte extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne puis
penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la
Chretiente le voulifiez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir
pour luy fayre acquerir ma maledidion ains que plutos
introviendrz pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop
juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & en-
cores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays donner avec droit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife a
vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne en foye
pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale def-
vant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la
plus grande affliction qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en cas
qu'il perfife en cette m'efconnoiffance de son devoir, que de
luy ou de moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy ou
royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre avec
moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoy je vous
requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gouverne
enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d' affeaion que je
fens mon caeur opprefe d'ennuy. PourDieu fouvenez vous
de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me prendre en votre
protection me raportant de tout a vous, & fur ce prian.
Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts vos ennemys &
diflimulcz amys, comme je le desire de me consoler &
de mc venger de ceulz qui pourchaflent un tel malheur
entre la mere & I'cnfant. Je cefleray de vous troubler,
mais non a m'ennuicr queje ne recoive quelque confola-
tion de vous & de Dieu cncore un coup.je le fupplie de
vous gardcr dc tout peril. Futhbery xii Mars.

Vofirc fidelement voue6 fceur

& obeifTante coufine,

A la reyne d'Angletcrrc M A R IE :

rnladanlc ma bonne feur
& cutlfinc.

No. XI. (Vol. 11. . 30.)

A Testament by Q Mary.
N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Cott. L;b.

Mr. Crawford late regius profefibr of church hiltory Verpai.
in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, L x6.
according to him, is written by Nauc, Mary's fccre- P 415
tary, the reft with the queen's own hand. What is
marked " is in the queen's hand.
C Onfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eflat de vie

humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft,

ou doibt affeurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
fericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre
tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pourroient in opine-
ment furvenir en cette captivite, mefmesa ctfe des grandes
et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenue jufques a present;
j'ay advise tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou raifun enju-
gement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ame, en-
terrement demon corps, et disposition demonbien, eftat,
& affaires, par ce present mon '.etament et ordonnancc de
mon dernier volont6, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife S. Esprit.

Premierement, me recongnoifiant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de atisfadtion par
toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la louc la
bonte. Et m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Rc-
dempteur Jesus Chrifi. Jc rccommende mon ame a la bc-
noifte et individuc Trinii, et aux pricres dc la glorieufe
Vierge Marie, ct de tou s les anes idincts & fiindtes de
paradis. efperantpar clur im::rites et intcrcenion, eltre aydee
a obtenir de etrc fidce particilantc avco eulx de flicitó
eternelle. lit pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et
entier, dfpouillant des a preflent tut 'ellnitiincit des in-
jures, calnnies, r ebelli t

ns, et Lautr.i of'tnfes, qui me

pourroient avoir elte fadct durant nma vie, par mes ubecti
rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'cn rtlict la vengeance a
Dieu, & Ic fipplie leur parudonner, die Ieinn ffc.tion,
que je luy relqiers par:!,jn a m es faultes, et a tous ccul
et cellcs qucje puis avuir off r.:; J faic' ou de parullcs.

Je
I

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The tw7followingparagraphr
crntaiin direntions conctring the place and circumjlaice of her
bu-ria/L.]

Pour ne contrevenir a la g!oirc, honneur, et conferva-

tion de 'Eglilf catholique, apoflolique et Romaine, en la
quclleje vculx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoie mon
filz y pucil etre reduiet conrre la mauvaife nourriture,
qu'il a prise a mon tres grand regret en I'herefie de Calvin
entre mes rebelles, je le laill; liul et unique heritier de mon
royaume d'Efcoffe, de droiit que je pretende jufement
en li couronnc d'Angletcrre et pays que en dependent,
ct cneirallcmnent de tous et chacun mes meubles et im-
meubles qui refteront aprcs ma mort, et execution de ce
pre'ent teitarrent.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite

herefie, Je cede, tranfporte, et faicte don <" de touts et
", chacuns mes droicts, queje pretende et puis pretendre
' a la couronne d'Angletcrre, et aultres droifts, feig-
' neuries, ou royaulmes en dependantz, au roycatholique,
" ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, con-
' fentement de fa faintete; tant pour le voyr aujourhuy
' le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique, que pour
" reconoiffance de gratuites faveurs que moy, et les miens
" recommandcz par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma
' plus grande neceflitc; et rcfguard aufli an droic que
"* luy mefme peut pretendre a cs ditz royaulmes et pays,
" je Ic fupplie qu'en rccompcnce il preign alliance, de la
* i

maiont de Lorraine, et si il ce pleut de celle de Guise,

" pour mcmoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
( cofle dc Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que
"t mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours
*" vou: pour une de fcs filles, si il luy plaifoit de 'accep-
,' ter, ou faillant une de fes niepces marieecomme fa fille.

" Je layfle mnon filz a la proteaion du roy, de prince,

" ct dues de Lorrayne ct de GuiCe, et du Mayne, aux
', qtielz je recommende et son etat en Efcoffe, et mon
,, droilt en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, et quelle le
" parlie de cefte royne."

Je fuz don au " compte de Lenox" de comtedeLe-

nox tenu par te fn pcre, et commandemon filtz, comme
mon heretier ct lucccflur, d'obeyr en cell en droit a mon
volointt.

Jc

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les ommes et deniers, qui fe

troveront par moys deues, tien mis caui:e dedroid eftre faits
" a Lohliven" etre promptement payce et acquitts, et
tout tort et griefs repares per lefdits executeurs defquelz
J'en charge la conscience. Oultre, &c. [Faolow tIo or
three paragraphs concerning particular l,,gatys, and then is
addedJ Fait au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour
de - Mil cinq cens foixant & dix fepc.

/fter a blank page follws in te queen's hand:

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lcnox, au Claude
' Hamilton lequcl ic montrera le plus idelle vers moy, ct
(' plus constant cn religion, aujugmcnt de -- ucs
"' de Lorraineet de Guyfc, ouje Ic rpport fur cedeceulx

a que j'auray donnay Ic charge de trnytcr avefque eiJx

' de par moy ct cculx, a condition de cc marrier ou allitr
" en la dite mayfon ou par Icur advis."

Fclrlw near twa pages of ;arjitculr legaqcs.

" Et le remets ma tantcde Lcnox aut droi& quelle peut

" prerendrea la cont d'Angous avant l'acort fait par mon
e commandement entre ma dite ta:;te de Lnox et le
" comte de Morton, veu quil a efie fait & par le feu roy
"' mon Mary et moy, fur la promcf! de fa fidelle aflift-
c" ance, si luy ct moy encouriona dangier ct befoing d'ayde,
' ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fccretcmcnt au les nos en-
' nemis rebelles, qu' attemtprient contre fa vie, et pour
"ceft effet pris les armes, et ont porte les banniercs def-
" ploiees, contre nous, je revoque aufli toute autre don
"que je Iuy ay fait de conte de Morton fur promcnies
"de fes bons lervices a advenir, et entends que la dite
"c Conte foit reunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y par-
" tenir, comme fes trahifons tant en la mort de mon feu
" Mary, que en mon baniement, et pourfuit de la mien

i ne 'onc merite. Et defends a mon filz de ce jamays ser-

" vire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes pa.
" rents, a qluelleje crains ne s'eftende jufques a luy, lc
', connoiflint du tout aff:clionne aux ennemis de mon
" croite en cc roy.umc, du quel il elt penconaire.

&" Je recommendc mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon

" filz, ct luy commande detcnir pres de liy et s'enfervit,
" ctje luy layfi) le bicn du ont dc Boducl ion oncle,

'. Cl

" en rcfped qu'il eft de mon fang, mon filleul, ct ma
" efti lailfeen lutelle par son pere.

&" Je declare que mon frere bafRard Robert Abbe de St.

" Croix na'eii quc par circonvention Orkenay, et que Ie
"ne fut jamays mon intention, comme il apret par la re-
"vocation que j'ay fayte depuis, et ete aufi faite d'avant
' la afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois deliberer si il ne
"m'euflent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx eRats
"je veulx done que Orkenay foitc reune a la couronnc
"comme une de plus neceffaires pour mon filz, et fans

la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.
*' Les filles de Morra ne parvient 2ccefli heriter, ains
" revient la conte a la Couronne, si il luy pleft luy don-

ner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome l'en fienne
" ligne."

NO. XII. (Vol. II. p. 142.)
A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen

of Scots.

Aprl-_ DLEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the
Harl.Lib. date the 12th of Nov. and in like manner has feeri
37. B. 9. some part of the contents of one other of the ame date,

'o. 326. direced to Mons. de Moviiir, amballador for his majesty

the mol Chriflian king, both which are agreeable toyour
princely dignity, as by the one your highncs desires to
know the true cause of my baniihment, and offers unto me
all favour if I hould be innocent of the heinous fats com-
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory, so
by the other the said ambassador is willet to declre unto
me, if your husband's murder could be laid jufily againfl
me, that you could not follitit in my cause, neither yet for
any person that was participant of that execrable fat,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you hould
have any means to do it; your majesty's offer, if I be in-
nocent of that crime, is moit favourable, and your de-
fire to know the truth of the fame is moss equitable; and
therefore that I hould with all my fimpli(ity,finccrity and
truth answer thereunto is most reaobnablc, to the end that
your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence
lhall ufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation,
if I be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of

thd!

the evil disposed minds of the moi part of your nobility
against your aid husband, and not revealing of it, which I
am alfured was sufficiently known tohimfelf, and to all that
had judgement never o little in that realm; which also I
was constrained to undertand, as he, that was specially
employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
of your nobility, that they might with all humility inter-
cede at your majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters
as are more specially contained in the declaration follow-
ing, which I am confirained for my ownjuftification, by
this letter to call to your majcfty's remembrance. Not-
withstanding that 1 am assured, to my grief, the reading
thereof will not finally offend your princely mind. It
may please your majefiy to remember, that in the year of
God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other
nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majesty,
and banihed your realm for insolent murder committed in
your majeity's own chamber, which they alledged was
done by command of your husband, who notwithftand-
ing affirmed that he was compelled by them to fibfcribc
the warrant given for that effe, howsoever the truth of
that matter remains amongf them: it appertains not to me
at this time to be curious; true it is that I was one of that
number, that heavily offended against your majefly, and
passed in France the time of our banishment, at the desire
of the reft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Chris-
tian king, to interceed that our offences might be par-
doned, and your majesty's clemency extended toward us,
albeit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, was
of the opinion, that the said fact merited neither to be re-
quifite for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the care-
ful mind of his majesty towards the quietness of that realm,
that the dealing in that cause was committed to Monfr.
de Movifir, who was directed at that time to go into Scot-
land, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom
Almighty God of his oodnel's may long preerve in happy
estate and perpetual felicity; the careful travail of the laid
de Movifir was so efFeaual, and your majesty's mind b
inclined to mercy, that within ort pace thereafter, I
was permitted to repair in Scotland, t deal with earls
Murray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Le dingt cn,
in the name and behalf of the laid earl MorLon, lords Re-
vtn, Lindsay, and remanent rompllis, that they might
1i ake offer in the names of tne said carl, of any liattcr that

V%!. I. lr
, ' rniht

might satisfy your majeily's wrath, and procure your cle-
mency to be extended in their favours; at my coming to
them, after I had opened the effea of my message, they
declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband
had been the occasion already of great evil in that realm,
and if your husband hould be fuffcred to follow the ap-
petite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effets; for help-
ing of such inconvenience that might fall out by that kind
ot dealing, they had thought it convenient tojoin them-
selves in league and band with ome other noblemen, re-
solved to obey your majesty as their natural sovereign, and
have nothing to do with your husband's command whatfo-
ever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to
humbly requelt and travel by all means with your majesty
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed,
they desired to know the said earl's mind herein; when I
had answercd, that he nor his friends, at my departure,
could not know that any such like matter would be pro-
ponit, and therefore was not infiruaed what to answer
therein, they desired that I should return sufficiently in-
ilru~ed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of
your on, whom God might preserve; this menlage was
faithfully delivered to me at Newcailc in England, where
the aid earl then remained, in presence of his friends and
company, where they all condescended to have no far-
ther dealing with your husband, and to enter into the
said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the request of the Most Chriltian king and
the queen's maiefty of England by their ambassadors pre..
l'ent, your aieflty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under ccndition alw:iys that they fl ould remain banish-
ed forth of the raclmn, the pace of two years, and farther
lturing your majefly's picafure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the humble reqtelf of your own nobility, o
that immediately after the laid earl of Morton repaired in-
to Scotland to Quhittingraime, where the carl Bodvell and
secretary Ledington come to hiln; wh.t speech passed
there amonif them, as God hall be my judge, I knew
nothing at that time, but at their departure I was request-
ed by the laid earl Morton to accompany the carl Bod-
ve'l,and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with fch
answer as they flould obtain of your majesty, which be-

i
l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ing given to me by the said perrons, as God lhall be my
judge, was no other than thetb words, "e Schaw to the
* earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech of that
" matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit that the
answer might be made more fenfib'e, fc;retary Ledington
said, that the earl would fufficitntly understand it, albeit
few or none at that time underfand what passed amnongft
them. It is known to all men, a!s veill be railling let-
ters pafled betwixt the said earl and Ledington when they
become in divers fa&ions, as also ane buck sett furtht by
the ministers wherein they airm that the earl of Mor-
ton has confefled to'them, before his death, that the earl
Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling
away off the king your husband, to the which propofi-
tion the said earl of Morton affirms that he could give no
answer unto such time he might know your m;!jeffy's
mind therein, which he never received. As to the abo-
minable murder, it is known too by the depositions of ma-
ny persons that were executed to the death for the commit-
ing thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcri-
vit band for that effeEt; by this unpleasant declaration,
the most part thereof known to yourfclf, and the re-
mainder may be understood by the aforesaid witnefes that
was examined in torture, and that are extant in the custody
of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency b
far as may concern any fat does appear sufficiently to your
majefly. And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be noother-
wife charged therein, but as what would accuse the vcffel
that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy
of such as immodcrately use the fame. As for the fpe-
cial caure of my banishment, I think the fame has pro-
ceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to ac-
cufe the earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge
himself to have confelfed before he died, and would not
be induced, for lols of reputation, to perform any part
thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I sup-
pofc it is, what punilhment 1 Ihould deserve, I remit me
to your majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentleman Should be of his fame, reputa-
tion and honour, and how far ever ilk man hould ab-
hor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
lJave been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so
near of his kin, otwitlfiandii, all the injuries I was

F f '
coo-

confirained to receive at his hand all the time of his go-
vernament, and fur uo other cause, but for shewing of par-
ticular frieindihip to particular friends in the time of the
lat cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accuse
him in any matter being dead, and more furry that bting
on lyfs, be such kind of dealing obtained that name of
Ingrate. Always fur my own part I have been banilhed
mly ntive country those three years and four months, liv-
ii', in anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which
were not inall, inteinlittit and. deponit upon, and has
continually since the time I was relieved out of my iaft
troubles at the desire of Monfr. de Muvifir, attended to
know your mtnjety's plealure, and to wait upon what
fcrvice it Ihould please your majesty for to command. Up.
on the 8th of Apiil inft. your good friend secretary Wal-
filghame hs declared unto me, that her highness tho't
it expedient that I flould retire myielf where I pleased, I
declared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform
that desire, till such time as I lhould receive it from your
majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your high-
ness to direct me, until such time as I hould have received
further information tron you. Upon this occasion, and
partly by permniflion, I have taken the hardrets to write
this present letter, whereby our majesty may understand
any part of my troubles pat, and ilrait prelent. As to
tmy intention futuie, I will never deny that 1 am fully re.
lolved tofpend the reft of my days in your majelty's ser-
vice, and the king your son's, wheresoever I Ihall be diest-
ed by )our majcety, and for the better performing there-
of, if so hall be her majcftv's plealure, to recommend
the tryal of my innocency, and examination of the verity
of the preceding narration, to the kng your Ion, with
requeit that I may be pardoned for uch offences as con-
cel ned your majelty's service, and var common to all men
the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, except to
me, I hould be the bearer thereof myvelf, and be dirti-
ed in whattbever Itrvice it (hould pleiaf your majesty for
to command. Molt humble 1 beseech your majesty to cun-
fider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that
I may have meais to serve your majelty according to the
sincerity us my meaning, and so expectiang your majelty's
anlwer, after the killiig yuur hand with all humility, 1
ake leave from London.

No. Xll.

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. i63.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald

Douglas his ambaifador in England, Ootuber,
1586.

R ESERVE ip yourfilf na langer in the earneff dealing ct. r.ib.
JR for my mother, for ye have done it too long; and Ca'isg.. *9
think not that any your travellis can d goode if hir lyse ,al in ,le
be taking, for then adeu with my dealing with thaimetnat king's
are the special infirumentis thairof; and theirforc, gif ye hand.
looke for the contineuance of my favour rowartis you, fpair
na pains nor plainncs in this cace, but readel my letter
wrettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourfelfquhollie
to the contentis thairof, and in this requeit let me leap
the fruiais of youre great credit there, ather now or
never. Fairwell. October, 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, anbaiflador in Eng-

land, probably from secretary Maitland. Nov.
27, 1i36.
B Y your letters Cent by this bearer, (albeit concern- A copy in

ing no p!easant subjed) his majefcy conceives well Ute'tt.

of your earnestness and idelity in your negotiations, as pDick. Vn.
also of Mr. Archibald's ativity and diligence, whom you A. oi. 9.
To greatly praise and recommend. I wish the issue cor.
respond to his Majefly's opinion, your care and travell,
and his great diligence as you write. His maefRy takes
this rigorous proceeding aainft his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning hiln both in honour
and otherwise. Hiis hiehneffes aions and behaviour utter
plain!y not only how far nature prevaiis, but also how he
apprehends of the fcquel of that process, and of what mo-
ment he esteems it. There is ambaFrade hor'ly to be
dircted, wherein will be employed an earl and two coun-
fellors, on whole answer will depend the continuance or
diflblution of the amity and good intelligence between
the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther ex-
tremity be used, and his majesty's uit and request disdain-
ed, his highness will think himself dishonoured and con-

F f 3 tcmned

temned far betides his expecation and deserts. Ye may
perceive his majesty's disposition by his letter to you,
which you fllall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal
according thereto. I need not to recommend to your care,
concerning your mafler's service both in weill and in ho-
nour. As you and your colleague hall behave yourfclf
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your
affEction to your master. I am glad of that I hear of
vourfelf, and I do fully credit that youwrite of Mr. Archi-
bald, whose friends here make great account of his pro-
fcflid devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes
to the king's majefly her son. Farther I am confirained
to remit to next occufion, having scarce time to scribble
these few lines (which of thcmfelves may bear witnes of
my haste.) Wiliing you a prosperous issue of your nego-
ciation, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Nov`. 27th,
J586.

THE people, and all estates here are so far moved by

te rigorous proceedings aainft the queen, that his ma-
jefty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
Vot go abroad for exclamations against them, and im-
precations against the queen of England.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 167.)
To the king's majefly, from Mr. Archibald Dou-

glas.

o . LE A S E your majefly, received your letter of the

I5S6. 1 date the 28th of September, the th of OLober,
rom the. which was the fame day that I direted WVM. Murray to-
Original in
;he colcn. wards your highners; by such letters as he carried, and
of si A. others of several dates, your majefly may perceive that I
Dick. Vol. had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach un-

pl. -. to, anent the performing of the two chief points contain-

ed the said letter befor the receit thereof, which by there
prefcnts I mufi repeat for answering of the faidis. As to
the irft, so far as may concern the interceeding for the
queen your majefy's mother her life, I have divers times
and in every audience travelled with this queen in that
matter, specially to know what her full determination
must be in that point, and could never bring her to any
further answer, but that this proceeding against her by or-

der

derofjuftice was no less againt her mind, than againt their
will that loved her best: as towards her life the could give
no answer thereunto, untill such time as the law hath de-
clared whether the was innocent or guilty. Herewithall
it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a
number of the affociants that earnestly prrled her that the
lawmight proceed againf her, giving realons that so long
as he was suffercd to deal in matters, so long would
never this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this
fate in aflurance, and in the end they uifd this protefta-
tion that if he would not in this matter follow their ad-
vice, that they hould remain without all blame whatfo.
ever hould fall out; whereupon file had' granted theim
liberty to proceed, left such as had made the request,
might hereafter have charged hlcielf with inconvenience
if any hould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, be-

cause both papit and protestant has behaved them, as it
hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers re-
fpeas, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was con-
ceived against them, the other upon zeal, and care that they
will be known to have for preservation of their sovereign's
life and ate in this perilous time, upon consideration
whereof, I have been confirainej to enter into ome deal-
ing with both, wherewith I made her majesty acquainted;
the proteflants, and fch as in other matters will be known
to bear ho small favour unto your majesty's service, hath
prayed that they may be excused from any dealing in the
contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowed,
and by their speech to their (overeign requested for, and
that before my coming in this country; if they {hould now
otherwise do, it would produce no better effet but to
make them subjet to the accusation of their sovereign,
when it hould pleale her to do it, of their inconflancy,
in giving councell whereby they might incur the danger
of ill councellors and be conequent worthy ofpunifhme.t.
Such of the papists, as I did deal with, went immediate-
ly, and told her majesty what I had spoken to them, who
albeit ihe underftoud the matter of before, ent for me
and declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to
them, willing me for the well of my maitter's service to
abstain from dealing with such, as were not yet fuffici-
ently moved to think of my master as he did. I craved
leave of her majesty, that I might inform them of your

k f4 ma.

majefiy's late behaviour towards her, and the Ifate ofthis
realm, whereunto with ome difficulty Ihe gave her con-
sent. At my late departure from court, which was upon
the 5th of this inflant, and the day after that the lords of
this gtand jury had taken their leaves of her majeffy to
go northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to pro-
niie to have further Ipeech in this matter at the returning
of the said lords, and to give full answer according to your
majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I
had proponit in name of your majesty. As to the 2d
part concerning the aociation, and desire that the pro-
mile madeto the mailer of Gray concerning your majesty's
title may be fulfilled; it appears by the laid letter, that
the very point, whereupon the queflion that may bring
your majetly's title in doubt hath not been rightly at the
writing of the (aid letter confidered, which I take to have
proceeded for lack of reading of the a of parliament,
wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to
the aid matier, and nothing may now cause any doubt to
arise against your said title, except that an opinion should
be conceived by there lords of this parliament that are o
vehement at this time againlt the queen your majefly's mo-
ther, that your majesty is, or may be proved hereafter
alenting to her proceedings, and some that love your ma-
jefty's service were of that opinion that too earnet request
might move a ground, whereupon furpicions might grow
in men so ill asseted in that matter, which I tho't might
be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of
your majesty's innocence at this time, and by reason that
good nature and public honefly would confirain you to in-
tercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with
itself, without any further, some suspicion that might move
ill affected men to doubt. In my former letters 1 humbly
cravcd of your majesty that some learned men in the laws,
might be moved to advise with the words of the aflocia-
tion, and the mitigation contained in the a of parlia-
ment, and withall to advile what suspicious effets your
majesty's request might work in theCe cholerick men at this
time, and how their minds might he beds moved to re-
ceive realon; and upon all these considerations they might
have formed the words of a declarator of your majflty's
innocence to be obtained in this parliament, and faling
thereof, the very words of a protellation for the fame es-
fc4 that might ellf serve for your majelty's service, and

fur

for my better information. Albeit this was my fimpte opi-
nin, I ihall be contented to follow any direction it fihall
p,.fzie yo: r majesty to give; I have already opened the sub-
tl' c-. hereof to the qu.en of this realm, who seems not to
be Aff.nded herewith, and hath granted liberty to deal
therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any
doubt of mind. This being the rum of my proceedings
in this matter, besides the remainder, contained in other
letters of several dates, I am constrained to lav the whole
open before your majesty, and to humbly pray that full
information may be lent unto me what further to do here-
in, in this middle time, while I hall receive more ample
direction I fiall proceed and be doing according to such
direction as I have already received. And so, mos gra-
cious sovereign, wishing unto your majetly all happy fuc-
cess in your affairs, I humbly take my leave from London,
:6th of Ot this 586. Your majesty's molt humble
subjec and obed' servant.
A memorial for his majefy by the marter of

Gray.

T will pleare your majesty, have tho't meeter to et it rn.
down all things as they occur, and all advertif.nents isg6. An
as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre. Original in

I CAME to Vare the 24th of Dec'. and ent to WVm. hand in the

Keith, and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertise the queen collct. of
of it, lik as they did at their audience. She promised ,c

A. D'ck

the queen your majesty's mother's life hould be spared fol. .
till we were heard. The 27th, they came to Vare to me,
the which day Sir Robt. came to V are, where they hewed
us how far they had already gole in their negociation,
but for that the discourse of it is set down in our general
letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will tefitfy unto
your majesty that Wm. Keith hath used himself right ho-
neftly and jufily till our coming, refpecing all circumflan.
ces, and chiefly his colleague his dealing, which indeed
is not better thln your majesty knows already.

THE zth day of Dec'. we came to London, where

we were no ways friendly received, nor after the honest
fort it had plealed your majefly use her amballadors, never
man ent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we
indcrfopd of Mr. de Bellicvre his leave taking, and for

that

that the custom permitted not we lent our excufs by Mr.
George Young.

THE ilt day of Jany. Win. Keith and his colleague

according to the custom lent to crave our audience. We
received the answer contained in the general letter, and
could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done
that day your najefty has it in the general, yet we was
not out of expectation at that time, albeit we received
hard answers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where

our conference was, as is set down in the general. I re-
marked this, that he that day said plainly the detaining
of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that he pre-
tended a fucccflion to this crown. Judge then by this,
what is tho't of your majesty as ye ihall hear a little as-
ter.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambafiador,

whom we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse
of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thank-
ed him in your maiefty's name and opened such things as
we had to treat with this queen, save the last point, as
more largely set down by our general.

IF is tho't here, and some friends of your majcfty's ad-

vised me, that Bellievre his negotiation was not effectual,
and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk
of this Chafeauneuf his servants taken with his whole pa-
pers and pacquets, which he was fending in France, for
that they charge him with a conspiracy of late againt the
queen here her life. It is alledged his servant has con-
fefled the matter, but whom I shall trut I know not,
but till 1 fee proof I hall account him an honest man,
for indeed o he appears, and one (without doubt) who
hath een very instant in this matter. I hew him that the
queen and earl of LeiceRer had desired to speak with me
in private, and craved his opinion; he gave it freely that
he tho't it meeteft, I hew him the reason why I commu-
nicate that to him, for that I had been fufpeted by some
of her majesty's friends in France to have done evil offices
in her service, that he should be my witness that my earned
dealing in this Should be a fufficicnt tefimony that all was
lyes, and that this knave Naue who now had betrayed her,
had in that done evil offices; he desired me, feeing fie aw
only with other folks eyes, that I should no ways impute

it

it to her, for the like {he had done to himself by Naue his
persuasion. I answered he hould be my witnets in that.

TH 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which

we got the oth day; at the first, he said a thing long
looked for hould be welcome when it comes, 1 would
now fee your matier's offers. I answered, no man makes
offers but for rome cause; we would, and like }'our ma-
jefty, firif know the cause to be extant for whiich we otffr,
and likewise that it be extant till your majefy has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promile for an
hour, but you think to hist in that fort. 1 anfvered we
mind not to fiifr, but to offer from our fvereign all things
that with reason may be; and in special, we offered as is
set down in our general, all was refused and tho't nothing.
She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very
despitefully repeated all our offers in presence of them all.
I opened the last part and said, Madam, for what respect is
it that men deal against your person or eflate for her cause?
She answered, because they think flie flall tucceed to me,
and for that she is a papist; appearingly said I both the
causes may be removed, flie said file would be glad to un-
derifand it. If Madam, said I, all that she has of right
of succession were in the king our sovereign's peifon, were
not all hope of papirs removed? She answered I hope
so. Then Madam I think the queen his mother shall
willingly demit all her rights in his perfun. She answered
the hath no right, for he is declared unable. Then I
said, if he have no right, appearingly the hope ceases al-
ready, so that it is not to be feared that any man attempt
for her. The queen answered, but the papifis allow not
ourdeclaration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's per-
son by her aflignation. The earl of Leiceftcr answered,
she is a prisoner, how can she demit. I answered the de-
miflion is to her on, by the advice of all the friends she
has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any at-
tempt conttit the queen here away, who liall party with
her to prove the demifflon or alignation to be ineffectual
her son being opposite party and having all the princes her
friends for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with
his majcfty of before. The queen made as he could not
comprehend my meaning, and fir Rob'. opened the matter
again, he yet made as tho' he underfood not. So the
Carl of Leiccftcr answercd that our meaning was, that

the

the king lhould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the
queen aniwered, then I put mnyfelfin a worse cafe than of
before; by God's passion, that were to cut my own throat,
and for a dutchy, or an earldom to yourself, you or such
as you would caufC some ,f your desperate knaves kill me.
No, by God, he (hall never be in that place. I answered
he craves nothing of your maiefy but only of his nother.
The earl of Leicefler answered that were to make him
party to the queen my mistress. I said, he will be far
more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She
would flay n longer, but (aid he would not have a worse
in his mothe's place. And laid, tell your king what
good I have done for him in holding the crown on his
head since he was born, and hat I mind to keep the league
that now lands between us, and if lie break it hall be
a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us
a farewell; but we efcheuit. And I fpcak craving of her
that her life may be spared for IS days; he efufed. Sir
Rob'. craved for only eight days, he said not for an hour;
and so geid her away. Your majesty fees we have deli-
vered all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for lle
and her councel has laid a determination that they mind
to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council
than herself, which I like the worse; for without doubt,
fir, it hall cut off all friendship ye had here. Altho' it
were that once they had meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembring themfelvcs, that they have medled with your
mother's blood, good faith the) cannot hope great good of
yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further your
majesty may perceive by this las diicourfe of that I pro-
ponit, if they had meaned well to your majesty, they had
used it otherwise than they have done, for reason has
bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind fonething
to speak in this matter, because we look (hurly our letters
hiall be troucit by the way.

FOR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter

their determination, altho' the queen again and the earl of
Leicester hs desired to (peak with me in particular; I
mind not to speak, nor hall not; but assuredly (hall let
all men fee that I in particular was no ways tyed to Eng-
land, but for the refpcct of vour majesty's service. So al-
beit, at this time, I could not effectuate that I desired,
yet my upright dealing in it hall be manitefted to the
world. We are, God willing, then to crave a.ldience,

wvhcee

where we mind to use [harply our inffruions, which hi-
therto we have used very calmly, for we can, for your ho-
nour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than the Frenci
ambaiiador has said for his master.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in

your service, and not the effedt, for had it been double by
any 1 might have here had credit, but being I came only
for that cause will not my credit (hall serve here to any
further purpose. I pray God preserve your majesty all
fend you a true and sincere friendihip. From London
this 1ath of Jan. 1586.

I underfand the queen is to fend one of her own to

your majety.
To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and fccre-

tary to his majetly, from the malter of Gray.

Y lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to ,sth. fln.
his majefly, whereby your lordihipfhallunderftand isl6. an.

Original in

how matters goes here. And before all things I pray your the coledL.
lord/hip move his majedv to refpec my diligence, and o fir A.
not the effe in this negotiation, for I Iwear if it had Dick. VI.

A. ie!. 79.

been for the cown of En-laud to mvftlf I could do no '
more, and let not unfrierlds have advantage of me, for
the world hall fee that I loved England for his majesty's
ferviceonly. I look Ih-rtly to find your lordhip fliend as
ve made promise, and by (; I [hall be to you if I can.
W'". Keith and dJired, iulatters had gone well, tohave
run a course that your lordhip might have here been in
credit and others difippointed, but now I will do for you
as for mvfelf; which is to care for no credit here, for in
conscience they mean nut honeflly to the king our fove.
reign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is
gone or shortly to go, thertefre my lord without all kind
of scruple Ipray you to advise him the btilt is not this way.
They fay here, that it has been said by one who hearJ
it from you, that ye delired nt the kilg and iEngiland to
agree, becaule it would rack the n,,blcmen, anJld give
an example of it by king J.ames the tuir, I aid'fwe;cd in
your name that I was assurcd vco ncvicr lh.iJ 1il :c( it. Mr.
Archibald is the fpeadkr of it, whlo I aillir )uair r hlrdlhl
has beis a poio i this niat rc, lur itt. ' i,..;i ci m lkii:
so his opiuin.. lie c irec nu i. i :, : c t lt:iigtii the

kin'
2

king will be fain to deel this way, either by fair means or
neceifity, o that when he deals this course he is assured to
be welcome; to set down all that is pastos the like pur-
poles, it would consume more paper than I have here, so
I defer it to meetings There is a new conspiracy alledged
against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambaflador resident three of his men taken, but I think
in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr. Stafford, who is
ambafador for this queen in France, is touched with it, his
brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our
negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till
this invention was found forth. I remit all other things
to the inclosed. We minded to have ent to his majesty
a discourse, which we have set down of all our proceed-
ings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized
that the bearer is to be truflHnt by the way for our pac-
quets, so that we defer it till our own coming; this I have
put in a privy part betide the pacquet. We shall I think
take leave on Fryday the 13th day, where we mind ex-
actly to follow the rigour of our infirutions. for it can-
not stand with the king's honour that we fay less then
the French ambaflador, which was, le roy mon maifire ne
peult moins faire que Ie refentir. So that about the 24th
I think we Ihall, God willing, be at home, except that some
flay come which we look not for. The queen and the
earl of Leicefer has desired to peak with me. I refused
save in pretence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter-
mination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave
no credit but for that cause. It will please your lordlhip
retire the incloscd from his mael}ty and keep it. So after
my service commendedl to yourself and bedfellow, I com-
mit you to God. From London the iath of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majetty, fro:n fir Robert Melvill.

otth an TI may plcafe your majcvy, since the direclion of our
a56. An formncr letters, wc hd udience, and her majesty ap-
h'ig^nlin peared to tke our oveCturcs in good part in pretence cf
band, in the her council; albeit no ofitenc would take place with them,
colleft. ot having taknll refulution to proceed with extremity, not the
ir A. Dik. less it plcad her mr.a'cl to desire us to tfay for two days
Vol. A. '
fl. ima. on taking our leave, un.il flu h;.d 1:dvi:cd upon our pro-

!itions;

petitions; since which time, her majesty is become more
hard by rome letters (as we are informed) has come from
Scotland, making lIme hope to believe that your majesty
takes not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary
in effect, and had of before removed the like opinion out
of her majesty's mind, which by finifier information was
credited, their reports has hindered our commifflon, and
abuled this queen, fearing in like manner we hall be stay-
ed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well
enough known to all men how heavily your majelty takes
these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they have
by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to
hinder our negotiation. As also Allynour Steward is to be
directed in their party, by our knowledge, whohas awan-
tyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform,
and we willed him to desist from this dealing, faying it
do s harm, and he is not meet for that purpose, remitting
to your majesty's good direcion to take order herein as we
shall be antwerable to your majesty not to omit any point
we have in ch.rge, as the truth is, the maitcr of Grhaye
has behaved himself very rightly and discreetly in this
charge, and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who
were of before hi; friends. We have been bchalding to
the menfirals who has born us best company, but has
not been troubled with others. Wylzeme Kethe hath
left nothing undone that he had in charge. As for maf-
ter Archibald he has promised at all times to do his de-
woyr, wherein he shall find true report mnade to your ma-
jefty, craving pardon of your majesty that I have been so
tedious, after I have kilred your majesty's hand I hum-
bly take my leave. Praying God to grant your majesty
many good days and happy, in whofc protection I com.mit
your majefly at London, the oth of Jan. 86.

SIR,
ALBEIT Maftcr George has rot heen in commitlion,

he is not inferior in his service to any o us, a well by
his good advice and diligent care he tc for the ad-
vancement of your service, wh'rciii have not bee a
little furthered.

To

To the king's majesty, from the master of Gray

and fir Robert Melvill.

sit Jan. ITLEASE it your majeRy in the last audience we had,
s586. An fnce our last advertisement, by W". Murray we
the Clled. find her majeftyat the resuming our offers something miti-
f fir A. gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, be-
Dick. Vol. fore we got our leave, at our reasoning, certain of the
A. i.L so. council, namely my lord of Leicefier, fir Chriflopher Ha-

ton, my lord Hunldon, and my lord Hawart being present
in the chamber, gave little share of any great contentment
to have her from her former resolution, now caffin in per-
plcxiter what she hould do, always we left her in that
state, and since have daily pressed conferrence with the
whole council, which to this hour we have not yetobtain-
ed. This day we have lent down to crave our leave.
The greatefi hinder which our negotiation has found hi-
thertu is a persuasion they have here that either your ma-
jefly deals superficially in this matter, or that with time
ye may be muved to digest it, which when with great dif-
ficulty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters
written to them of late from Scotland has found ome
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that refolv-
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special meflage,
they have made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try
your highncis's meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty
to like of their proceedings, where from no terror we can
fay out unto him is able to divert him, he has given out
that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts
not to hlp lliis matter at your highness's hand. If he
come there that errand, we think your majesty will not
ovcrfee the gi;at iflrace that his attempts hall give us
here, if he be not tane oldtr with before that he be further
heard, and if so be that any other be direted (as our
intellig ncegiv:s us there shall) our humble suit is to your
majtdty, th.,r it may plcafe your highness to hear of us
whut we find here, and at what point we leave this mat-
ter ith her ,ajclty, before that they find accidence, the
caufri wh:r, 'f rmiutting to our private letters. We com-
mit your n itj fr trth prltelt to God's eternal protec-
tion. Fiua. LuUi .'i thi b&it t f Jaui. 1586.

No. XV.

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL

APPENDIX.
I had no opportunity of sing fveral of the following

papers, till those Jhets of the h/lary, to which t. re-
late, werg printed of. For this reafin no refe;reces
are made to them there; but I have supplied that defe.?
by marking the partiular pnages in the hiory which
they jerve to illfliratc.

No. XXXI. [Vol . .

I. p. 49. Line 9.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the

earl of Bothwell and lady Jean Gordon his wife.
From a rnanufcript belonging to Mr. David
Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455.

POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt

U hon. Mr. Rotert Maitland dean of Aberdene,
Mr. Edward Henryson docr in the laws, two of the
senators of the college of justice, Mr. Clement Little,
and Mr. Alexandcr Syme advocattis, commiflrs of Ednr;
compeered Mr. Henry Kin rolle, procuratr for Jean Gour-
doune countes of Bothwell, conititute be her for pur!:'.w-
ing of ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her colit.x
James erie Bothwel her huiband for adultry, comr-.it:ed be
him with Belie Crawfurde. the putuilprs fervint for the
time; and fick!ykc, for c ai erl, conlpc;a e 'r. £d-
mond 3.y, who efter he had purlued a;n craved ihe pir.-
suer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if h hr hrj 'ft caus
to purfew the said ation, and obt:aincd i, derved t e li-
bell, and the said Mr. Harrietook the morne, the ;iat day
of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The quhi !t dry,
having produced some witnefles, he took the next day,
being the I of May, to do farther diligence. Upon the
quhilk f May, he produced some moc wvitneffes, and

Vol. 11. g re.

'rnounced farther prob.itioune. After quhilk, he dcfircj
a tern to he afirned to pronounce sentence. To whom
the fid cnimiitirs aligncd Satterday next, te 3 oI
i..iv, to pronounce fenence therein, fecundum aliiglta ec
)ro;at, iquilk accordingly was given that day in hfvour
ti ' tl: putlwar.

A.r the fme time there was another proces intendit be

the eil of Bothwell contra his lady, for to have their mar-
x age dcclared nul, as being contracted againfi the canons,
.ithou a dpcnfation, and e and his lady being within
iJtgrccs dfiedndn , viz:erdis a kin, and that wyfe for ex-
puding of this proces, there was a commiffioune grantit
to the rchbifhop of St. Androis to cognolce and determine
ir, ad Rot. bishop of Dunkeld, WVilliam bishop of Dun-
blane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanan in Glasgow, and
j a:fon of Egelfhame, Mr. AlcxanderCreichtoun, and Mr.
George Cooke chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne
LI.inda.rflomle cianon in Dunbar and prebendar of Pc!-
touiie, or any anc of them. This commiflione is datit.
2; Aprile 1567, was presented to two of the saids com-
,iio(oners, viz. Mr. A.nd'. Ciawfurd and Mr. John Man-
esel (oullneI Saiti. la} 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburnc
p;irfon cf Auldhanltucks, procurator for the erle of Both-
vcll, who acccpted the delcgaiioune, and gave out their
i;ation by i'recct, direltcd, Decano Chriftianitates de
1 li;jIngtioc, icec r,.n vicano fca curato eccle. parochiae de
Clci lto;:Ic, f.: c:iL.iulq; alteri cappel!anodebite requifi-
I , Icr (ilnlni:nl, at thc said cries inflancc, both of the
.,ilv icrie :riliy itl hc could be had, or otherways at the
l; a:, l.'c kiik of Crhilhounc the time of service, or at hr

Iv.i:' i ld1,ct 1foric witntllrs, prime, fecundo, tertio ct

(cril:'l.i'o;i, Itni:o tamzn conlc::tu pratuplice edito.
'.id I k.:.!\.V to te itntiics in the f.id matter, Alex.
* iiL,, oi (;iaiovavy, wvho did nmarry the fai.l crie and his
ldJ\, ill ealcud-hioule kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Ban-
r.::; )ue of Auchnoule justice clerk, Mr. Robert Creich-
toun of klliot the queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers
provolt of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael-
a'jbot of Mclrors, and to conpcar before the aid judges,
or any one of them in St. C;ils kirk in Ed'. on Monday
the 5 of May, be thamlfilvcs, or their procurators. Upon
the ;aid 5 day, Mr. John Mandeftoun, one of the judges
tdlecgat only being present conmp.;rcd the fmce procura-
tors t':r Loth th. parties that wcru il tl)c former proces,

Mr.
9

M1r. l.dmond lHay ( aiticula'lie ) and Tvn words
Iomc of the witucfles summoncd produced, r.a:;i received i" ti *'a-
for proving of the fame. The lIid procurator renouncedl iC.'.,'' i
fardcr probatioune, and the judge afiigne.l the morne, the
6th of May, ad publicanJum produta, ncinpe dcpoti-
tiones ipforum tef-ium. The quhilk day, polt publicatas
depositiones priedilas, Mr. HiZe. Kinroll, procurator for
the lady initantcr objccit obj:^tioncs juris gencralitcr,
contra pro dtic, infiper rcnunciavit ulteriori dcfiniio-
ni; proinde conclufa dc confnliu procuratorum hinic ice
caufa, judcx predictus flatuit .rfltinum dirn pro tcrmina,
ad pronunciandam fuam felcntiar dfinituram, cx de-
ducis coram eo, in pirfcnti caufa ct procclit. Con-
sorn hereunto, on Wcdnicfday the 7th of May, the fid
judge ave out, his fcntence i favour of the crie, declar-
ing the marriage to be, and to have been null from the
beginning, in rclpea of their contingence in blood, which
hindcri thcii I.,;wvfil mnarriage without a difiltnfation ob-
tained of bcl'ir.

No. XXXII. [Vol. I. . .:7 ;. L.;:' 2 ..,

Queen Mary to Qutcn i_:.Jeth.

IM A D A M,
A Ltoullh the nccciitv of my c.i ,e . wlicii aalcth n (-,.. !:..

to be impo:tune to you) diJ :n.k. you to juJ re tat c. . .

I am out of te wvay; ',: fulch as have nt my p.:i:itn, ' '*
nor the rcfpets whereolf ou arc pcrfuad-'d, wvitl i , ri. J"' ,!; ;
I do as my cauf: doth requirc. Madam, 1 have not acc:-
cd you, neither in words, nor in thmoght, to have iu:d
vourfelf evil towards ne. And i htli:vv, that you hiv.
;lo want of goad undcrtairdii)t, to keep you irm pcr-
fwaion againit your natur. l good incti:i't:in. But in thc
mean time I can't chufc (hiving my fci;fis) but [crceiv
very evil furtherance in mv matt rs, slice nm coming hi-
ther. I thought that I had fuflcicn'lv difcour'ed unto
you the difconmo!i:ics, which this deIay brinieth unto
me. And cfpecialy that they think in this ne;t month of
Auguf, to hold a parliament against me and all my fcr-
vant,. And in the mean time, I am flayed hire, and yet
will you, that I hould put mycit forther into :,ou: (. o;n-
try, (withou: sccing ou) and remove me urdicr i'im

G g2 I::i;;

mine; and there do me this dishonour, at the request of my
rebels, as to fend commiflioners to hear them againit me,
as you wold do to a mere fubje&, and not hear me by
mouth. Now, madam, I have promised you to come to
you, and having there made my moan and complaint of
these rebels, and they coming thither, not as poflelTors,
but as fu.je&s, to answer. I would have besought you
to hear my justification of that which they have falfly set
furth against me, and if I could not purge myself thereof,
you might then discharge your hands of my causes, and
let me go for uch as I am. But to do as you fay, if I
were culpable I would be better advised; but being not
so, I can't accept this dishonour at their hands, that be-
ing in poffeflion they will come and accuse me before your
commillioners, whereof I can't like: And feeing you think
it to be againfit your honour and confignage to do other-
wife, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy, un-
till you may fee how I can discharge myself every way.
And to susser me to go into France, where I have a dowry
to maintain me; or at the lead to go into Scotland, with
assurance that if there come any strangers thither, I will
bind myself for their return without any prejudice to you,
or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protest that I will not
impute it to fallhood, If I receive itrangers in my country,
without making you any other discharge for it. Do with
my body as you will, the honour or blame hall be yours.
For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants
may be succoured (tho' you would not so) by strangers,
than to susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope to
receive, in time to come, particular commodity. There
be many things to move me to fear that I shall have to
do, in this country, with others than with you. But for-
afmuch as nothing hath followed upon my las moan, I
hold my peace, happen what may happ. I have as lees to
abide my fortune, as to fek it, and not find it. Further,
it pleated you to give licence to my fubjeds to go and
cone. This has been refuted by my lord Scroop and
Mr. Knolls (as they lay) by your commandment, because
I wou!d not depart hence to your charge, untill I had
allfwctr or this letter, tho' I shewed them that you required
my aliver, upon the two points, contained in your let-
ter.

THi
3

THE one is to let you briefly undcrfland, I am come

to you to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
I would declare unto you mine innocency, and then require
your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan
and complaint to God, that I am not heard in my jugt
quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have refpe&
thereunto, as my cafe requircth; and to you, madam, first
of all, when you ihall have examined your conscience be-
fore him, and have him for witness.-- And the other,
which is to come further into your country, and not to
come to your prelence, I will efleem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing
forced. In the mean time, I beseech you, to return to
me my Lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having
noneof my counfal here, and alfoto susser me, if it plca'c
you, without further delay, to depart hence whither.i-
ever it be out of this country. I am ure you will not de-
ny me this imple request for your honour's fake, feing
it doth not please you to use your natural goodness to-
wards me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own accord,
I am come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And
if God permit my causes to succeed well, I hall be
bound to you for it; and happening otherwile, yet can't
blame you. As for my Lord Fleeming, feeing that upon
my credit you have suffered him to go home to his house,
I warrant you he shall pass no further, but hall return
when it hall please you. In that you trust me, I will not
(to die for it) deceive you. Butfrom Dumbarton I an- Perhaps f,
Iwer not, when my L. Fleeming hall be in'the Tower.
For they which are within it, will not forbear to receive
succour, If I don't assure them of yours; no, tho' you
would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge,
to have more refpe& to my servants and to my cftate, than
to my life. Good fiRer beof another mind, win the heart,
and all ihall be yours, and at your commandment. I
thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you.
Alas. do not as the serpent, that ftoppeth his hearing,
for I am no inchanter, but your sifter, and natural cousin.
If ( afar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint
of an advertiser, he had not so died; why hould princes
ears be stopped feeing that they are painted so long; Mean-
ing that they hould hear all and be well advised, before
they answer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and
less of the chamelion, to turn you to my likencfs, and

Gg 3 tho'

tho' 1 fliould be so dcncrctci: and curs'd as men fay, yott
are fufficientlv armed \\ith coniltncy and with juilicc,
which I require of God, who give you race to use it well
with long and h:appy life. From Carlile, the 5th of July,
1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 473. Line ult.)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop,

and fir F. Knollis, September 3d, 568.

cort. Lib. ' cY lords, pleafit your honourable lordflips, I am
c, .
C .. 1 informit by James orthwick, lately come from

:iin-l il the quccis maicfly your foverane, that it is fchawin to her
hJl highness, I fhuld have ridden in Crafimrdmure, fen my

latt cuming into this realm, upon the earl of Murray's de-
pendants. And that I fuld have caulit, or been of coun-
tall to Scottifmcen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or
fpulzic her majelty's fubjcEts.

My lords, I thought it right necdful because your lord-

ships is, be your loverane, comman'cd to attend upon the
queen's majtly my miftrcls, so havint. daily accfs in thir
Inatteis, to declare upon the truth; humbly dtciring that
your lordihips will, for God's caule, certificate the queen
your overalic the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wire

had knowledge of ony Scottifman's ryding in England, to
do the fi;bjcts thcreof hurt in bodies or goods, fene the
liegc of Lcith ; and as I udcrlland it hail be fund true,
that; if onv sic opnen hurt be done, it is by the queen my
ovcrci,!n's dil')be;ients, and that I have not ridJen nor
hurt no Scottifmil:!n, nor commanded no hurt to be done
t., i:r e i, fnt my coming from the queen's majefly cfEng-
larl, it is well kcnd, for that never ane will complain
of mn.

I HAVE dnlc more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the

carl of Murray ha; done, and will be loathcft to do them
any harm than h will. Except the queen's majcltv your
fovcrct,,n, c, nm;indl ic false reports to be tryit, quhercof
this is altogidder an invenitit leafing, her gract Iill be
trutilir, an i tvc n the hearts of t ue meni here, qhom of
sic rcp'irt (ill be m.ade, th.t b.aieth would serve hir, and
may, bctter than they unworthy liars.

M1,

My lords, I understand the queen's majefly your so-

vereign is not contented of this bruit, that there should
ony Frcnchman come in this realm, with the duke of
Cbatteicrault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the
counfdll of their cuming, nor has no sic certainty thereof,
as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's maj.fly
your sovereign. And gif 1 might as well fay it, as it is
true indeed, her gracefelf is all the wyitt, and the cunfall
that will never let her take order with my maiftrefs caue.
For that our fovercign havand her majesty's promise, be
writing, of lutr, fr:cndfhip, and afliftance gif need had
so requirit, enterit that reatm, upon the 16 day ,f May,
1Cn that time the queen's majesty has commanded me di-
verse times to declare she would accept her cause, and
do for her, and to put her in peaceable poflieflion of this
rca!m', and when I required of her m;,jcfly, in my ma:f-
trefs name, that her highness would cither do for her, (as
her fpccial truf was he wold) according to her former
promiles, or otherwise give her counfal wold not consent,
(as 1 Ihow her grace 1 sand divcri' repugnant) then that
Ihe would permit her to pals in Fiance, or to some other
prine to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk was
agains all reason) that he would permit her to return in
her awin countric, in fie fempil manner as fle came out
of it, and said to her majesty ane of thir, of her honour,
would not be refufit, fecand that he was comed in her
realm upon her writings and promil'es of friendship. And
ficklike, I said to her highness, gif my maifirefs had the
like promilf of her nobility and estates, as she had of
herself, I ihould have reprovit them highly, gif they had
not cor.defccndit to one of thir threc, and so I fay, and
1 I write, that in the warld it shall be maift reprehend.
able, gif this prmirf taketh not other good effe&1, nor
)ct it does. Notwithstanding, I get gud answer of thir
promises of friendship made to my Iovereign, and to put
her grace in this her aw!n countric peaceably, we have
fund the contrary working by Mr. Middlcmore, dicetit
from her highnels to (tay the army that cuift down our
houfcs. And alfua, in the proceeding of this late preten-
dit parliament, promised twenty days bfore the time to
mylelf to have caiusei it been dif'hargit. And yet con-
trary t this promise, have they made their prctcnJit man-
ncr of forfaulture of 31 men of gid reputation, bilhops,

G'S 4 abbotis,

btbottis, and barroniL, obedient fubjeas to your sovereign,
,;* l";** her cause.

' :; E h:,, :., dif'-?it, f-n our sovereign's cause was

t:; , , ::-:' ; :: . - d;.. q ren'a majeify of that realm, an
i;, i:r:i i!' ,:'..1'.! , *,ds S.its worth of her awin true
* ..ti;:; , r, u-l.ir ii:: conor of the law, groundit up-
or deit :.l'. '..rc.'!: ;':;.:, icrwin, authority.

ITE niu;.:;'F, cie '.ppefiions, the burnings, the ra-

vihing of v.,-'n, the deirutilion of policy, both eccle-
liaitical and tcimpnral, in thij mean time, as in my for-
mer wriings I said it was lamentable to ony chriflian
man to hear o', except God gif grace, the profession of
the evangile of Jtfus Cnrit profeflit be your prince, coun-
fall and realme, be mair mnndit, nor the auld inamity
that has ftind betwixt the realms, many of my countrymen
will doubt in this article, and their proceedings puttis my
self in fana Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majefly of that realm,

upon quhais promise and honour my maiftres came there,
as I have said, will leave all the French writings, and
French phrases of writings, quhilks amongis them is over
meikie on baith the fides unfit, and plainly, according to
the auld true cullom of Ingland, and Scotland, quherein
be a word promift truth was obferv'd, promise, in the
name of the eternal God, and upon the high honour of
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
quhereof he is defcendit, and presently wears the dia-
dem, that she will put my maiftrefs in her awin country,
and caufc her as queen thereof in her authority and
strength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an
certain day within two months at the farthest, as we
'underfland this to be our weill, fua will we, or the maif
part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen,
and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefore,
and for the true perpetual friendship of that realm, will
condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty
God, keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble
and wilif men can condescend upon, for the weill of this
haill island. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen your sovereign, quhilk I hew to your lordships
felfis both in religion, in the punifhmcnt of the earl Both-
wile, for the queen's last husband's slaughter, and for a
mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

LDOUBT-

DOUBTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic

time and friendly working, as may gif us occasion baith
to forgette Middlemore and his latepretendit parliament,
we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our
will to ref where he is, under the promise of friendlhip.
As I have baith said, and will ever affirm, made be your
sovereign, quhilk was only caufc of her graces coming in
that realme, and seek the help and moyen of French, or
Spaniih, till expulfe this treasonable and false preteadit
authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MY lords, I desire your lordships confider, that it is

he, that maift desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scot-
land to continue, and of a poor man befl cause has, that
writ this.

MY brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in

your lordliips communing with him, it appearit to him,
your mind was we Ihold susser the earl of Murray to
work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain
thereof to the queen's majeily, and her highness wald fee
it reformit. My lords, her majefly will be over meikle
troublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit already.
For I am sure, gif reason andjuitice may have place, our
maiftrefs, and we her fubjeds, have received express
wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds flerling,
in the time of this unhappy government, feeing the refor-
mation of fa great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie
and the ungodly law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle
praais'd, I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor
our weill, your lordships would fua mean, nor that it is
good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your so-
vereign fie advertisement thereof, as your good wifdor.s
shall find in this cause meet. It will be true and frind-
ful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases,
nor boasting, and finding little other effe, that will cause
us to hold away the Frenchmnen. This is plainly written,
and I desire your lordships plain answer, for in truth and
plainness langeft continues gud friendlhip, quhilk in this
matter I pray God maylang continue, and have your lord-
ihips in his keeping. Off Drumfreis, the 3d day of Scp.
tember 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command clifully

HERRIS

(QLeen Mary to Qt Elizabeth.

C ,..
s . A DA II E ma ['onne bcur. J'ay rcfccu tc v uO

t. tLib. JVA lcttres, d'un imcine date ; 'une, ou vous ti:es

ca!.. An mention de l'excule de Mlonf'. de Murra pour tcnir ibn
Oiisin]. prctendu paremnent, qui m:. femble bien soid, pour obtc-

nirplus de toilerance quc je m'eftois prfunadec n'avoi par
vof.re romnc:', quant a n'ofnr donter conmiffion d VCe-
nir fans un parlement Spur leur peu Ie' nombre de nblefle
alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ent que trois on q'uatr
d'avantnre, qui cufl nt atifi bien dit Icur opinion hors
de prlimitt, qi n'a elc tenu tant pour cette ecilt, mais
pour firc cc qi'c;; rc!l mcint nous avions requis eltrc em-
pc'chcs, qui clt l. forfalture de mcs fubjcls pour m'avoir
felds fidcllcs, ce que je m'aflurois, jufques a heir, avoir eu
en promcflc de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup
c M;iifre Kniolcis vous induire a ire contre eulx, voire,
a les nfayre refentir ; toutetfois je vois que je l'ay nial
ris, j'cn fuis plui mar ie, pour cc que fur votrc lettre
qi'il me montrceent, ct Icur parole, je I'ay si divulgucmcnt
;Ifll.ray que pour vcn"geance quc j'cnl Jeefiri;a, si nen met-
trc diffrcnce entr Icur faux depot tnicis, ct Ics mienl
finccres. Danis voltre lcttc aifli dlatce du iom- d'Aouft,
vous mc:tics ccs :.o:s. " I think your adverse party, up-
' on rmy fiundry formcr alvices, will hold no parliament,
<' at ;all; ailn if they dJ, it fll.il be only i form of ali
" alinnbly, to acord wham to fend into this rcalm, and
" iln wha firt;for othcrwi;ic, if tley flia; proceed in man!-
' ner o a pail;amncnt, with any a3t of judgment ag:ri:ft
'; :nn' I'eri n, I hall nt, i ny wvil., allow thereof; aill
' they ft i.ll be li ovcrl'cn, ihcn you may thinlk' tilC
"' t:i;ie to be of no other mncnit, than the formicr r:)-
: ccdurcs ; and by such their r.,lh manner of proceedlini,
" they fliall most prejudice thcni.ivcs ; and bc af3Tlreid to
" find me rcay^ to condlemn t!icni, i;i their doings." 'S ;r
quoyj'ay co:itrcm:in:lr e rncs t;r.ritciirs, Ics f. ill'tt retirer,
fouffrnnt fe!nnn vollre c;,mnnlm dclent d'etre f.aulicmilnt
nommes traitres, par cc!x. qui Ic so;t d'c vrnay; ct cn-
core d'etre provo(lques par efcarmn,,in dies, (et par prinf:; d:
mes gens t lettres, ct at conira'irc voil; .etc; inirolnntc
que mes fubjeis ont cvahi.i les voftrcs, M'adaIua qui a fait
ccrapport n'est pas homme de bicn, car laird Szr.ord c:

11J

ion fils font ct ont c.cs mcs r:...clcs dcpuis ]e cmmence-
m:n;; ciquires vou_, s'i's 'c'licint a Donfris ;:vcqliic
eulx, j'avois offri rc;ipendrc d 1.i i'ronticc, c' rqui ni: tilt
rcfuec, ce qui m'endevroit ;.''1s delkharger, eanmoins,
pour vous faire prcuve de ma fidlitc, et de leur tlili:, s'il
vous tme fayte donncr le nom c(Is coulpables, et me ftrti-
ficr, je cmmandcrav mes fiibj.lts Ics pot.r fjivre, ou si
vous voules quc cc foit Ics voilrcs, los miens Icur aydc-
rent; j vous prie m'en mander volire volonte, au rcfle
mcs fulctas fidel!cs feront rc!'onfab!cs a tout ce que leur
sera mi, u les contre vous, ni les v,'frcs, ni lcs rcbelles,
dc'puis que me confeillates les ainr retircr. Quant aux
Frant:is, j'cfcrivis quc 'cn m'ei fiz rulle pourluitc, car
j'crp rois tant en vous, que je n'cn arois belbign,-je ne
liicu file dia aura en ics letrrcs rr.ai, ie vous jure devant
1)iciu qie jc ne fc;ay chnlfc du monde c lcur venue, que
ce que ni'en a.'es minnday, ni n'cn .i oui de France mot
du monc, et ne Ic pisis croire pour ccf! occasion, ct si ils
li font, c'Al fijns mon fceu ni (cnnlfintrment, Poirquo je
vous fu;'plie ne me condamncr fans m'ouire, car je fuis
pref de tenir tout c quc j'ay cff'rt a Meftcr Knoleis, et
vous assure que vofire amitt, (qu'il vou:; plct m'osFrir, sera
rcfcuc avant toutcs les chofi' du mondc, q::ant France
fervit la pour presser leur retour a ceie condition, que
prcnies mes affaires en mein, en foeur, et hoanc ai,
comme ma Franc ect cn vous ; m..is ;un chofc ficlc me
rcnde confuse, j'ay tant d'cnemis qu'ont votre oreillc, la-
quellc ne pouvant avoir par parlle, toutes mcs aclions vous
font defguifies, et falfement raportcc, par quoi ii m'cft
impoTible de m'affurcr de vaus, pour Ics mantcries qu'on
vous a fait, pour defl:uire vo'trc honne volont de mov;
par quoy je defirerois bicn nvoir cc bien vous fa;rc cntcndre
ma lincere et bonne affl''ion, l:It(iel'cje ne puis si bien
defcrire, que mes eneris a tort ne la decolort. Ma bonne
foeur, gagnes moy ; cmv oys moy qucrir, n'cntrs en jca-
loufie pour fiulx raorts (Ie relle qice me delire quc votre
bnnne gracc; je me rnmettrav fur Mclcr Knolcis a quije
me fuis librcment dc(fi',!vcrte, ct apres votls avoir bailec
Ics mains, jc pricrav l)ieu voi:; (doincr en fantc, longue
et heureufe vie. Dc I'olron, t, j vous promets, j n'ef-
pere partir, qu'avelii: : vcotrc i o'rne grace, quoyque les
mcntcurs mcntcnt. Ce 26 d' Aoul.

No. XV.

No. XV. [Vol. II. p. 79. line 18.]
Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3;

1580-1.

S IR,

C.t. Lib. T HAVE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of
cail. C. | your letter of the 25th of the las direced unto his

lordihip, containing a report of your negotiation with the
king and his council, in your feconJ audience, where-
with having made her majesty acqu;inted, he seemed
somewhat to mi/Jlike, that you hould o long defer to deal
for the en!argnect of Empedorles. ut I made answer in
your behalf. that I thought you were directed by the ad-
vice of the said Empedocles fiends, in the oliciting of
that cause, who knew what time was fittcf for you to
take o dcJl there in, with most effect, and bed success,
wikh which anfwver, her majesty did in the end reft very
well atisfied, touching that point.

YOUR putting of us in hope that D'Aubigny might ea-

fly be wo:n at her Majesty's devotion, was at first inter-
preted to have been ironic poke by you. But since it
feemeth you infill upon it, 1 could wifi you were other-
wife persuaded of the man, or at least kept that opinion
to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways futficiently
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and re-
ception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the
inclosed copy, which you may use to good purpose there,
shall partly give you Come light; there is no man here can
be periuaded that he will chance his purpose, for so small
advantage as he is likely to find by it, and therefore you
hall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that fring,
as I have already written to you. The prince of 0.
range fending, I fear will not be in time that it maydoany
good; for besides that these people are in themselves
flow in their rcfolutions, their own affairs are, at present,
so great, their state so confused, and the prince's autho-
rity so small, that he cannot so oon take order in it; and
yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or care-
leh in the matter, having, more than three weeks pafl,

fcnt

sent one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear
nothing. The letters, you desire flould be written thi.
ther by the French ministers, I have given order to Mr.
Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will carefully
perform it, o that, I hope, I lhall have them to fend you
by the next. And so I commit you to God. At Whitehall
the third of February z58o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
This litter is an original, and in fame parts of it wrote in

cyphers and explained by another hand. By Empedocl is
underlood Morton, by YiUtnarius the king of Scots, D'A..
bigney is marked thus o ' o

3 Feb. 1580.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given,

and in time to be better manifested, being now
thought meet to be in convenient fort used, and
laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing
the king, the nobility, and that state.
EIRST, it hath been informed, by credible means, C^t L;

that D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with la alig. c. .
'ave the king's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, AnOrigion!.

and of his errand there, tending chiefly to purfunde the
king, to think and esteem it an evil president for princes,
that fubjeas might have power to deprive their lawful so.
vereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
by any mean, to defeat him, either of the present govern-
ment of that realm, or yet of the pofleflion of the crown
and inheritance thereof, but rather to afture the fame to
him: and that for the accomplilhment of that aurance,
the king flould have been advised and drawn to have go-
verned, for Come short time, as prince, calling D' Aubig-
ny torule as govornor of the prince, by commiiflon from
the queen his mother, until the king's enemies were up.
pressed; after which time, D'Aubigny should have power
given to establish and resign that kingdom to the king,

by

by his mother's vo!uantarv consent, w:.ic.-'by all such, as
had before been in ailon againt the ueen or her au-
thority, might be brought to fiand in the king's mercy.
And tor that the king might live in moie furetv, D'Aubig-
ny hould be declared both econd pc: ion in lfccffiion of
that crown, and also lieutenant-g neral of Scotland, and
that D'Aubigny, before his departure out of France, re-
ccivcd cornmillion from tihe king's mother to the effcds
icmcmbred, or near the .fame. Tiat in this beiall he
had conference with the bilhops of Glasgow, and Ross,
anl with fir James Baford, with which persons, and with
the duke of Guise, he had and hath frequent intelli-
gence, and by fir ames Baford he was advised to confer
with the lord John Hamilton before his repair into Scot-
land, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he ftnt
one John Hamilton to the said lord John to excuse him in
this part, alledging, that he did forbear to come to him,
left thereby he thould narr or hinder greater effetts to be
executed by him i Scotland.

Tl'n.r before l.i coming into that realm, the nobili-

ty and country wele vwll quieted and united in good con-
cord, with great love betwixt the king and nobi!ity, and
amongtt the nobleife, but he hath both drawn the king
againit sundry of the chiefeft of his nobility, that have
been mcft ready, and have expended their blood and pof-
ieffions to prefcrve: Ieligion, and defend the king's per-
son, his government and efiate, and allu hath given occa-
sions of grcat su'spicions and ofifnce to be engendered be-
twixt the king and his nobility, and especially witih such
·s have been in acion aaii;ft the kii's mother, ad her
authoritv, who by force and meians of the laid conliiiio,n
and practicc, lhould have been brought into molt dan-
gerous condition ; and who a!so may find thcinfclves in no
fmiall pcrrill, while he poflifics the king's ear, abulth
his presence, and holdeth such of the principal keys and
ports of his realmc, as he prefintly cnjoyeth.

THAT he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the

great benefits done to him an;d Ilis rcalme, by the queen's
majctly of L;;larnd, but also to requite the fame with
sundry signs of ,reat uith.uiikfU!ifs, and wounding
therewith the honour of her ;majfty, and thereby hath
adventured to 'hake the h:ly ;:mi ity long time continued
betwixt those pri::ces.

AND

AND whereas there griefs were to be repaired by ecntce

lctters and good offers, to have palled, and been done be-
twixt them: In which refped, the king and council ha-
ving resolved to write to her majesty, for her highness'
better fatisfa&ion in the late negotiation ofMr. Alexander
IHume ofNorthberwick, had given order to the king's fe-
cretary to frame that letter: II minding to break the
bond of amity in funder, willed the secretary to be sure
that nothing hould be insertcd in that letter, whercby the
king hould crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby
to cut off all loving courtclics betwixt them, as by th
declaration of the laid secretary may be better learned,
and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement ofD'Aubig-

ny's protcRion, Alexasii!.r IKing p:cumed with that bold-
ne's to make his lewd harangue, and by his means hath
hitherto escaped challileilment allu currnc-ion, due for his
offencc.

THAT fir James Basrd, condemned of the slaughter

of the king's father, hath be: ;. ca'l'cd i;: the realm by
Lcnnox, without the privity of tle kiini. And whereas
the slid fir James foulnd ii a grc'. velvet idek, late the
earl of Bothwcll's, .nd saw, anl. had in his hands the
principal band of the conflpiraors i: that murder, and can
best declare and witness vwho wV:.'. authors and executors
of the fame ; he is drawn by L"nnox to fupprcs the trutl,
and to accuse 'uch as; he himtlf k:icweth to be innocent
and s by order (f law, will be b found, if they may
have due trial, which, contrary to all juiticc, is; by Len-
nox means denied.

;Tis is t charge

aai:/! './:;':nv, .:ei:tionld in te

frcroin, letter ly Iti!'f,,mn; l. ; Buford t/ey me.s fir
ja:eis Ba/ufr.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. It9. Line 25.)
The Scottilh queen's offers upon the efflt of her

liberty propounded by her ficretary Naw, No-
vember 1584.

T H E queen my miftref, bin, once v.'..! .i'.tred oftr. .:.
your ma..y's amity, ci . -

I. }brVTLL As
, kl.

1. WILL declare openly that ihe will (as it is fincerefy

her meaning) straitly tojoin unto your majesty, and to the
fame to yield and bear the chief honour and rcfpecl, be-
fore all other kings and princes in Christendom.

2. SHE will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere for-

getfuners of all wrongs which she may pretend to have
been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in any
fort or manner whatsoever, shew offence for the fame.

3. SHE will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own

particular name, as also for her heirs and others descend-
ing of her for ever, your majefy forjuf, true, and law-
fiu queen of England.

4. AND consequently, will renounce, as well for herself,

as for her said heirs, all rights and pretences which he
may claim to the crown of England, during your majefiy's
life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all aas and thews, by her hereto-

fore made, of pretence to this aid crown to the prejudice
of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms and
Rile of queen of England, by the commandment of king
Francis her late lord and husband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for Co much as

may be expounded to turn in her favour, or for her be-
hoof, touching the deprivation of your majesty, and will
declare that he will never help and serve herself with
it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majesty's life,

by open force or otherways, any publick declaration of
her right in the fucceflion of this realm, so as secret affur-
ance be given unto her, or at the leaf publick promise,
that no deciding thereof shall be made in the prejudice of
her, or of the king her on, during your majefRy's life,
nor after your decease, until such time as they have been
heard thereupon, in publick, free, and general afiembly
of the parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not practice, directly or indirectly, with

any of your majesty's fubjets, neither within nor out of
your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or foreign,
againt your majesty and your estate, be it under pretext
of religion, or for civil and politick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your sub-

jeas declared rebels, and conviited of treason against
you.

so. SH

to. SEu will enter into the aflociation, which was

shewed her at Wingfield for the surety of your majc-
sty's life, so as there be mended or right expricated some
clauses, which I will ihew to your majesty, when I shall
have the copy thereof, as I have before time required.

1. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war or trouble against this ltate, and will renounce,
from this time, all enterprises made or to be made in her
favour for that refpea.

12. FURTHERMORE, this realm being aflailed by any

civil or foreign war, he will take part with your majesty,
and will aflilt you in your defence with all her forces and
means, depending of herself and with all her friends of
Christendom.

I3. AND to that effe&, for the mutual defence and

maintenance of your majefly, and the two realms of this
isle, (he will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
five, as shall be more particularly adviscd, ani will per-
fwade as much as in her, the king her son to do the like.

The leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and

especially the antient league between France and Scotland,
in that which hall not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offensive, having good

assurance, or secret declaration and acknowledgement of
her right in the fucceflion of this crown, and promise,
that happening any breach betwixt France and this realm,
(which ihe prayeth God never to happen) the just value
of her dowry hall be placed for her in lands of the revenue
of the crown.

15. FOR assurance of her promises and covenants, he

doth offer to abide hcr'clf in this realm for a certain time,
(better hofage can he not give than her own person)
which, so as the be kept in the liberty here before pro-
pounded, is not in cale to escape secretly out of this coun-
try, in the sickly state he is in, and with the good order
which your majesty can take therein.

6. AND in cafe your majesty do agree to her full and

whole deliverance, to rtire herself at her will out of this
realm, the sisid queen of Scots she will give sufficient hof-
t lge for such time as will be advised.

17. IF he abide in this realm, fle will promise not to

cepart out of it, without your li ence, o as it be pro-
niiled unro her tlhat her slate, in such liberty as (hall be
acocrdcJ unto her, hall not be in any fort altccd, untill

VOL. II. 11 h after

after tryall to have attempted against your life, or other
trouble of your estate.

18. IF the go into Scotland, ihe will promise to alter

nothing there in the religion which is now used there, the
being suffered to have free exercise of hers, for her and
her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France; and
further, to pull out every root of new division between
the fubjeds, that none of the ubjeas of Scotland {hall
be sifted for his confciencc, nor constrained to go to the
service of the contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences

done against her in Seotland, and things shall remain there
as they are at this present, for the refpet, saving that which
hath been done against her honour, which he meaneth to
have revoked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a ure and general recon-

ciliation between the nobility of the country, and to cause
to be appointed about the king her son, and in his coun-
cil, such as (hall be fit for the entertainment of the peace
and quiet of the country, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her bcft to content your majesty, in

favour of the Scots lords banihed and refuged hither,
upon their due fubmiflion to their princes, and your ma-
jefty's p:onife to aflift the laid queen and king of Scotland
againls them, if they happen to fall into their former
faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her
son, with the advice and good council of your majesty.

23. As he will pals nothing without the king her son,

so doth she desire that he intervene conjointly with her in
this treaty, for the greater and perfeaer aflurance there-
of; for otherwise any thing can hardly be etablifhed to
be found and c,!ntinue.

24. THE said Scotch qt!een trufteth, that the French

k;n,., her go)d brother, according to the good affection
which hl hth ailways fhevwcd h:r, anti hath been :ifrcfl
trtlifi.d unto me by Monfr, de MLaniliilere for this liil
treaty, will very willingly intcrvcic, and will :Jilt 1 :
for the surety ot her prolifcs.

25. AN D so wi!l he princes of the hti c. I:' Lrrain.

following the will ol te i id king, will b:nl n hc1l. ; .
thcreu n to

,6. FORa othr kin;:. a;nd princes *(i Ch!i cn:nrn, ]:.'
will aily to otain t!,. iilc of thellc, If tr -t i:::'. :' ,

lemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
vaceflary.

27. SH doth delire a rpeedy answer, and final conclu.

lion of the premies, to the end to meet in time with al
inconveniencies.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to frengthen the

said treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, She
defireth that demonfration be made of some releafement
of her captivity.

Objetions against the Scottish queen, under fe-
cretary Walsinghame's hand, November, 1584.

H E queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill
afited to her majey, and therefore it cannot be but
that her liberty hould bring peril unto her majesty.

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and

other ill-affeeted fuhjeds, and greatly advance the opi-
nion had of her title as fucceflor.

THAT as long as he thall be continued in her ma-

jct's poiefion, the may serve as it were a gage of her
majety's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the dan-
ger (he may be thrown into, in cafe any thing Mhould be
done in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in the of-
fence of her majesty.

What course were fit to be taken
November with the queen of Scots, either to

i584' be enlarged or not.

H E course to be taken with the aid queen may be Cot. Lib,
confidered of in three degrees ; either, Cal.

1. To continue her under custody in that Rate she
now is.

a. To restrain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
1. TOUCHING the firlt, to continue her under custody

in that fate (he now is; it is to be confidered, that the
pritces that favour that queen, upon the complaint the
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commirera-
tion towards her, and promitf to do their endeavour for
her liberty, for which purpose, her niiniftcrs follicit them
daily.h AN

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, {he ac-

quainteth them with her offers made to her majesty, which
appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable for her
majesty, so as the refusal and rejeting giveth her friends
and favourers cause to think her hardly dealt withal, and
therefore may, with the better ground and reason, attempt
fomcwhat for the setting of her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refufa!,

finding her cafe desperate, will continue her practice under
hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her de-
livery, but to attain to the present poffefion of this crown
upon her pretended title, as he hath hitherto done, as
appeareth, and is most manifcft by letters and plots inter-
cepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland,
which hath proceeded altogether by her direction, where-
by a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majesty's
enemies, o as it appeareth that this manner of keeping
her, with such number of persons as he now hath, and
with liberty to write and receive letters, (being duly con-
fidered) is offensive to theprirces, the said queen's friends;
rather chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and sub-
jed to all such practices as may peril her majefy's per-
son or slate, without any provision for her majefly's fafc-
ty, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. TOUCHING the second, to restrain her in a more
firaighter degree of the liberty she hath hitherto enjoyed.

IT may at first fight, be thought a remedy very apt to

flop the course of the dangerous prasices fofRered here-
tofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy might prove
very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort
devoted to her majefly, as few years past it did; and if the
king of that realm were not likely, as well for the release
of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pre-
tended titles, to attempt somewhat against this realm and
her majefly, wherein he hould neither lack foreign at-
fiftance, nor a party here within this realm: But the
king and that realm handing affeced as they do, this re-
ithaint, inftad of remedying, is likely to bleed thele in-
conveniencies following

FIRsT, It will increase the offence both in him, and in

the reft of the princes her friends that mifliked of her re
lfraint.

S£co';D-

SECONDLY, It will give them jult cause to take some
way of redress.

LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke

some desperate ill difpoled perfin, all hope of her liberty
removed, to attempt somewhat against her majcfty's own
person, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which
inconvenicncy being duly confidcrcd, it will appear mani-
fefily, that the refiraint, in a ftaighter dgrce, is likely
to prove a remedy subjea to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said

queen at liberty, miniflreth some caufc of doubt, touching
the manner of the liberty, in what ort the fame is t be
performed, whether to be continted here wi:hin the realm,
or to be rRfored into her own countiy.

Bur firfi, this proposition, before the particularities be
weighed, is to be confidered in generalitv.

FoR it is very hard lor a well affected Iu'jeA, tha' ten-

dreth hermajAIfy's furcty, and weig'tthl ci:her the nature
of the Scottifhi queen, being inclined o a;bitio:i and
revenge, or her former a.tionis, what praAices he hath
set on foot molf dangerous for her majefly and this realm,
to allow of her liberty, b'ing? not made acquaintel with
such causes, as time. hath wrought, to make- it less peri-
lous than it ha:h been, nor with such cautions as m.v, in
some fort, be devised to prevent both her ambition and
malice; and therefo:e to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidercJ, that tle danger that was in the

mother, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth
the fame title fle doth: Such as do ac.t her, both at
home and abroad, do lT;,fL him; (and he is the mo:e
dangerous for that ie is unmarried, which may rea:ly
advanice his fortune; nll ih.it he is a man, whrrebyv h.s
may enter into aioun in his own prlboi) wvhcie ith i, r-
itrained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now al;oe-
ther at his devotion, ;ind the lrl ty affeefted to this crown
abased i so as the m.ttr dul? conlidered, neith r her li-
Ibrty lor rftraint d,tli reatly alter the cf. for perils to-
wards her mnjely, unlcls hy luchi proiiif.s as mav b- mad-:
by way of treaty with her, tc ,!angcr likely to grow from
the king her son to be prov id for.

BUT in this behalf it m. he ohbierd, that Co Il n as

the mother remains in her nicefty's h;.n is, the king will
attempt nothin fotr tlar o his mothc;'s peril.

H h 3 To

To this objection it may be answered, firLt, That they

hope that h r majety, being a prince of justice, and in-
clined to mercy, will not punish the mother for the son's
off, ne, unless he ihall be found, by good proof, culpable.
Secondarily, That men will not be over-hafty. confider-
ing in what predicament the king standeth touching his
ex e'tai n of this crown, to advise any thing that in
t!. e future may be dangerous to the giver of such coun-
cil as mav reach to his mother's peril.

AND l.IRly, the taking away of his mother, he being

ftrng in the field through both foreign afiftance, and a
party here within the realm, will appear so weak a reme-
dy, ( . hich may rather exasperate both him, and her par-
ty, to proceed with more courage and heat to revenge, if
any uch hard measure should be offered unto her) as they
will suppose for the reason above specified, that no such
extremity will be used.

IT may aso be objected, that the setting of her at li-

berty will great'y encourage the papifis both at home and
abroad; but htrein, if the provision be duly confidered,
that may be made by parliament both here and there, they
ha'l rther find caute of discomfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that

wis in tht mother appearing most manifefily to be seen
in the f.n accompanied with more danger, with due con-
fide; ation had also of such remedies as may be provided for
the prev nting of the dangers, that her liberty may mi-
r.iier jult cause to doubt of; there will be good cause of
hope found, that the fame will rather breedbenefit than
perils.

Now it refleth, in what fort the aid liberty (hall be

perfolmel; if it hall be thought meet the hiall be con-
tinued within the realm with ome limitation, epecially
in that place where ihe now refideth, the country round
about bcing so infected in religion as it is, it is greatly to
be doubted that will very much encreafe the corruption,
and falling away in that behalf. Besides he hould have
cornmidiry, with much more cafe, and peed, to entertain
praittes within this realm, than by being in her own
country.

I' abroad fieely without limitation either in Scotland

or I[rance, then ihall her majesty lore the gages of her
faftty, then hall he be at hand to give advice in further-

ancc

ance of such pratices, as have been laid for to fir trouble
in this realm, wherein Ihe hath been a principal party.

Foa the firt, it is answered before, that the refpe of

any perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort refrain
her son. For the other, if it be confidered what harm
her advice will work unto herself, in refpe& of the vio-
lation of the treaty, and the provision that may be made
in parliament here, it is to be thought, that Ihe will then
be well advised, before he attempt any such matter, which
now he may do without perill. Besides such princes, as
have interposed their faith and promise for her, cannot
with honour assist her, wherein the French King will not
be found very forward, who, in most friendly fort hath
lately rejecRed all such requefRs, propounded either by
her, or her sion's miniflers, that might any way offend
her majeRy. And so to conclude, feeing the cause of her
grief hall be taken away; the French king gratified,
who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that, by any
Spanish practice, he ihould be drawn to violate her faith,
that the reft of the princes shall have no just cause of of.
fence, but rather to think honourably of her majesty con-
fidering the Scottilh queen's carriage towards her, which
hath deserved no way any such favour; the noblemen of
Scotland hall be restored, who will be a good fay of
such councells as may tend to the troubling of this realm,
especially having so good a ground of warrant as the par-
liament to fland unto; the charges and perills which her
pracices might have bred to this realm hall be avoided;
and lastly, the hope of the papiits hall be taken away, by
filch good provisions, as in both the realms may be made,
whereby the perils that might fall into her majesty's own
person, (a matter of all others to be weighed) hall be
avoided, when by the change that may grow by any such
wicked and ungodly pracice, they hall fee their cafe no
way relieved in point of religion.
Rcafons to induce her majefy to proceed in the

treaty under Secretary Walsinghame's hand.

HA T such plots as have of late years been devised Catt. Lib.
(tending to the riling of trouble within hii realm) Calg. c *S

have grown from the Scots queen's ministers, and favour-
ers, not without her allowance and fecking: Or,

Hh 4 THAT

THAT the means ued by the aid ministers, to induce

princes to give ear to the said plots, is principally ground-
ed upon some commiseration had of their restraint.

THAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put

in execution, hath proceeded, for that the aid princes
have, for the most part, been entertained with home and
domeflick troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their

realms begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempt-
ed in her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be

attempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort,
to the perill of her majesty.

THAT for the preservation thereof, it shall be conve-

nient for her majesty to proceed to the finishing of the
treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the said
queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 149. 1. 27.)

A letter from Sir Amias Pawlet.

SIR,

.i in.Ca!. I Did forbear, according to your diretion signified in
C' s j your letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed to

the execution of the contents of Mr. Waades letters un-
to you, for the dispersing of this lady's unneceflary ser-
vants, and for the seasing of her money, wherein I was
bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (although in
vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th of
thi inlLint, which I doubt not are with you before this
tirre; but upon the receipt of your letters of the th
which c. me not unto my hands untill the 8th in the even-
ing, by rcafon as did appear by indorfement, that they
had been mi;ltken, and were Tent back to Windsor, after
they were entered into the way towards me, I confider-
ed, that being accompanied only with nry own servants, it
might be thought that they would b intreated to fay as I
would command them, and therefore I thought gooJ,
for my better difchargc in these money matters, to crave
the aillance of Mr. Rich.lrd IB.gott, who repairing un-
to me the next moriiing, we had acceis to this queen,
whom we four,,l in her bed, troubled after the old man-

ns'ic

her with a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide
of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her
hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her
former praAifes, doubting left the would persist therein
by corrupting underhand ome had members of this slate,
I was exprefly commanded to take her money into my
hands, and to reft answerable for it, when it fiall be re-
quired; advising her to deliver the aid money unto me
with quietnets. After many denials, many exclamations,
and man irter words againfi you, (I fay nothing of her
railling a',inti myself) with flat affirmation that her majesty
might have her body, but her heart she should reer have,
refusing to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my ser-
vants, and sent for barrs to break open the door, where-
upon (he yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I
found there in the coffers, mentioned in Mr. Waade's re-
membrance, five rolls of canv,,s, containing five thousand
French crowns, and two leather bag<, whereof the one
had, in gold, one hundred and four pounds two Ihiflings,
and the other had three pounds in silver, which bag of fil-
ver was left with her, affirming that fie had no more mo-
ney in this house, and that the was indebted to her ser-
vants for their wages. Mr. Waades note maketh men- cmre can
tionof3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, tell yo, the
he was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the tcfti- trtth of thi
monies and oaths of diverse persons, as alTo by probable natter.
conjecRures; so as in truth we found only two rolls, every
of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this
queen's guifte to Curie's wife at her marriaze. There is
found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by
estimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one
bag nine hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred
fourscore and fix pounds eighteen flillin s. All the forc-
said parcells of money are bellowed in bags, and `calcd
by Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of
Naw's money, which I reserve in my h:inds, for the ule
of this houihold, and may be repayed at London, where
her majesty Ihall appoint, out of the money, received
lately bty one of my servants, out of the Exchequer. I
fearci left the people might have disperscd this money in
all this time, or have hidden te fame i rome fccrct cor-
nets, for doubt whereof, I h id caused all this queen's fa-
mily, from the highest to the loweid, to e uarded in
the several places where I found them, so as fs I had not

found

found the money, with quietness, I had been forced to
have searched rft all their lodgings, and then their own
persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a fingu-
lar blessing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a
contrary success might have moved some hard conceits in
her majesty.

TOUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I

trust I have done so much, as may suffice to satisfy her ma-
jefty for the time, wherein I could not take any absolute
course, until I heard again from you, partly because her
majesty, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to your confi-
deration to return such as hall be discharged to their feve.
ral dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you
have forgotten to deliver your opinion; partly, for that as
yet, I have received no answer from you, of your resolution,
upon the view of the Scottish family ent unto you, what
persons you will appoint to be difmift; only this I have
done, I have bestowed all such, as are mentioned in this
bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame
may uffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink
hall be brought unto them by my servants. It may please
you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what fort,
and for what course, I hall make their passports, as also,
if they hall fay that they are unpaid of their wages, what

This aiy I hall do therein. Yt is said that they have been ac-
S) eso. customed to be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the
my t pre- whole year. Her majesty's charge will be omewhat di-
sent in the mini(hed by the departure of this people, and my charge
Frbca by this occafon, will be the more afy. But the persons,
da's hands. all save Baftian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there

was no great cause to fear their praaices, and upon this
ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all
this difmiled train lhould have followed their miRfrefs,
until the next remove, and there to have been discharged
upon the rudden, for doubt that the said remove might be
delayed, yf The did fear, or expect any hard measure.

O'rER s shall excuse their foolish pity as they may; but

for my part, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, yf
in any thing that I have said, written or done, I have
had any other refpct than the furtherance of hier ma-
jely's service; and so I hall most earnestly pray you to as-
firm for me, as likewise for the not seaing of the moncy
by Mr. Manners, the other commiflioncrs and mylelf. I
trust Mr. Waadc hath anwcrcd, in all humble duties, for

the

the whole company, that no one of us did so much as
think that our commission reaching only to the papers, we
might be bold to touch the money. to as there was no
speech of that all to my knowltkde, a d as you know I
was no commissioner in this learch, but had my hands full
at Tyxhall, discreet servants are not hafiiy to deal in great
matters, without warrant, and especially where the cause
is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

Youa advertisement of that happy remove hath been

greatly comfortable unto me. I will not fay, in refpet
of myself, because my private interest hath no measure of
comparison with her majefly's safety, and with the quiet
of this realm. God grant a happy and speedy yffue to
these good and godly councels; and so I commit you to
his merciful protetion. From Chartley the oth of Sep-
tember 586.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 174. line 25.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury

and Kent, &c. touching their proceedings with
regard to the death of the cocttifh queen, to
her majesty's council.

T may please your honble good lordihips to be adver-
tifed, that, on Saturday the 4th of this pr*fcnt, I Ro-

bert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in the
county of- to whom your lordships letter and menage
was delivered, and her majefy's commiflion (hewn; where-
upon the earl forthwith lent precepts for the laying of
such hues and crie° as had troubled the country, requiring
the officers to make stay of all such persons, as hould
bring any such warrants without names, as before had
been done, and to bring them to the nextjuftice of peace,
to the intent that upon their examination, the occasion
and causes of such editious bruites might be bolted out
and known. It was alto resolved that I the said earl of
Kent hould on the Monday following, come to Lylford
to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer with
my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert
Beale came to Fotheringav, where after the communicat-
ing the commiffon, &c. unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir
Druc Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-

covered

covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrew(bury.
being then at Orton, fix miles of; it was thought good
that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale lhould go unto
him, which we did on - morning ; and together with
the delivery of her majesty's commilfion, and your lord-
hip's letter imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent
and we thought meet to be done in the caufc, praying
his lordship hither the day following, to confer with me
the said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordhip
promised. And for the better colouring of the matter,
the aid earl of Shrewsbury fentto Mr. Beale, a jutice of
peace of the coun.y of Huntingdon next adjoining, to
whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale
had under your lordships hands, for the flaying of the
hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to
the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the julRices
of peace of Huntingdonshire, and to cause the pursuers
and bringers of such warrants to be tfayed, and brought
to the next justice of peace; and to bring us word to So-
theringay cafile on 1Wednesday morning what he had done,
and what he should in the mean time underhand of the
authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir A-
mias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town,
and other places adjoining. The fame night, the sheriss
of the county of Northampton upon the receit of your
lordhip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were ent
to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrew(bury's in-
tention and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other
letters were also ent with their lordships assent to fir
Edward Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Bru-
denell, &c. to be here on Wedneldiy by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time it was thought meet
that the execution (hould be. So upon Tuefdav, we the
earls came hither, where the heriff met us; and upon
conference between us it was rcfolved, that the care for
the fending for the surgeons, and other necefTary provision
should be committed unto himagainft the time. And we
forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the presence of
herfelfand her folks, to the intent that they might fee
and report hereafter that (he was not othcrwise proceeded
with than according to law, and the form of the flatut3
made in the27thycarof her majety's reign, it was thought
convenient that her mjefty's commislion hould be real
unto her, and afterwards he was by sundry fpeechcs

willed

willed to prepare herself against the next morning. She
was alol put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable
manner of proceeding with her, and the ncccflity that was
impoled upon her majelty to proceed to execution, for
that otherwilc it was found that they could not both find
rogether; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his
being here new contpiracys were attempted, and io would
be still; wherefore since he had now a good while since
warning, by the said lord and Robert Bealc, to think up-
on and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but th.tt
he was, before this, fettled, and thctefore would accept
this melFage in good part. And to the efFtct thit no chri-
fiian duty might be faidi to be omitted, that might be for
her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that
it' it would please her to confer with the bishop and deac
of Peterborough, {he might; which Jean, we had, for that
purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
place. Hereto he replied, crofling herself in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, flying that she
was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, wh:ch her
anceltors had profelled, from which flie would not be re-
moved. And albeit we used many persuasions to the cn-
trary, yet we prevailed nothint; and ther=fore, when
she demanded the admittance of her pricft, we utterly de-
nwed that unto her. ereupon, th: deanded to under-
ihand what answer we had toucn hr frmer ptition to
her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and the
bestowing of her body. To the firi we had none other
answer to make, but that we thought if they were not
sent before, the fime might b in MNr. Waade's custody,
who was now in France, and feeing ther papers could not
any wile plealure her mi jcltv, e douted not but that the
fame woul J be delivered unto fulch as h. should appoint.
For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thn;iht that her
majesty would not make any profit of her tings, and
thertcf e (in our opinions) file mighlt t down wat; file
w,,uid have done, and the famn thi;hul, be impaitcl un:,
her mijelt , o( whom both she and others might cxpect
all cnirtcf. 'l'ouching her I'o!y, wve ncw n,:t hr ma-
jeitv's .lcanltir, and thcrcfoic ciUld ncithlcr Cv that her p-c
titiin thmoll be d'ny'cd, or grinted. Fur the priatic cos
Il titiigton, Iheuttc lv ,Idcn'c, it, auld would have in.er: cit it,
thl,t hel Jdetih w.i for h,r rligion; w;.iuit, it wV.; ft-

1%<» ~ ~ ~ s )

loons by us replied, that for many years e was not
touched for religion, nor lbould have been now, but
that this proceeding against her was for treafn, in that
the was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for dtroying
her majesty's person; which the again denied, adding fur-
ther, that albeit he for herself forgave them that were the
procurers of her death, yet hbe doubted not but that God
would take vengeance thereof. And being charged with
the depositions of Naue and Curie to prove it against her,
she replied, that The accused none, but that bereafter when
fie hall be dead, and they remain alive, it (hall be seen
how indifferently she had been dealt with, and what mea-
sure had been used unto her; and aked whether it had
been heard before this, that ervants had been praaifed
to accuse their mistress, and hereupon alto required what
was become of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the

commiflion, that the charge of her was in the disposition
of us the earls, we required S- Amias Paulet and S. Drue
D)rurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
had before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers to
watch that night, and that her folks should be put up, and
take order that only four of them flould be at the execu-
tion, remaining aloof of and guarded with certain persons
lo as they should not come near unto her, which were
M.clvil her steward, the physician, surgeon, and apothe-
cary.

WEDN.ESDA Y morning, after that we the earls were re-

paircd unto the castle, and the heriff had prepared all
thigs in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place
w.he:re were present, we which have signed this letter, Mr.
Hlenry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt. his foa
,n.I heir apparent, and William Montague his brother.
1ir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas Brudcnel, Mr.
Ucuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingcfield, Mr. oarrtft,
and Rayncr, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Pcterbo-
rough, and others.

AT t ftairfold, fhc paused to speak to Melvil in our

hearin, which was to this effect, ,s Melvil, as thou has
been an honett li.rviant t me, to I pray thee continue to
my Ibn, anJ commend me unto him. I have not impugn'd
his religion, nor the rc:igioin of ,others, but wish him well.
And as I forgive al th.t have offended me in Scotland, so

I would
7

I would that he hould also; and beseech God, that he
would fend him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Mel-
vil's answer was, that he would so do, and at that infant
he would beseech God to affit him with his spirit. Then
ihe demanded to speak with her priest, which was denied
unto her, the rather for that he came with a superstitious
pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnef request,
and aying that when other gentlewomen were executed,
Ihe had read in chronicles that they had women allowed
unto them, it was permitted that he hould have two nam-
ed by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After
fle came to the scaffold, sirs, in pretence of them all, her
majestie's commiflion was openly read; and afterwards
Mr. Dean ofPeterborough, according to a direEtion which
he had received, the night before, from us the earls, wou'd
have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But at
the first entry, he utterly refuted it, faying that she was
catholique, and that it were a folly to move her, being
so resolutely minded, and that our prayers would little
avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it might appear that
we, and the whole afrembly, had a chriflian desire to have
her die well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr. Dean, was
read and pronounced by us all. "1 'hat it would picafe Al-
mighty God to fend her his holy pirit and grace, and al-
so, if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of
his mercy to receive her into his heavenly and cvcrlafting
kingdom, and finally to bless her majesty, and confound
alt her enemies;" whereof Mr. Dcan, minding to repair
up (hortly, can hew your lordships a copy.

THIS done, he pronounced a prayer upon her knccs

to this eff':, " to bcfeech God to fend her his holy
spirit, and that {he trusted to receive her alvation in his
blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdo:n,
besought God to forgive her enemies, as he forgave
them, and to turn his wrath from tis land, to blels the
queen's majeftie, that he might f-rve him. Likewise to be
nimrciful to her on, to have compalTcln of his church, ad
altho' he was not worthy to be heard, yet ie had a con-
fidencc in his mercy, and praycl all tiie tainits, to pray
unto her Saviour to receive her." As;ei tils (turning to-
wards her servants) h duficJ them t p y for her, that

her

her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made
by the executioners, he pardoned them; and said, he
was glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near. Then
she mifliked the whinning andweeping of her women, fay-
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her refolu-
tion, and k:sing tilem, willed them to depart from the
fcaffo:d, and farewell. Ad so resolutely kneeled down,
and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down
her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her
fcrvan:s were incontinently removed, and order taken that
none fould approach unto her corps, but that it lhould
be embalned by the surgeon appointed. And further her
crofte, apparell, and other things are retained here, and
not vielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that
might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such
as sent him hither.

T iIS hath been the manner of our dealings in this

service, whereof we have thought good to advertise your
lordships, as particularly as we could, !br the time, and
further have thought good to signify unto your lordships
beiides, that for the avoiding of all sinister and slanderous
reports that may be raised to the contrary, we have caused
a note thereof to be concciv'd to the fame effect in writ-
ing, which we the laid lords have subscribed, with the
hands of uch othtr :here the knights and gentlemen above
named t at were prelcnr at the aion. And so beseech-
ing Almighty God king to bless her majefiy with a most
pro:perous reign, and to confound all his, and her ene-
mics, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the
tth of February i58, in haft.

Your lordfiips at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Ap-

pendix, is taken from a collection made by Mr.
Crawvfurd of Drumroy, hifloriographer to Qleen
Anne, now in the library of the faculty of Advo-
ca:cs Mr. Crawfiuld's transcriber has omitted t,
mrn'i :on the book in te Cott. Lib, where it is to be
found.

No. XIX.

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. 180. line 4.]
The objeAions against Mr. Davison, in the cause

of the late Scottilh queen, mut concern things
done either, . Before her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that session. . After the fame.

.nB EFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can becott. Lb.
B charged to have had any hand at all in the cause of Cait C.

the aid queen, or done any thing whatsoever concern-
ing the fame, direaly or indirely.

2. DURING that efilon, he remained at court, where

the only intereit he had therein, was as her majesty's fe-
cretary, to receive the letters from the commifioners, im-
part them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commiflion-
ers, it is well known to all her council,

1. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting

whatsoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause
of the said queen, till the fending down of her majesty's
warrant unto the commiflioners, by the lords and others
of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence, pal.
fed against her.

3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation

publishing the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any
other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the fame*
And,

THAT the only thing, which can be specially and truly

Imputed to him, is the carrying up the aid warrant unto
her majeRty to be signed. She fending a great counsellor
unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it
to the great tal of England, by her own special diredio
and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident#
i. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trea-

furer, was delivered by him unto Mr. Daviron, with her
mnajefty's own privily, to be ready for to sign, when 1hak.
should be plcafed to call for it.

VOL. 1. Ii A. THA.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the least

five or fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry
it up, till he sent a great counsellor unto him for the fame,
and was harply reproved therefore by a great peer, in her
majesty's own presence.

3. THAT having signed it, he gave him an exprefa

commandment to carry it to the eal, and being fealed to
fend it immediately away unto the commillioners, ac-
cording to the direcion. Herself appointing the hall of
Fotheringay for the place of execution, milliking the
court-yard, in divers refpeets, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her
hear any more hereof, 'till it was done. She for her part,
having (as he said) performed all that, in law or reason,
could be required of her.

4. WHICH direaions notwithltanding, he kept the

warrant fealed all that night, and the greatest part of the
next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majesty withal, and finding her
majefly resolved to proceed therein, according to her for-
mer directions, and yet desirous to carry the matter so, as
the might throw the burden from herself, he absolutely
resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's

chamber, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton,
and in his presence refiored the fame into the hands of
the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received
it, who from henceforth kept it, till himself and the reft
of the council sent it away.

WHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and in-

terest the said Daviron had in this cause, whatsoever is, or
may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the com-

milioners, that it was the general at of her majesty's
council (as is before mentioned) and not any private act
of his, may appear by,

I. THEIR own confefRion. 2. Their own letters sent

down therewith to the commifloners. 3. The tefiimonics
of the lords and others to whom they were directed. As
also, 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The
tenor of her majesty's firll commilfion for their calling to
ihe fiar-chamber for the fame, and private appearance and
fubmifion afterward inftcad thereof, before the lord chan-

cellor

tellor Broomley. 6. The confedlion of Mr. Attorney-
general, in open court confirmed. 7. By the sentence it-
lelf upon record. 8. Besides a common at of council,
containing an anwer to be verbally delivered to the Scot-
tifh ambaitador then remaining here, avowing and justify.
ing the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given rome extra-

ordinary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evident-
ly appear by,

I. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of as-

fociation, being earnetly prefced thereunto by her mae-
fly's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a com-

miflloner, in the examination of Babington and his com-
plices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a meanto ltay the commiifioners from pro-

nouncing of the sentence at otheringay, and deferring it
till they should return to her majelty'b presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks un-

prelented, without once offering to carry it up, till her
majesty ent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was fealed un-

to the commissioners, as he was specially commanded,
flaying it all that night, and the greatest part of the next
day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of

the lord treasurer, of whom he had before received the
fame.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the aid Da-

vifon did nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary to
the duty of the place he then held in her majesty's ser.
vice.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS eems to be an original. On the back is this title,

THE innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late
Scottiih queen.

li 2 No. XX.

No. XX. [Vol II. . 280. line 27.]
Letter from e, Sir Robert Cecil, to his majesty

King James.

M 4 OST worthy prince, the depending dangers up.

From the M on your afiealonates have besl such, as hath in-
( riginl. forced lilencc in him, who is faithfu:ly devoted to your
Bibl. F. person, anj in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards
u. Edin of fortune, tor the maintenance of the just reg31 rights,
A. ,. orci
No. . that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is in-

velted in your royal pertbn. Fall not then, mofi noble
and renowned pnce, fom him, whole p:ovidence hath
in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an inftru-
ment of his glory, and the goed of his people. Some
fecre's, I find have been revealed to your prejudice,
which mufl proceed from some ambitious violent pirited
perion near )our maj:iy in council and favour; no man
in particular will I accule, but I am sure it hath no foun-
dation from any, with whom, for your service, I have held
corretpondence; otherwise, had, long since, been dif-
aiMled from prformaice of those duties, that the thoughts
of my he;rt endeavoureth ; being only known to th's wor-
thy n:blemnu bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of
Ch ilten'iom for his fidelity to your person and fate, and
to Mr. David Fowlis y.urmoit loyal Lervant, my firn and
fa thlul csrcl'i)ondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom
I have found in all things that concern you, mt secret
anid allured. It may, tihereiore, peaic your majefly, at
the humble motion of ', which jargon I desire to be the
ind.orimnii ot your coimands uito me, that by fime
token of yur tflvour, he may undtrlttid in what terms
you regard hi. fidcllly, fccrecy and service. My pon-
ite afetliotin tc your perfti, (not as Jou are a king, Irut
as )ou are a g(,od k.ng, and have just title, as;er my f.-
vireign, tohlc great king) doth transport me to prefump-
4iun. LC,r, idciu not, most nble pricce, the mo:ivc of
case and lovc, altl.o' mixed with dt'fiCs in judmcnt.

,. I, therefore, si.ft befceTh your mjcfty that for

the gocd of tholt whom God, by divine Providence,
hath dltined to your charge, that you will bc pleased to

have
3

have an extraordinary care of all praficers or pratices,
against your person; for it is not to be doubted, but that
in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, fation, or fear,
there arc many that defite to have their sovereign in mino-
rity, whereby the sovereignty and slate might be swayed
by partiality of subalternate persons, r.:ther than t y true
rule of power and justice. Pre'erve your person, and
fear not the praaices of man upon he point of your right,
which will be p:efervcd and maintained ;igainft all alults
of competition whatever. Thus 1 leave the protection of
your prfun, and royal posterity, to the A!mivhty God of
Heaven, who biefs and preserve you and all yuurs, in all
rcgal happinefb to his lory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person. is the

convertation End L:cret keeping of )our c(uncells, which,
as I have said, are often betrayed and ii`covered, either
out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faction, or
base conception, the which your maj :(ty is to regard with
all circumfpction, as a matter mtll dangerous to your
person and Itate, and the only means to ruin and defiroy
all those, that stand faithfully devoted to your majcfty's
service. Some particulars, ad perlons of this nature, I
make nodoubt have been discovered by the endeavours of
this nobleman, the bearer hreof, of whom your majelty
mav be further informed.

3. THE 3d point considerable is that your majcfty, by

all means possible, secure you:felf of the good affStion
of the French king and States, by the negotiation of fbme
faithful secret confident; the French naturally diftafling
the union of the British islands under one monarch. In
Germany, I doubt not, but you have many allies and
friends, but by reason of their remote fate, they do not
so much importe this affair, which must be guided by a
quick and sudden motion.

4. WHIENz God, by whoe Providence, the period of

all pcrlons and times is determined, hall cali to his king-
dom of glory her majcfty, (although I do afijredly hpe
that there will not be any quctlion in compe:iti n, yet
f r that I hold it not fitting to i e any minute entrance
jlto a cauie of so high a nt.re) do humbly befcech your
m;ijefty to design a ecret, faithful, and expericnced con-
sident servant of yours, being of an approved fidelity and
judgment, continually to be he e rcfident, whose negotia.
tion, it were convenient your majesty &fould furtifie, with

'1 i 3 such

such secret trust and powers, as there may not need 4
days respite, to pot for authority, in a caule, that cannot
endure o hours respite, without varieties ofdanger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend
least good to your eftablilhment, will not in publick op-
pung your title, but out of their cunning ambition will
seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of common
go d to the state, in propounding of good conditions for
di(bulthening the common weale, of divers hard laws,
heavy impositions, corruptions, opprellions, &c. which is
a main point to lead the popular, who are much disguised
with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
convnienr, that these motives, out of your majesty's pro-
vidence, hould be prevented, by your free offer in these
points following, viz.

1. THAT your majefly would be pleated to aboliih pur-

vaiors and purvaiance, being a matter infinitely offensive
to the common people, and the whole kingdom, and not
profitable to the prince.

2. THAT your majelty would be pleased to diflolve the

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and an-
cient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil
education of their children, by which no revenue of the
crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, ge.

nerally repined against by the subjea, in regard of their
uncertainty, being many times altered from their true
meaning by variety of interpretations.

4. THAT your majesty will be pleased to admit free

outport of the native commodities of this kingdom, now
often refrained by subalternate persons for private profit,
being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants,
and a plain defiruaion to the true indufiry and manufac-
ture of all kingdoms, and against the profit of the crown,

THESE, being by your majesty's confidentsin the point

of time propounded, will afliuredly confirm unto your ma-
jefie the hearts and affeaions of the whole kingdom, and
absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designed
patriots, that, out of pretext of common good, would
seek to patronize thcmselves in popular opinion and pow-
er, and thereby to derogate from your majesty's bounty
and free favour, by plincely merit of your moderation,
judgment, andjuftice,

YOUR

YOUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the ubjed,

will no way impeach the profits of the crown bt advance
them. The difproportionable gain of ome chequer offi-
cers, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle un-
neceflary clerks and attendants, will only fuff-r fime de-
tirment; but infinite will be the good unto the kingdom,
which will confirm unto your majesty the universal love
and affetion of the people, and efiablilh your renown
in the highest esteem to all poferity.

THE Lord preserve your majetic, and make you tri-
umphant over all your enemies.

MY care over his peron, whose letters pass in this pac-

quet, and will die before he leave to be yours, flall be no
less than of mine own life, and in like esteem I will hold
all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I will hold
my felfreferved from being known unto any of them, in
my particular devoted affeaions unto your majesty, only
this extraordinary worthy man, whose aociate I am in
his misfortune, doth know my heart, and we both will
pray for you, and if we live you hall find us together.

l BESEECH your majesty burn this letter, and the others;

for altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may be disco-
vered.

Your majeity's mos devoted

and humble servant,

0I
Ii 4 A CRITICAL

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

CRIT I C A L
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

The Murder of King HENRY, and the Ge-
nuinenefs of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.
IT is not my intention to engage in all the con-

troverfies, to which the murder of King Henry,

or the letters from Mary to Bothwell, have given
rife far less to appear as an adversary to any par-
ticular author, h,> hath treated of them. To re-
peat, and to expose all the ill-founded afcrtions
with regard to these points, which have flowed from
inattention, from prejudice, from partiality, from
malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no less
irksome to myfilf, than unacceptable to most of
my readers. All I propose, is to aftri others in
forming ome judgment concerning the facts in dif-
pure, by Itacing the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and
with the fame attention and impartiality, which I
have endeavoured to exercise in examining other
pontroverted points in the Scottifn history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two
Idfercnt fyftcms have been formed. The one sup.

poses

poses Bothwell to have contrived and executed this
crime. The other imputes it to the Earlsof Mur-
ray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted fa&s in his-

tory, is a matter rather of curiosity than of use.
They stand detached; and whatever we determine
with regard to them, the fabric of the Itory remains
untouched. But the fa& under di!pute in this place
is a fundamental and eflential one, and according
to the opinion which an Historian adopts with re-
gard to it, he must vary and dilpofe the whole of
his subsequent narration. An historical system may
be tried in two different ways, whether it be con-
liftent with probability, and whether it be supported
by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge theKing's murder upon Both-

well argue in the following manner; and though
their reasonings have been mentioned already in
different places of the narrative, it is neceflary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay
they, was a sudden and youthful passion. The
beauty of his person was his chief merit. His ca-
pricious temper soon raised in the Queen a disgust,
which broke out on different occasions. His en-
gaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted
this dilguft into an indignation, which he was at no
pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps, in its
own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted
that art and condefcention which alone could have
repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and
fettled hatred effaced all remains of affection. Both-
well observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found it on a scheme, which
proved fatal both to the Queen, and to himself.
He had served Mary at different times with fidelity
and luccefs. He insinuated himfelfinto her favour,
by address and by flattery. By degrees he gainedher
heart. In orderto gratify his love, or at leat his am-
t bition,

bition, it was necessary to get rid of the King.
Mary had rejected the proposal made to her for ob-
taining a divorce. The King was equally hated by
the partizans of the houe of Hamilton, a confider-
able party in the kingdom; by Murray, one of the
molt powerful and popular persons in this country;
by Morton and his aflbciates, whom he had deceiv-
ed; and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest
by a recent favour. Among the people Darnly was
fallen under extreme contempt. He expeced, for
all these reasons, that the murderof the King would
pass without any enquiry. And to Mary's love,
and to his own address and good fortune, he trusted
for the accomplishment of the ref of his wilhes.
What Bothwell expeaed really cameto pass. Mary,
if not privy herself to the dign, connived at an
action which rid her of a man whom he had such
good reason to detest. A few months after, he
married the person who was both fufpeaed and ac-
cufed of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his

party reason in this manner. Murray, they fay,
was a man of boundless ambition. Notwithftand.
ing the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's
return into Scotland, he insinuated himfelfinto her
favour, and engrossed the whole power into hisown
hands. He set himself against every propolal of
marriage which was made to her, left his own chance
of succeeding to the Crown hould be dftroyed.
He hated Darnly, and was no less hated by him.
In order to be revenged on him, he entered into a
sudden friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and
mortal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate
the crime, by giving him hopes of marrying the
Queen. All this was done with a cdefin to throw
upon the Queen herself the imputation of being ac-
cefury to t!i r.-rdcr, and under that pretext, to

dclitr-oj

destroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison her, and
to seize the sceptre which he had wrested out of her
hands.

THE former of these systems has an air of pro-

bability, is consistent with itself, and solves appear-
ances. In the latter, some afirtions are false, Iome
links are wanting in the chain, and effects appear,
of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray,
on the Queen's return into Scotland, fI-rved her with
great fidelity, and by his prudent administration ren-
dered her so popular, and lipowerful, as enabled her
with ease toqualh a formidable infurrestion raised by
himlelf intheyear 1565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, with-
out followers, without influence over the nobles,
whom the Queen, by her neglec, had reduced to
the lowest itate of contempt, and who, after a long
disgrace, had regained (according to the molt fa-
vourablefuppofition) the precarious polfeflion of her
favour only a few days before his death ? It is dif-
ficult toconceive what Murray had to fear from the
King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the
Queen had no previous attachment to Bothwell, no-
thing can appear more chimerical than a scheme to
persuade her to marry a man, whole wife was still
alive, and who was not only fufpedted, but accused,
of murdering her former husband. But that such
a scheme should really succeed is ifill more extra-
ordinary.-lf Murray had infipared Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himlelf been accessory
to the commifion of it, what hopes were there that
Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow-criminal
all the pcriecutions which he suffered, without ever
retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the
whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly
feud had subsisted between Murray and Bothwellb
the Queen with difficulty had brought them tofome

terms

terms of agreement. But is it probable that Mur-
ray would chufe an enemy, to whom he had been
so lately reconciled, for his confident in the com-
mifiion of such an atrocious crime? Or, on the
other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination
of a wife man, first to raise his rival to supreme
power, in hopes that afterwards he mhould find
fbme opportunity of depriving him of that power
The molt adventrous politician never hazarded such
a dangerous experiment. The molt credulous folly
never trusted such an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong these general reasonings may

be, we must decide according to the particular
evidence produced. This we now proceed to ex-
amine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's mur-

der appears, . From the concurring teltimony of
all the cotemporary historians. 2. From the con-
fellion of those persons who suffered for aflifting at
the commilion of the crime, and who enter into
a minute detail of all its circumstances. Anders. v.
ii. 165. 3. From the acknowledgment of Mary's
own commissioners, who allow Bothwell to have
been one of those who were guilty of this crime.
Good. v. ii. 213. 4. From the express testimony
of Lefly Bishop of Ross to the fame effect with the
former. Dcf. of Q. Mary's Hon. An. 2. 76.
Id. v. iii. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared
that Bothwell had olicited him, at different times,
to concur in the con'piracy formed again(l the lift:
of the King; and that he was informed by Archi-
bald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was preient at the murder. Crawf. Meem. App.
4. The letter from Douglas to the (Qeen, pub-
lilhed in the Appendix to vol. II. No. 12 confirms
Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herrcis promises, in
his own name, and in the name of the nobles who
a41rcd Lo the Quecn, that they wuld concur in

punifni-

punishing Bothwell as the murderer of the King,
Append. vol. I. No. 23.

THE mos direct charge ever brought against

Murray is in there words of Bilhop Lefley. " Is it
·' unknown," addressing himself to the Earl of
Murray, " what the Lord Herreis said to your face
" openly, even at your own table, a few days after
"the murder was committed ? Did he not charge
" you with the foreknowledge of the fame murder;
" did he not, nulla circuitione ufus, flatly and plain-
' ly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming
·' with one of your most assured and trulty servants
"the fame day whereon you departed from Edin-
" burgh, said to him, among other talk, This
" night ere morning Lord Darnly flall lose his
' life ?" Defence of Q. Mary, Anders. v. ii. 75.
But the assertion of a man lo heated with faction as
Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence,
is of little weight. The servant to whom Murray
is said to have poken these words, is not named;
nor the manner in which this secret conversation was
brought to light mentioned. Lord Herreis was one
of the moll zealous advocates for Mary, and it is
remarkable that, in all his negociation at the court of
England, he never once repeated this accusation of
Murray. In answering the challenge given him by
Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of
mentioning Murray's knowledge of the murder;
but though he openly accuses of that crime some of
those who adhered to him, he industriously avoids
any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith
Pref. XII. Mary, herself, in conversation with
Sir Francis Knolles, accuscd Morton and Maitland
of being privy to the murder, but does not men-
tion Murray. And. 4. 55. When the Bishop of
Ro's and Lord lierreis themselves appeared before
the Engliih council January II, 1569, they de-
clarcd themlfclvcs ready, in obedience to the Queen's

COm1-

command, to accuse Murray and his associates of
being accessory to the murder, but " they being
' allb required, whether they or any of them, as
"of themselves, would accuse the said earl in fpe-
"cial, or any of his adherents, or thought them
"guilty thereof;" they answered, " that they took
' God to witness that none of them did ever know
"any thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or
" were in council and foreknowledge thereof; nei-

ther who were devisers, inventors, and executors

"of the fame, till it was publickly discovered long
"thereafter by some of the afailins, who suffered
"death on that account." Good. v. ii. 308. These
words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and
Herreis themftlves, and seem to be a direct confu-
tation of the bishop's assertion. The bishop him-
self repeats the fame thing in still stronger terms.
And. 3. i.

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Pro-

teftation touching the murder of the King of Scots,
after mentioning the conference at Craigmillar con-
cerning a divorce, of which we have given an ac-
count vol. I. 330. add " So after theif preniffes,
' the murder of the King following, we judge in
"our consciences, and hold for certain and truth,
" that the Earl of Murray and secretary Lething-
" ton were authors, inventors, counfcllors and cau-
*' sers of the fame murder, in what manner, or by
" whatlbmever persons the fame was executed ?"
Anders. v. 4. 188. But, . This is nothing more
than the private opinion or personal affirmation of
these two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they
make has no connection with the premisses on which
they found ir. Because Murray proposed to obtain
for the Queen a divorce from her husband with her
own consent, it does not follow that therefore he
committed the murder without her knowledge,
3. Huntly and Argyll were at that time the lJcders

cf'

of that party opposite to Murray, and animated
with all the rage ot fation. 4. Both of them were
Murray's perlonal enemies. Huntly,-on account
of the treatment which his family and clan had re-
ceived from that nobleman. Argyll was desirous
of being divorced from his wife, with whom he
lived on no good terms. Knox 328. and by whom
he had no children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Mur-
ray's sifter, and by his interest he had obftru&ed that
design. Keith 551. These circumflances would go
far towards invalidating a positive testimony they
mo-e than counterbalance an indeterminate fufpi-
cion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether Huntly
and Argyll ever subscribed this protestation. A copy
of such a protestation as the Queen thought would
be of advantage to her cause, was transmitted to
them by her. Anders. v. 4. 186. Theproteltation
itfilf publilhed by Anderson is taken from an un-
subscribed copy with blanks for the date and place
of subscribing. On the book of this copy is pasted
a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer of the
" Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of
" Huntly and Argyll." Anders. 194, 195. But
it can scarce be esteemed a reply to the above-men-
tioned protestation. Murray's answer bears date at
London, January 19, 1568. The Queen's letter,
in which (he inclosed the copy of the protestation,
bears date at Bowton, Jan. 5, 1568. Now it is
scarce to be fuppoied that the copy could be lent
into Scotland, be fibfcribed by the two Earls, and
be seen and answered by Murray withn so short a
time. Murray's reply leems intended only to pre-
vent the impression which the vague and uncertain
accufatons of his enemies might make in his ab-
lence. Cecil had got the original of the Queen's
letter into his custody. Anders vol. 4. 186. This
naturally leads us to conjecture that the letter itfeltf
toecther with she inclosed protcftation, were inter

ceptcd

cepted before they came to the hands of Huntly
and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjeaure alone.
The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to befound; Cotr. Lib. Cal. C.
fol. 2o, and is an original subscribed by Mary,
though not written with her own hand, because he
seldom chore to write in the English language. The
proteation is in the fame Volume, fol. 20'2, and is
manifestly written by the fame perfin who wrote the
Queen's letter. This is a clear proof that both
were intercepted. So that much has been founded
on a paper not fublcribed by the two Earl., and
probably never seen by them. Betides, this method
which the Queen took of fending a copy to the
two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare
with regard to a conference held in their own pre-
fence, appears Iomcwhat full)cious. It would have
been more natural, and not Ib liable to any milin-
terpretation, to have dclired them to write the mIuit
exact account, which they could recollec of what
had paired in the converlation at Craigmillar.

THE (Queen's commili.oners at the Confiircncs in

England acculed Murray and his aociatis of hav-
ing murdered the King. Good. ii. 28,. Bt: thd-e
accusations are nothing more than looe and gen'e-
ral affirmations, without descending to iu::h parti-
cular circunlltances, as either acertain teir truth,
or discover their falsehood. The lame acLulation
is repeated by the nobles affcmbled at Du:nb-rton
Sept. 1568. Good. ii. 359. And the amne obfer-
vation may be made concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have cndeavo .rtd to

account for i/urrn'y's nurd'ri . t h Kilng, by
supposing that it was done o purpose, that he
might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's
adniniil ration, and thereby rendering ineffe&ual hex
gener.il Revocation of Crown lands, which would
have deprived him and his allociates of the belt parr

VOL. II. K k of

of their estates. Lesey Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a
Scottish Monarch, will fce that such a revocation
could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power
of the nobles rendered it ineffectual. The best vin-
dication of Murray and his party from this accufa-
tion, is that which they presented to the Queen of
England, and which hath never hitherto been
published.

Paper wnfwers to the objections and alledgance of the Queen,
Offic,. alledging the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the

Earl of Morton, Marr, Glencairn, Hume, Ruth-
'yet, &c. to have been moved to armour, fr that
they abhorred and might not abide her revocation
of the alienation made of her property.
IT is answered, that is alledged but all appear-

ance, and it appears God has bereft the alledgance
of all wit and good remembrance, for thir reasons
following:

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never

had occasion to grudge thereat, in respect the
Queen made him privy to the fame, and took refo-
lution with him for the execution thereof, letting
his Lordihip know Ihe would assuredly in the famine
except all things Ihe had given to him, and ratefy
them in the next parliament, as (he did indeed; and
for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind him
MaiRer John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to
whom he declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it Ihould be provided, yea of free
will did promise and offer before ever he demanded,
as it came to pals without any lett or impediment,
for all was ratified by her command, and lrInd
write, at the Parliament, but any difficulty.

I'rEM

IT , M as to my Lord of Morton. he could not

grudge thereat quha never had of her property
worth twenty dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord ume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.
ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing

of the property quilk alfua was gladly and liberally
confirmed to him, in the said parliament preceed-
ing a year; was never ane had any cause of mif-
content of that revocation, far less to have put their
lives and heritage to so open and manifest ane dan-
ger as they did for sic ane frivole cause.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and

fLow any miscontentment of the said revocation, it
was my Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha fpak
largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to the
Queen herelf, and did complain of the manifest
corruption of ane at of parliament past upon her
MajeRy's return, and fa did lett any revocation at
that time ; but the armour for revenge of the King's
deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time
there was no occasion given thereof, nor never a
man had mind thereof.

HAvING thus examined the evidence which has

been produced against the Earls of Murray and
Bothwell we shall next proceed to enquire whether
the Queen herself was accelrory to the murder of
her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known,

than strong suspicions arose, among some of her sub-
je'ts, that Mary had given her consent to the conm-
miflion of that crime. And. a. 156. We are in-
formed, by her own ambaflador in France, the Arch-
bishop of Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreign.
c s, on this head, were no less unfavourable to her.
keith, I'res. ix. Many of her nobles loudly accused

K k 2 her

her of that crime, and a great part of the nation,
by fiapporting then, fem to have allowed the ac-
cufation to be well tounde !.

SOME dimeS, however, areof such a nature, that

they carce admit of a pufitive or direct proof.
Deeds of darkness can fcldom be brought perfetly
to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Pri;:cip..s, but only of being Acceffaries to a crime;
not of having committed it themlelves, but only of
giving conlcnt to the commission of it by others;
the proof bcones still more difficult: and unless
when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof
by circumstances, or presumptive evidence, is all
thlt can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such
evidence is fometitnes held to be sufficient for con-
demning criminls. The degree of convi&ion which
such evidence carries along with it, is often not in-
ferior to that which arises from positive testimony;
and a concurring series of circumstances satisfies the
understanding no less than the express declaration of
wineffes.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been pro-

duced against Mary. We ffall first confider that
which is i;tunded upon circumstances alone.

SoI L of hefe tltpicious circumstances preceded

the Kil:g's death; others were tibfequent to it.
\¥ith regard to the former, we may oblerve that
t'-e Qyern's violent love of Darnly was soon con-
verted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill conduc&, and e:ceffcs of every kind
were futch, tha: if they did not jltify, at least they
accc:ui ftr this fudicn change of her inllifpofition to-
wards lhim. Thle rife and progress of this domellic
r,pturc, I have traced with great care in the hiLtory,
and to tle proofs of it which may be found in
papers ptihlifced by other authors, I hve added
tl:olJ con;aincl in App. N° XVI. nd XVI!. 'The
Earls of Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argcll, and

IHuntly

Huntly confidered the scheme of procuring for the
Queen a divorce from her hufoand, as one of the
molt flattering proposals they could make to her,
and employed it as the molt powerful inducement
to prevail on her to content to a me.ifure, which
they had much at Ihart, but from wh.ch they knew
her to be extrezt.cly averfi. And. 4. p. . 8.
Du Croc the French abaffador, who was an eve
witness of what he dtfcribes. not only represents her
dilguft to Darnl) to be extrcn e, but udclares tha:
there could be no hopes oi a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of phy!iial:., Dec. ri.
and I do assure you is not at all w.11; and do hc- Is66.
lieve the principal part or her dilfal; to cofii i.
deep grief and sorrow; nor :..)es it cmin polible to
make her forget ithe lam. 3: ill fle repeats thefl
words, 1 could wil to be dcLd. You know very
well that the injury she has received is exceeding
gr at, and her majesty will ncver forget it.- i-
speak my mind freely to you I do not expe_1, upon
several, accounts, any good undcrtlanding be-
tween them [i. e. the King and QCi.cn unlcfi
God effecually put to his l-.:nd.·- .l i; ;: dc- Dc.. :?.
portmnent is incurable, nor cn tere c.cer be any
good expeCed from him or several rrbn., w 'ic'
1 might tell ou was I peient with )y ,u. I cannot
pretend to tortcll how ;1 may turn, . I :;ill lay,
that matters cannot subsist lonz as thev

.rc, witiloul

being accompanied with fi;ndry bad cc:'ll'qucnes.
Keith. Plref. vii. Had i ienry died a nactu!:'.; cat!,
at this jun&ure, it mult have been conidcr. d a a
very fortunate event to the Queen, and as a albn-
able de:iv. rance from a hulband who had b :'om.e
altogetier o'ious to her. Now as ' clry \.;! nIL;r-
dered a tew w,-eks aftcrwaris, and as nithi.:': hI::
liappened to render rhe Qicen's averii: to ;,; .
violent, the opinion o tol'e who co.i.lrr ; a.:,'

;;
the autlor ot an evenr, wv.iLh was l.ila;, ;,;:. 1;,

K k 3 ;L;!te

agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to some of our
readers to be neither unnatural nor over refined. If
we add to this, what has been observed in the his-
tory, that in proportion to the increase of Mary's
hatred of her husband, Bothwell made progress in
her favour, and that he became the object not only
of her confidence but her attachment, that opi-
nion acquires new strength. It is easy to observe
many advantages which might redound to Mary as
well as to Bothwell from the King's death; but
excepting them, no person, and no party in the
kingdom could derive the least benefit from that
event. Bothwell, accordingly, murdered the King,
and it was, in that age, thought no violent impu-
tation on Mary's character, to suppose that he had
consented to the deed.

THE steps which the Queen took after her hus-

band's death add strength to that supposition.
i. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh, at the time of
the King's death, asserts that " every body fufpet-
ed the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak
freely to others, said plainly that it was He." p.
155. 2. Mary having ifued a proclamation, on
the zth of February, offering a reward to any per-
Ion, who hould discover those who had murdered
her husband; And. . 36. a paper in answer to this
was affix d to the gates of the Tolbooth, February
6, in which Bothwell was named as the chief per-
bon guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was
accuted of having given her consent to it. And. 2.
1 56. 3. Soon after, February o, the Earl of Len-
nox, the King's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring
her, by every motive, to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his
own fult)icions of Bothwell, and pointed out a me-
thod of proceeding agtinft him, and for discover-
ing the other authors of that crime, no left obvious
rtha equitable. He advised her to seize, and to

commit

commi; to sure custody Bothwcll himself, and thoie
who were already named as his accomplices; to call
an aflembly of the nobles; to iue a proclamation,
inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on
that encouragement, no person appeared to accuse
them, to hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them
without farther trial. And. . 40. 4. Archbishop
Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March 9th, employs arguments of the ut-
most weight to persuade her to prosecute the mur-
derers with the greatest severity. " I can conclude
nathing, (fay he) by quhat zour Majesty writes to
me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve
zow to make a rigorous vengeance thereof, that ra-
ther than it be not actually taine, it appears to me
better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I
afl your Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I
can heir nathing to zour prejudife, but I man con-"'4/
firaindly writ the famin, that all may come to zour
knawlege; for the better remede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth haw now rather
than ever of before, the greite vertue, magnani-
mitie, and confRance that God has grancit zow, be
quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this molt:
heavy envie and difplefir of te committing tcreof,
and conserve that reputation in all godlinl;, ze
have conquilt of lang, quhich can appear na wayis
mair clearlie, than that zow dlofick jultice that the/l,'
haill world may declare zwr innocence, nd give..'.
testimony forever of thiir trcafon that has com-
mitted (but fear of God or man) o cruel andt un- ,iti.t
godlie a murther, quhairof there is la mncik/e ill..
Ipoken, that I am conftrainit to afl zw mercy,
that neither can I or will I make the rehearlal therot,
whick is owr odious. But alas ! Madame, all vcrt.
Europe this day there is na purpole in head la fre-
quenc a of zour Majefti', and of te pre'ent slate
of zour realm, quhilk is in the molt part interp.erit

K k 4 linillcrly."

finiftRrly." Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as ap-
pears from Append. Vol. 1. No. XIX. urged the
lame thing in strong terms. 6. The circumstances
of the cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and
rmonftrances, called for the utmost vigour in her
proceedings. Her husband had been murdered in
a cruel manner, almost in hr own preence. Her
fubjeEts were filled with the uoft hc.rror at that
crime. Bothwell, one of her principal favourites,
had been publickly acculed as the author of it.
Reflections, extremely dilhonourable to herself, had
been :hrown out. If indignation, and the love of
justice, did not prompt her to purlue the murderers
with ardour, decency, at least, and concern for vin-
dicating her own charater, should have induced
her to avoid any appearance of remissness or want
of zeal.

BUT instead of thjs, Mary continued to discover,

in all her aions, the urmoft partiality towards
Bothwell. On the i ;th of February, five days after
the murder, fbe bestowed on him the reversion of
the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the
year 1565 fle had mortgaged to the citizens of
Edinburgh. This grant was of much importance,
as it gave him not only the command of the prin-
cipal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely
lefirous of keeping pofleffion of it . 2. Bothwcll

being

* Cty from the original in tbe Charter-LurLft f the city of Edin-
*:trgt of aai .jigt.ntisn to the reetrJen of bhe Jperioity of
Ltitb y Qttcfn Mary, to the Ear l as Bothuwll.
Maria Dei gratia Rccii'a Sc(ctorimni, or:.ibus probis hominilus

fuis ad qus p:rfente, lir. z pervenrrint (alt]m. Sciatii, quod
nos ad menoriam rcducrntes multip!ce I,'ur:m veruin et fidec
lerviunm, non antiim quonidam noll:im charili i mintri Ma: i;
Regira: regni nltri pro tenpore in nolr.i rtriiilri,: t '

t tiEum ct

jiiiiplennlJn vrumin tiam t obiiinlet iir<, tn iiiir:Li attes G(la;iX
quUl ilu ti.JC; .oIumil rgrnul:, ai ex ic.l iuaImI nolli hoi.uliS

CP

being extremely desirous to obtain the command of
thecaftle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in order to pre-
vail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young Prince to his cuf-
tody. Mar consented; and fle Instantly appointed
Bothwell governor of the castle. And. . Pref. 64.
Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the murder, pre-
vious to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been con-
duced with the utmost remissness. Buchanan ex-
claims loudly against this. And. 2. 24. Nor was

et auftoritatis in punitione furum, malefa.torum, et tranfgreflb
rum infra idem, per noilrum confilum coiiltanguineum et conti-
liarierm Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum Halis, Creighton
c: Lidifdale, magnum aimirallun rcgii oltri, conmm;ffiunern
et cner-tinem ad hunc cftfctum habentum, per quas iple funnl
corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in perfor.
matione et extentione noltri di&i fervitii, fuam hereditatem, fu.
pra ummram viginti millium mcrcarum hujus notri regni, alie-
navit ac l;fit. ECt nos cogitantes quod, ex nnitra principali ho-
nore et devoria, diitum noltrum confifum confanguineum & con-
filiarium cm quodam accidene et gratitudinc reconpenfare et
gratificare irciinbit quax nos commode fibi ccncedere poterimus,
unde ipfe m;.gis h;ibi'is omnious affuturis temln roibus cfre poterit,
et; d '-ij'lfiln'di performandum in omnibus caulis feu cventibus:
In ;eco:npe,"ltinnem quorum premiiflorum, ac pro diverfis aliis
no:i;:s ratiola.i)libub caufis et coniderationii s nos noventibus,
icin.u,, .&c. dictuim Jacobum comitem i:'cilile, &c. ac luos
ha,.ii; ii.lcu.us qtnicillnque nollros Icgittimrit, &c. affignaths
in ct d 'itra.s ruvcir:onii tacas, &c. per Symoie Prelton de
codetn mili' e, p:aFpo!itun, Lialiv), conlu!es, et communiiatem
hujus nollii b.lrgi dc Edinburgh, pro liipfis ac fui iuccefroribus,
&c. nobi., i:ollriii;u lerciibus, fucccnfiibbus, et alfi:natis pro
redemp:i(,n., &c. llUerioritui s totius vilm de Lcit;:, &c. im-
pi:m.orataN per nos diCELis pr;rpofito, &c. fb reverfioinc IulienatC
contincntis fummn;m decem millium mrrcarum monetau pr-
tiript;e nuincrandam et calcuiandamn in parochiai cclfi de
Edinburgh. il;'ur premonitione quadiiginta dicrum, ut moris
c!t. vluti i.a Ldili revcrfionis litern, c. de data 8vo Olb.
i ;j, &c. (I '!Le relt is form, and ccnt.-ins a claule of abfclute
garr;dice) IN e' cuJs IEI 'IT,'rt.tO',IOI pSiafentibus mag-
nuIn ; ;.llumi tic.ll':riia pponi fcimUiis,. Apud tEinlburgh, d-
cii:i q,:iIuo iO pie i:::j e Febuarii, ..i:nu Doinini mnillciinio quin-
g::;.tciin) f:?:,c:C::i'o I:xto, et rinli uji;ri viccfilon quinto.

'Te re:t fal elntire.

it

it without reason that he did so, as is evident from
a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house
when his matitr wasmurdered, and was dug up alive
out of the rubbih. Being examined on the Mon-
day after the King's death, " This deponar fchew
that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the
Queenis fervandis the keyis of her halmir. Quhilk
the Laird of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair,
here is ane ground. Efter quhilk words fpokin, thai
left of, and procedit na farther in the inquisition."
And. 4. p. 2. 167. Had there been any intention
to search into the bottom of the matter, a circum-
t1ance of so much importance merited the most care-
ful enquiry. 4. Notwithstanding Lennox's repeat-
ed felicitations, notwithstanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the neceflity of complying with
them, in order to encourage any accuser to appear
against Bothwell, he not only refused to commit
him to cuitody, or even to remove him from her
presence and councils ; And. . 42, 48. but by the
grants which we have mentioned, and by other cir-
cumltances, dilcovered an increase of attachment to
him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to
a publick trial; but (lie permitted him to fit as a
member in that meeting of the Privy Council, which
directed his own trial; and the trial itlelf was car-
ried on with such unnecessary precipitancy, and with
so many other ufpicious circumtancics, as render his
acquittal rather an argumentofhis guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumnttnces have all been
mentioned at length, Vol. I. p. 403, &c. and there-
fore are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days
after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of her re-
gard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the
sceptre before her at the meeting of Parliament.
Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament, the granted him
a ratification of all the vat pofsllions and honours,

which

which he had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services
he had performed. And. . 117. 8. Though
Melvil, who foresaw that her attachment to Both-
well would at length induce her to marry him,
warned her of the infamy and danger which would
attend that ataion, hle not only disregarded this a-
lutary admonition, but discovered what had passed
between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell feiz-
ed Mary as ffe returned from Stirling, April 24.
If he had done this without her knowledge and con-
sent, such an insult could not have failed to have
filled her with the most violent indignation. But
according to the account of an old M. S. " The
friendly love was o highly contracted between this
great princess, and her enormous fubje&, that there
was no end thereof (for ir was constantly elteemed
by all men that either of them loved other carnally)
so that he suffered patiently to be led where the
lover lift, and all the way neither made bftacle,
impediment, clamour or refitance, as in such ac-
cidents use to be, or that he might have done by
her princely authority, being accompanied with the
noble Earl of Huntly, and SecrLtary Maitland of
Lethington." Keith, 3'3. Melvil who was pre-
ent, confirms this ccount, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was leized, informed him that
nothing was done without the Queen's content.
Melv. 158. o1. On the 2th of May, a few days
before her marriage, Mary declared that he was
then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had
offended her by seizing her person, flie was so much
satisfied with his dutiful behaviour since that time,
and so indebted to him for pait services, tiat fne
not only forgave that offence, but rctblvcd to pro-
mote him to higher honours. And. . 187. ii.
Even after the confederate nobles had driven Both-

well

well from the Qeer's pretence, and though he law
that he was confidered as the murderer.of her for-
r, - husband by so great a part of her. fbje&s, her
i;.o;on did not in the least abate, and. he conti-
nue r express the most unalterable #ttachmnint to
!l:in. ' I can perceive (ays Sir N. Throg!norton)
thai the igour with whiJi the Qeen is kept, pr,-
ceed .h y order from these men, because th..ct , i.
Qr.-i I. .11 not by any means be induced , leeli
hc rtliority to prosecute the murder; nor will ot
conien by any persuasion to abandon the Lcrd Both-
weil for her husband, but avoweth constantly that
fie will live and die with him; .Wn faith that if it
were put to her choice to relinquifl her crown and
kingdom, or the Lord B'- .el, :,c; wo.ld leave
her kingdom and dignit . go a liip;i dams witl
him, and that she will never content chat he hall
fare worse, or have more harm than herself." App.
p. 42. See also p. 44. From this long enume-
ration of circumstances, we may, without violence,
draw the following conclusion. Had Mary really
becn accessary to the murder of her husband; had
Lothwill perpetrated the crime with her conient, or
at her command; and had fle intended to stifle the
evidence againll him, and to prevent the discovery
of his guilt, he could lcarce have taken any other
steps than those lhe t ok, nor could her conduc
have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of dcencv.

THE positive evidence produced agaifit Mary
may be clafled under two heads.

1. THE depositions of bome perfins who were

employed in committing the murder, particularly
of Nicholas lHuibe-t, who, in the writings of that
age, is called re. b Paris. This person, who was
Bothwcli's ser -it a;d much truied by him, was
twice eximir,.d, and the original of one of his de-
positions, and a copy of the otier, are atill extant.

1,

It is pretended that both there are notorious forge-
ries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
naizveti which it is almost impollible to imitate; they
abound with a number of minute fa&s and particu-
larities, which the most dextrous forger could not
have easily aflembled, and conne&ed together with
any appearance of probability; and they are filled
with circumstances, which can scarce be fuppoled
to have entered the imagination of any man, but
one of Paris's profeflion and charater. But, at
the fame time, it must be acknowledged that his
depositions contain some improbable circumltances.
He seems to have been a foolish talkarive fl ov;
the fear of death; the violence of torture; r.n , the
desire of pleating those in whose powe. ;l- was,
tempted him, perhaps, to feign forne circu ::t.ances,
and to exaggerate others. To fay that i'fn; circum-
stances in an affidavit are improbable or fall, is
very different from faying that the whole is forged.
I fufpet the former to be the cafe here; bLut I Iee no
appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some
of the mos material fa&s in Paris's aidavits reft
upon his tingle testimony; and for th c reason, I
have not in the Hillory, nor hall I in this place,
lay any stress upon them.

2. THE letters said to be written by Mary to

Bothwell. These have been frequently publifled.
The accident by which the Queen's enemies got
them into her pofeflion, is related Vol. I. 435.
When the authenticity of any ancient paper is du-
bious or contested, it may be ascertained either by
external or internal evidence. Both theSe have been
produced in the present care.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of the getiuneners ofMary':;

letters. i. Murray and the nobles who adhered to
him affirm, upon their word and honour, tlhnt the
letters were written with the Queen's own hand,
with which they were well acquaite. Good. ii.

L,4,

64, 92. 2. The letters were publikly produced
in the parliament of Scotland, December 1567,
Good. ii. 360; and were so far confidered as ge-
nuine, that they are mentioned, in the aft against
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good.
ii. 66. 3. They were llewn privately to the Duke
of Norfolk, the Earl of Suflex, and Sir Ralph
Sadler, Elizabeth's commissioners at York. In the
account which they give of this matter to their mif-
trels, they eem to confider the letters as genuine,
and express no suspicion of any forgery; they par-
ticularly observe, " that the matter contained in
them is such that it could hardly be invented and
devised by any other than herself; for that they dif-
course of ome things, which were unknown to any
other than to herself and Bothwell; and as it is
hard to conterfeit so many, so the matter of them,
and the manner how there men came by them, is
such, as it feemeth that God, in whole fight murder
and bloodlhed of the innocent is abominable, would
not permit the fame to be hid or concealed." Good.
ii. 142. They seem to have made such an impref-
sion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent
letter to Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has
there words, " If the matter shall be thought as
detestable and manifest to you, as for ought we can
perceive it feemeth here to us." Good ii 134.
4. After the conferences at York and Westminster
were finilhed, Elizabeth resolved to call together
the Earls who were then at court, and to lay before
them the whole proceedings against the Scottiih
Queen, particularly that " the letters and writings
exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen of Scots let-
ters and writings, should also be hewed, and con-
ference [i. e. comparion] thereof made in their
fight, with the letters of the laid Queen's being
extant, and heretofore written with her own hand,
and lent to the Qt)cen's maiety whereby may be

searchcd
1:

icarched and examined what difterence is betwixt
them." Good. ii. 252. They affmbled accord-
ingly, at Hampton Court, December 14 and z5,
1568; and " The originals of the letters supposed
to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused; and
being read, were duly conferred and compared, for
the manner of writing, and fashion of orthogra-
phy, with sundry other letters long since heretofore
written, and sent by the laid Queen of Scots to the
Queen's Majesty.- In collation whereof no dif-
ference was found." Good. ii. 256. 5. Mary
having written an apologetical letter for her condut
to the Counters of Lennox, July o1, 1570 , he

tranf-

* Mary's letter has never been publilhed, and ought to have

a place here, where evidence on all ides is fairly produced.
" Madam, if the wrang and false reportis of rebellis, enemeis
weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trulted of
me by zoure advice, had not so far ftrred you aganis my inno-
cency, (and I must fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have not
onelic as it were condempait me wrangfullie, hot o hated me,
as some wordis and opene deideis hes teftifeit to all the warlde,
a manyfelt miflyking in zow aganis zowr awn blude) I wold not
have omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow excusing me
of hose untrew repordes made of me. But hoping with Godis
grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to zow, as I trust
it is already to the mailt pairt of all indifferent perfonis, [
thocht it belt not to trouble now for a tyme till that such a mat.
ter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the transporting
zoure littil son, and my onelie child in this countrey. To the
quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald beglaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I have born
him, and God knawis with quhat danger to him and me boitb;
and of zow he is defcendit. So I meane not to forget my dewtie
to zow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how unkyndlic
that ever .e have delt with me, hot will love zow as my awnt,
and refpet zow as my moder in law. And gifye plea to knaw
farther of my mynd in that and all uther thingis betwixt us, my
ambaflador the bifop of Ross fall be ready to confer with zow,
And io after my hairtlie commendationis, remitting me to my
raide ambafador, and zour better confideratioun, I commit zow
to she prouttetcun of Almyghty God, quhom I pray to prefrve

ZOW

transmitted it to her husband then in Scotland; and
he returned to the Countels the following answer:
" Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer the
Queen the King's mother's letters lent to you, what
can I ay but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ
the belt he can for hiriilf, to feame to purge hir of
that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly pr-
fuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my
awin knawledge, but by her handwrit, the confefii-
onis of men gone to the death, and uther infallibil
experi: n e. It wull be lange tyme that is hable to
put a mattir so notorious in oulivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or inn .cency to appear quhair the contrary
is fa weill knawin. The maift indifferent, I trust,
doubtis not of the equitie of zoure and my cause,
and of the jut occafioun of our miflyking. I i
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis in-
terest, were hir trew confeflinun and unfeyned re-
pentance of that lamentable fa&t, odious for hir to
be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God
isjuft, and will not in the end be abused; but as he
has manifested the trewth, so will he puneife the
iniquity." Lennox's Orig. Regift. of Letters. In
their publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be
fufped of advancing what would be moss lubfcr-
vicnt to their cause; not what was agreeable to
truth, or what flowed from their own inward con-
vicijin. But in a private letter to his own wite,
Lennox had no ccafion to diflemble; and it is
plain, th..t he not only thought the Queen guilty,
but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwcll.

znvw an 1 mv brotl:r Charle, and caus .ow to krnw mny pai:r
butt:.t .or zc do. 'ronr. Chatilworth this x of July 1 57;.

To-ny I.adiic .Lennox Youre nntura! gdec Nice
I:.y .odcr i law. ar.id ;vyngc Iucilit er.

II. Iv'r

II. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the

genuinenes of the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we
may observe, 'i. That whenever a paper is forged
with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to establish the point in view, his solicitude
to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any
appearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to
use expreflions the most explicit and full to his pur-
pole. The paifages foisted into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages; the legendary miracles
of the Romish faints,; the supposititious deeds in
their own favour produced by monasteries; the
false charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 13.
are so many proofs of this aertion. No maxim
seems to be more certain than this, that a forger is
often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls into
the error of proving too little. The point which
the Queen's enemies had to eflablifh, was, " that
as the Earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the
horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so
was he of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
fuader, and commander of the said murder to be
done." Good. ii. 207. But of this there are only
imperfict hints, obscure intimations, and dark ex-
preflions in the letters, which however convincing
evidence they might furnish if found real letters,
bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity of
evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All
the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can
serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefy, Blackwood,
Turner, &c. abound with passages to this purpose;
nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet fiill it might have been expected
(liys hcr latest defender) that some one or other of
t!:e points or articles of the accusation ihould be
made out clearly by the proof. But nothing of that
is to be lecn in the present cafe. There is nothing

VOL. II. LI :

in the letters, that could plainly lhew the writer to
have been in the foreknowledge, counsel, or device
of any murder, far less to have persuaded or com-
manded it; and as little is there about maintaining
or juitifying any murderers." Good. . 76. How
ill adviled were Mary's adversaries to contrat so
much guilt, and to pratife so many artifices in or-
der to forge letters, which are so ill contrived for
eftablilhing the conclusion they had in view ? Had
they been lb base as to have recourse to forgery, is it
not natural to think that they would have produced
something more explicit and decisive? 2. As it is
almost ipoffible to invent a long narration consist-
ing of many circumstances, and to connect it in
such a manner with real sacs, that no mark of fraud
shall appear; for this reason fiilful forgers avoid
any long detail of circumstances, especially of so-
reign and uperfluous ones, well knowing that the
more these are multiplied, the more are the chances
of detetion increased. Now Mary's letters, efpe-
cially the firif, are filled with a multiplicity of cir-
cumflances, extremely natural in a real correspond-
ence, but altogether foreign to the purpose of the
Queen's enemies, and which it would have been
extreme folly to have inserted, if they had been alto-
gether imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The
truth and reality of several circunllances, in the let-
ters, and these, too, ot no very publick nature,
are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence.
Lett. . Good. ii. p. . The Queen is laid to have
met one of Lennox's gentlemen, and to have tome
conversation with him. Thomas Crawford, who
was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's com-
missioners, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of
this circumliance. He likewise declared, that
during the Queen's stay at Glasgow, the King re-
peated to him, every night, whatever had passed
through the day, between her Majesty and him,

I and

and that the account given of these conversations in
the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. ii 245. Ac-
cording to the fame letter there was much difcoulife
between the King and Queen concerning Mynto,
Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. ii. 8, io, . What
this might be, was altogether unknown, till a lItter
of Mary's, preserved in the Scottilh college at Pa-
ris, and published, Keith, Pref. vii. discovered it to
be an affair of so much importance as merited all the
attention the paid to it at that time. It appears by
a letter from the French ambassador, that Mary
was fubjeet to a violent pain in her fide. Keith,
ibid. This circumfiance is mentioned, Lett. i. p.
30. in a mannerfo natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine prodution. If we hall liill think
it probable to suppose that so many real circum-
fiances were artfully introduced into the letters by
the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity
to their prodution; it will carce be pofible to hold
the fame opinion concerning the following particu-
lar. Before the Queen began her first letter to
Bothwell, he, as usual among thoi: who write
long letters containing a variety of 'fl'je t', made
notes or memorandums of the particulars he wilhed
to remember; but as lie fat up writing during a
great part of the night, and after her attendants
were asleep, her paper failed her, and she continued
her letter upon the lame iheet, on which iihe hald for-
merly made her memorandums. Tis he herself
takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: " It
is late; I desire never to cease from wrti ng un:o you,
yet now after the killing of your hands, I will end
my letter. Fxcule my evil writing, and read it
twice over. I'xculie that thing that is fcriblit, for
I had na paper zelterday, quhen I wrait that of the
memorial." Good. ii. 28. Thcfe memorandums
still appear in the middle of the letter; and what

L1 2 we

we have said seems naturally to account for the man-
ner how they might find their way into a real letter.
It is scarce to be luppofed, however, that any forger
would think of placing memorandums in the mid.
dle of a letter, where, at first fight, they make so
abl'rd and so unnatural an appearance. But if any
shall still carry their refinement so far, as to suppose
that the forgers were so artful as to throw in this cir-
cumftance, in order to preserve the appearance of
genuinencfs, they must at least allow that the
Queen's enemies, who employed these forgers,
could not be ignorant of the design and meaning of
there (hort notes and memorandums; but we find
them miltaking them so far as to imagine that they
were the credit of the bearer, i. e. points concerning
which the Queen had given him verbal instructions.
(Good. 2. 5 . This tley cannot poflibly be; for
thie Queen herelf writes wi:h so much exadnefs
toncerning the differentpoints in the memorandums,
that there was no need of giving any credit or in-
irLtdions to the bearer concerning them. The me-
morandums are indeed the contents of the letter.
. Mary, mentioning her conversation with the King
about the affair of Mvnto, Hiegait, &c. fays,

i he morne [i. e. to morrow] I will fpeik to
him upon that point ;" and then adds, " As to the
reft of Willie Hiegait's, he confeflit it; but it was
the morne [i e. the morning] after my cumming
ur he dd it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which
could not have been made till after the conversation
hnppend(, leems either to have been inlerted by the
Qucen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps, he
having written it on the margin, it was taken thence
into the text. It we tfuppole the letter to be a rl
one, and written at different times, as it plainiy
bears, this circumtrance appears to be very ntural;
hit nlo reafin could have induced a forger to hve
vcntuied upon such an anach oiiitn, for which there

was

was no neceflity. An addition perfectly similar to
this made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good.
ii. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the

advocates for her innocence have contended that
these letters were forged by her enemies, on purpose
to blast her reputation, and to justify their own re-
bellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the
arguments which were produced, in her own age,
in support of this opinion; the observations which
we have already made, contain a full reply to them.
An author, who has enquired into the affairs of
that period with great indutry, and who has ac-
quired much knowledge of them, has lately pub-
lilhed (as he affirms) a demonstration of the forgery
of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds
upon evidence both internal and external. With re-
gard to the former he obfcrves, that the French copy
of the Queen's letters is plainly a translation of Bu-
chanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
tranlation of the Scottilh copy; and, by confe-
qucnce, the assertion of the Qleen's enemies, that
she wrote them originally in French, is altogether
groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries.
He accounts for this strange succession of tratifla-
tions, that supposing that when the forgery was pro-
jcted, no perlbn could be found capable of writing
originally in the French language letters which would
pals for the Queen's; for that reason they were firit
composed in Scottish; but unluckily the French in-
terpreter, it would eem, did noc underfland that
language ; and therefore Buchanan translated them
into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered
into French. Good. . 79, So.

IT is scarce neceflary to observe that no proof

whatever is produced of any of the suppositions.
' he manners of the Scots, in that age, when al-
moil every man of rank spent a part of his youth

LI3 in

in France, and the intercourse between the two na-
tions was great, render italtogether improbablethat
so many complicated operations should be neceflary
in order to procure a few letters to be written in the
French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may ob-

fervc that ail this author's premises may be granted,
and ytt his conclusion will not follow, unless he
liktwili prove that the French letters, as we now
have them, are a true copy of those which were
pro.:iuce by Murray and his party in the Scottish
parli;:ment, and at York and Weftmin!ter. But
this h- hia:. not attempted ; and if we attend to the
hiitry of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious,
ir-ui.: hve been uniuccetful. The letters were first
published at the end of Buchanan's DetecTion. The
first edition of this tre.tife was in Latin, in which
language three of the Queen's letters werefubjoined
to it ; tiis Lia:in edition ws printed A. D. 1571.
Soon atter a Scottish translation of it was published,
and at the end of it were printed, likewise in Scot-
tifiL, the t!reeletters which had formerly appeared in
l.atin, and five other letters in Scottifb, which were
not in te Latin edition. Next appeared a French
traiifi.;ticn of the etectccion, and of seven of the
lc::ers; this bears to have been printed at Edin-
burgh by Thomas Warem, 1: 72. The name of
the place, as wll as the printer, is allowed by all
partits to be a manifelt imposture. Our author,
fium Ibi (b;rving the day of the month, on which
the printing is aiid to have been finished, has as-
fcried that this edition was printed at London; but
no fi-el's can be laid upon a date found in a book,
whlre every (,:her circumstance with regard to the
printing is allowed to be false. Blackwood, who
(next to Lcfy) was the best informed of all Ma-
ry's advocates in that age, affirms that the French
edition of the detection, was publilhed in France:
" 11 L[B'ucl.nr:l a depuis adjouftl a cefte decla-

mation

mation un petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Due
de Norfolk, et de la facon de son proces, et la tout
cnvoye aux freres a la Rochelle, lefquels voyants
qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, I'ont traduit en
Francois, et iceluy fut imprimee a Edinbourg, c'eft
a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas Waltem, nom
apofte ct fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jcbb. 2.
256." The author of the Innocence ade Marie goes
farther, and names the French translator of the De-
teEtion. " Et iceluy premierement compose (com-
me ii femble) par George Buchanan Efcoffoys, et
depuis traduit en langue FranCoise par un Hugonot,
Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant
gentilhome, et un de plus remarquez fediteuz de
France. Jebb. . 425, 443." The concurringtef-
timony of two cotemporary authors, whose reficence
in France afforded them sufficient means of infor-
mation, must outweigh a flight conjecture. This
French translator does not pretend to publish the
original French letters as written by the Queen her-
self; he exprefly declares that he translated them
from the Latin. Good. i. 103. Had our author
attended to all thele circumstances, he might have
saved himielf the labour of so many criticisms to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is
a translation from the Latin. The French editor
himielf acknowledges it, and so far as I know, no
person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator was

so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary had written there
letters, partly in French, partly in Scottiih. Good. i.
103. llad this translation been publi(hed at London
by Cecil, or had it been made by his direction, so
gross an error would not have been admitted into
it. This error, however, was owing to an odd cir-
cumltance. In the Scottish translation of the De-
tetion, two or three sentences of the original French
were prefixed to each letter, which breaking off
with an &c. the Scottish translation of the whole

L 1 4 followed.

followed. This method of printing translations was
not uncommon in that age. The French editor ob-
serving this, foc.lihlv concluded that the letters
had been written partly in French, partly in
Scottif-.

IF we carefully confider those few French fen-

tences of each letter, which still remain, and apply
to them that species of criticism, by which our au-
thor has examined the whole, a clear proof will
arise, that there was a French copy not translated
from the Latin, but which was itself the original
from which both the Latin and Scottish have been
translated. This minute criticism must necessarily
be dilagreeable to many readers; but luckily a few
sentences only are to be examined, which will ren-
der it extremely lhort.

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to

it ends with these words, yfaioit bon. It is plain
this expression, veu ce que peut un corpsfans cur, is
by no means a translation of urm plane perinde eThe
atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither the
Latin nor Scottish have retained. yufques a la
,Yee is not a translation of ttot prandii tempore; the
Scottifi translation, qbile denner-time, expresses the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently
quhile signified until as well as during. ye n'ay pas
tenu grand propos is not justly rendered neque contu-
leieriermonem cm qu quam; the phrase used in the
french copy is one peculiar to that language, and
gives a more probable account of her behaviour than
the other. gugcant bien qu'il n'y fafit bon, is not
a translation of ut qui judicarent id non e f ex ufu.
The French Ientence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with
apprendre. It is evident that both the Latin and
Scottish tranlations have omitted altogether these
words, et tcuiefoisje nepuisr apprerdre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with presenter.

oY.,

Taye vedls plus tard la haut is plainly no translation
of diutius illic morata fum; the sense of the French
is better expressed by the Scottilh Ibave walkit later
tbere-up. Again, Pour excuser vofire affaire is very
different from ad excufandum nofira negocia. The
five remaining letters never appeared in Latin; nor
is there any proof of their being ever translated into
that language. Four of them, however, are pub-
lithed in French. This intirely overturns our au-
thor's hypothesis concerning the necenity of a tranf-
lation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Dete&tion the whole

sonnet is printed in French as well as in Scottish. It
is not poflible to believe that this Scottish copy could
be the original from which the French was tranf-
lated. The French consists of verses which have
both measure and rhyme, and which, in many
places, are far from being inelegant. The Scottilh
consists of an equal number of lines, but without
measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever think
of a thing so ablurd and impracticable, as to require
one to translate a certain givcn number of lines in
prose into an equal number of verles, where both
measure and rhyme were to be ob!erved. The
Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifestly to be
a translation of the French; the phrases, the idioms,
and many ot the words are French, and not Scot-
tilh. Besides, the Scottilh translator has, in several
instances, miltaken the Jfnie of the French, and in
many more expresses the sense imperfectly. Had
the fnnet been forged, this could not have hap-
pened. The diretors of the fraud would have
unlerftood their own work. I hall latisfy myself
with one example, in which there is a proof of both
my aflirtioiis. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivrc j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottilh, but a

French phrafc; the two other lines do not exprels
the sense of the French, and the last is abfulute
nonsense.

I'HE eighth letter was never tranflared into

French. It contains much refined myfticilm about
devices, a folly of that age, of which Mary was
very fond, as appears from several other circum-
stances, particularly from a letter concerning im-
presas by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's
adversaries forged her letters, they were certainly
employed very idly when they produced this.

FROMI thele observations it seems to be evident

that there was a French copy of Mary's letters, of
which the Latin and Scottilh were only translations.
Nothing now remains of this copy but those few
sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish tranfla-
tion. The French editor laid hold of there fen-
tences, and tacked his own translation to them,
which, so far as it is his work, is a servile and a
very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin;
whereas in those introductory sentences, we have
discovered strong marks of their being originals,
and certain proofs that they are not tranlated from
the Latin.

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin

and Scottith tranfations with thele entences, that
the Scottih translator has more perfefEly attained

the

the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early
translated into Scottish, Good. ii. 76; it is probable
that Buchanan made his translation not from the
French but from this Scottilh copy. Were it ne-
ceffary, several critical proofs of this might be pro-
duced. One that has been already mentioned eems
decisive. Diutius illic moratafum bears not the least
resemblance to j'ay veill plus tard la baut; but if,
instead of I walkit [i. e. watched] laiter there-up,
we suppose that Buchanan read I wailit, &c. this
mistake into which he might so easily have fallen,
accounts for the error in his ranflation.

THESE criticisms, however minute, appear to be

well founded. But whatever opinion may be form-
ed concerning them, the other arguments with re-
gard to the internal evidence remain in full force.

THE external proof of the forgtry of the Queen's

letters, which our author has produced, is extremc-
ly specious, but not more solid than that which we
have already exam.ned. According to Murray's
diary, Mary i.: .c: from Edinburgh to Glasgow
January 21, 1567; she arrived there on the 23d;
left that place on the 27th; sfhe, together with the
King, reached Linlithgw on t!.e 2Sth, flayed in
that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh
before the nd of the month. But according to
our author, the Qu'een did not leave Edinburgh till
Friday January 24th; as Ihe flayed a night at Cal.
lenlar, he could not reach Glasgow booner than
the evening of Saturday the 25th, and the return-
ed to Linlithgow on Tucfday the 2ith. By conie-
quence, the firit letter which fuppofcs the Queen to
have been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as
the second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Sa-
turday morning, wereas he did not arrive there till
the evening, mull be forgeries. That the Queen
did not set out from Edinburgh sooner than the

24th

2th of January, is evident (as he contends) from
the public records, which contain a Pretet of con-
Jfrmation of a life rent by James Boyd to Margaret
Chalmers granted by the Queen on the 24th ot Ja-
nuary at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the
Queen's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, ap-
pointing James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son.
1 hat the King and Queen had returned to Linlith.
gow on the 28ch, appears from a deed in which
tney appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace
t'lre, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good. i.
118.

1'SIS has been represented to be not only a con.

vincing but a legal pro:)f of the forgery of the
li-tcr said to be written by Mary; but how far it
falis tlh rt of this, will appear from the following
cunf idera ions.

i. I: is evident from a declaration or confelion

made by the B.lhop of Ross, that before the con-
ferences at York, which were opened in the begin-
ning of Otober 568, Mary had, by an artifice of
Mlaiiland's, got into her hands a copy of those
letters which her subjects accused her of having
written to B thwell. Brown's trial of the Duke of
Norfolk i4, 3. It is highly probable that the
Biihop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote
the efence of QuLeen Mary's honour in the year
1570. They were published to all the world toge-
ther with Buchanan's Detection, A. D. 1571. Now
if they had contained an error 1i gross, and so ob-
Viotu, ac that tim', to discovery, as the supposing
the Q(een to hive pafled lseveral days at Glasgow,
w!ile he was really at dinburgh; had they con-
tailed ;i let:er dated atGlafgowSaturday morning,tho'
ie did not arrive there till the evening; is it pof-
fible that she herself, who knew her own motions, or
the able and zealous advocates who appeared for her
.: that g, flhould not have publilhed and cxpofed

this

this contradi&ion, and, by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of such an impoture? In difquifi-
tions which are naturally abstruse and intricate, the
ingenuity of the lateit author may discover many
things, which have edcaped the attention, or baffled
the lagacity of those who have ormerly confidered
the fame subjet. But when a matter of fact lay
so obvious to view, this circumstance of its bing
unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any of her
adherents, is almost a demonstration that there is
some mistake or fallacy in our author's arguments.
And so far are any either of our historians, or of
Mary's defenders, from calling in question the com-
mon account concerning the time of the Queen's
setting out to Glasgow and her returning from it,
that there is not the lead appearance of any differ-
ence among them with regard to this point. But
farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which

our author refts the proof of his affcrtions, con-
cerning the Queen's motions, are not the originals
subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tran-
flations of copies of those originals. It is not ne-
ceffary, nor would it be very easy to render this in
telligible to persons unacquainted with the forms of
law in Scotland ; but every Scotsman conversant in
business will understand me, when I fay that the
precept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is
only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which was
fealed with the Privy-feal, on a warrant from the
fignet-office, proceeding on a signature which bore
date at Edinburgh the 24th ot January; and that
the deed in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a
letter, fealed with the Privy-feal, proceeding on a
signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with some de-
gree of reason, that a proof tounded on papers,

7 which

which are so many removes distant from the origi-
nals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all publick papers were issued in

the name both of the King and Queen; by law,
the King's subscription was no lels requisite to any
paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original signatures be produced in order to ascertain
the particular day when each of them signed, or to
prove that it was signed only by one of them, the
legal proof arising from these papers would be, that
both the King and Qucenfigned them at Edinburgh,
on the 24th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued

by the sovereign, in that age, eem to have been in
a great measure arbitrary, and affixed at the plea-
sure of the writer; and of consequence, there dates
were seldom accurate, are often faie, and can never
be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent,
and was found to be so pernicious, that an a of
parliament, A. D. 592, declared the affixing a
false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THER E still remain, in the public records, a

great number of papers, which prove the necefity
of this law, as well as the weakness and fallacy of
our author's arguments. And though it be no easy
matter, at the diflance of two centur es, to prove
any particular date to be false, yet urprifing in-
stances of this kind shall be produced. Nothing is
more certain from history, than that the King was
at Glasgow 24th January 1567; and yet the record
of fignaturcs from 1,65 to 1582, Fol. 6th, con-
tains the copy of a signature to Archibald Edmon-
fton said to have been fubflcribed by our S6vereigns,
i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January
24, 567; lo that if we were to trutt implicitly
the dates in the records of that age, or to hold our
author's argument to be good, :
. would prove that

noc

not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edin-
burgh on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Bithop

of Ross, that on the 25th of O&ober 1566, Mary
lay at the point of death; Keith, App. 134; and
yet a deed is to be found in the publick records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that
day. Privy-feal, Lib. 3. fol. 89. Oucbterlony *.

BorHWELL seized the Queen as he returned from

Stirling, April 24th, 1567, and (according to her
own account) carried her to Dunbar with all dili-
gence. And. i. 95. But our author, relying on
the dates of some papers which he found in the re-
cords, supposes that Bothwell allowed her to stop at
Edinburgh, and to tranfaat bulinefs there. Nothing
can be more improbable than this supposition. We
may therefore rank the date of the deed to Wright
Privy-feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is men-
tioned by our author, Vol. . 124. among the in-
stances of the false dates of papers which were if-
sued in the ordinary course of business in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper
to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April 14th, not April
24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's his-

tory, it is, that lhe remained at Dunbr from the
time that Bothwell carried her thither, till she re-
turned to Edinburgh along with him in the begin-
ning of May. Our author himself allows that he
resided twelve days there, Vol. . 357. Now
though there are deeds in the records which bear
that they were ligned by the Qccn at Dunbar dur-

N. B. In the former editions, airothr infance of tLh fCme

nature with thole which go b.foc ;.nJ filow wi1s mentioned;
but that, as hal Ciine tc n discovercd, was tfunidd on a milla!,c
of the perli;n c),'l)yed to search the rcord', and is threfoe
omitted in tis dition. The realbnin!,, howevcr. in !h- l)i-f
fcrtation itands till i full force, notzitllun ing, this ci:ii n.

ing

ing that time, yet there are others which bear that
they were signed at Edinburgh; e. g. there is one
at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy-feal, Lib. 36.
fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at
Dunbar on that day. Lib. 3l. Chart. No. 524,
526. lb. Lib. 32. No. 154, 157. There are some
signed at Dunbar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh
April 3oth, Lib. 32. Cart. No. 492. Others at
Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No. 158. These diffe-
rent charters suppose the Queen to have made so
many unknown, improbable, and inconsistent jour-
neys, that they afford the clearest demonltration
that the dates in these records ought not to be de-
pended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the

charter aid to be signed April 27th, which hap-
pened that year to be a Sunday, which was not,
at that time, a day of buflnefs in Scotland, as ap-
pears from the books offederunt, then kept by the
Lords of eflion.

FOM this hfort review of our author's proof of

the forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is eviden.
that his arguments are far from amounting to de-
monftration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of

these letters is founded on the stile and compoition,
which are said to be altogether unworthy of the
Quen, and unlike her real productions. It is
plain, both from the great accuracy of composition
in most of Mary's letters, and even from her soli-
citude to write them in a fair hand, that fle valuedl
herlel on thole accomplifments, and was desirous
of bcingelleemed an elegant writer. But when she
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of
inaccuracy appear. A rmarkablec inils:Lce of this
may be found in a paper publilhed, Gouod. ii. 301.
Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
most hurry; and yet unuer all the disadvantages of

a tranl-

a tranllation, they are not destitute either of spirit
or of energy. The manner in which he expresses
her love to Bothwell have been pronounced indecent
and even fbocking. But Mary's temper led her to
warm expreflions of her regard; thole refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce
between the sexes, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Roylton's papers there is a series of
letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, co-
pied from the Harleian Library, P. 37. B. 9. fol.
88, in which Mary declares her love to that noble-
man in language, which would now be reckoned
extremely indelicate.

THE sonnets and some of Mary's letters to Both-

well were written before the murder of her hus-
band; some of them after that event, and before
her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior
to the death of her husband abound with the fond-
eft expreflions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly
discover that their familiarity had been extremely
criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
pressions, which her enemies employed to prove that
the was no stranger to the schemes which were
forming againit her husband's life. Of this knd
are the following passages, "' Alace! I nevir diffa-
vit ony body; bor I remit me altogidder to zour
will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and
quhatfaever thing come thcrof, I fal! obey zow.
Advise too with zourfclt, git z.' can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak
medecineand the bath at Ciair.niliar." Good. ii. 22.
" See not hir quhais fenzeir teiris flld n ft be fa
meikle praifit and etemir, a tl!; trew andi i'ithfu!l
travellis quhilk I ultene for to nCe!.te hi;- pl;ic:.
For obtaining of the cuhilk, nn:i:. :-: natir.l, I
betrayis thame that may imp.'::c.'c ;ne. ( od '),- v,:
me," &c. ibid. 27. I ha'; v.'.ilkl i.:-: t; ir-

VOL. II. 'M i up,

tip, than I wald have done, gif it had not been to
draw something out of him, quhilk this berer will
fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest commodity that
can be offerit to excuse zour affairis." Ibid. 32.
From the letters posterior to the death of her hus-
band, it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's
seizing Mary by force, and carrying her along with
him, was contrived in concert with herself, and
with her approbation .

HAVING

That letters of o much importance as those of Mary's to

Bothwell Ihould have been intirely loft, appears to many alto-
gether unaccountable. After being produced in England before
Elizabeth's ccmmiflioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Eal of Murray. Good. ii. 235. He eems to have kept
them in his pfireflion during life. After his death, they fell
into the bands of Lennox his fuccefor, who reftoted them to
the Earl of Morton. Good. ii. 91. Though it be not neceff-
rily conneced with any of the queflions which gave occasion to
this Dilertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of some of
my readers to inform them, that after a very diligent search,
which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to Both-
well can be found in any of the publick libraries in Great Bri-
tain. The only cert in intelligence concerning them, since the
time of their being delivered to Morton, was communicated by
the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Eq; ambaflador

from Queen Elizabeth to the King of Scotland, written to Sir
Francis Walsingham, ecretary of fiate, from the original re-
gifter book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from ISth of Augult 1ic.,
to 28th September 1583, in the porlcion of Christopher Hun-
ter, M. D. of Durham.

j582, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the ccffer wherein

were the originals of letters between the Scottish Queen and the
Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
thereby was at preelnt wanting, and unknown where it reflcd,
yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plufcardyne's mean;,
that both the coffer and allb the writings are come, and now re-
main with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hardly
intreated to make delivery to her Majesty according to her Ma.
Jelly's dcfirc.

Ti l'

HAVING thus taed the proof on both fides;
having examined at ol great a length the different

fy senms

Tirts time pall I have expended in searching where the cos-

ser and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
fliou!d have tound great difficulty; now I wiil cfaly Gowrie,
and of my fIccc/s you lhall be hortly advertised.

12th of November 1i 8, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE had both learned, that the ca' et and letters men-

tioned in my last, before these were come to the pofleffon of the
Earl of Gowrie, and also found that no mean might prevail to
win the f.me out of his hands without his own content and pri-
vity; in which behalf I had employed fit inltruments, that ne-
verthelefs profited nothing; therefore I attempted t essay him-
self, 1 tting him know that the said calket and letters should have
been brought to her Majefly by the offer and good means of
good friends, promfiung to have delivered them to her Majefy
before they came into his hands and cuilody, and knowing that
he did bear the like affetlion, and was ready to pleasure her
Majelty in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus far
tendered to her Majelty, and which thereby should he well ac-
cepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his
comfort and contentment; I moved him that they might be a
present to he sent to her Majelty from him, and that 1 might
cause the fame to be conveyed to her Majesty, adding hereunto
such words and arguments as might both flir up a hope of libe-
rality, and also belt effett the purpose. At the firil he was loth
to agree that they were in his poffeflion; but I let him plainly
know that I was certainly irformed. that they were delivered to
him by Sanders Jardin; whereupon he prefled to know who did
so inform me, enquiring whether the ions of the Earl of Mor-
ton had done it or no. I did not ohcerways in plain terms deny
or alwer thereunto, but that he might think that he had told
me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleaicl that I hall
give him to be the author thereof; after he had said [though]
all there letter. were in his keeping (which he would neither
grant nor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any perfio
without the contents and privities, as well of the King, that
had ,ntcrei theiuin, as also of the rell of the nob'emen enter.
Dr:iers of the ation against the King's mother, and that .ould
have tiem kept as an evidence to warrant and make go. d that
action. And albeit I replied, that their aion in tiat i.a, to ..chr.
ing tile aflignation of the crown to the King by his inmouer, had
tcecived such citablihmennt, confirmation, and itrungth, by as

M m 2a of

yftems with regard to the fads in controverry; it
may be cxpctcd tha I should now pronounce fen-

tence.

of parliament .r - other publick authority and inflrunents, as
neither lfouid that cafe be iuffered to come in debate or queRtion,
nor Such crolls and paprs ought to be hewed for the frengh.
ening thereof, f( as these might well be left and be rendered to
the hands of her Majefly, to whom they were defined before
they fell in hi, keeping; yet he would not be removed or fatilf
fed; concluding, after much reasonings. that the Earl of Mor-
ton, nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durt
at any time make delivery; and because it was the firt time
that 1 had moved him therein. and that he would gladly both
answer her Majeltv's good expectation in him. and als perform
his duty due to his sovereign and afiociates in the aifon afore-
-id; therefore he would seek out the said calket and letters, a
his return to his house, which he thought fhculd be within a
Short time; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and
consideration had of the cause, he would give further answer.
This relblution I have received as to the thing; and for the pre-
sent I could not better, Icaving him to give her Majetly such
testimony of his god-will towards her, bv his fra. k ,!ealing
heein, as she may have cause to confirm her highnes's good
Opinion cr.ctived already of him, a d be thereby drawn to
greater goodness towards him. 1 Ihall Ithll labour him both by
myself and alio by all other means; but I greatly dilfrult the de-
fred fuccei herein.

z4th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

Foi the recovery of the le:ters in the coffer, come to the

hands of the Earl of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnestly
therein, letting him know the purpose of the Scottish Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and als seeking thereon to have them deliered to her or de.
siced, and that the meins which he will make in this be-
hiaf Shall be so great and effenual, as th.ei writings cannot be
fWvly kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that
bath the cuflody thereof, neither hall he th:lt is once known to
have them be uffered to hold them in hi. hands. Herewith I
have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that adion, and
the prties therein, and particularly to himself that is now
openly known to have the poieilion of thede writings, and I
Eave lettin him fee what surety it hall bring to the fid cause
and all the parties therein, and to himself, that thece writings
may be with secrecy and good order cornmitti-d to the keeping
of her Majesty, that will have them ready whcafoever any ue

liall

Ience. In my opinion, there are only two condu-
sions, which can be drawn from the facts which have
been enumerated.

ONE,

Ihall be for them, and by her Highnefles countenance defend
them and the parties from such wrongfull objections as {hall be
laid againit them, offering at length to him, that if he be not fully
satisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the associates all not
like of the delivery of them to her Majefly in this good manner,
and for the interest rehearsed, that I {hall readily, upon meeting
and con;ference with them, procure their afnt in this part; (a
matter more easy to offer than to perform) and, lafly, moving
him that (for the secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her
Majefly's good opinion towards himself may be si mly fettled and
confirmed by his acceptable forwardness herein) he would, with-
out needless scruple, frankly commit these writings to her Ma-
jelty's good culIody for the good uses received. Alter long de-
bate he resolved, and said, that he would unfeignedly hew and
do to her Majefy all the pleasure that he might without offence
to the King his overeign, and prejudice to the auciates in the
aaion, an therefore he would firlt make search and view the
said leters, and herein take advice what he mright do, and how
far he niight ftisfy and co tent her Majelty; promising thereon
to give more reilu'e afwer; ad he concluded flatly, that after
he had iLut:i ar,d seen the writings, that he might not make de-
livery ot them ithou he priviry of the King. Albeit I tood
long wi.h im againt} his relilutiu in this point, to acquaint
the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands
ol her Majelty, lettiug him f¢e that his doing:, there mIould ad.
mit geat daiger to tle cause; yt I could not remove him from
it. It may b that he m'eaneh to put over the matter from him-
fc:f o the King, upon fight whereof I IhAll travel eff.rually to
obtai the King's consen., that the letters may e committed m
her ajefly'b keeping, thinking it m re easy to prevail herein
with tile itirg, in the prelelt love and affection that he bearcth
to her Higbr'f, than to win a;y thinlg at the hands of tne as*
fociats in the action, wheleoffomr principa; of them now come
and remain at he evotion of the Kina'. mother; in hi. I hall
flt;l call on Gowrie to eatch out te cobiFr, according to his pro-
mile; and as I ih.ll find him mind, it t do therein, so hall [
do my belt ;na v hie endeavour to effccl the uccefs to her Ma-
jcay's belt coiutcntmiclt.

2d December tIPa, from Edinburgh.

BcCAUti I saw good opportunity offered to renew the mat.
ter to the Earl of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the cos-

Mm 3 for

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition

or love, encouraged by the Queen's known aver-
sion to her husband, and presuming on her attach-
ment to himlelf, struck the blow without having
concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. 1 hat Mary, instead of
teflifying much indignation at the deed, or discover-
ing any relentment against Bothwell, who was ac-
cufed of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, conduCted his trial in
such a manner as rendered it imporlible to discover
his guilt, and soon after, in opposition to all the
maxims of decency or of prudence, voluntarily
agreed to a marriage with him, which every confi-
deration hould have induced her to detest. By this
verdi&, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having
contrived the murder of her husband, or even of
having previously given her content to his death;
but he is not acquitted of having discovered her
approbation of the deed, by her behaviour towards
him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and

his adherents laboured to establish, " That as James,

fir in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where.
upon he told me, hat the Duke of Lennox had fought tarnefl-
ly to have had those letters, anJ that the King did know where
they were, so as they could not be delivered to her Majefly with-
out the King's privity and consent and he pretended to be
fiill willing to pleasure her Majefly in the fame, so far as he
may with hi duty to the King and to the reft of the affociares
in that aion; but I greatly diltrull to effet this to her M:i-
jeily's pleifure, wherein, nevertheless, I hall do my uttermotl
endeavours.

WH ET James VI. who put the Earl of Cowrie to death,

A. D. 1 ;s., and SIized all his ffcats, tcck care to dellroy his
mother's letters, for whole honour he was at that time extremely
zeilous; whether tlhey have ;'criIhed by ome unknown accident;
or whether th,.y m;sy not t1ll renaiin unoblerveJ among the ar-
c-h:'es of lJ;: of cur great familics, it is impflblc to dtcr-
pine.

fum.
6

fumtyme Erle of Bothwile, was the chiefe executor
of the horribill and unworthy murder, perpetrat in
the person of umquhile King Henry of gude me-
mory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the
Queenis lauchfull husband; fa was he of the fore-
knowledge, counfall, devise, perfwadar and com-
mandar of the said murder to be done." Good. ii.
207.

WHICH of there conclusions is most agreeable to

the evidence, that has been produced, I leave my
readers to determine.

Mm4 INDEX.

# INDEX.

IN D E X.
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages.

A
A ,D MS O N, archbishop of St. Andrews, is excommu-

nicated by the fynod of Fife, ii. 139. He excommuni.
cated his opponents, ib. is restored by the general aflem-

bly upon conditions, 14o. his mean submission to the general
aflerbly 204
lbany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles against his
brother K. James II. i 57. is made prisoner, but escapes to
France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of k ngland, 58.
procures afittance to invade Scotland on mean concitions, ib.
returns to Scotland, and is reltored to favour, 59. cabals again,
but is forced to fly to France ibid. 60
_* Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James
V. i. 37, 63. after several unfucceiful firuggles with the no-
bility, he is forced to retire to France 63
Jdlm;c.,, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuses the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him ii. 69
Allen, cardinal, publilhed a book proving the lawfulness of kil-

ling exco.municated Princes - - ii. z25
Alva, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q Mar, ii. 27, 31,

43. ', ec;lle(i from his government of the Netherlands 5 a

Ambajdors, their ffice - ~ i. 87
Andre's St. the arcl;bilhop of, remarkably cured of a dangerous

dillttmnpr, i. 135, 36. the motives of his opposition to the Q
Rekent, 158. his great influence on the bench of Bilhops ;irnd
weightc in Parliament, 163. governed the church with gicat
moderaion, 165. persecutes the reformers, bi4'. ,16. c:-
tcrn;s gi cat service to the Congregation agan!fi :hi. i'ren h. ' a ,
is itnpr. on.ed tor celebratin, Nlafs. ol. ru:ns ('t.M. r, .
f4irs by his imprudent condu, 46, 457. . a;e; ;' r
in Dumbarton callle, and hanged -- i. 7
--- the cattle o', detnolilhed lv the r'en.h . 'J

· the prior of, promotes a t:caty between *I:.e C (r tr t
and the Reformers, i. 78. is provoledl o Ic.0l": . ,
180. is one of the chief promoters ol the c;:m. I, I; .

tn,,

orne account, and a charater, of him, ibid. 197. artful en.
d. avturs uscd to undermine him, ibid. presumption of his in-
nocencc of the designs charged on him, ibid. is sent by the
conention to invite the Queen to Scotland, 2;2. is received
by her with confidenceand affedion, 253. restrains the turbulent
ipiiit of the people against popery, 2z6, 267. is sent to restrain
the licentious praaices of the borderer, 272. executes his com-
million with vigour and prudence, 273. a conspiracy againlt
him Jdfcovered, 282. is created Earl of Mar, 28;. becomes
obnoxious to the Earl of Huntly, ib. See Mar and Murray.
Ai/1gus, Earl of, was the only man who aflerted the independency

of his country, i. 23, 24. allimes the Regency during the
ninor:ty of K. James V. 37, 64. is unable to gain h;s assec-
tions, 64. is attainted and flies into England - 65

-- Obtains leave to return into Scotland, ii. 92. frrenders

himflf to K. James VI. 103. he with several others seize the
catlle of Stirilig to oppose Arran, o6. they are forced to fly
into England at the approach of the King with an army, 107.
be is attainted and his efiate forfeited, 1 I . is concerned in a
plot in favour of Spain, 2og. is seizcd and committed prisoner
to the calle of Edinburgh, z o. escapes and flies to the moun-
tains, 211. offers to submit to a trial, 21;. sentence is pro-
nounced againf him, 26. he refuses to submit 217
Adjcu, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eli-

zabeth - - - i. 2;
inne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI. ii. 200,
azo. her arrival in Scotland-and coronation, 203. heads a par-
ty that opposes the chancellor - - 22, 213

.rchbiops, Bifocps, Deans and Chapters revived in Scotland dur-

ing the Kind's minority, ii. 38, 39. this gives great offence to
many of the clergy, 39, 40. an act of afembly against these
offtice, 86, 87. Bishops made subjei to prefbyteries and assem.
blies, 139. a great llroke given to their authority, 18S, 186.
None of them present at the Queen's coronation 203
.rr/·, E.arl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to the

JPauplin of France, i. 163, 164. uses his interest with the re-
:1rr. tors to ilakl a treaty with the Queen Regent, 178. leaves
h r court in refen:nent of her treachery, ISc. refuiles to ac-
c.de to a treaty with Murray the Rcgcn, 46. is soon after
fr rd to fubniir, 497. acts as liuticnant to the Qe:n after
the Regent's niu:der, ii. 6. is prevailed on to join the King's
l.&.tv, :l. qunricls with Atho'e, S5. confederates with him
i:,;;; .i Morton, the Regent, f r thrir mutualdefence, ibid. they
ji:.nnflr;:te against him to the l'ing, X;. they raise forces
;1:lir,l himi, 64. negociate a trra;y .ith him by the media-
ti n I'f' Q Elizabeth, 65. is promoted to the office of chan-
ccl.r, 67. The King's authority delegated to him and Lord
I',;l;s ;;ganl1 the popilf Loids, z2o. his forces are defeated
in a:n engtagemcint with tlel ibid. 221
/rl'tcracy, predominant in cotland i. 255

3rado

Jrmado, Spanilh, preparations for it, ii. Isi, 1 9. it is defeated

19+
Arron, Earl, is appointed Regent during the minorityofQ Mary,

i. 97. hi. chara8er, ;8. corilents to the Iclemes of England
which difgulls he public, too. becomes suspicious of the Earl
of Lennox, oz. is forced to renounce the friendship with Eng-
land and declare for France, 103 and to perlecute the reformers,
104. puhlic!.ly abjures the doctrines of the reformers, o05, is
contemned by one half and little trutted by the other part of the
nat.on, 6. heads the partizans ot France and defenders of
popery, 107. attempts in vain to seize the murderers of cardinal
Teatoun, 113. is orced t, n ake a truce with the conspirators,
114. his eldest ion is condizioially excluded all right of fuc-
celion, 1 7. hi, mean conceflion to the court of France, 24,
z12. gets the title of Chatelherault, a2;. is unoermined by
the Q IDowager, 132, 133. proposals and arguments for his
refinration, I 34. he consents to it, 135. retrats by the influence
of the archbilhop of St. Andrews, 136. is at las prevailed or
and gets advantageous terms, 137. See Chatelbtratlt.
--- eldet son of the Duke of Lhatelherauit, joins in an aflob

ciation with the reformers, i. 194. narrowly escapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 195. is full of resentment against
the French on that account, ibid. 196. the Congregation so-
licit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, 244. his great imprudence
with regard to Q Mary, 274. discovers a conspiracy against
the Queen's favourites, 282. loses his reason, ii. 67, 68. is
imprisoned by Morton 68
v---- late Capt. Stewart, gets that title and eflate, ii. 8o. is

appointed to conduct Morton, from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ibid. tortures several of his fcrvants cruelly, 81. his infamous
marriage with the Countess of March, 83, 84. his variance with
Lennox, 84. is frustrated in an attempt to rescue the King at
Ruthven, 91. is confined prisoner to the caltle of Stirling, 92.
regains his liberty and the King's regard, too. resumes his
power and arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthven conspirators de-
clared guilty of high treason, 103. is detelled as author of a per-
fccution against the clergy, o09. is gained over to Q. Elizabeth's
irterel, 114. gets fcveral forfeited estates, 116. his corrup-
tion and inoencc. z2. is made chancellor and has unlimited
power, ibid. iz3. his venality is limited by his wife, z13.
his monllious tyranny and oppression, ib. 1 4. his power un-
dermined by Wotton the nglifh envoy, 34, 135. is confined
in the catle of St. Andrews, but oon recovers favour, 135, 136.
his interell finks much, 138. is trippcd of his honours and
spoils, and reduced to his original liation - ibid.
A.rtic.i, Lord of, their origin and business, i. 81. by whom cho-

ifn, 8z, 83. the ubfcquent variations and political use made of
this inflitution - 83, 84
urandel, Earl of, is appointed a commiflioner to the conference
#t WcRmiucr - - i. 46

Ajh^b

A4&,, ambaifador from Q. Elizabeth to Seotland, ii. 191. his

great promises to King James, ibid. his proAires are soon for.
got, 195. he is ahamed and withdraws priva.ely from Sco.
land -- - ibid.
aifnaazies, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted for,
i. 363-365. reveral inllances of it in France. 365, 366. a
fop put to it ihere and in Scotland, 366. several great men
approve of it, 367. prevailed greatly afterwards ii. 2cs
jemhsy of the church of Scotland, the sift but feeble and irre-
gular, i. 25 . another affimb!y, their demands from the con-
vent'on, 274 275. two other afimblies in vain solicit an ag-
menion of their revenues, 293, 294. they addred Q. Mary
in high flrains ofcomplaints, 342. an afcmbly proceed, at Glaf-
gow notwihfanding the King's interdition, ii. 86, 87. two
assemblies yield many of the privileges of the chu'ch to the
King, 239, 24o. declare it lawful for MiniRers o si, in Parlia-
ment, 243, 244. SeeClrgy.
,Jjoiatioa, tbrm;d in .cf.uc u; Q. Elizabeth againit Q Mary

ii. 118
.bolk, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of Ar-

gyl, ii. ;5. joins with him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib.
dies oon after an entertainment at Morton's, 66. fupicions of
hi, being poiioned - - - ibid.
ibigne, Lord de, second on of the Lord Lennox, arrives in

Scotland from France, ii. 70. becomes oon a great favourite
of K. James, ibid. high titles and polls beflowed on him, ib.
71. rotes againll him, appendix, 461. See Ltmer.
A.lurian family, their origin and power - i. 87, 88

B

dB l dingtmw, An'hony, some account of him, ii, 143. the rife of
his conspiracy against Q Elizabeth, 142, 143. the names

and Icheme of operations of his aociates, ibid. 144, they are
betr.ayfd, Ifized and execured 145, r46
Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commiflioners to the

c ',iedeates at Weltmiifler i. 486
Eciol, John. his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. to. is pro-

ferlcd by Ed. . z. soon forced by him to rfign ibid.
Ealard, a tr.fficking pri l, solicits an invasion of England from

Spain, ii. 143.joins in a conlpiracy to murder Ql'.lizabeth. ib.
is discovered and taker, into cullody, 141. and executed ibid.

Earans, th.ir jilidiilion very xtecnfive, i. 21. the difference be-

tween the greater ard Ifieer, vh ente, 78. three hundred of them
remor.firate ainil the conduA of the Q Dowager, Sz2. the
lefl.r dmiite by their reprcfentative i Parlianent, ii. 187.
Fpti'i" of the leflir Barons to Parliament, append. 325.
See A'ob'e.
.Baf/icoH Doraw, a book publihed by King James VI. frengthens
hlis ilncrce in England - - 1. 245

JtrtiO

Bloenw, cardinal, made use of by K. James V. tomortify the nobles,

i. 68, 69. his pretensions to the Regency on the death of that
Prince, 96. forges a ftlhment of the late King, ib. his views
how disappointed, ib. his charaer, 97. opposes the Earl of
Arran, Regent, too, os. excites moA of the nation against
the Englih, 102. seizes the young Queen and her mother, ib.
cajol! the Earl of Lennox, ib. obliges the Regent to renounce
England and declare for France, 103. and to persecute the
reformers, lo4. engrcfles the chief direction of affairs, o16.
his double dealing with the Earl of Lennox resented, ib. 107.
is murdered, as 1. his death fatal to the Catholics, 13. a
vain attempt to revenge it, ib . 4. scandalous reports con-
cerning him - - 147
Sdiftrd, Earl of, comes as Ambaflador from Q Elizabeth to wit-
neit the baptilm of James Vl. i. 387. his inflrudions, 388.
389. his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appendix 349, 35S., 360
Bd!lado,, Sir Lewis, jultice clerk, K. James's Relident at Lon-

don, ii. 133. joins in promoting Q. Eliz h le :'. hitcreR in Scot-
land, ibid. is sent with her envoy into that country ibid.
Blac, Mr. David, minilter at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

seditious expreiTions in the pulpit, ii. zg, z3o. being up-
ported by the clergy, he declines the civil jurifdiAion, 230. is
condemned by the privy council, 231. i fcnterced by the
King to reside beyond Spey -- 23
Blrackir, captain, and three others, executed for the murder of

Darnly i. 435

Bortbius, Hector, his hillory of Scotland, some account of, i. 5
Bolteo Cafe, Q Mary confined a prisoner there i. 471
Boar, a toreigner, made govcrnor of Orkney i. 150
B.errtrs, an attempt to restrain their licentious prafices, i. "72,

273. QMary visits them, 377. a scuffle there, in which the
Englilh warden, &c. were made prifoncrs - ii.

Bwrtibwic*, Lord, assists the Q.Regent in defending Lcith i. 213
Bttwll, Earl of, intcrcept a fum of money froma England to the

Congregation, i. 212. favours the Qccn Regent, but resides at
his own house, 2t 3. his referntment acain:' the prior of St. An-
drews, z85. is by him when Earl of Murray and !'.cent fum-
m.'ned to a public trial, 326. prevents it by leaving the king-
dom, 37. a ettence of Outlawry agsinll him prevented by
the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return, 336. efcapcs with her
after the murder of Rizio, 36 1. son.e accjunt of his former be-
haviour, 369, 370. commences a f'vourite of the Queen, 370.
Ihe reconciles him to several Lords, w;h whom he was at va-
riance, ibid. 371. he increases in favour with her, 373. cir-
cumltances concurring in this, 374. he is wounded in attempt-
ing to frize one of the borderre., 377. the Q1een's extraordi.
nar) regard for him on this occasion, ibid. to Iccurc adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton ad h;; afrciate, 3,I. propa.
sos tilc retoration of the popi!ll ecc!ciiallical jurif';,lCion, j3t.
his views in this, ibid. 3'-.. is fijto:;ced the alihor .f D:rnly's

ulurder,

murder, 401. is charged with it by Lennox, 403. but fill ha-
youred by the Queen, 404. appointed governor of Edinburgh
Ca>fle, ibid. his trial is hurried on, 405. remarkable par-
tiality in his favour, 46. Lennox accules him openly. 407.
comes to his trial with a great retinue, 408, 409, is acquitted
by a jury, 409. the trial univerially cenlured, ibid. 41o.
challenges any that would accuse him, 410. several aas of
Parliament pasTed in his favour, ibid. 411. he procures an a in
favour of the reformation, ibid. 41 z. prevails on everal of the
nobles to recommend him as a husband to the Queen, 413, 414,
41 5. seizes the Queen on a journey from Stirling, and carries
her to Dunbar, 417, 413. his view in this, 41t . obtains a par-
don under the great feal, ib. 49. procures a divorce from his
wife, 419. carries the Queen to the caflle of Edinburgh, ibid.
is created Duke of Orkney, 420. and married to the Qeen,
ibid. is not a!lowed the title of King, 421. he watches the
QOeen very clo:ely, ibid. 422. endeavours to get the Prince
into his cufody, 422, 423. is alarmed with an association of
the nbles agiinft trh Qeen and him, 44, 42;. carries the
Queen to the c;itle of l;orthwick, 426. raiies forces againit
the confederate Lords, ibid. he marches atinft them, 427.
proposes a finale combat, 48. this how prevented, 4z9. takes
his last farewell of the Qteen, and is forced to fly, ib. fends for
a calket of letters front Q_ Mary to him, 435. they are inter-
cepted by the Earl of Morton, ibid. his milerable fate, 447;
448. rcfl.iirns on his condu.t, 448. copy of his divorce from
Lady Jean Gordon, appendix 93
Buthwell, late Francis Stewarr, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 1 96.

is imprifbned for coifultin w;tchs, :0;, zc6. elcapcs and
attempts to break into the King's pre.i.nce, 206. retires to the
north, ibid. He and his adherents are attainted, 209. fails in
an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under prcction of
Q Elizabeth, who solicits for him, z21 . ceizes the King's per-
son, 213. forces him to dismiss the chancellor, and his other fa-
vourite, ibid. and to grant him a remiflinn, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, z 4. is encouraged by the
Englilh amb-iffdor, 217. makes another attempt to come at
the King. 2 8. is repuifed and obliged to fly to the north of
England, ibid. is abandoncd by Q. Elizlbeth and f)rced to
fy into Spain and Italy, 223. remanis in indigent ublcurity,
and is never after reconciled to the King - ibid.
---- Adam, ilhop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of mar-

riage of Q: Mary to the Earl o Bothwell - . 420

Botbwuellhaugh. See Hamilton.
Boulogne, vrelted by the rench out of the hands of the English,

i. z24. they canlent to restore it and its dependencies to the
French 126
Bowew, Envoy finm Q Elizabeth, accuses Lennox of diftrbing

tiuc ^cace, ii. 7. is rcluicd an audience, ibid. is sent to encou-

rage

rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 92. to enquire about King
James's correspondence with the Pope - 46, 247
Boyd, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James III.

fruirated i . 36
- is prevailed on to join the King's party against Q Mary, ii.

21. joins the Ruthven conspirators - 89
Britrne, Count de, comes an ambassador from France to witnels

the baptiim of K. James VI. i. 387
Bruce, Robert, his claim tothe crown of Scotland, i. o. his grand-

ion asserts his right and vindicates the honour of his country.
i z. he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles 46
- a priest, employed by the King of Spain to seduce the Scot.

nobles - - ii. 196
- Mr. Robert, a prelbyterian minifler, performs the ceremony

of the coronation of K. James's Queen - ii. 203
- Edward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits himelif with address and

reputation as ambassador at the court of England ii. 244, -i.
- Mr. Robert, a minilter, his resolution in refusing to pub; itl

the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 269. is depri ed
and banished on that account ibid.
Buebanaa, George, his hitlory of Scotland, some account f, i. ;.

remarks on his dialogue d jure Regis, 183. alone acculs Q.
Mary ofa criminal correspondence with Rizio, 356. approved
of affalfination, 367. his partiality in overlooking an at of P2r-
liament in favour of the reformation, 41 z. attends the Regent
into England when called on to aecufe (Q I 'ary, 47.- wa on:C
of the preceptors of K. James VI. ii. 56. commended for h.
great genius 30

Brrligh. See Cecil.
Burroughs, when firll represented in Parliament ii. : o

C
C I S, John, a declaration of his in name of Q Eizabeth to

the Lords of Grainge at Lethington, appendix 411
Caithiefi, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Botlhvell for ti.l

murder of Darnly - - i. 4cy'
C..lvin, the patron and refRorer of preflnyterian church gvcr;,-

ment

Cambd, rome miltakes of his i. 388, 39, 4;;
Caaongate, near Edinburgh. a Parliament held there ii.
Cardan, tome account o him, i. 135, t36. his remaikable CLri

of tie bilhop of St. Andrews ibi..
Cary, Sir George, ent ambaflador from Q. Elizabeth o t -

courage the conspirators at Ruthven .- ii. c.
-- Robert, sent by Q. Elizabeth to sooth K. Jams. ;!'t..r ..:

death of his mother, ii. i8o. is not permiitcd to cnrr Sco:-
land, ibid. was the firl that brought K J.inie in tcligcl ce -'
the death of Q Elizabeth - --
Cajkct of Iltcra trom (M Mary to Bothwell ic;.cd by the Erl of

A.I.l ls ;.,

Morton, i 435. her asemis avail el~r much ofthem,

ibid. 436

Ca.J, Earl of, joins the King's paty - ii. 21
C/ltiwm, the French ambalidor, i employed to procne the con.

sent of his court to her marriage with Dunly, i. 38, 319. he
endeavours to make up the diQtences betwee the Q aee and
him, 373. his interceion in behalfof Q Mary ii. a18
Catkerina of Medicis, afumes the government fter the death of

Francis 11. her son, i. 246. her arfh treatment of QMary,
ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 304, 305.
bends her whole endeavours to deflroy the Prosftasu, ii. 25.
her artful conduc with that view ibid. a6
Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, i. 232, *56. is employed

to negociate a peace with France, ibid. over.reaches the French
ambaflador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 256. is appointed a
commillioner to the conference at Weftminfer. 486. is sent by
Q. Elizabeth with propolhls to Q. Mary, ii. o. has an inter.
view with her, which excites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, 50. is
treated hardhly by Q Elizabeth for consenting to Q. Mary's
death 179, l8o
- Sir Robert, on to the former, heads the party against Eflt,

ii, 73. his characer, ibid. 274. his great aiduity, ibid.
enters into a private correfpnndeuice with K. James, 280. a
letter from him to his Majelly, append:x - 116
Celibacy of the popilh clergy, achief engine of their policy, i. 144,

173
Charls V. Emnpercr. his great power, i. 7. and unlimited am-

bition, 88, 89. is checked by Franci i. - 89
- K. of France makes a league with Q Elizabeth, ii. 31, 3z
Ckatllerault, Duke of, that title conferred on the Earl of Arran,

Regent of Scotland, i. 12 5. his right of fucceclion to the crown
of Scotland maintained, 58. enters a protefiation to save his
right, 161. joins the reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 191. joins in association with them, 194. i1
looked on as the head of the congregation, 9;, 196. His pu.
fillanimity, z21. becomes obnoxious to Q_ Mary, 274. his
jealousy of the prior of St, Andrews, 288. deprived of his
French pension, o04. is alarmed at the Earl of Lennox's return
to Scotland, 313. an accommodation brought about by the
Queen's influence, ibid. adheres to Murray in opposing the
Queen's marriage, 338- is pa, doned on his umble application,
but forced to reside in France, 3 1.. hit partizans grumble at
Murray's being advanced to the Regency, 451, 452. returns
from France and heads the Queen's adhcrt nts, 95;. is made her
lieutenant-general, ibil. His resolution wavering, the Regent
commits him pifoncr to thl casli o ELinburgh, 496, 497.
is fct at liberty by Kirk ldy and j,.'ns thl Q.ecu's party, ii. 4.
is pcl.,imi.d traii;(r hy Lennox tile *

. e

-t ,enr, 9. i recon-

ciled to Morton the Raecnt, 46. article . a :rcaty beLween
teca,, ibid. iiis dcath - - - S5

: Cigure

tbrcb of Scotand, revolutions ' ir ...'e; the anion ofthe crow,,

ii. 29Q, 300. See 4^mbly, Clergy.

Ch~ch Larnd annexed to the crown by Parliament ii. 185
Clas, the inflitution and ature es - . 27, 28
Crgy; popilb,their great riches and power, i. 67,111 were made

ule of by K. James V; to fipprels the noble%, 68, 69. made a
considerable body in Parliament, 142. tieir gicat influcnce over
thelaity, 143. they engrossed learning, ib. and held many of
the chief employments, ib;d. 144. their power increased by
celibacy, ibid. they seized the ellates of the intefl. tc. 14. and
tried all matrimonial and tefRamcntary causes, ibid. become
obnoxious to the laity, 46. their great corruptor, whence,
ibid. these of Scotland particularly dfiblute, 147. their weak
defence of their tenets, 148. t'y in vain to impose false mira-
cles, ib. 149. their impolitic cndu& to the reformers 167
'-- reformed, try in vain to recover therevenues of the church,

i. 25 , 25 z, 254. procure a debolition of all relies of popery,
254. a new regulation concerning their revenues, 27;-z80.
they are no gainers by it, z8o. their stipends, what in those
days, ibid. are offended at the moderation of their leaders, 302.
occasion a tumult among the people, ibid. 303. more com-
plaints of their poverty, 3 14, 391 are jealous of Q. Mary, ib.
39z. the small allowances appointed to support them all, 392.
their application for payment of their lifends of little effet,
451. frelh complaints of the deficiency of the funds for their
maiitenance, 509. are put off with fair words, and promises,
ibid. 510. archbilhop?, &c. introduced among them by Mor.
ton, ii. 39. their grievances under iis adminiltration, 5 , 53.
they approve of the Ruthven conspirators, 93. by favouring
them tey provoke the King, 104. severe laws made a^ainft
them, c8, cg. they of Edinburgh fly into England, o03. as
do several others that were molt eminen, ibid. more vigorous
mneafures againt them, i i. they obtain no redress on the re-
iloration of the exil d Lords, 13. reprefi:.t thc.ir grievances
to Parliament, 183; a maintcnaace provided for them by Par-
liament, Ise, 186. they prevail to get P. ib.terian govern-
ment etablii!hd by law, zao. their zeal aai ri' thePopinh Lords,
214, 21;, 25. their ralh proceedin?c, '

. z27. they ercst

a landing Council of the CIlu ch, a28. \ in cate one of their
number who declined the c;i, ; rirdil;,,2i. z;0 t.-t their
standing Council ordered to leave Pr.. o . z31. tils occa-
sions a violent tumult there,:, : . . tley tie their ut-
molt efforts to spirit the pe pli z . - d.. ie. ted and fly to
England, ibid. z27. th ir po'.'er gre;.t'y rtiuced, ibid. are
prevailed on to give up many ofthei3 ,;ivile.es, 239. are re-
tlored to a feat in Prliamen!, 241. this v;clenitly oppoed by
many of them, 24+. but carried in their gencrl Aflembly, ib.
244. those entitled to this privilege are laid under many regu-
lations and reitridion', z2o. they are brought under great lub.

VOL. 1I. N jcaion,

jcaion, 25 . the revolutions among them since the Union of
the Crowns -- - 299, 300
Clinton, Lord, appointed a commiffiioner at the conference at

Weltminfer - - - i. 486
Cordurn of Ormifton, receives a supply of money from the Engli&

to the congregation, i. 212. is intercepted and robbed of it ib.

Coin in Scotland, some account of, - i. 206. ii 52
Conmiarits appointed to try canses in place of the Spiritual

Court, i. 300. they are deprived of all authority 393
Confiejie of faith by the Reformers, consented to by Parliament

1. 240
Congrgatioa, the Protelants diflinguilhed by that name, i. 174.

their leaders enter into an association, 179. are involved in dif-
ficulties, 209. apply to Q. Elizabeth tor assistance, 21o. mo-
ney sent them by her, intercepted, 212. make a raih and defpe-
rate attempt on Leith, and are repulsed, ib. 2 3. are no lefE un-
fortunate in a second idrmilh, 213. are quite dispirited and re-
treat to Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body of the nobles,
216. their army dwindles away, ibid. are animated by Knox,
ibid. they apply again to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. their parties har-
rafs the French, 221. are assisied by a fleet from England, 22z.
conclude a treaty at Berwick, with the D. of Norfolk, 223,
224. the design and fubflance of this treaty, 224. negociate a
peace with France, 232. articles of the treaty, 233. they reap
advantages from it, 34, 235. See Rformatim.
Ccovexuat, national, framed in defence of the King and Govern-

ment, ii. 192. the nature and reafonablenefi of it, ibid. 193.
the progress of it since -- 193

OCurtey of Scotland, what - i. 159
Craig, a minifler, boldly tetlifies againfi Q Mary's marriage with

Bothwell - i. 420
Craw.ford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes Dumbarton Caile,

ii. 15, 16. the difficulties of that enterprize - 16
-- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanilh fhation, ii. 191,
196. ofers his service to the K. of Spain, 196. joins in re-
bellion againit the IKing, 199. is forced to submit to him, ib.
and impriloned a ihort time - - ibid.
Cricatet, Regent during the minority of K. James II. his barba-

Ious plicy - - - i. 52, 53
---- a jtluit, a plot against Q; Elizabeth discovered by his

mesns - - ii. 117
Criminals, a remarkable indance of the difficulty ofbringing them

to julli'.e - - - .20, 2
Croc du, the French Anmb..if.dor, rffifcd to countenance Q Ma-

ry's marniage with Botiwell. i. 421. attempts in vain a recon-
cili. tion between tlec Qu:en a.d the confeicrae Lords, 427,
428. meciatci a i uce b.:te;r. the Kiri's and Qecn'b party
in -;!tland - . 32

Cro,:.*' rt/'icr ta. '
^,. .,;',:.2 . .. ,: .by Prliamcnt to the Dau.

phin

phin of France, i. 16 1. deputies appointed to carry it. but are
prevented - - - 163, 64
Caaingbw, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwell in name of

the Earl of Lennox, . 408. demands a delay, which is refused

ibid.
Carke, one of Q Mary's secretaries, is seized and carried prisoner

to London, ii. 149. is produced an evidence againll her 1 5

D

YdV by, Henry, Lord, proposed as a hulband to Q Mary, i.
J og9. his right of fuccefion confidered, ibid. 310. is per-
mitted to viit the court of Scotland, 3 6. arrives there, and
quickly gains the Queen's heart, 317. his character, 319. dif-
gufis several of the nobles, particularly Murray, ib. 320. cul-
tivates a iamiliarity with David Rizio, 320. is derpifed on that
account, 3l1. grows intolerably insolent and haughty, 39.
schemes to airalinate Murray, 331. a plot to seize and lend
him to England prevented by the Queen, ibid. evidences of
this, 332, 333. his marriage with the Queen celebrated, 335.
is honoured with the title of King of Scotland, ibid. is im-
placable with refpet to the exiled nobles,346. lofestheQueen's
affedion by his untoward behaviour, 3 52. demands the Crown
matrimonial, 353. becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with
the Queen, ib. his resolution to be avenged of him encouraged
by the nobles, 3 5. articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 357. heads the conspirators who perpetrate the mur-
der, 358. cosines the Queen after it is committed, 3 9. pro-
hibits the meeting of the Parliament, ib. makes his escape
with the Queen, 360, 361. her hatred to him increales, 368.
is neglected by her and treated with little refpet by the nobles,
372. resolves to leave Scotland, 374. his wayward and ca-
pricious behaviour, 375. he writes the reasons of his conduct
to the Qeen, ib. his RIrange behaviour at the baptifin of the
Prince, 388. a faire reason alledged for this confuted, ibid.
389. retires to his father at Glasgow, 391. falls ick there,
394. conjectures concerning his ditemper, ib. is negleaed by
the Q2een, 395. he afterwards visits and exprecles alection for
him, 396. he is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 399.
is lodged ina separate house, ibid. he is murdered tere, ibid.
400. his character, 400. a proclamation issued for difcovcring
the murderers, 401. a remifi enquiry made into it, 40-41o.
Capt. Blackadder and three others executed on that account,
451. the confefion of Mcrton the Regent at his death con-
cerning the murder, ii. 8. paper of objetions of the Court
of England against his marriage with Q_ Mary, App. a ifllfir-
tation concerning his murder, at the end of vol. ii.

David i. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the church i. 141
-- II. troubles during his minority - i. 34
Davils, ent into Scotland by Q Elizabcth, a: a spy on the French

N n a Armbaf.

AmbalTador, ii. 96. is ent to gain Arran's interest o Q.Elif
zabeth, 114. this he soon accomplilhes, ibid. brings the war-
rant for Q. Mary's dea:h at Q. Elizabeth's desire, 68,

1 169

is charged by her with disobeying her orders, 179. is imprison-
ed, tried and fined, and loses a!l favour, ibid. objekticns aga:nf
him in the cause of the late Scottifl Queen App. 481
D.S2, Monficur, is sent with a supply of forces to ffilR the French

against the Erglifl in Scotand, i. 1z3, 124. his success theic

124
Discipline, in the Church, the sirs book of, compored, i. 2; , ib.

why obj<cted against in a convention of the States, ibid. an-
other attempt in favour of Church dicipline frustrated ii. 85
Dc;,las, the power and pro.erty of that family, i. 34. tliey

airpre to independency, 3. vil!. Earl of, murdered by K.
Janmcs ii. ibid. his son endeavours to resent it, 54. is forced
to Ply into England - - ibid.
- William, QMary committed a prisoner to his caflie of
Loclcven - - -- 44,
--- ~ Gei rge, brother to the above, affiRs the Queen in inak-

ing hr e:cape . - 452,453
--- Archibald, one of Darnly's murderers, ii. 141. under-

goes a rock trial for that crime and is acquitted, 142. is sent
AmbaiTador to England, ibid. letter from him to the Qof
Scots, apcndix, 43z. to the King 438
Driuy, icr \:i. enters bcotlar.d wi!h an army to support theQueen's

party, ii. 6. they join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
he procures a truce between the King and Queen's parties, 32.
comes with forces to nfll Morton in besieging the calle of
Edinburgh, 47. which is forced to surrender - 4

-- Sir Druc, is appointed one of Q Mary's keepers ii. 12t
Dudy, Lord Iobert, recommended by Q.Elizabeth, as a hulfand

to Q. Mary, i. 35. why a favourite of Q Elizabeth's, ib. is
hihily promoted by her, ibid. 36. his situation extremely
dlica", 30-. becomes suspicious of Cecil 3?8
DmLarici Calile, furprized ant taken in the King's name by the

Rcent - - - ii. 15, 17
Duty, a minitlcr of Edinburgh, banihed from his charge by K.

J .ines, for his free invecives aainlt the courtiers, ii. 87. as-
ter bint resorcd he is driven from it a second time for ap-
poriing the Raid of Ruthven - 10

Dii:bui'.S, is raken and burnt by the Enflif, i. icS, o09.

, a greit tray there bieteen the renci and Scot', 128, 12e.
is fcized by th Refobrmers, 185. its inhabitants are terribly
alirmed by the Fench, 212. a treaty there with the French
and L.nlgHfh, 232, 233. a loan demanded f it by . Mary,
34z. hich is grunted for the superiority of Leith, ibid. the
ti-aty of iiltkd on by Q. Elizabeth, 3?9, 390. i poffrned

by

by the Qteen's party, ii. 4. and fortified, by tlem, 18. the
City and CalUe hold out againit the King's forces, 30. is re-
duced to great itraits by famine, 3 . is relieved by a truce, 3 z.
the citizens take up arms to promote the King's marrinae, zoo.
they rife again and insult the King and his miniftcrs on the
murder of the Earl of Murray, 206. 0o7. affill the Kin,:
against Huntly, 218. a violent tumult there on account of the
Clergy, 232-135. they are severely punilhed for it by the
King, 236-23s. their minilters return to their charges, 2,c,
241. divided into parishes, and number of Miniicr5 increased,
241. they decline publilhing the account of Cowrie's confpi-
racy, 268. all, except one who is banilhed, arc persuaded by
the King to do it - - ibid. 1)
Edward I. of England, dellroyed the public archives of Scotland,

i. 4. is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, . his art to
acquire the superiority of cotland, ibid. his wars with the
Scots under Robert Bruce ----- 2, 13, 46

iElington, Earl of, is prevaied on to join the King's pary, ii. 21
f.li.cc'ta, her peaceable aczeflion to the Crova oft Eti.land, i.

14.

'4 j;ports te con-re gation in Scotland, 2 t1, 2 L. is sparing
in her iupplies, 211. rcfolves to li'pport them on a econd ap-
p!ic.ition, 216. her good condutt in mttcrs of irn-ortancc,
217. motives that determir.cd her to al:i; thtmn, ib. z 19. o20.
her delib rate and refolut condue , 222, z:3. fends a itro'.g
flzet to their a.tllance, 223. conc' uues a treaty with ithem, ib.
224. her right to the Crown of England asserted by 1'rancis and
Mary, in France, 233. obtains ad rantatcous ernms for :ite Scot.,
.234. is (olicited by the Parliamet of Scotland to marry the
Earl of Arran, z. 4. this Ibe declines, 24;. the rced of her dil-
content with Q.Mary, 55. 2 ;6. her jaloufy of tih fiiccefflon,
257, z6o. her exceliive vanity and jaloufy of M lry's beauty,
260, 2z,i. her diinnulation to her, 261. rcfutes her a fife con-
duc, 26z. fnds to congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 26(;.
rerufis a co::ccfjn made by Q. Mary, 270. her jealousy of her
rr 'ht letrayed her into nican aions. ibid. her refmnb!anc to
I l'n. VII. ibid., a perl;rnal interview with Ql. May propofrl,
2:)3, nle artruily declines i, ibid. her views in regard to .
J'.;ary's marriage, 297, 298. aflumes a dil;,gi.c;;ble authority,
_C8. names one for a hubiand to QMary, j;3. the different
qua!ificaions of her minieftrs and favourite', ib. 3c6. dissembles
vith (< Mary about her marriage, 307-309. adl likewii'
with regard to L. Darnly, 3 c. ralronts Q. \ Iary by her infinu-
ation concerning Lennox, 3 11. is perplexedi aitout the marriage
of the Scottilh Queen, 31 5, 316, permits Darnly to visit tle
court of Scotland, 3 16 assets to declare againlt Q. Mary's
marriage to him, 322, 323. her reasons for this condu't, 323,
324. her great difimulation in that afflir, 330. her harlh and
deceitful behaviour to Murray and his aflbciates who had fled
to her, 339. is stuck at hearing of the birth of ames V[.
372. confiuu to fland godmother to him, ibid. the l'arlia-

N n 3 ment

ment address her to fettle the iucceffion, 379. this greatly em-
barrafes her, ib. 380, 381. she tooths and gains her Parlia-
ment, 38z. endeavours to accommodate her differences with
MIary, 389. writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's mur-
derers. 407. interposes her behalf when a prisoner, 437. her
ambafldor i refuted access to Q Mary, ibid. she offers aflit-
ance to the other nobles, 438. her deliberations concerning the
disposal of Q. Mary on her arrival in England, 41C, 462. re-
solves to detain her there, ib. 463. her motives to this con-
dut, ib. 4 4. fends her letters of condolance, and gives or-
ders to watch her conduct, ib. 464, 465. the gladly accepts
the office of umpire between her and her fubjeAs, 465, 466.
receives a very refing letter from Q Mary, 469. her precau-
tions against her, 470. appoints conmmffioner, to hear Q Mary
and her accusers, 476. her important situation on that occa-
sion, ib. her views in this affair, 477, 478. receives the Re.
gent's demands, 481. removes the Conference to WefminfRer,
48 . her mean artifices to get the evidence of Q Mary'stuilt
fiom the Regent, 49o. treats her with greater rigour, 491.
writes a harih letter to Q; Mary, ib. he difmifes the Regent,
without approving or condemning him, 493. but secretly sup-
ports his party, ib. makes proposals to the Regent in her fa-
vour, 497. Norfolk's projecf concealed from her, oo. dif-
covers and defeats a rebellion in Q. Mary's favour, 506, 507.
resolves to deliver her up to the Regent, 5o0. her great con-
cern at his death, ii. . continues to encourage fafions in
Scotland, a, 3. her political condua with regard to Lennox,
6-9. is excommunicated, and deprived ofher kingdom, &c.
by the Pope, 8. supports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lennox to be Regent, 9. proposes a treaty of accommo-
dation between Q.Mary and her fubjecs, o. procures a cef-
fation of hoRilities, ib. fends proposals to Q Mary, 1 . her ar-
tifices in the conduf of this affair, ib. 12. appoints commis-
finercr to framea treaty, 13. finds a pretence to render their
ictling fruitles, 14. a marriage proposed between her and
the D. ofAnjou, z5. declares openly against the Queen's party,
zg. concludes a treaty with France, 3 . her motives for ne-
gociating a peace between the two parties in Scotland, 42, 43.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q. Mary, o. negociates a
treaty betwecn Morton and his adversaries, 65. her answer to
K. Jamec's demand of a pofleflion of an erlate in England, ib.
66. a marr.ige between her anJ the D. of Alengon proposed,
61;. inierpofes in behalf of Morton, 74. her measures in or-
der to save him, 76, 77. countenances the conspirators at
Ruthven, 9z. is alarmed at accnfpiracy against her, I I , I tz.
the designs of Q. Mary's adherent's against her, 113. endea-
vours to recover her interest in Scotland, and gains Arran to her
interef, 1 4. amufesQ Mary with a fruitlefa negocirion, 1 17.
a new confpiricy agsing her, ibid. an association formed for
her defence, 18, 9. her suspicions of Q Mary, z 9. her

life

lif endangered by a conspiracy, 12;. this how discovered
and prevented, 126. occasions an extraordinary fatate for her
preservation, ib. is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, 131. endeavours to form a confederacy
of the Prcteflant Princes, ibid. 132. and to proceed with ri-
gour againt Q Mary, 133. advances her interest in Scotland,
and propoes a league with it, ibid. 34. fettles a pension upon
K. James, 134. concludes a treaty with Scotland, 14c. account
of Babing:on's conspiracy against her, 142-146. her difi-
mulation after Q. Mary's conviction, 161, 16z. her answer to
K. James's interceflion for her, 164. her farther dilfimulation
and anxiety, 167. signs the warrant for her execution, 68.
her speech to Davidson on that occasion, ib. assets to lament
Q Mary's death, 178. several marks of her artifice in that as-
fair, ib. 179. he endeavours to ooth K. James, 180. pro-
vocations given by her to Spain, 189, 190. prepares to meet
its resentment, g0o, 191. endeavours to secure Scotland, ibid.
tries to prevent K. James's marriage, 199. solicits him to treat
conspirators againt him with rigour. 2 t . evades the decision
of K. James's right of fuccefflion to the Crown of England, 244,
245. is disgusted at several of his proceedings, 246, 247.
dilcovers his correspondence with the Pope, ibid. fresh grounds
of her suspicion, 273. her condud with regard to the Earl of
Effex, ibid-279. her irrefllution concerning his death, 279.
and great concern after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from K.
James with regard, and increases his subsidy, 86. her lad ill-
nets, 283. conjectures concerning the causes of her melancholy.
284-286. her death, 286. and charater, 287, z88. de-
clared the K of Scots her fucceflor, 289. some of her letters,
appendix - 327, 351. 362, 363, 36, 380, 382. 387, 406
Elphitv e, ecretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a corref-

pondence with the Pope, ii. 48. is tried and found guilty of
high treason, ib. and pardoned on the Queen's interceflion, ib,
Eigland, the English seize and detain King James I. of Scotland

long a prisoner, i. 34. the nobles there humbled, 38. had
earl two houses of Parliament, 80. they invade Scotland, loS.
their depredations there, o, I I . a peace between England,
France and Scotland, 111 invade Scotland again, 18. gain
a great victory, 1I9, Iso. it proves of little advantage to
them, 121. they force the Scots into a closer union with France,
za. conclude a peace, 126. an Englih fleet arrives in Scot-
land to aflif the congregation, 222. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 223, 224. they enter Scotland and besiege the
French in Leith, 224. are several times repulred, a26. causes
of their bad success, ib 227. articles of a treaty of peace,
235. they quit Scotland, 36. reflseions on the right of uc-
ceion to their Crown, t;7-260. the Parliament favours Q.
Mary's right of fucceflon, 379. a league between England
and rance, ii. 31. between England and Scotland, 140. the
ztional covenant adopted in England - 93

N n 4 E&tai

Zatails, with what view introduced - . 2, 23
.Efi/tpa government in the Church, Come account of, i. 248. an

attempt to reviie it, ii. 39. it is abo;.lhed by the Aflembly
86. juiifdition abolihed, 74. See rcbliAops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Sparih tad on, i. 19r.

his offers of service to the K. of Spain, i.6. appeals in rebel.
lion, 98. is forced to submit to the King, 199. imprisoned
for a ihort time, ibid. joins in another conspiracy, 209. is
summoned by the King to furren'er, 0o. offers to submit to
atrial, 21i . sentence pronounced against him 216
,rfina of Dun, is employed by the Queen Regent to deceive the

Protefiants, i. 175. his resentment of this uiffe ibid.
-- Lord, governor of Edinburgh CalUle, as a neutral part

between the Quecen Regent ar.d the congregation, i. 214. re-
ceives the Quccn.Recent into the Caile, 226. is created Earl
of Mar, 289. See Mar.
-- Alexander, has the chicfdire&ions of the education of K.

James VI. ii. 56. admits ome of the nobles to make com-
plain:s to him againa IMorton the Regent. 8. is turned out
of Stirling CAlle by his nephew the Earl of Mar 6z
Ejie.val, the I rencl : nvoy, endeavours to obilruc a treaty be-

twveen England .nd Scotland - - i!. 14D
EJ.ex, ELrl of, et uu .by tlhe Enlih Papits as a candidate for

the rown, ii. .:3. i Js a party in England, 273. his cha-
racter, ibid. i r.at') i£i:: :uiiecd by the Q(een, ibid. 274.
favocr :',c K. c'ce;: , z*. . ob:ains the oices of Lord Licu-
tenanr anl: L'o .:;.': in ChiLf in Ireland, ibid. is unfuccel-
ful in tiat expediliun, ibid. 275. receives a harsh letter from
the QCren, -:. turns tu England and is confined, ibid. is
tried and cenf:,.d, ibid. endeivours to spirit up KingJames,
276. his rah ad frantic cordut, 277. is again taken into
cuilody. 278. hi: death, 2-9. his on and ani.:ciates are reftor-
cd to h:ir h :ours alter the acceflion of K. James ibid.
.Eaope, the flat; of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

i. 84
Excwmumnicatin, a terrible engine of the Popili clergy i. 148

F
FEllou, an Engliflhman, ixes the Pope's excommunication of

Q. Elizabeth, on the ga:es of the bilhop ot' London's pa-

Ice - ii. 8
Fereltn. M. de la Motte, sent by the French King to interpole

'or K. Janie when confined by the Ruthven conspirators, ii.
9. is o . c: to return wi.hout fucccfs - ibid.
Fudlalgovrmtt, ;ts origin a: d arilocratical genius, i. r , 16,

18. c ,. wli:ch limited the power of feudal Monarchs, 17.
feudal vafl' ls liable to fe . taxes, 18. a remarkable inltance cf
the feeblcncfs of feudal government, o0, 2a. the molt per

cft

fe idea of the feudal system, how attained, 44. ate ofit aI
England, 77-79. and in Scotland 79. 80
,if, a populous and powerful county much devoted to the con-

grega:ion, i. 2z.. is detroyed and plundered by the French,
ib. the fynod of, excommunicates the Archbilhop of St. An-
drews for contumacy, ii. 139. they excommunicate the Popilb
Lords - - 2- .
Feorhr, Lord, with the Earl of Argyl, is rent againt the Popi

Lords, ii. zzo. are defeated by them ibid. 221

Forduv, John de, his hitoriy of Scotland when wrote i. 5
Forir, Sir John, warden of the Englith border, a scuffle between

him and the Scots - --i. 135
Fotheringay Catlle, Q. Mary's imprisonment, trial and death there

ii. 140-174
Franee, the cenfequences of the subversion of the feudal govern-

me- there, i. ;. a body of French arrive in Scotland to sup.
por te C.h:,lics, 1 5. they reduce the caflle of St. Andrew's,
11 . nother party of them arrive there, 123, z4. their tranf-
ations there, ibid. 127. conclude a peace with England, 26.
their politic conduct, z2/. 128. they leave Scotland, 127.
their artifices in a treaty of marriage between the Dauphin and
theQ of Scots, 157, 158. eedeavour to expel the rench army
out of Scotland, 19o. another party of them arrive there and
fortify Lei:h, 198. they ex-fperate the peolF h their info-
lence, ibid. they are f'nt aga:nit ;he congregation, 22o. they
deRroy and plunder Fife, and are much harraffed by parties of
the congregation, 221, 222. are greatly alarmed by the arrival
of the Englilh fleer, 222 they return to Leith greatly harrafled
and xhaulled, 223. are besieged there by :he r. igith and the
congregation, 226. they gain several advantages ibid.-z28.
their motives for concluding a peace, 230. negotiatic ns or that
purpose, 231, 232. articles of the treaty. 235, 234. they teave
SCotland, 236. the French advice QMary to niodeia.e mca-
fures, z23. their propoLls y an abaflador rejetted, z24.
they agree to Q. Mary's mariage with Lord Darnly, 39.
the licentiousness of their morals - - 397
- King cf, a copy of his diretions sent to Scotland, app 419
franci: I. gives a check to the ambitious projeits of Charles V.

i. 89. his fidelity to the Scots, . hi. death 1l5
- - II. comes to the crown of France, i. 193. hi. charac.
ter, ibid. 245. is guided by the Duke of Guile and Cardinal
of Lorrain, ibid. he treats the Protellants with great rigour,
231. his death - 24;

G

fIord, Dotor and Gilbert, their notion concerning the
\G lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated Prac, s,

ii. 142. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Eliz:beth, ib.d.
Gilbtt being gained byWalhnghan betrays his afociates, 145.

to

is employed carry on a foreign carrepondence with Q. Ma-
ry - - - - 46,1 47

Cmis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft . 69

- - Lord, chancelor, intimates the King' order to Morton
to furnder the Regency, ii 59. is killed in a rencounter at
Stirling - - - 61
* tihe tutor of, pins the conspirator of Ruthren, ii. 89.
his bold speech to King James, 91. he, with the other confpi-
ntors, seize the cale of Stirling and eret their andard, so6.
he is attainted, and his eflate forfeited 15
Glaf/gm,, bilmop of, a note of his concerning the Qeen of Scot-

lanu's dowry, appendix -- 415

Glncaira, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 89
Glnli.vi, the battle of - ii. 220
Gordon, Sir John, a fcufle in the fireets of Edinburgh between

him and Lord Ogilvy, i. 285. being confined for it, he makes
his ecape, 86. when ordered by the Queen to surrender
.imfelf, he takes up arms againf her, ib. 287. is defeated, and,
together with his brother, made prioners, So0. he is behead-
ed and his brother pardoned - - 291
--- Lord, set at liberty - . 336

Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's itereft in the
north, ii. o3. his carater and good condua as a soldier

32, 33
Cowrie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at Ruth-

ven, ii. 89. is vifted and pardoned by the King after his escape,
29. becomes fufpeaed, and is ordered for France, o6. delays
his voyage, and is taken into cutody, ibid. he is tried and
executed - 07
- John and Alexander, sons of theabove, their charaerand

conspiracy, ii. as5. the furprifiggcircumltances f that-re-
markable tranfaion, 252-z56. ~veral different conjeures
concerning it, 2; -268. their dead bodies brought into Par-
liament and condemned, 269. their defms and honours forfeit-
ed, and name abolilhed for ever, ib. different accounts of this
affa r publilhed, but not fatisaory, 270-272. See Rut hv.
Graham, Sir David, of Fintry, accused ofa conspiracy with the

popilh Lords in favour of Spain, ii. 210o. is convied and be-

headed a-
Gry, master of, some account of him, ii. 120, 1at. he becomes

a favourite of King Jamies VI. ib. is gained to Q. lizabeth's
interest, 121. betrays Q Mary, ibid. perfuadesK. James to
write a harfl and undutiful letter to her, sa. jois with others
in prnmoting Q Elizabeth's interet in Scotland, 133. his trea-
chery when ent to intercede for Q Mary, 67. his bareness
dijcovreJ, he is disgraced, 18a. his vain attempt againf fecre-
tar) :?^.. ,ind, 183. as in Italy as a spy from the court of
Fngland, 46. a memorial of hib for his Majesty, appendix,
41 r 448. to tc ecutary of t - - 44;

CVii/s

Gai/i, duke of, his violent counels with regard to the Scots, i.

193, 94. is murdered at the iege of Orleans - 296
- his intrigues againt Q. Elizabeth, ii. x 2, 113. is a
principal promoter of the holy league, 131, 189. drives the
French King out of his capital - 189

H

.Hddi;ngtou, seized and forfeited by the Englilh, i. 2zz.
is relieved by the French - - 124.
Hamiwkon, the rife of that family, i. 36. arbitrary proceedings of

Morton the Regent against it, ii. 67, 68. See Cbetlberalt.
.--- of Bothrelhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-
fide, i. 470. is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent, by the iterceflon of
Knox, 471. an account of his murdering Murray, 5 1 , 512.
makes his escape, 512. is received in triumph at Hamilton, ii.

- Mr. Patrick, the first who fuirred in Scotland for the

Protellant religion - - i. 165
Hartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an Englifiharmy, i. o18.

burns Edinburgh and Leith, ib. 109. is made Duke of Somer-
let, and protecor of England, 1 8. See Semerfit.
Haton, vice chamberlain ot England, the argument by which be

prevailed on Q Mary to plead at her trial - ii. 153
IfEry I1. of France, fends forces to ailt the Scots, i. 5. a mar-

riage propsed between his son the Dauphin and theyoung Q.
of Scots, 123, i24. excites the Scots to invade England, 153.
his infamous imposition on QMary in the treaty of marriage,
157, 158. persuades his son and Q. Mary to aflume the titles
of King and Queen of England, 170. his death 191
--- 11. degenerates greatly on his acceflion to the crown of

France, i. 130. enters into a private negociation with QEli-
zabeth, 132, I 33. interposes feebly in behalf of Q_ Mary, 16a
- V 111. of England, by his fyRlem of reformation becomes

formidable both to Papifis and Protelants, i. 70. proposes an
interview with King James V. ib. is disappointed by him and
declares war againSt Scutland, 71, 72. invades it, but is forced
to retreat, ibid. his importance as to the balance of power
in Europe, 89. his influence in Scotland how obtained, 92.
his schemes with regard to it on the death of James V. 98.
were ill-conduced by himself and odious to the Scots, 99. at-
tempts to gain the Regency by great promises, 03. invades
Scotland, lo8. this being il.conduted turns to no account,
109. receives and rewards the Earl of Lennox, ib. encourages
the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, I 14. his death, and cha.
ranter, ai5. his inconfifent condut, it9. excluded the Scots
line by his teltament - -- 390
Hrrui, Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the Regent, i. 95.

comes to a treaty with him, 496. he and the duke are com-
mitted prifoncn to the catle of Edinburgh, 497. intimates the

King's

King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, ii. 59. account
of his behaviour in Parliament, appendix, 385. a letter from
hiln to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis - 454
VHicf.rd, fcctetary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by di.l

covering his intrigues with Q. Mary - ii. ;6-r3
Highlands and IJes, an attempt to civilize them by K. James VI.

ii. 2 . regulations for that purpose, 282. three tosvns endued
with the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to be built there

ibid.
Jaodgfcn, a pried of Reims, maintained the lawfulners of killing

heretical excommunicated Princes --- ii. 142
Homr, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a secret embassy to the

Pope - - ii. 249

Ho.vard. See Norfolk.
Hundanze, Lord, guvernor of Berwick, his interview with Arran

ii. 114, 1I
H;mnt, Earl, thcugh a catholic, joins the reformers in opposing the

jrench arny, i. 191. ailts them only with fair promises, 213,

!4. his further concurrence with them, z28. some account of
that family, z83, 24. his enmity againt the young Queen's
muitiltcrs, ibid. nis resentment islamed by an accident, 285.
appears in an open rebellion againf the Qien, z88. his plot
again;: her minilers disappointed, ibid. breaks out ito open
rebellion. 289. is trodden to d;eath in a battle, 2,0. his family
prc'ccutcd with the utmof rigour, 291. several anecdotes
and conjectures conccrnin his plot, iid. 292. is attainted by
Parliament, 3co. the attainder repealed and the family re.
iored to eltate and honours - - 411
--- his attachnmnt t, rothwell, 406, 4.13. refues to fuumit
to the P.eert. 49-. is forced to do it, 47. a&s as lieutenant
to the Qleen aer the Ic.-rn's murder, ii. 6. is proclaimed a
traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 9. receives fume money
and promies ofafihlance from Spain, ibid. o. agrees to a trea.
ty with Morton the Regent, 46. is one of th: head, of the Spa,
nill tRlion, 191. engages to tc Prince ,f PI'arn to fcrve the
King of Sain, 196. is imnirilon d tor a ihort time, .q. ercets
a ltandlard of rebellion, ibid. l:ut Ibrced to fub.'it to the King,
ibid. is again imprilbned, ic9. is son sett :it lilher, ibiJ. re.
ceives a commiflion frcm. the Kiing, 2c6. is b:n:::r.us ruldcr
of the Earl of Murray, ibid. is summoncd t , furr,n.icr to jus-
tice, o07. flies to the mountain, 21l. (.c.rs to !bmi to a
trial, a; . lentence pronou:ncrd a^ain.t him, 2lzt. ielfuces to
flubat, z 7j. makes another dcfpcrate attcpt, but is oiced to
fly - -- 21, 219
JA ME S . was detained long a prisoner in England, i. 34.

troubles in Scotland during that time, ibid. 35. was much
improved by an Englilh education, 7, 48. his policy on his re.

turn

tutr to Scotland, 49. his charater, ibid. oe. lfpprefles the
power of the nobles, ibid. they being exasperated, conspire
againl , and murder him - - 5sI 5Z
7avues 11. troubles in Scotland during his minority, i. ;, 36.

his attempts against the nobles, z5, 53. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 53. procures several good laws to be passed, 54, 55.
reduces the power of the nobles, 55. his death 56
-- III. the ate of Scotland during his minority, i. 36, his

impolitic conduai, 56, 57. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 57, 58. is greatly insulted by his nobles,
59. his defpic;ble minions, ibid. was the firfi that appointed
a Itanding guard to his person, 60. the nobles are provoked
to take arms :,iainil him, 61. is killed in a battle againf them,
ibid. his charaeer -ibid. 6z
-- IV. his charaaer, i. 6z. is killed in a battle against the

Englifl at Flowden - - z, 63

V. his minority long and turbulent, i. 36. tranfa&ions

during that time, 3. 64. affr.es the goverr.ment while very
young, 6;. his chalrer, ibid. 66. his scheme for humbling
the noble, 66-69. is liverted from it by the clergy, 71, 72.
takes arms for the defence of his kingdom, 72. his nobles re-
fufingto follow him, throws him into a deep me'ancholy, 73-
75. which is incrcafed by a surprising defeat of his force', 75.
his death, ibid. refle&ons on his condut, ibid. 76. he refused
an alliance with Charles V. Emperor -
- VI. h;s birth, i. 371. his baptism, 387. the care of hin

committed t the Earl of '1pr; 4... is by him prererved from
falling into the hands ofBo:hwl!, 422. is crowned, 441. the
nobles oppressTd by iMorton the Regent, turn their eyes to him
for Icdrefs, ii. 5. his education and difoofitions, ibid. 57.
he becomes suspicious of the Regent's powcr, 57. discovers
early a great attachment to favourites, 70. adopts tvo ofdif-
ferent dilpo!ition., ibid. enters Edinburgh with great folemni-
ty, 72. is by. his f:',rdites engaged in unpopular measures, 83,
89. is seized by a party of nb!es at Ruthven, go. and forced
to receive com!laints againlt his favourites, ib. 91. diflembles
with them, and ban;fhes Lennox, 92. is brought to Stirling and
Holyroodhotrc, 4+. his concern for Lennox's death, and regard
for his memory., 5. receives the French ambaflador with great
refped, 96. makes his efcapc from the conspirators, ibid. 97.
relolve; to treat them with moderation, 99. visits Gowrie and
grants him a pardon, ibid. renews his fondness for Arran, ib.
oo00. is by him persuaded to violent measures against the con.
fpirators, o. his anfvcr to a haughty letter from Q. Elizabeth
on their behalf, x o . is by her iterpofition rendered more vio-
lent againll them, to. is provoked by the clergy, o04. his
fleps to humble them, o,7. hs prafufion to Arran, aI6. fends
a new favourite to England againll the banihed Lords, t20.
devolves thewhole regal authoity onArran, 122, 123. writes an
rndutiful letter to his mother, 1 29. is threatened to be difin-

herited

herited by her, ibid. receives a pension from Q Elizabeth, 34.
is reconciled to the exiled Lords, 36. becomes popular by con-
cluding a treaty with England, 40, 141. his scandalous beha-
viour with regard to Archd. Douglas, ibid. ,tz. his endea.
vours to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 163, 164.
is greatly incenscd at her death, 180. arguments used by the
Englilh minilters to pacify him, ibid, 1i1. is forced to lisle
his resentment, ,18. attempts to unite the nobles, 184, 185.
is courted both by Spain and England, t9o, 191. rehilves vi-
gorouly to adhere to the latter, 191. takes several Reps with
that view, ibid. his skill in the popish controversy, 192. wrote
a commentary on the Revelations, ibid. his maxims with re-
gard to popery, ibid. i,8. his excessive lenity to conpirators
againi him, 98. resolves to marry the Princefi of Denmark,
199. arts used to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is confummat-
ed in Norway, 201. passes several months in Denmark, ibid.
reflecions on his condua there, ibid. 202. his arrival in Sco:-
land with his Queen, 203. indulges the Prelbyterians, 204.
the ill conlequcnces of his lenity, ibid. 25o. his zeal againit
wi:chcraft, zo;. is solicited by QElizabth to treat the con-
(pirators againfthim with rigour, 2 11, zl2. is furpeed of on-
niving with them, 212. is surprised and seized by Bothwell,
ibid. 213. and forced to comply with his terms, 213. his lenity
to Borhwell abused, ibid. z26. is fufpeaed of favouring the
popiih Lords, ibid. is in new danger from them, 218. dele-
gates his authority to Argyl and Sorbes against them, o20.
goes in perton againtl them, z21. waies their lands and gar-
riibns their calles, ibid. his right of the succession to the crown
ot England opposed by the Fapilts, 222. his lenity to them in-
censes the clergy and people, :z6, 2z7. is much provoked by
the obltinacy of the clergy, 229. gives orders against them, 23 2.
is much infuted, and in great danger at Edinburgh, 232-23;.
leavesEdinburgh and proceeds with feverityagainft the citizens,

3 3;- 39. acquiresabnblutedominion in ecclefialicalaffairs,z4o,
24 1. firengthens his interetl in parliament, by restoring the feats
oftheccleiallics, 241-243. endeavours with fuccefi to gain
a party in England, 344. incrcafcs his reputation, by publitfing
his Bafilicon Doron, 24. is accured by Q_ Elizabeth of cor-
responding with the Pope. 247. this he denies, and bow account-
ed for, ibid. 248. other reports concerning this, 248, 249.
is at great pains to gain the Roman catholics, 249. his regula-
tions with regard to the church, zc, z:x. the myflerious ar-
fair of Gotvry's conspiracy, 2a5-273. his cautious behaviour
in regard to the Earl of fstex, 277. fends ambassadors, to
fve him, 278. they arrive too late, 279. he refores hii Ton and
.flbciates to their honours after his accclion, ibid. continues
his intrigues in England, ibid. 20, as1. his interelt greatly
Ufrengtlened there. ibid. endeavours to civilize the highlands
and iles, 28J, 282. is proclaimed King in England after the
dsath of Q. Elizabctb, z89. is procliiimcd likewise in Sco!:and,

390.

290. pep fbr his journey to ngland, 291. enters London,
ad ta pofffiou of the throne, 292. his characer how dif-
sent from that of Q Elizabeth, ib. a ltter from him to Mr.
Arbld Dougs, ppendi - - 37
Iuwr~ s caftb, ref~te o to r to ary, i. 288. it is

fored, and the gov or pnified ibid. 289.
Ittlj, the liberty of, how prerved - - i. 86

K

'K EITH, Sir William, sent to intercede for QMary when
K under sentence, ii. 163. letter to him from fecrtary Mait

land, appendix - 437
Kist, Earl f, appointed to fee the oentence againfi Q Mary exe-

cuted ii. i70
Ktr of Ferniher, ravages England on the murder of Murray the

Regent, ii. z. his design, 5. has fcuffie with the Englilb, 135
- Geo. brother to L. Newbole, is discovered when ready to

fail to promote a plot in Spain, ii. zc9. his scheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison - - 212

Ki/igrew, Henty, his declaration on the peace, appendix 413
Kings, feudal, the mos limited of all Princes, i. si. general

causes of this, 17. their revenues were but (mall, ib. 8. had
no tanding armies, 19. and jurifdilion limited, 20. means
used to extend the royal authority 39. their jurifliion en-
larged, 41. the extraordinary influence of the Scottif Kings
in Parliament, 76. the reason of this ibid. 8s
Kir4ald of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q. Dowager, i. 15. his attainder reverted in Parlia-
ment, 300. offers to fight Bothwell in single combat, 428.
his interview with Q Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
429. rekles Maidand from confinement, 5o6. labours to sup-
port the King's authority, and restore harmony after the murder
of the Regent, ii. 3, 4. accedes to the Queen's party, 4. pro.
vides for a iege by increasing his garrison and fortifying Edin-
burgh, 18. proclaims Lennox's aUhority unlawful and usurped,
ibid. attempts in vain to prevent a meeting of the Parliament,
19. forms a cheme for surprising the King's party, zz. is at
sirs successful, but afterwards defeated, 23, 24. comes near to
an agreement with Mar the Regent, 36. a treaty withMorton,
breaks it off, 43-45, fires upon Edinburgh from the catlle,
45. is besieged by the Regent, alftied by the Englilh forces, 47.
ss forced by mutiny of the garrison to capitulate, 48. furren.
ders to Drury the Englilh general, ibid. is by order of Qt Eli-
zabeth delivered up to the Regent, 49. he and his brother
are executed - - ibid. o
Kolv, Sir Francis, sent by Q; Elizabeth with letters of condo-

lence to Q Mary on her arrival in England, i. 464. some of
his letter, appendix - - 386-388-393
kxex, John, a famous reformer, his character, i. 130. after being

some time abroad, he is recalled by the persecuted Protefants,

1 i-0.

'176. inflames the multitude at Perth with rage againfi the Pa
pilts, ibid. his notion concerni g the government of womed
whence, 82, 83. his residence fixed in Edinburgh, 187. com-
plains of the lukewarmnef ot te reformers, zc2. his opinion
to the convention of reformers tiat it is lawful to resist and de-
prive tyrannical Princes, z20. aimaes and revives the de-
fpoading Congregation, l2 , z16. complains of the neglet of
the reformers in providing maintetar.ce tcr their preachers,
24z. recommends tre Geneva odel of Church government,
249. propose fuperinterdaut in techurch. 2zo. compols the
fit book of difcipll.e. 25 . rcr:-onces frienditip with the Earl
of Murray for his moceration, 277. i tried for encouraging a
mutiny among the peoile, and acquitted, 303, 304. popillt
judges concur in this deciion, id. is p blickly accused by
Maitland of preach.ng fediious dotrine concerning refinance,
21 . characters of the two disputant , ib. approved of several
inltances of affllination, 367. agrees to fme regulations con-
cerning the eleaion ofBifhops, ii. 40. his death and charac-
ter, 41, 42. his eulogium by Morton the Regent, 42. articles
sent by him to the general assembly, appendix 41a
L JngFde, the battle of i. 47

Lauarta, cardinal, is ent as a Nuncio from the Pope with
a present to Q_ Mary of Scotland, i. 383. is opped at Paris,

384
Ltagwr, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics o called, ii. 131.

was universally agreed to by them all over Europe ibid.
taring, the revival of, promotes the reformation i. 139
Lice/ter, Earl of, appointed a commifiloner to the conference at

Wcetminfier - - . 486
Lath, burnt by the Englih, i. g 9. fortified by the French, g98.

besieged by the Englifl, za . Q Mary lands there from France,
263. the superiority of it granted by her to Edinburgh, 342. is
seized and fortified by Morton and the Regent ii. 8
xfoxr, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, 102. is much
courted by cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions to the fuc-
cefilon, how founded, to1. relents Beatoun's deceitfulner to
him, oo. heacs the reformers and the advocates for the Eng-
liil alliance, 107. furprizes the Regent and cardinal, ibid. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. oS. continues alone in the
interell of England, og. is forced to fly to that court, where
he is rewarded, ibid. is married to a niece oi K. Henry's, by
which he became father to a race of Kings. ibid. his claim
to the fuccelion, 309. is imprisoned for a secret correspondence
with Q: Mary, 30o. is invited lecredly hy her to return to Scot-
land. ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received with great fa-
miliarity by her, 3 , 3 3. his forfeiture is repealed, and he is
reftosd to his elate and honours by the Parliament, 313. his

t$~~~~ ~lady

lady (eat prisoner to the Tower of London, 32;. and treated
with rigour, 330. he inifs on the proecution of his son Darnly'a
murderers, 403. charges Bothwell with it, ibid. the prosecution
is hurried, 405. he craves a delay, which is refused, 4o6, 407.
he is left alone in it, ibid. solicits Q Elizabeth's interest to ob.
tain a delay, 407. infifb on it by proxy at the trial, but is over-
ruled, 408, 409. being apprehensive of danger he flics towards
England, 410. his countess accuses Qt Mary of the murder to
Q.Elizabeth, 467. he appears at the conference at WefRminftcr,
and accuses Q Mary of the murder upon oath, 488. returns to
Scotland proteced by an Englilh army, ii. 6. is eleted Regent,
9. his progreis against the Queen's party, ibid. appoints com-
mifioners to frame a treaty with those of the Qneen, 13. fur-
prizes Dumbarton castle, 5-17. joins the Earl of Morton at
Leith, 8. holds a Parliament in the Canongate, 19. another at
Stirling, 22. he is furprized and killed there - 23
Lrw, late Aubigny, his charater, ii. 71. joins with the King's

other new favourite to undermine Morton, ibid. renounces Po-
pery, 73. Q Elizabeth demands him to be removed from the
privy council, 74. is accused by her ambaflador, 78. Arrar
tries in vain to supplant him, 84 is commanded by K. James
at the requelt of the nobles to leave the kingdom, 92. puts off
his departure on various pretences, 93, 94. returns unwillingly
to France, where he oon dies, 94. his memory vindicated and
much regarded by the King, 95. died a Pioteftant ibid.
- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the no th after dil.

perfing the Popilh Lords - ii. 22Z
Lt/li, Norman, murders Cardinal Beatoun, i. 112, 13. he and

his aflociates keep pofieffion of thecaltle of t. Andrew'-, 1 3.
makes a truce with the Regent, 14, 1 5. are encouraged by
Henry VIII. -- ibid.
- bishop of Rots, is sent by the catholics in Scotland to en-

gage Q. Mary in their interest, i. 2zz. his proposals to her re.
jected, ibid. 53. his negociations in England in favour of QL
Mary, ii. 26. is confined long in the Tower, and afterwards
is banilhed England -29
tirsdfa, Lord, carries the proposal from the confederates to Q(

Mary, that Ihe hould resign the government, i. 441. joins the
Ruthven conspirators . ii. 89
iecrblhvi catle, Q Mary committed a prifoncr there, i. 434.

her escape from thence - - 453

----- -- Lord, letters to and from him, Appendix - 416

osgaw of Rellalrig, an alledged accomplice in Gowrie's conspiracy,
ii. a28, 259. is tried, and his ellate forfeiLed long after his
death - - 259, 260
oLrd confederate, arolciate against Bothwell and Q Mary, i. 424.
raises forces againit them, za5. publilh the motives of their
condut, 426. prevail on the Queen to urrender to them, 430.
assume the title of Lords of the ecrct council ard the royal
authority 43

VOL. It, o Lor ,

iords popih, conspire against K. James, ii. 196. are treated by

him with great lenity, 198. form a new conspiracy, 209. the
King proceeds agaict them, 210o. more of his lenity to them,
214. frelh dangers from them, z28. they receive money from
Spain, z 9. zeal of the clergy against them, ibid. are declared
guilty of treafcn and their estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the
King's army, 22c, 221. are dispersed on the King's approach,
221. go abroad and give security to keep the peace, ibid. re-
turn to Scotland, and petition for leave to reside in their own
houSes, 227. this granted by a convention of eflate, ibid.
recant their errors and are absolved from excommunication, 240.
relapse, and are again reconciled to the church of Rome, ibid.
are reflored t, their efates and honours - 241

L-rraincardinal,gets loie of the bes benefices in Scotland, i. 163.
-- Princes of, their ambitious views, i. 68. instigate the

Dauphin and Q M:lry to take the titles of King and Queen
of England, 17o. resolve to invade England, ibid. and to check
the rebormation in Scotland, 171. the cardinal's great influence
over the young King, 193, 194. drives the Queen Regent of
Scotland to violent nicaflrcs, zoo. their violences occasion a con-
ipiracy against them, 23 . are forced to withdraw their troops
from Scotland, ibid. they insult the Scottish ambaflador, 44.
have great power over the young King and Queen, 245, z46.
are forced to contract their views on the death of the King

----- --- -- 247
Lutier, a bold and principal promoter of the reformation, i. 139.

the rapid progress of his doctrine 140

M

M RJ70 R John, his history of Scotland, tome account of, i.;,
1V1 lMaitlandofLethington, fcretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her fcrvice and joins the Congregation, i. 214. his cha-
racer, ibid. 215. is lent by them ambaf'ador to Q. Elizabeth,
216. lends them aranccs of her protection, 220o. is sent by
Qt.iary to the court of England, 269. makes a conceflion to
Q Elizabeth, ibid. 270. accompanies Q.Mary in a progress to
the north, 28'. hc is employed by Q. Mary to desire a personal
interview with Q. Elizabeth, 293. publickly accuses Knox of
preaching seditious doctrine concerning refitance, 35. inti-
mates to Q Elizabcth the intention of Q_ Mary to marry Darnly,
322. prudently conceals her resentment fl om Q Elizabeth, 3 25.
proposs moderate measures with regard to Q Mary when im.
prisoned, 439. attends the Regent when called on to accuse her
in England, 475. he difnpproves of this measure, ibid. his in-
trigue with the Duke of Norfolk, 480, 493, 499. is impriobned
by the Regent, 505. is relieved by Kirkaldy, and Secured in the
callle, o6. propoles a coalition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, ii. 3. accedes to the Queen's party, 4. is
cdprived of his office of cretary, and proclaimed traitor, 9. is

attainttd

attainted in a Parliament of the King's party, 9g. agrees with
Mar, 36, 37. his views in refuing a reconciliation with Morton
the Regent, 43, 44. rejects overtures ofa treaty with him, ibid.
is besieged by him in the caltle of Edinburgh, 45. is forced to
capitulate and surrender to the Englih general, 48. to avoid
the Regent's resentment he dispatches himself, o5. several of
his letters, appendix - - ii. 403, 437
Maitlad, Sir John, is made fecretaryfor Scotland, ii. 133. concurs

with others in promoting (QElizabeth's interef there, ibid. at-
tempts against him by capt. James Stewart, late Arran, 182.
they prove abortive, and he is advanced to be chancellor, 183.
an attempt to remove him from that office, frulrated, 98. his
death, 223. a copy of verses in honour of him wrote by the
King ibid.
Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrews, i.

285. accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north, 286.
he and his associates narrowly escape aflaflination, 287, 288.
is created :iarl of Murray, 289. See Mirray.
- the title is conferred on L. Erikine, 289. the person of the
young Prince put into his hands, 404. his resolution in pre-
serving him from Bothwell, 422. is chosen Regent, ii. 24, la-
bours to bring about a general peace, 36. is thwarted by Mor-
ton and his associates, ibid. 37. dies of melancholy, 37. his
character, ibid. his merit and integrity was acknowledged by
both parties - ibid.
- the young Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns out his

uncle from the cafle of Stirling, ii. 62. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 89, go. he with the others seize Stirling castle, and
erec their standard, o16. is attainted and his etate forfeited,
1i 5 is pardoned, and restored to estate and honours 137
March, countes of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of Ar-

ran - - - ii. 83, 84
Mary of Guile, QODowager of Scotland, takes a considerable miare

in the government, i. a2a. is much addited to the French in.
terest, ibid. projects a marriage of her daughter to the Dauphin
of France, 123. becomes instrumental in promoting the refor-
mation, 132. apires to the office ofRegent, ibid. 133. pro.
motes dilatfcfion to the present one, and favours thl reformers,
133, 134. visits the court of France, 134. returns toScot-
land to take pofleflion of the Regency, 135. after fomeoppofi-
tion the obtains it, 137. confers several offices of trult upon
Itrangers, 150, 151. proposes to lay a tax upon land, 152. is
forced to drop it, ibid. tries in vain to excite a war with Eng-
land, 153. the nobles vigorously oppose her measure,, 54.
treats the reformers with great refpec, 15;. obtains a con-
ccflon from the Parliamentin favour of the Dauphin, 161. her
artful management of the reformers, 16Z, 63. bellows the va-
cant benefices on foreigners, 163. he alters her conduct to the
reformers, 167. remonltrances against the violent measures of
the Princes of Lorrain, t72. is persuaded by them to pcrfe.

Oo a cute

cute the reformers, 173. her rash answer to their remnranee,
ibid. 174. funmmons their preachers to appear befor her, 174.
breaks a promise he had made them, 175. marches with an army
againit them, 177. concludes a treaty with them, 178. this
he again breaks. 179. her severity at Perth, ibid. her chemes
discovered, ibid. iSo. he goes to attack them, 181. has a.
gain recourse to negociation, 182. he is iartled at their de-
mands and gets time to aofwer them, 183. violates another
treaty, 84. lo6es Perth and forced to abandon Stirling and
Edinburgh, he retires with precipitation toDunbar, ibid. 185.
marches to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, 88. gains time
by her artifice, ib. 189. makes another treaty with them, 189.
her artifices to undermine the prior of Sr. Andrews, 197. the
absurdity of her cheme, ibid. 198. gets a reinforcement of
French troops, who fortify Leith, go. she disregards a remon-
ftrance ofthe reformers, 199. is influenced by French coun-
fellors, and persuaded to violent measures, loo. retires to Leith
on the approach of the reformers army, zo2. her prudent and
artful condudt there, ib. her haughty and imperious answer to
a freh remonstrance from them, 203. is, by a convention of
them, deprived of her office of Regent, zo;. the foundation of
this sentence, ibid. zo6. foments diferences among them, 209,
sio. is deserted by her principal secretary, a14. ends French
troops againfi the reformers, 220. retires into the cafle of
Edinburgh on the approach of the Englilh, z22. her death and
charaAer, 229. repented of her violent meafares, 230. listened
to the inflrutions of a reformed preacher - ibid.
Mary Queen of England, herperkcuting reign, i. 137, 38. her

death - -16
--Queen of Scots, born, i. 9. apropofal to marry her to Ed.

VI. 98. he is demanded by Henry VIII. 99. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, 123. a treaty for that
purpose concluded, 124, 125. he is sent to be educated in
France, 125. the fatal consequence of this, ibid. is imposed
on by the artifices of the French in the treaty of marriage, 157.
her marriage celebrated with great pomp. 158. they take the
title of King and Queen of England, 170o ihc makes concef-
sions tothe Congregation, 232, 233. declares Q. Elizabeth's
right to the crown of England, 235. she acquires an entire
arcendant over her husband, 24;. the is overwhelmed with
great aflliion on his death, and retires to Rheims, 247. the is
invitd by the convention to return toScotlind, z52. an emilla-
ry from the catho!ics in Scotland proposed violent measures to
her, ibid. fle is dcermiied to moderation by the French and
the prior of St. Andrews, ib. 253. is prevaild on to prepare
for htr return to Scotland, 255. the origin of the discord be-
tween her and QL Elizabeth, ibid. 256. her pretensions to the
crown of England, 257. is envied on account of her beauty,
26o. demands a itfe condu8 from QElizabeth,which is refused,
46z. leaves France with great rlufance, ib. 263. lands at

Leith,

rthb, 262. is much af~ted by the change ofher fituaio, ib.
several diadvantages attending her acceion, ib.-z65. fore
circumtances to her advantage, 265, z66. her acomplifhmenta
ofbody and mind, ib. the servants of her chapel insulted, 266,
267. pocures the free exercise of her religion, 67. iue. a
proclamation in favour of the Proteftano, 68. employs them
only in the adminifiration, ibid. attempts to gain Q. Eliza
beth's favour, 269. makes a concellion to her, 270. which ie
rejeAed, 271. The makes her public entry into Edinburgh, ib.
an insult off.red to her religion on that occasion, ib. 272. dif-
courages the attempts of the papifis to gain her favour, 273.
her aversion to the family of Hamilton, 274. makes a progrefa
into the north, 286, 287. her ministers narrowly escape a*affi-
nation, 287, 288. is refused access to the catle of Inverness,
288. when in the utmof consternation is relieved by the Mon-
ros and other Clans, 88, 289. her forces defeat Huntley's re-
bellion, 290. she desires an interview with Q. Elizabeth, 293.
negociations concerning her marriage, 294. is olicited by diffe-
rent Princes, 295, z96. her deliberations concerning it, 296.
is forced to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q Elizabeth,
298, 299. to please her fubjets, determines against a foreign
alliance, 299. determines not to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh,
300. further negociations for her marriage, 3o4. discovers
the views of Catharine of Medicis, ibid. 305. Lord Robert
Dudleyrecommended to heras a hulband by Q Elizabeth, 305.
The is highly offended at this, 306. diembles with Q. Eliza-
beth, ib. 309. entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly,
ac. The recalls Lenox, 310. is affronted at a letter of (QEliza-
beth's, 312. her indifference as to the reformed, and zeal for
the catholicreligion, 314. is taken with Darnlyat firt fight, 317.
is greatly moved at Q: Elizabeth's insulting craftinef, ib. 318.
negociates with the court of Rome for a dispensation to marry
Darly, 318. and the consent of the court of France, 319. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to Q Elizabeth for consent to
her marriage, 322. which he affects to refue, 323. in resent-
ment (he proposes to fend an angry melfage to Elizabeth, which
Maitland prevents, 3z. juftiies her condut to the English
ambafiador, ib. 36. endeavours to get Murray's confcnt,
3X7. courts the pope's protetion, and receives a ubfidy from
him, 328. her great address in gaining the consent of her sub-
jets, 329, 330. prevents a plot aainf Darnly, 331. fun-
mons her vassals to take arms againit Murray, 332. and him to
appear before her, 334. her marriage with Darnly celebrated,
335. he confers the title of King of Scots upon him, ib. this
tep censured, ib. her refentmcnt againll the maecnntent', 336.
(he marches againt them, 337. rcjets the intercecfion of Q
Elizabeth in their behalf, ib. continues her march aainit the
rebels, 338. her conduct and courage on that occafon, ib. 339.
drives them out of Scotla;id, 339. her frther refeniment
againht them, 34o, 34+. has recourtI to fcveral devices to rair

0 3 moisil,

money, 34., 342. her prosperity promotes het religion, 34,.
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 34;. deter-
mines to treat them with lenity, 347. is diverted from this
by her religion and French influence, 348, 349. this the source
of her after misfortunes, 35o. her intention to restore popery,
3J. is difgufed with Darnly's insolent behaviour, 352. her
familiarity with Rizio offends the King, 3;.5 vindicated
from any criminal correspondence with Rizio, 356, 357. uses
her utmost endeavours to prevent his murder, 359. he is con.
fined by the conspirators, ibid. he gains the King, and es-
capes from them, 360. is reconciled to the exiled nobles, 361.
her hatred to Darnly increases, 368, 369. and favour for Both-
well commences, 369. extinguishes some domestic feuds among
the nobles, 371. is deliveredof her son James VI. in the Caitle
of Edinburgh, ibid. invites several foreign princes to his bap-
tifm, 372. continues to treat Darnly with neglet, ibid. her
attachment to Bothwell increases, 373. prevents Darnly's in-
tended flight, 375, 376. visits the borders, 377. an inftanceof
her regard for Bothwell on that occasion. ibid. how he rival'd
Q Elizabeth, 378. her right of fucceilion favoured by the
English parliament, 379. he endeavours to avail herself ofthat
opportunity, 381, 382. Ihe takes an extraordinary flep in fa-
vour of popery, 383. receives a present from the pope, but
flops his nuncio at Paris, 384. endeavours to procure a bet.
ter fubfillence for the reformed clergy, ibid. 385. her averfon
to the King excessive, becomes melancholy, ibid. ihe declines
a divorce from him, 386. goes to Stirling to celebrate her son's
baptism, 387. is greatly offended at the King's behaviour on
thatoccafion, 388. restores the popih ecclefialtical jurifdition,
392, 393. her neglec of the King during his sickness, 395.
the breach between them becomes irreparable, ibid. 396. she
visits him at Glasgow, 396. the motives of her dissimulation on
that occasion, ib. 397. prevails on him to come to Edinburgh,
399. her ufpicious behaviour to him there, ibid. 400. issues a
proclamation for discovering his murderers, 40o. is supposed to
have been accelfary to it, ibid. 40z. is charged with it abroad
as well as at home, 402. goes to visit her fun at Stirling, 417.
is met on her return by Bothwell, who seizes and carries her to
Dunbar, ibid, 418. this uppofed with her consent, ibid. is
conduiced to Edinburgh, 419. and married to Bothwell, 420.
fends an apology to the courts of France and England, 421.
her conduct causes a general indignation against her abroad,
423. is alarmed at a combination of the nobles againR her, 424.
The publilhes a manifesto to vindicate her concdud, 42;. is con-
duEled to the caltle of Borthwick, 426. marches with Both-
well's forces against the confederate Lords, 4 -. an attempt of
an accommodation proves vain, ibid. 42z. is forced to fur-
render so the confederates, 4 3. i inlul ed by the oluiers and
mob, ibiJ. 431. is carried tn Edinburgh, where manyabufes are
fctr.d her, ib. i3 lent a priibnr to Loghlikvil Calle, 434. Q,

5 Elazabth

Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 436. the Englilh ambafgia
dor is refused access to her, 437. various proposals among the
confederates concerning her, 438, 439. they oblige her to re-
sign the government, 439-441. different reasonings on this
measure, 442-445. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 446. her party among the nobles be-
come dispirited, 448. her resignation of the Crown accepted
by the Parliament, and her iprifonment declared lawful, 450.
her letters to Bothwell read, and he declared accessary to the
King's murder, ib. escapes from Lochlevin, 452, 453. ar-
rives at Hamilton, 453. is attended by many nobles and a nu-
merous army, 453, 454. an aflociation signed in her defence,
494. her imprudence in hazarding a battle, 457. her army
defeated by the confederates, ibid. her precipitate flight into
Galloway, 458. rashly determines to retire to England, 459.
goes thither againlt the advice of her attendants, ib. 460. ar-
rives at Carlisle, 461. writes to Q Elizabeth, imploring her
good offices, ibid. receives letters of condolence from her, and
demands admittance into her presence, 464, 465. this refused,
and why, 465. offers to submit her cause to Q.Elizabeth, ibid.
is much deceived in her expectation from this, 468. and offend-
ed on dilcovering the artifices of Q. Elizabeth, ib. 469. ear-
nclly (blicits to be admitted into her presence, 469. he is car-
ried to Bolton Cattle, 47 . chagrined at finding herself a pri-
soner, 472. agrees to an enquiry into her conduct. ibid. her
diflimulation with regard to religion, ib. commiilioners appoint-
ed to appear in her name, 475. her chief view in this affair,
476, 477. contents to moving the conference to WefRminlitr,
483. file is carried to Tuthbury in Stafordlhire, 484. is much
offended at the regard shewn the Regent, and recalls her content
to the conference, 485. the accusations again!t her produced by
the Regent, 487. is accused likewise by the Earl of Lennox.
488. her commiffioncrs refue to anfwcr, and demand a per-
lbnal interview, 488, 489. they protet againt future proceed-
ings, ,+9. a suspicious circumflance againit her, ib. 49. her
commlinoners withdraw from the meeting, .1g9 ile re!biute
answer to a harsh proposal of Q, Elizabeth, 492. avoids any
farther progress in the enquiry, ibid. is enraged at the uroceed-
ings, and proposes desperate meauire, ,43, 494. frc,'d chi-
mericalconjectures with that view, 49. . propri:; a divorce fronm
lotlhwell, 493. is influenced by the D. o Norol!;'., fchemcq,
ibid. exchanges many letters and love tkens witlh hii, 490.
conlent, to proposals from the Erigiill noble,. go'. their vicws
in this tranfation, ;oo-5sc. a rebeliir'ln y her aidhercrrs
againtl Q_ Elizabeth, 0c6. is removed to Coventry, 50S. (4
Elizabeth thinks of delivering her up to the Regent, 510. this
project how disappointed, ib. 511 . acccfi.on of l;rcril to her
party after the murder of the Regent, ii. , 6. tOty inleiivor
to foment a war with England, b. her ;utoiny !,rclanimed
at Litlithgow, 5. her parties defeated by tiie new Regent, 9,

0o 4 1o.

to, lhe answers propoals by Q, Elizabeth, it. attempts in
vain to get foreign assistance, ibid. . appoints commissioners
to frame a treaty for her liberation, 3. this proving fruitless,
Ihe is more frialy confned, 4. the invalidity of her reign-
tion declared in a Parliament held by her adherents, 19. at of
Parliament in England to cub her and her party, 24. he
looks for proteAion from the King of Spai, 26. is denied the
privilege of an ambaador at the Court of England, 29. is
more close confined and watched, ib. proceedings againf her
in Englad, 33. her interefl negleed by the French, 34. is
hurt by the malacre at Paris, 35, 36. her adherents divided
into two fations, 43. one of them joins with Morto the Re-
gent, 46. review of the characters of her adherents and oppo-
nents, 48, 49. her forlorn situation, 49. is carried to Buxton
Wells, So. loses several of her friends by death, 53. fends a
letie- and presents to her son, 68. her nmefenger, why difmifed
without feeing him, ibid. her unefinefs at his confinement by
the Ruthven conspirators, 9. complaints to Q Elizabeth of
her hard usage, ib. 96. and begs her intercefion for the King
her son, ibid. Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour, Il-
1 3. a fruitlef negociation with Q Elizabeth, 17. is alarmed
at an association in defence of Q Elizabeth, 19. is committed
to more severe keepers, 120. betrayed by Lord Gray the Scots
ambalador, 121, 122. a tatute for the preservation ofQ. Eli-
zabeth, proves fatal to her, 26. is more rigorouDly treated,

7. her complaints to Q, Elizabeth disregarded, 28. is, by

the French ambassador's interef, removed to Tuthbury, 8.
is undutifully treated by the King her son, ibid. 1 2. her pas-
Jionate complaint to the French ambaffidor on that occalion,

z29. threatens to disinherit him, 130. several discoveries al-
ledged againit her, 4.6, 147. he is guarded with unusual vi-
gilance, 149. her domestics, papers, &c. are seized, ibid. lhe
s conveyed to Fotheringay Castle, ibid* deliberations concern-
ing the method of proceeding against her, So, a I. is fufpi-
cious ofpoifon or private muraer, s q l, 1; 2. vindicates herlelfto
the D. of Guise, ibid. the commnifiioners for trying her arrive
at Fotheringay Castle, 52. her spirited speech when refusing
to plead, ibid. 53. is at length prevailed on, 53. ihe pro-
tefls against the authority to the court, 14. the accusation
against her, ibid. her defence, 155-157. her sentence, 158.
irregularitits in her trial, 59. her sentence is cofirmed by
Parliament, ib. who demand the execution of it, 6o. France
interposes eebly in her behalf, 162. the fenteace against her
publilhed, 164. he is treated with the utmost rigour, 65.
her lat requctt to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. refues the afiftance of
a Proteflant Bilbop or Dean, 166. artifices ued to inflame
the people againit her, 168, 69. her behaviour at her death,
170- 74. entiments of hiltorans concerning her, I74, 175.
her charater, 175, 176. her perfun described, 177. is bunr
ed flu at Petesborough, and fterwards in Wefitniaer-Abbey.

ibid.

ibid. 178. letter from her, Appendix, 4s7, 4t, 47. her
will, App. +29. objetionr again her by Walfgha, App.
467. what coure to be taken with her, ibid. * diertaion om
the genuinenes of her letten to Bothwell. End of Vol, ii.
axuwnlU, Lord, arives from Spin, and peprs foce tojo
the Spaniards, ii. 191. his follower dipered, he is tae
prisoner - - - ibid.
MJdil is sent by the French King to obnre the motions of the

Queen Regent and her adver , i. to1. feat to make up a
difirence between Elizabeth and Mary, 312. brings about a
appearance of friendihip between them, ib. is set to inform
QElizabeth of the birth of. James VI. 37t. puts aletterin
to the Queen's hand against her marriage with Bohwell, 416.
is forced to fly from court, ib. advises . James to moderate
measures upon his escape from the Ruthven conspirators ii. 99

--- Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his character, ii. S4. ze-

loufly opposes Episcopacy, ib. declines the civil juriidion in
ecde~iafical matters, o04. is forced to fly into England to
avoid persecution -- lo
--- Sir Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q. Eliz
beth for Q. Mary while under sentence, ii. 166. executes his
commiflion with fidelity and zeal, 167. a memorial of his to
the King, Appendix 6
---- Mailer of the hofehold to QMary, takes his a fare-
wel of her, ii. 172. her parting feech to him ibid. 173
Mfildu, Sir Walter, sent by QElizaethb with propofls to Q.

Mary . o , il
MJWac, Bilhop of Valence, employed by the French to conclude

a peace with England and Scotand, i. 231, t32. terns greed
to by him - 233-535
Mfmgon appointed ArchbilhopofGlafgow, iis6. is refugld

and excommunicated by the general Afiembly for his immora
life ------ -- ibid. 87
AMenasrm~, Constable of France, endeavour to prevent the

Dauphin's marriage with Q. Mar, i. 156. his prudent advice
to Henry II. agz. makes a lender appearance in favour of
Q Mary - - . 34
Morton, Earl of, his irresolute conduft as to the Reformation, i.

214. accompanies Q Mary in a progress to the North, 286.
infligates Darnly to be avenged of Rizid, 35 , 3 6. takes the
diredion of that enterprize, 358. is admitted into the Queen's
preence, who promises him a pardon, 360. is forced to fly into
England, 362. obtains his pardon on Bothwell*s interceflion,
39. seizes a ca&lcet with letters from Q Mary to Bothwell, 435.
he is, by Q. Elizabeth's interposition, in favour with the King's
party, after the murder of the Regent, ii. 4. appointed one of
the commiflioners to treat with the Q(een's party, 13. his de.
mands frultrate the meeting, ibid. 14. is entirely influenced
by the Court of England, a,. commands the King's forces at
Leith, 30. has several ikirmilh with the Q(een' forces, ib.

closely

clo(ey besieges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ib. a
fu;penfion procured by the Englilh and French ambafadors, 3 z.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 36, 37. he is chosen
Regent, 37. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor-
thumberland, 38. obtains the temporalities of theArchbilhop.
rick of St. Andrew'., 39. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 42. attempts in vain to gain Maitand and
Kirkaldy, 43,44. makes a treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt
ly, 45. gets pofcfflion of the Calile of Edinburgh, 48. his
severity to Kirkaldy and his brother, 49, 50. his adminifira-
tion becomes odious, 5 . his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. Sz. connives at the disputes of the clergy, 54.
he irritates the nobles, 5. Argyll and Athol efufe to an-
fwer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord
Claud Hamilton, 56. discovers the designs of the nobles arainlt
him, and propoles to resign his office, 58, 59. his resignation
accepted by the King gives universal joy, 59, 60. obtains an
approbation of his conduct, and a pardon in ample form, 60.
continues to watch the motions of his adversaries, 6 , is forced
.o surrender the Cafile of Edinburgh, ib. resumes his authori-
ty, 62. gains the Cafle of Stirling, and a feat in the Privy
Council, 63. procures a meeting of the Parliament at Stirling,
ibid. 64. his ecurity ratified in it, 64. forces are raised for
and against him, 65. he is reconciled to his adversaries by the
intercession of Q Elizabeth, ibid. is furpeCied of foul play at
an entertainment at his own house, 66. his illegal proceedings
.gainft the family of Hamilton, 67. the King's new favourites
undermine him, 71, 72. he endeavours to prevent them, 73.
L(. Elizabeth intcrpoles in his favour, 74. is charged with being
accessary to the late King's death, 75. he is contined in differ-
ent pritbns, 76. dilcourages an attempt to refcuc him, ibid.
ail his friends arc turned out of office, 7. he is tried and
cordemned, S . his resolute calm behaviour and confeflion be-
fore and at his death, 81-83. his body is treated with igno.
minv - - 83
Murray, Earl of, late Prior ofSt. Andrew's, goes kith a handful

of men agaiull Huntly, i. 290. by his great: kill and courage
he gains a compleat viaory, ibid. his grant is confirmed by
Parliament, 3o0. cabals against him byLennox and Darnly, 30o.
his averlion to Darnly and other Court favourites, 3z6. calls
Eothtiell to fland a trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
ly's narriage with the Queen, 327. he and his :irociates arc
mli'e the dupes of Q: Elizabeth's policy, 3o. concerts to
ci: Darnly and carry him to England, 331. this picvented by
the Queen, ibid. avoids afiailination intended him by Darnly,
ibid.-333. evidences of tlhefe plots, ibid, the (.e:l, 's vafil:;
are called to arms againit him, 3 2 a. he is fummoied to appear
before her, 334 is again summoned and outlawed on his non-
apparaILce, 33(. is tfrced to fly with his allbc.ates into Argyl-
ihiie, 337. lticy are intsiceeid lor by Q izabc:h, ibid. are

pulr

pursued by the Queen, and obliged to fly into England, 339,
they meet with unexpected ill-treatment from Q.Elizabeth, ib.
34o. courts Rizio to intercede with the Queen for him, 346.
many of his old friends solicit for him, ib. 347. the Queen's
favour how intercepted, 348. 349. a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 35o, 35 . this how prevented, 352. he and his
aflbciates arrive at Edinburgh, 360. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ib. are alarmed at the Queen's escape,
but soon reconciled to her, 361. he is appointed Regent dur-
ing the minority of K. James VI. 445. his harkh behaviour in a
visit to the Queen, 446. the faccefs of his wife adminiltration,
448. procures many of the Queen's party to join him, ibid.
449. gets the places of Itrength into his hands, 449. his office
Regent confirmed by Parliament, 450. his severe and haughty
behaviour disgusts several, 45 ,45 z. his adherents in great con-
lternation at the Queen's escape rom Lochleven, 454. his pru-
dent conduct on that occasion, 455. defeats the Queen's army
at Langfide, 457. he improves this victory, 470. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament, 473. is called up-
on by Q Elizabeth to vindicate his conduct, 474. he arrives
at York, 476. his views in this affair, 477. complaints of the
Queen's commifflioners against him, 48. he behaves with
great reserve on this occasion, 79. this part of his conduat
accounted for, ibid. 480. intrigues with the Duke of Norfolk,
480. his demands from the Englih commissioners, 481, 482.
answers the complaints of the Queen's commilioners without
touching on the murder, 48z, 483. agrees to have the confe-
rence moved to Wefminfter, 483. is affectionately received by
Q.Elizabeth, which offends Q Mary, 485. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder, 487. produces his evi-
dences, 491. is difmilfed by Q. Elizabeth without approving
or condemning his condut, 492, 493. his party is secretly sup-
ported by her, 493. returns to Scotland, and by his vigorous
condut, breaks the Queen's party, 495. he receives proposals
both from Q. Elizabeth and Q Mary, 497, he disappoints Nor-
folk, 503, 504. an account of his murder 511, 512. his cha-
~aer, 5, 5 1 3. his death much lamented by Q Elizabeth
and the King's party, ii. . much anarchy the contequence of
it, a. part of a letter of his, App. 396. his heir murdered by
the Earl of luntly - - - ii. zo6

N
N AvJ , ecretary to Q.Mary, is ent by her with a letter, and

presents to her son, ii. 6. why dil'nifl'd without feing

him, ibid. is sent with offers of humble cfignation to Q. Eli-
zabeth, 19. is seized and sent prifoncr to London, i4o. is
produced an evidence againfl her 158
NYvil discovers and prevents Parry's dcfign to murder QL Eliza-

beth - - - ii. 16

Anller,

Xlfftb, their extensive power, i. 22, 23. becomes trbunt r d

formidable, 24. their power greater in Scotland than in my
other kingdom, 25. the caues of this, z6-33. their power of
ong duration, 38, 39. it becomes intolerable to the Princes,
ibi. they are humbled in France and England, ibid. but co-
tinue vigorous in Scotland, 39. discord among them encouragd,
40. their jurifdifion circumscribed, 41. are greatly mortiid
by K. James V. 66-69. ae disappointed in a scheme to Iew
their refctm ent, 72. refue to attend the King into England,
73. they te the revenues of the church, r4. refuse to pat
awth them to the reformed clergy, 242, 251, 252. difenfionas
among them, 280, 281. a convention of them approve the
Queen's marriage to Darnly, 328. several of them recommend
Bothwell s a bolband to her, 413, 414. ftrnge combination
of them on this occasion, 414, 415. a body of them anciate
gainft her and Bothwell, 424. their different views in this,
ibid. a party of them favours the Queen, 436. they are much
dipirited by the good condut of Murray, 448, 449. they ar
much provoked by Morton the Regent, ii. 55. think of re-
dre from the King, 56. infiufe ffpicion of the Regent's
power into him, 57. a meeting of them by him, 58. a party
of them conspire against the King's favourites, 89. they frde
his peron and drive them off, go, 9g. their neglec of, and
ingratitude to the clergy, 38. the King attempts to reconcile
their feuds and unite them, 184. See Lord.
NeTrffU, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner to hear the cause be-

tween Queen Mary and her acufers, i. 476. forms a icheme
of mounting the throne of Scotland, 479, 480. intrigues with
the Regent and Maitland with that view, ibid. 481. he repre-
ents the demands of the Scots to Q, Elizabeth, 48 , 482. his
farther negoations with refpea to Q. Mary, 498, 499. en-
deavomu to conceal his deigns from Q. Elizabeth, 499. is im-
poed on by the artifice of the Regent, ibid. oo. gets the
content of many of the English nobles, 5o0. his project ap.
poved at foreign courts, So. is discovered and defeated by
Q_ Elizabeth, 503, 504. flies to Norfolk, 5o;. he surrenders
en a second fummens, and is sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid.
is sett liberty, and continues his intrigues with Q. Mary, ii.
26. is betrayed by his ficrmary, ibid. is seized with his de-
pendants, and accused by them, 28. is executed ibid.

NorthmrbLrllsd, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q.

Mary, i. 5o6. his Ilheme defeated, 507, So8. he is seized by
the Regent, 0o9. is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
and put to death at York - - i. 38
disaghuin, Countcf of, ome account of the tranfabion con-

cerning the Earl of Elfcx' ring ii. 285

0
*

INDEX

0
O Ctsaiat, their inftituioo and exenfive power, ii. st,

they undermine the King's miniters, ibid. become odious,

and a combination is formed against them, 25. being split
into faflions, and envied by the courtiers, they rign their
commiffon - 24
Ogilwvi, Lord, has a cufie with Sir John Gordon in the Ire

of Edinburgh - - i 285

Olipha~, Master of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 89
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scotland, ii. 79, his in.

ftruAions, ibid. is aaflinated - - 31
D'Ofil, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endeavoura

to promote a war with England, i. 154. his design frufrated,
ibid. the number of troops under his command, 180. inftigatea
the Queen Regent to violent measures againf the Reformers,
ibid. is sent by Q Mary to demand a ife conduct from Q
Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scotland 26

P
P iy, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, 1. 102. creates a fur.

picion of the Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent,

103. is made Archbishop of St. Andrews - 116
Paris, the malacreof, ii. 34, 3 . rejoicings of the Popish party

on account of it, 3 . the confernation and horror of the Pro-
teftants - -- ibid.
Parliamnt, the nature of their original constitution, i. 76-79.

particularly that of Scotland, 79-93, 236. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 236. a difficulty darted and an-
twered, 238. their proceedings with regard to religion, ibid.
239. condemn the Popish and approve the ReformedDotrines,
240. several other regulations of the fame tendency, ibid.
241. teir validity called in quefion, 242. exceed their powers,
243. their prccedings laidbefore the King and Queen, ibid.
244. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, 41o. pass an at it
favour of the Reformation, ibid. 4 confirm the proceed.
ings of the confederates, 450. parliaments held both by the
King's and Queen'* parties, ii. 19. another of the Queen's ad.
herents, ibid. attaint upwards of 00o of their opponents, 21.
a parliament at Stirling by the King's party, 22. urprized by
the Queen's adherents, ibid. another at Stirling, 63, 64. one
at Edinburgh, 72. and on the King's being of age, 183, 184.
icveral new laws made there, 184, 187. the leifer Barons ad.
mitted into parliament - - 187
Parry, DoCtor, undertakes to murder QElizabeth, ii. 125. is

encouraged by and gets ab'ulution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. 126. is executed - 126
Par/ , a Jefuic, publihas a book in favour of the Ifanta of

Spaisu'

Spain's rigt of fucceiffon to the Crown of England ii. 22Z
Pafquaiaade and Pictures, accusing Bothwcll of Darnly's murder,

i. 4o , 4c2, 411. a law made againt them - 41
Patt, William, his account of the Scottish ancient military dif.

cipline -- - i. 120, z
Patlet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q: Mary's keepers, ii. 120.

his rigid severity to her, 127, I Z. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence, 147. his rude trratment of h.r, 165. refuses to
be concerned in privately afliflnating her, 169. a leuer from
him. Appendix -472
Pell-ev, Bhop of Amiens, is appointed to rpport the popilh in-

terest in Scotland, i. 00o. drives the Queen Regent to violent
mteaures againir the Protestants - - ibid. 201
,Pntrt, an insurrection of the Reformers there againfl the Papists,

i. 176, 177. its inhabitants are severely treated by the Queen
Regent, 179. a French garrifen placed there, ibid. is besieged
and taken by the Protelants, 184, a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy - - ii. z56.
Philip II. of Spain, married Lo "' Queen of England, i. 138.

reinforces his army with her trof.p, 153. his great power, ii.
131. joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to invade and
conquer England, 19o. his preparations for it dilatory, 194.
his design frutlrated, ibid. meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 19;. intrigues with ome Scottiih Lords
with that view, 196. remits money to them - 219

Piniey, the battle of - i. 119
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q Elizabeth, deprives her of her

kingdom, and abfolvcs her fubjets - ii. 8
ally, one of Babington's conspirators againit Q: Elizabeth, ii.
144. discovers the plot - 145
Poltrat, a fraatic zealot, aflaffinates the Duke of Guile at the

siege of Orleans - i. 297
Pout, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one of the Lords of Session,

proteis againit laws oppreflive to the Church - ii. to8

Popery, where moll flcurifling, i.
i o. what kind pvailed in

Scutland, i.l was partly grafted on Hea:hcnifm, 86. is
much hurt by the Congregation, 239. their doarines condemned
by Parliament, 240. the urilfiction of their courts aboliflhed,
ibid. their wolhip prohibited, ibid. attempt in vain to gain
Queen Mlary's favour, 273. the great influence of Popery, 349.
Psoivcr, the balance of, the great conlequence of preserving it, ii.

85. 6
Pryycrian church government cllablithed in Scotland, i. 246. is

coniirmed by King Jmcs VI. - 27
.P·rocfganrs, in France, violently persecuted, i. 194, 195. are mo-

derate on Q. Mary's arrival fronm France, 267, are employed
lv her in the adminitration, 2b8. a fchemc for uppreffing
tilemI all over lIurope, 348. a league formed for that purpose,
ii, I 3 1,. S:c Rtirma:iiwn.

R

R
R Anfey, a favourite of K. Jaines IT. nar'owlv ercapw. the

i;.te of his associates, i. 9. is appointed Capta n oF the

King's guard, and created E rl of Bothvell, 6 -. Se Both.udll.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French to ngoci.te a peace

with England and Scotland, i. 3 . terms agreed on by him,

233, 23.
Randolph, sent to encourag te he Congreratinn, i. 211. con-

gratulates Q Mary's arrival in Scotland, z63. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. is impoftd on
by Q Mary in the aff:ir of her marriage with Darnly, 32.
sent into Scotland on the murder of I'.t::ray, ii. 2, 3. irter-
poses for Morton, 77, 78. flies from Scotland in the night, 80.
is sent again there, and concludes a treaty with England, 4..
several of hii letters, App. 318, 329, 331, 345, 353, 35;, 359

Ratclij: Sec Sux.
Reformation itz progress in Scotlind, i. 129. account of it si;

preachers, ibid. is much influenced by Eng!ar'I, 130, 131.
two remarkable instruments of promoi:n, it, i i. it makes
great progress, 137. cnuies con:rbu;iing to promote it, 139.
its advantages over p:)pery, 149. is tavcured by the ( Re-
gent, 15;. an inltnce of rig:!rd for it in Scoland, t56, 157.
the whdle arty not chargeable .:ith Cardina '.'c.toun'o mur-
der, lib. a priefl burn: tor embracing it, ibid. 16'). the re-
formers vioenttly periccuted by the Archbifhopof Sr. Ad rew's,
ibid. are protcdrd by the Q. Reent, I'6. arp'y i vai to
th' Popiih clergy, 167. a pcrizution against then;l phcd on
by th I:French interei!, 172, 173. the preachers futninmned be-
fore the lRegcnt, 17.1.. they are deceived and leclared out-laws
by her, 17I . a riotou. i::furreetion of thcm nt Perth againit the
P^'Fills, 17f. pI'rc to c'cfe t hemftlves againit thie Queen.
177, 178. conc!u.e a treaty with h;r v. hch (he: presently breaks,
178, 179. tcy :i!:ce anms againll the tccn, i;so, 181. in-
fill on redrefiin civil ;i vwell a;i ;eliinus grievances, t

z.' the

influence of t rciorr.ation on il;erty, ti, i. they beliege anJ
tai:e 'erth, 1 84. thiy f i:.'c Siiing and i';.inbur.lh, ibid. 1.is.
cominnit greal violentes on clu chel ai'd in')r:'irie", I i ;. t::cir
conc!ua how acco.:n;ci. tbr, ibiJ. 186. an i'tance of iheir mo-
deration, 7. si.: .t:i; rc .i:lce at .uinhur,h, ibid. the
(Queen prepare- to atr;;'lk tl: .', I .i . meales :niorher trc.ay with
lier, 89. are storcd to ;::).::o;. lli. ;b'urh, c. but allowed
the execifce of ti,' ir r!,i'lbll:, Lbki. dc:n;.. i :: : L.xpulion of
tile Fs:icch ai in, 19o ;,re :i,: . oi tici i.;1

t :l c . rol Fiance.

19+. tcir ia;ity l.i t:I.cnel, ILid. rienon: r.ite agaiplt the
'rench frtitl\t L.th, c;. 'ace rms in tii own defence,
201. tclinlil .: :; ..i.i. L I'.' "si eIt, 203 are highly in-
centlcl at r!' iniFCeriJ s ;in lerr, il'.l. z^. . by adiice of a con-
VCltion J 'riv'e l :tile i
L o;)vij:r ot iie ollice of Regent.

o205

so. tb he ndti of this cOdoi ibid. 2o6. the grt
_o eoararnged by Prliame~ 4, 451. See Carugnmi,
oftHiet , t heb juryiai --

.- i. 21
bki4, the pnrvilege f, to whombeuging - i.

wIS, iaoned bothb b jcdmdaw --- 1.40

s awmof the chacb, pr din of Parliament concerning

thei - -- - . 241
R iJ an a t for the Popeat Loda naocite for Q Ma-

ry, ii. 6. is a ens with te D. Norfolk 27, 8
lie, David, fie account of him and hu rife, i. 3o, 3.

Danlyi' conoe ioa with him, 322. his good oices courted
by Murry, 346. inteef and miliaity with the
Quee 33. incn the htrd of Damly, ibid. ad of the
fieds of the aeiled Lords, 34S fevedl concurring i of
thi, ibid. 35S. a combiatio fbned t murder hin, 355.
he is murdr in the Qeas palace - 358, 359

jtu invad Britain, i . giv the

t aief accoun of the

Scots - - ibid.
.Rof Bilhop of, dooly promotea Qeen Mary's interet at
London, ii. 27, 28. conied to he Tower, and threatened
with capital puniDuneat, , 2, 9 is let at liberty and baniled
the kingdom, 29. fe letters ofhi Appendix 388, 409
itaj, a foreigner, made keeper of the great al of Scotland, i.

150
lRthv, Lord, the murder of Rizio propod to him by Darnly,

i. 355. heads the conspirators againt him, 358. his put in
tbht tranfatib, bid. 359 is dmitted into the Queen's pre-
fence, who proiies him a pardon, 360. did not repent of it at
his deat - 367
-- crated E. fGowrie, be and his affibcate seize the King,

and remonirte again his favourit, ii. go, 91. drive hm
from him, ibid. thir condut approved in an aflembly of the
Ibts, 93. the King efcbpes from them, 97. by Arran' in-
fluence volent m ares ae deterioed agaift them, 1oo0 Q.
Elizabeth interede i their behlf, 1o. are declared guilty
of high trea, o3. take. efge in foreign countries, ibid.
re haiy tremted by Q Eliabeth, i at. a reconciliation with
her broght abot, x3, 136. reurn to Scotland, and are re-
coeiled to the King, 36. their moderation on being restored
o ther d ad o
th38. their neglec of their friends
the C rgy - - ibid.

that name iaboild by Parliament, i. 69. See Gewrik.

Jttkvwrnid, what -- 9
SC dbr, Sir Ralph, appointed a commdoner to hear the cause

between Q^Mary and her accurers i. 476
aa d of Calder, Lord St. John, oent to lay the proceedings
9fu eo agregation Puliaae bfe the King nd Queen

i

in France, i. 243. is coldly received and difamifed without a
ratification by them - - 244
Savdgr, a Spanih officer, his desperate resolution to kill Q. Eli-

zabeth - - - ii. 142, 143
Scotland, its ancient history fabulous, i. . the origin of the Scot,

2. their history why remarkably obscure, 3. rome account of
the writers of it, 4, 5. is divided into four periods, 5, 6. a re-
view of the third ara, 7. some account of the controversy con-
cerning its independency, ib.-iz. this the cause of great
animotiies and much bloodihed, 13. the date of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 14. it begins to have an influence on
the fate of difiant nations, go, 91. influence as to the balance
of power, g9. slate of Scotland at the birth of Q Mary, 96.
is invaded by the English, and several places burnt and plun-
dered, 108, og9. much alienated from the Englilh, 1to, I r.
a peace concluded between England, France and Scotland, I 1 I.
computation of damages done by the Englilh in Scotland, to,

II . a new breach with England, t 16. is invaded by a great
Engliflh army, S. the Scots are defeated with great flaugh-
ter, i 19, zo. their manner of fighting at that time, zo, ar.
a marriage agreed of their young Queen and the Dauphin of
France, 124, 125. they oon repent this flep, 127. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aversion to the French, 28,
129. this inflamed by another incident, 50, 151. they decline
a war with England, 153. fend reprefcntatives to wi:ness Q
Mary's marriage, 56. their care as to the marriage articles,
157, 1 58. they refuse consent to the demands of the French,
159. four of their deputies fupeled ta be poisoned, 16o.
which much increases the aversion, 61. grant the crown ma-
trimonial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the Englifli for
aiftance againit the Frenlch, 210, z16. an Englif fleet arrives
for that purpose, 222. conclude a peace with England and re-
ceive an English army, 2:3, 224. all arties agree in resenting
the French, 233, a treaty between England, France and Scot-
land, 231, 232. both Erglihl and French armies leave Scot-
land, 23(. they rejoice much at the death of the young King
of France, 247. fend to invite the Qccan to Scotland, 252.
reject propofils of an amblrador from Frarce, 25;, Z54. fate
ot Scotland on Q Mary's return front Fratce, 264. ,reat
zeal f the nation gaintl Popery, 267. the Scots brought into
contempt by Q. Mary's conduaf, 423. in a miserable condition
after the murder of Murray the legent, ii zo. llate ot factions
at that time in ir, ib. 21. a league cmoriuudcdl rtwven Scotland
and Englannd, 40. a view of the rcuoti1 nns ct Scot!and since
the accelion of lames VI. 29 ;-0o. o t:; i i., y of the Rate,
293---9. ani of the church, c93, 3. tC: .he :;i.:u, ani
t.ilte .n to lernin, - - 3:: -3 37
Scott of ilc.lelgh, enters and ravao,'s F.n .1 nl afier iic mu! iU:r

or Mut. y t!hc Re. lit, ii. 2. the deligC o: !;ii.

Vo. i. Pp S,'-.,

Sraep, Lord, sint to condole with, and watch Q Mary on her

arrival in England - -i. a64
Sjim, Lords and court of, by whom irft appointed, i. 43. the

President and one half of their number of the Clergy 144

Sate, Lord, afifRs the Queen regent in defending Leith i. 13
Stbriawjry, Earl of, the charge of Q. Mary's person committed

to him, i. 484* why removed from that office, ii. zo2. is
appointed to fee the sentence againif her executed, 70. letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Appen-
dix - - - 475
Siaclair, Bilhop of RoTs, a zealous Papist, concurs as President

of the Selfion, in acquitting Knox of a charge of treason, i.

303
Semerftt, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army, i. 19.

is reduced to a very critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great laughter, ibid. this viftory why of little advantage,
122. cabals against him at the court of England, force him to
return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 126
Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. 89, Igo. See .r-

mado. the Infanta of, let up as candidate for the Crown of
LEgland - - 222
SpaniJb ambafiador is ordered to leave England, for intriguing in

favour of Q Mary - - - ii. 9
S.rot, his Discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. z59-

261. is executed - - 261
Ste.,art, James, prior of St. Andrews, is appointed to carry the

crowvn matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, i. 163, 164.
See St. Andreuws.
--- Efire, Lord Abigne, his arrival in Scotland, ii. 70.
See Aubigny.
-- Capt. James, his charater, ii. 71. becomes a favourite

of Kitg James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder ofthe late
King, 75. is cr, aed Earl of Arran. See rran.
_-- Col. William, commander of the King's guard, contri-

butes to his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, ii. 98.
seizes the E:lrl of Gowrie - - o06
-- Francis. created Earl of Bothwell, i. 96. joins in a

treal nable correspondence with the Popish lords, ibid. See

l o htlwell.
--- ail f that name combine in opposing the Chancellor,

ii. 213
Si/rlin'r seiz.cd by the Rcfrmerr, i. is;. a par'iarrent there by

ct'k Ikin ' party, ii. 2z is luipli',ed by the Queen's adhe.
*!,:t', and a grcat tray efues - - ibid. 23
Srczzi, Lcon, commands a body of I'French sent into Scotland,

i., . r'c',tice, and dmolilhcs tl:e allle of St. Andrews,
1l . : c. Francc.

S.u,ii,7n a Icill;;iaablP. atutcconcerning it - i. 117
S;:r:,'.:::i:l'i/ts propibJ in the Chrch of Scotland, i, 2S0. their

uIL..LIS - - - ibid.

.1 .. rv

SRJx, Earl of, one of the commissionen to hear the cause between

Q. Mary and her accfers, i. 476. aembles a powerful army
on the borders, ii. 3, 4. he and Scroop enter, and ravage
Scotland -

T
T AX upon land, firt proposed in Scotland i. ;

Tthrogmwrtoe, SirNicholas, sent ambafiadorextraordinary

from Qt Elizabeth, to oppose Q_ Mary's marriage with Darn-
ly, i. 324., 32g. his intercession for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 346, 347. his enmity to Cecil, 347. is ent to ne-
gociate Q. Mary's liberation, 437. is refused accefi to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his, Appendix, 365,
366, 374, 378, 381, 383. 384.
- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy againlt Q Eliza-

beth, ii. 111. at firit he denies, but afterwards confefles it, ib.
112. refleftions on his confefllion, 12, 1 13. is executed I t4

qichbeura, designs to afliinate Q_ Elizabeth - ii. 44
Treason, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law of

Scotland -- - ii. 29, 6o

U
V IL O R , a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland,

i. ;o
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of ii. 298

W
W AL LACE, Sir William, bravely alerted the liberty of

his country - - - i. I
Walingbam, secretary to Q. Elizabeth, ent ambaflador to King

James VI. ii. ic2. returns without success, ibid. makes a
favourable report to her concerning James, ibid. interpofcs in
favour of Q, Mary, 119. discovers Babington's conspiracy,
145. why a determined and inveterate enemy to Q. Mary,
149. a letter from him, Append. - - 460
Iarwick, Earl of, succeeds Someriet in the government of Eng-

land - - - - i. z6

W nlminiflr, the conferences concerning Q. Mary there i. 483
Wteftnorland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of QMary,

]. 50). his fchemcs discovered and defeated, 508, 509. he
cfcapes to the Netherlands - - 9

Whithorn, the prior of, imprisoned for celebrating Mas i. 301
W'illox, a minister, dec!ares for rfiRance and deprivation of ty.

ranicll rulers, i. 205. is called to attend the Q.Dowager on
her death-bed - - 230

Wiaart, George, his illegal execution, revenged i. t a
kitcbcraft, vigorously prufecuted in cotland - ii 205

/filto,

Wfttox, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a peace

with France - - i. 3
.-- Sir Edward, Cent by Q E!izabeth into Scotland, ii. 133.

his charaer, ibid. oon gets into high favour with K. James.
ibid. 134. procures a league between the two kingdoms, ib.
undermines Arran's power, 134, 135. forms a plot on King
James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave, 135, 136

Y
y ORK, the conferences there concerning Q Mary i. 476

Z

0 UC HE, Lord, sent ambafador by Q. Elizabeth, to re-
Z monfirate against King James's lenity to the Popiih lords,

ii. 217. his treachery on that occasion ibid.

F I N I S.

./
