'r H E
H IS T O R Y

O F
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccEssioN to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WI T H A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to thatPeriod,

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

VOLUME II.
THE SIXTH EDITION.

D U B L IN:
PRINTED FOP. JAMES WILLIAMS IN SKINNER-ROW.

MDCCLXXII.

# BOOK VI.

THE
HISTORY

o F
SCOTLA ND.

B O OK VI,

HE unexpected blow, by which the Regent BOOK VI.

T was cut off, struck the King's party with '-"'

the utmost coniternation. Elizabeth bewailed his Dilbrders
death as the moit fatal disaster, whieh could haveoccafion-
befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a ed by the
degree that little suited her dignity. Mary's adhe- egent s
rents exulted, as if, now, her restoration were not
only certain, but near at hand. The infamy of
the crime naturally fell on those, who exprefled
such indecent joy at the commiflion of it. And as
the aflaffin made his escape on a horse, w;hich be-
longed to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled directly
to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph,
it was concluded that the Regent had fallen a fa-
crifice to the resentment of the Queen's party, ra-
ther than to the revenge of a private man. On
the day after the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, anid
Ker of Ferniherft, both zealous abettors of the
Queen's cause, entered England in an hostile man-
ner, and plundered and burnt the country, the
inhabitants of which expected no such outrage. If
the Regent had been alive, they would scarce have
ventured on such an irregular excursion, nor could
it well have happened so soon after his death, un-
less they had been privy to the crime.

VOL. II. A THIS
_____

t'~~y ' anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave oc-

-' °cation. During such general confusion, men hoped

for universal impunity, and broke out into excesses
of every kind. As it was impossible to refrain
these, without a fettled form of government, a
Convention of the Nobles was held, in order to de-

S:eps ta- liberate concerning the election of a Regent. The
eards e- Queen's adherents refused to be present at the
leeingan-meeting, and protested against its proceedings.
other Re- The King's own party was irresolute, and divided
gen in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had set at

liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then as-
fembled a declaration acquitting him of the crime
which had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by pro-
posing to admit the Queen to the joint adminiftra-
tion of government with her son. Elizabeth ad-
hering to her ancient system with regard to Scot-
tifh affairs, laboured, notwithstanding the folici-

See Ap- tations of Mary's friends*, to multiply, and to
pend. No. perpetuate the-factions, which tore in pieces the

kingdom. Randolph, whom she dispatched into
Scotland on the first news of the Regent's death,
and who was her usual agent for such services,
found all parties so exasperated by mutual injuries,
and so full of irreconcilable rancour, that it dost
him little trouble to inflame their animosity. The
Convention broke up without coming to any agree-
ment; and a new meeting, to which the nobles of
all parties were invited, was appointed on the first

t Crawf. of Iay t.
Mm3em'. 1 MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still
C2. a- continued to acknowledge the King's authority,
A coa!iti- were at the utmost pains to restore rome degree of
on of par-harmony among their countrymen. They procured
ties at- for this purpose, an amicable conference among the
elaimte.d leaders of the two factions. But while the one de-

manded the restoration of the Queen, as the only

thing
4

THE HISTORY

thing which could re-establish the public tranquil-BooK VI.
lity; while the other esteemed the King's authority `--
to be so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be '570'
called in question or impaired ; and neither of them
would recede in the least point from the;r opinions,
they separated without any profpedt of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcile-
ment, by the hope of foreign aid. An envoy ar-
rived from France with promises of powerful fuc-
cour to the Queen's adherents; and as the civil
wars in that kingdom seemed to be on the point of
terminating in peace, it was expected that Charles
would soon be at liberty to fulfil what he plomnifed.
On the other hand, the Earl of Suflex was assem-
bling a powerful army on the borders, andits opera-
tions could not fail of adding spirit and strength to
the King's party * * Craw.

THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the Mem.134.

fations proved ineffecual, it contributed fbie-Q:i"ens
what to moderate, or fulpend their rage; but they pofletion
soon began to at with their ulual violence. Morton, of Edin-
the most vigilant and able leader on the King'sfide, burgh.
solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for
the safety of a party, so devoted to her interest,
and which flood so much in need of her afliftance.
The Chiefs of the Queen's faction, assembling atApiil to.
Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and
Kirkaldy, who was both Governor of the calde,
and Provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens,
though with rome dificulty, to admit them ,withi;!
the gates. Together wvith Kirkaldy, the Earl of
Athole, and Maitland, acceded aimfit openly to
their party and the Duke and Lord Hereis, hav-
ing recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
refunmed their places, which they had formerly held
in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition
of persons, so illustrious by their birth, or io emi-
nent for their abilities, they published a proclarna-
tion, declaring their intention tofiupport the Queen's

A 2 authority,

5

BooxsVI. authority, and seemed resolved not to leave the
"'"- city before the meeting of the approaching Con-

570.

50venttion, in which, by their numbers and influence,

they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices
on their fide *.

Endea- AT the fame time, they had formed a design of
-our to - kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if
volve the .
naton ina the- could engage them in hostilities, and revive
war with their ancient emulation and antipathy, they hoped,
England. not only to dilfolve a confederacy of great advan-

tage to the King's cause, but to reconcile their
countrymen to the Queen, Elizabeth's natural and
most dangerous rival. With this view, they had,
immediately after the murder of the Regent,
prompted Scott and Kerr to commence hostilities,
and had since initigated them to continue and ex-
tend their depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw,
on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of
rendering this a national quarrel, and resolved, on
the other, not to susser such an insult on her govern-
ment to pass with impunity; she issued a procla-
mation, declaring that mhe imputed the outrages
which had been committed, not to the Scottish na-
tion, but to a few desperate and ill-defigning per-
sons; that, with the former, she was resolved to
maintain an inviolable friendship, whereas the du-
ty, which she owed to her own fubjets, obliged
her to chaitife the licentiousness of the lattert.
Sullex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the eat, the other on the weft borders,
and laid waste the adjacent countries with fire and
: Cabaia, sword :. Fame magnified the number and pro-

4' grefs of their armies, and Mary's adherents, not

thinking therfelves safe in Edinburgh, the inhabi-
tants whereof were ill-affected to theircaufe, retired
Apr:1 2s. to Linlithgow. There, by a public proclamation,

they alTerted the Qc.en's authority, and sorbad
*Crw f. Mem. 137. Caiderw 2. I-6. t Cald. 2. 18r.

giving

giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or theBooK VI.
Earls of Argyll and Huntly, whom the had confti- ''
tuted her Lieutenants in the kingdom. 1570

THE nobles who continued faithful to the King, King's

though considerably weakened by the defection of arty en-
so many of their friends, assembled at Edinburgh burgh.
on the day appointed. They issued a counter-pro- May I.
clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder of the late King, and of the
Regent. They could not, however, presume so
much on their own strength as to venture either to
elect a Regent, or to take the field against the
Queen's party; but the afliftance, which they re-
ceived from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both.
By her order, Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with a thousand foot, and three hundred
horse; the King's adherents joined him with a
considerable body of troops, andadvancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already be-
gun hostilities by attacking the catle, they forced
them to retire, plundered the neighbouring coun-
try, which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after
seizing some of their castles, and razing others, re-
turned to Edinburgh.

UNDER Drury's protection, the Earl of Lenox Motives of

returned into Scotland. It was natural to commit Eliza-
the government of the kingdom to him, during beth'sco°n

,i ) °. . r

* ir T - *ii n 1 duet with

the minority of his grandson. His illustrious birth, regard to
and alliance with the royal family of England, as them.
well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that
honour; and his resentment against Mary being
implacable, and his estate lying in England, and
his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him
as a man, who, both from inclination, and from
interest, would ad in concert with her, andardently
wished that he might succeed Murray in the office
of Regent. But, on many accounts, she did not
think it prudent to discover her own sentiments, or

A3 to

BcoK. I. to favour his pretenfiors ton openly. The civil
'".^-' w\ars in France, which had been excited by a pre-
:!5 ° tended z'-a! for religion, and carried on with afierce-

ref that did it real dilhreonur, appeared now to be
on the point of coming to an issue; and after fled-
di,' the belt blood, and \waftirg the richest pro-
'ir!ces in the kingdom, bot!h pities desired peace
with an ardou.r, that facilitated the negotiations
which wer- cairving on for that purpose. Charles
IX. was known- to be a paflionate admirer of Mary's
beauty. Nor could he, in honour, lilter a Queen
of France, and the most ancient ally of his crown,
to languish in her present cruel situation, with-
out attempting to procure her relief. He had,
hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monftratirg, by his ambassadors, against the indig-
nit-, with which she had been treated. But if he
were orce at full liberty to pursue his inclinations,
Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from
the impetuosity of his temper, and the power of
his arms. It therefore became necessary for her to
at with some reserve, and not toappear, avowedly,
to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authorit-. Thejealoufy and pre-
judices of the Scots required no less management.
Had the openly supported Lenox's claim; had (he
recommended him to the Convention, as the can-
didate, x hhom she approved; this might hlve rouz-
ed the irdepende.it spirit of the nobles, and by too
plain a discovery of her intention, she might have
defeated its success. For these reasons, she hesitated
long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
melTages, w hich she received from the King's party.
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments was
at last obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature seems to have been the occasion of it. Pope
Pius V. having ilTued a bull, whereby he excom-
municated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom,
ard absolved her subjects from their oath of allegi-

ance.

ance. Felton, an Englishman, had the boldness to BooK VI.
fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's pa- '-
lace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own I5/7o
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this
fatal sentence againit the most powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was
now less regarded, its proceedings were more cau-
tious; and, it was only when they were rouzed by
some powerful Prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore,
imputed this ftep, which the Pope had taken, to a
combination of the Roman Catholic Princes against
her, and fufpeaed that some plot was on foot in
favour of the Scottish Queen. In that event, she
knew that the safety of her own kingdom depended
on preserving her influence in Scotland; and in
order to strengthen this, she renewed her promises
of proteting the King's adherents, encouraged
them to proceed to the election of a Regent, and
even ventured to point out the Earl of Lenox, as
the person who had the best title. That honour
was accordingly conferred upon him, in a Conven-
tion of the whole party, held on the i 2th of July*.

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meet- Lenox e-

ing of the Parliament, which the Queen's party leaed Re-
had summoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having gent.
effected that, he marched against the Earlof Huntly,
Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garrison, which he had placed in Brechin, to
surrender at discretion. Soon after, he made himself
master of some other castles. Emboldened by this
successful beginning of his administration, as well
as by the appearance of a considerable army, with
which the Earl of Suffex hovered on the borders,
he deprived Maitland of his office of secretary,
and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other

Spotfw. 240. Cald. 2. 186. See Append. No. II.

A 4 leaders

Boos VI leaders of the 0Qeen's party, traitors and enemies
i.'-. of their country .
iarV' ad- IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the
adhere-nts Queen's adherents had recourse to the King of
negGoiite Spain t, with whom Mary had held a close corre-
. th fpondence ever since her confinement in England.

They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two
of his officers to take a view of the country, and
to examine its coasts, and harbours; and obtained
from him a small supply of money and arms, which
were sent to the Earl of Huntly t. But this aid,
so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have

Elizabeth availed them little. They were indebted for their
pr' p:csa a safety ;o a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
Tatyam ot under colour of restoring the captive QOeen to her
daii.. be- throne. The first steps in this negotiation had been
Tv-ern taken in the month of May; but hitherto little
Mary' nd progress was made in it. The peace concluded
her i.- between the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in

France, and her apprehensions that Charles would
interpose with vigour in behalf of his fifter-in-law,
quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affecded to
treat her prisoner with more indulgence, she liften-
ed more graciously to the solicitations of foreign
ambafadors in her favour, and seemed fully de-
termined to replace her on the throhe of her ancef-
tors. As a proof of her sincerity, she laboured to
procure a ceiTation of arms between the two con-
tending facions in Scotland. Lenox, elated with
the good fortune, which had hitherto attended his
adminifration, and flattering himself with an easy
triumph over enemies, whose estates were wafted,
and their forces dispirited, refused, for rome time,
to come into this measure. It was not safe for him,
however, to dispute the will of his protedrefs. A
ceflation of hostilities during two months, to com-

* Crawf. Meem. 159. Cald. 2. 198. t See Appcnd. No. III.
1 Anderi. 3. 123. Craw-f Mcrr. 153.

mence

mence on the third of September, was agreed up- BooK VI.
on; and being renewed from time to time, it con--
tinued till the firit of April next -ear*. Spotfw.

SOON after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir 243

Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots. The dig-
nity of these ambassadors, the former her prime
Minister, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all
parties, that the negotiation was serious, and that
the hour of Mary's liberty was now approaching.
The propositions, which they made to her, were
advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince in
Mary'sfituation, had reason to expeft. The rati-
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing
any pretensions to the English Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her pofi:erity; the
adhering to the alliance between the two kingdoms;
the pardoning her fubjeas, who had taken arms
against her; and her promising to hold no corre-
fpondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that
might disturb Elizabeth's government, were among
the chief articles. By way of security for the
accomplishment of there, they demanded that
tome persons of rank Ihould be given as hostages,
that the Prince her son should reside in England,
and that a few caffles on the border should be
put into Elizabeth's hands. To rome of there
propositions Mary consented; some Ihe endea-
voured to mitigate; and others she attempted
to evade. In the mean time, she transmitted
copies of them to the Pope, to the Kings of
France and Spain, and to the Duke of Alva.
She insinuated, that without some timely and
vigorous interposition in her behalf, she would
be obliged to accept of these hard conditions,
and to purchase liberty at any price. But the
Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by his
efforts against the Turks, his treasury was en-

tirely

11

Boo VT. tirelv exhausted. Charleshad already begunto me-
~'-"y ' ditate that conspiracy against the Hugonots, which

I5'' 0marks his reign with such infamy ; and it required

much leisure, and perfect tranquillity, to bring that
execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed
in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great re-
nown to the Christian arms, by the vitory over the
infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened
an insurrection; and hisfubjects in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppression, and many indigni-
ties, were breaking out into open rebellion. All of
them, for these different reasons, advifsd Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude the
treaty on the best Terms she could procure *.

Eliza- IMARY, accordingly, consented to many of Eli-
beth's ar- zabeth's demands, and discovered a facility of dif-
tnhe eco position, which promised fill further conceflions.
duOt of it. But no conceiTion she could have made, would have

satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated
professions of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and
notwidlftanding the solemnity with which (he car-
ried on the treaty, had no other objeA in it, than
to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time t. After
having so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for
refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could not
now difmils her with safety. Under all the difad-
vantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found
means to excite commotions in England, which
were extrcmely formidable. What desperate effects
of her juit resentment mightbe expected, if fhewere
set at liberty, and recovered her former power?
What engagements could bind her, not to revenge
the wrongs the had suffered, nor to take advantage
of the favourable conjunctures, that might present
:hemfelv\s ? Was it possible for her to give such fe-
curity for her behaviour, in times to come, as might
* Anders. Vol. III. o10, izo. t Digges Comp. Amb. 78.

remove

remove all suspicions and fears ? And wasthere not BooK VI.
goodcaufe to conclude, thatnofuture benefits could -'
ever obliterate the memory of past injuries ? It was 'i570
thus Elizabeth reasoned; though she continued to
at as if her views had been entirely different.
She appointed seven of her privy counsellors to be
commiflioners for fettling the articles of the treaty;
ard as Mary had already named the Bishops of
Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingfton, for her
ambassadors, she required the Regent to impower
proper persons to appear in behalf of the King.
The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn abbot of Dunferm- 1571-
ling, and Sir James Macgill, were the persons cho-
fen by the Regent. They prepared for their jour-
ney as slowly as Elizabeth herself could have wished.
At length they arrived at London, and met the
cormiffioners of the two Queens. Mary's ambaf- Feb. 19.
fadors discovered the icrongeft inclination to comply
with every thing that would remove the obftacleg
which stood in the way of their mistress's liberty.
But when Morton and his associates were called
uporl to vindicate their conduct, and to explain the
fentirnents of their party, they began, in juftifi-
cation of their treatment of the Queen, to advance
such maxims concerning the limited powers of Prin-
ces, and the natural right of fubjeEts to resist and
to controul them, as were extremely ihocking to
Elizabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative were
very exalted. With regard to the authority which
the King now possessed, they declared that they
neither had, nor could possibly receive inftruftions,
to content to any treaty, that tended to ftubvert,
or even to impair it, in the least degree*. No-* Cald. 2.
thing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than z2.S
such a reply from the commiflioners of the King of sgg
Scots, to the Queen of England. His party de- -aynes,
pended absolutely on her protection, her hand had 523, 524.
feated him on the throne, and to her power lie owed
the continuance of his reign. With the utmoun ease,

lie

BocK VI. Rhe could have brought them to talk in a very dif-
'-J ~ ferent manner, and whatever conditions she might

' '' ihave thought fit to prescribe, they would have had

no other choice but to submit. This declaration,
however, she affeced to confider as an insuperable

It proves difficulty. And finding that there was no realbn
fruidel. to dread any danger from the French King, who

had notdifcovered that eagerness in fupportofMary,
which was expeted; the reply made by Morton
furnished her with a pretence for putting a stop to
the negotiation, till the Regent should fend ambaf-
March b. Fadors with more ample powers. Thus after being

amused for ten months with the hopes of liberty,
the unhappy Qecen ofScots remained under friter
custody than ever, and without any profpet of
escaping from it; wEhile those subjects, who still ad-
hered to her, were exposed, without ally or protec-
tor, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in
this neg.tiation rendered frill more insolent*.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce,

which had been observed with little exactness on
either fide, Captain Crawfurd of Jordan-hill, a gal-
lant and enterprising officer, performed a service

D-uIba-- of great importance to the Regent, by surprising
ton catlie the castle of Dunbarton. This was the only for-
b th'Re- tifled place in the kingdom, of which the Queen
gent. had kept poifelfion, ever since the commencement

of the civil vars. Its situation on the top of an
high and almost inaccessible rock, which rites in the
middle of a plain, rendered it extremely strong,
and in the opinion of that age impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great con-
ilquence, and esteemed the most proper place in
ti:e kingdoin for landing any foreign troops, that
r:ght corn to Mary's aid. The strength of the

And. j. 91, &c.

place

place rendered Lord Fleming, the governor, more B o o VI.
secure than he ought to have been, confidering its -
importance. Afoldier, who had served in the gar- 57
rifon, and had been disgusted by some ill usage, pro-
posed thefcheme totheRegent, endeavoured to de-
monitrate that it was practicable, and offered him-
self to go the foremost man on the enterprize. It
was thought prudent to rifque any danger, for so
great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else
was necessary, were prepared with the utmost fe-
crecy and dispatch. All the avenues to the castle
were seized, that no intelligence of the dcfign might
reach the governor. Towards evening, Crawfurd
marched from Glasgow, with a finall but deter-
mined band. By midnight, they arrived at the
bottom of the rock. Tle moon was set, and the
sky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rock
was highest, that the assailants made their attempt,
because, in that place, there were few sentinels, and
they hoped to find them least alert. The first lad-
der was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness
of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawfurd scrambled up the rock, and
fastened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which
grew in a cleft. This place they all reached with
the utmost difficulty, but were frill at a great dilf
tance from the foot of the wall. Their ladders
were made fast a second time; but in the middle
of the ascent, they met with an unforeseen difficulty.
One of their companions was seized with some fud-
den fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the
ladder. All were at a stand. It was impossible to
pals him. To tumble him headlong was cruel; and
might occasion a discovery. ButCrawfurd's presence

of

.Bo o VI. of mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier

"'vr - to be bound fast to the ladder that he might not fall
'57'l when the fit was over: and turning the other fide

of theladder,they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there frill remained
a high wall tofcale; but after surmounting so many
greater difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A
sentry observed the first man, who appeared on the
parapet, and had just time to give the alarm, be-
fore he was knocked onthehead. The officers and
soldiers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed,
and more solicitous about their own safety, than
capable of making resistance. The assailants rushed
forwards, with repeating shouts, and with the ut-
most fury; took pofleflion of the magazine; seized
the cannon ; and turned them againittheir enemies.
Lord Fleming got into a small boat, and fled all
alone, into Argyllfhire. Crawfurd, in reward of
his valour and good conduct, remained master of
the castle; and as he did not lose a single man in
the enterprize, he enjoyed his success with unmix-
ed pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French
Envoy, and Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrew's,
were the prisoners of greatest diftincaion*.

Archbi- \E R A c's character protected him from the usage
ihop of which he merited by his ativity in stirring up
S" Ar- enemies against the King. The Regent treated
to dea-h the lady v ith great politeness, and humanity. But
by hri. a very different fate awaited the archbishop; he

was carried under a strong guard to Stirling; and
as he had formerly been attainted by at of Par-
liament, he was without any formal trial, con-
demned to be hang'd ; and on the fourth day after
he was taken, the sentence was executed. An
attempt was made to convi&t him of being accef-
fary to the murder of both the King and Re-
gent, but these accusations were supported by no

' EBuch. 304.

proof.

proof. Our historians observe that he was the first BooK VI
bishop in Scotland who died by the hands of the '
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, '57
both in church and state, ought to have exempted
him from a punishment, inflicted only on the low-
eft criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, hisabili-
ties, and his profeflion, rendered him odious and
formidable to the King's adherents. Lenox hated
him as the person, by whose counsels the reputation
and power of the house of Hamilton were support-
ed. And party rage, and personal enmity, difta-
ted that indecent lentence, for which tome colour
was fought, by imputing to him such odious
crimes *. Spots.

THE loss of Dunbarton, and the revere treat- 2q2.

ment of the Archbishop, perplexed and enraged Kit kall'
the Queen's party; and hostilities were renewed the castle
with all the fierceness, which disappointment and of ldin-
indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during burgh in
the truce, had taken care to increase the number of t

Q.1een's.

his garrison, and to provide every thing neceflary nlne.
for his defence, iflued a proclamation declaring
Lenox's authority to be unlawful, and usurped;
commanded all who favoured his cause to leave the
town within fix hours; seized the arms, belonging
to the citizens; planted a battery on the steeple
of St. Giles, repaired the walls, and fortified the
gates of the city; and, though the affections of
the inhabitants leaned a different way, held out the
metropolis against the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that faAion,
repaired to Edinburgh with their followers; and
having received a frall rum of money, and rome
ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton
seized Leith, and fortified it; the Regent joined
him with a considerable body of men. While the
armies lay lb near each other, daily fkirm-ifles

happened,

BCE \-I. happened, and with various success. The Qjeen's
'-^ ' party was not strong enough to take the field against

the Regent, nor was his fiupriority so great as to
undertake the siege of the castle, or of the town*.

Both far- SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands
ties hold of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par-
Paria- liament to meet in that place. In order to prevent
May 1;. any objecaion against the lawfulness of the meeting,

the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly
as polfible; and assembled in a house at the head
of the Canongate, which, though without the walls,
lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meet-
ing; but they were so strongly guarded, that all
his efforts were vain. They passed an act attaint-
ing Maitland, and a few others, and then adjourn-
to the 28th of Auguf t.

THE other party, in order that their proceed-

ings might be countenanced by the fame shew of
legal authority, held a meeting of parliament soon
after. There was produced, in this assembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that
deed, whereby ihe had resigned the crown, and
contented to the coronation of her son. Confor-
mable to this declaration, an act was past, pro-
nouncing the resignation to have been extorted by
fear; to be null in itself, and in all its consequences;
and enjoining all good fubjets to acknowledge the
Queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to
support those who ac&ed in her name. The present
establishment of the protestant religion was con-
firmed by another statute; and, in imitation of
the adverse party, a new meetii'g was appointed
on the 26th of August t.

3i'r^<''e vlEXANV,\HII.E, all the miseries of civil war de-
con:o!" rfolated the kingdom. Fellow citizens, friends, bro-
[ -t-e- thers, took different fides, and ranged themselves
°d eunder the standards of the contending factions. In

* Ca'd. 2 233, &c. t Crawf.Mem. I,7. X Ibid. 177.

every

every county, and almofft in every town and vil- Boos VI.
lage, King's-men and zuieen's-men were names of`-'--'
diftintion. Political hatred dissolved all natural 5
ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good will and
confidence, which hold 'mankind together in focie-
ty. Religious zeal mingled itself with these civil
diftintions, and contributed not a little to heighten,
and to inflame them.

THE factions which divided the kingdom were, State of

in appearance, only two. But in both there, there faaions.
were persons, with views, and principles, so dif-
ferent from each other, that they ought to be
distinguished. With some, considerations of reli-
gion were predominant, and they either adhered
to the Queen, because they hoped, by her means,
to re-establish Popery, or they defended the King's
authority, as the best support of the Protestant faith.
Among there the opposition was violent and irre-
concilable. Others were influenced by political
motives only, or allured by views of interest; the
Regent aimed at uniting these, and did not despair
of gaining, by gentle arts, many of Mary's adhe-
rents to acknowledge the King's authority. Mait-
land and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a
coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might
be restored to some share in the government, and
the kingdom shake off its dependence on England.
Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and the
most powerful of the King's party, held a particu-
lar course; and moving only as he was prompted
by the court of England, thwarted every measure,
that tended towards a reconcilement of the factions;
and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed
protection.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the

meeting of their parliaments, now approached.
Only three peers and two bishops appeared in that,
which was held in the Queen's name at Edinburgh.

VOL. II. B But

19'

Boor VI. But contemptible as their numbers were, they pass-
,.-- -- ed an aft for attainting upwards of 2oo of the
1571. adverse faction. The meeting at Stirling was

nu:merous and splendid. The Regent had prevailed
on the Earlsof Argvll, Eglinton, Caffils, and Lord
Boyd, to acknowledge the King's authority. The
three Earls were among the most powerful noblemen
in the kingdom, and had hitherto been zealous in
the Queen's cause. Lord Bovd had been one of
Mary's commiflioners at York and Westminster,
and, since that time, had been admitted into all
her most secret councils. But, during that turbu-
lent period the condut of individuals, as well as
the principles of factions, varied so often, that
the sense of honour, the chief preservative of con-
fiftence in character, was entirely loft; and with-
out any regard to decorum, men suddenly aban-
doned one party, and adopted all the violent pas-
sions of the other. The defection, however, of
so many persons of distinCtion, not only weakened
the Queen's party, but added reputation to her
adversaries.

Thc AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin-
King's burgh, that at Stirling began with framing aCts
party fur-
prizcd i- against the opposite faction. But in the midst of
btiriing. all the security, which confidence in their own

numbers, or diifance from danger could inspire,
Sept. 3. they were awakened, early one morning, by the

flhouts of the enemy in the heart of the town. In
a moment, the houses of every person of diftinc-
lion were surrounded, and before they knew what
to think of so strange an event, the Regent, the
Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Callils, Eg-
linton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cath-
cart, Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and mount-
ed behind troopers, who were ready to carry them
to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this
daring enterprize; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill-timed solicitude of his friends about his

safety,

safety, not to hazard his own person in conducting BooK Vt.
ir, that day might have terminated the contest be- "'
tween the two factions, and have restored peace to '577
his country. By his direction, four hundred men,
under the command of Huntly, Lord Claud Ha-
milton, and Scott of Buccleugh, set out from Edin-
burgh, and the better to conceal their design,
marched towards the south. But they soon wheeled
to the right, and horses having been provided for
the infantry, rode fereight to Stirling. By four in
the morning, they arriv ed there; not one sentry
was posted on the walls, not a single man was
awake about the place. They met with no resist-
ance fi-om any person they had seized, except Mor-
ton. He defending his house with obstinate valour,
they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not
surrender till forced out of it by the flames. In
performing this, some time was consumed and
the private men, unaccustomed to regular difci-
pline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses
and shops of the citizens. The noise and uproar
in the town reached the cattle. The Earl of Mar
sallied out with thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon
the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers
kept together in a body. The townsmen tookarms
to assist their governor; a sudden panic struck the
assailants; some fled, some surrendered themselves
to their own prisoners; and had not the borderers,
who followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by car-
rying off all the horses within the place, not a man
would have escaped. If the Regent had not un-
fortunately been killed, the loss on tih king's fide
would have been as inconsiderable, as the alarm
was great. Think on the iAcb'jh.op of St. Andret's,
was the word among the Qieen's foldlers and
Lenox fell a facrif.ce to his memory. The officer
to whom he ifrrendered, endeavouring to protect The Re-
him, loft his own life in his defence. He v.asllain, gent kii'd.

B z according

Boo VI. according to the general opinion, by command of
wPvY Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of
1;'' concerting this plan with great secrecy, and pru-

dence; but Morton's fortunate obstinacy, and the
want ofdifcipline among his own troops, deprived

Melv. him of success, the only thing wanting to render
c26rwf this equal to the most applauded military enter-
Mem 2o4.prizes of the kind .
iMar cho- As so many of the nobles were assembled, they
fen Re- proceeded, without delay, to the eledion of a Re-
gent. gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were candidates

for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of
voices. Amidst all the fierce dissentions, which
had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftin-
guifhed himself by his moderation, his humanity,
and his disinterestedness. And as his power was
far inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great
as Morton's, he was, for these reasons, less formi-
dable to the other nobles. His merit, too, in
having so lately rescued the Leaders of the party
from imminent destruction, contributed not a little
to his preferment.

Proceed- WHILE there things were carrying on in Scot-
ings i land, the tranfations in England were no less in-
England
qagaift teresting to Mary, and still more fatal to her cause.
Mary. The parliament of that kingdom, which met in

April, passed an acf, by which, it was declared to
be high treason, to claim any right to the crown
during the life of the Queen; to affirm that the
title of any other person was better than hers; or
to maintain that the parliament had not power to
fettle, and to limit the order of succession. This
remarkable itatute was intended not only for the

+ CiSd. security of their own sovereign, but to curb the
4iar6.ae restless and intriguing spirit of the Scottilh Queen,
negotiat- and her adherents t.
ed be- AT this time, a treaty of marriage between E-
tw'enEli-lizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the French
zabtth
and the King's brother, was well advanced. Both courts
Duke of seemed
\n. o;.

seemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave out, BOOK VI.
with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail '">'"
of taking place. Neither of them, however, wished '57'
its success; and they encouraged it for no otherend,
but because it served to cover or to promote their
particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine
of Medicis was bent towards the accomplishment
of her detestable projeEt for the deftrution of the
Hugonot chiefs; and by carrying on a negotiation
for the marriage of her son with a Princess, whowas
justly esteemed the protedrefs of that party, by
yielding some things in point of religion, and by
discovering an indifference with regard to others,
she hoped to amuse all the Protestants in Europe,
and to lull asleep thejealoufy even of the Hugonots
themselves. Elizabeth flattered herself with reap-
ing advantages of another kind. During the de-
pendence of the negotiation, the French could not
with decency give any open assistance to the Scot-
tifh Queen; if they conceived any hopes of success
in the treaty of marriage, they would, of course,
interest themselves but coldly in her concerns;
Mary herself mtfft_ be'deje&ed at losing an ally,
whom she had hitherto reckoned her moit power-
ful protetor; and by interrupting her correfpon-
dence with France, one source, at least, of the
cabals and intrigues which disturbed the kingdom,
would be ftopt. Both Queens succeeded in their
schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Eliza-
beth, and blinded the Hugonots. The French
discovered the utmost indifference about the interest
of the Scottilh Queen; and Mary, confidering that
court as already united with her rival, turned her-
self, for protection, towards the King of Spain*.
Philip, whose dark and thoughtful mind, delighted
in the mystery of intrigue, had held a secret cor-

Digges, 144,' 148. Camd. 434.

B 3 respondence

Boors V refpordedce with Mar-, for some time, by means

w~v~^ of the Bilhcp of Ross, and had fpplied both her-
'57.' self, and her adherents in Scotland, with small

fums of money. Ridolp'-i, a Florentine gentle-
man, who resided at London under the character
of a banker, and who acted privately as an agentfor
the Pope, was the person whom the Bishop intrusted

Norfol!k's with this negotiation. Mary thought it nece'Tary,
confpriIcylikewvife, to communicate the secret to the Duke
n :,our of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to

liberty, upon his solemn promise to have :.o fur.. :r
intercourse with the Queen of Scots; which, how,-
ever, he regarded so little, that she took no ftep ili
any matter of moment, without his advice. She
complained in a long letter, which she wrote to
him in cyphers, of the baseness, with which the
French court had abandoned her interest; she
declared her intention of imploring the afiftance of
the Spanish Monarch, which was now her only re-
source; and recommended Ridolphi to his coni-
dence, as a person, capable both of explaining and
advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded
Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then to
burn this letter; but whether he had been already
gained by the court, or resolved at that time to
be-tray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the
order, and hid the letter, together with other trea-
fonable papers, under the Duke's own bed.

RI 2OLP HI, in a conference u ith Norfolk, omitted

rone of those arguments, and spared none of those
prornifes, whicharethe usual incentives to rebellion,
The Pope, he told him, had a great fum in
readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The
Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand
men, not far from London. The Catholics to a
man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half
the nation had turned their eyes towards him, and

called

called on him to revenge the unmerited injuries, BOOK VI.
which he himself had suffered; and to rescue an V
unfortunate Queen, who offered him her person, 1571.
and her crown, as the reward of his success. Nor-
folk approved of the design, and though he refuted
to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, allowed him
to. use his name, in negotiating with the Pope, and
Alva*. The Bilhop of Ross, who, from the vio- * Anders.
lence of his temper, and impatience to procure re-3 161.
lief for his mistress, was apt to run into rafl and
desperate designs, advised the Duke to assemble
secretly a few of his followers, and at once to seize
Elizabeth's person. But this the Duke rejected as
a scheme equally wild and hazardous. Mean while, Discover-
the English court had received some imperfect in-ed by Eli4
formation of the plot, by intercepting one of Ri-zabeth'
dolphi's agents; and an accident happened, which
brought to light all the circumstances of it. The
Duke had employed Hickford to transmit to Lord
Herreis, some money, which was to be distributed
among Mary's friends in Scotland. A person not
in the secret was intrusted with conveying it to the
borders and he, suspecting it from the weight to
be gold, whereas he had been told that it was fil-
ver, carried it directly to the privy council. The
Duke, his domeffics, and all who were privy, or
could be fufpeded of being privy to the design,
were taken into custody. Never did the accom- Sept. 7.
plices in a conspiracy discover less firmness; or ser-
vants betray an indulgent master, with greater
baseness. Every one confe-fed the whole of what
he knew. Hickford gave directions how to find
the papers, which he had hidden. The Duke him-
self, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing all dangerous papers to have been de-
stroyed, confidently asserted his own innocence; but
when their depositions, and the papers themselves
were produced, astonished at their treachery, he

B 4 acknowledged

Bo oK v. acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's
^'N mercy. His offence was too heinous, and too often
'57.' repeated, to obtain pardon; and Elizabeth thought

it neceffarv to deter her fubjets, by his punishment,
from holding correspondence with the Queen of
Scots, or her emissaries. Being tried by his Peers,
he was found guilty of high treason, and, after

' Anders several delays, suffered death for the crime*.
3" 149i- TTHE discovery of this conspiracy produced many
-, .s effects, extremely detrimental to Mary's interest.

The Bishop of Ross, who appeared by the consef-
sion of all- concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into cuf-
tody, his papers searched, himself committed tothe
tower, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened
with capital punishment, and after a long confine-
ment, set at liberty, on condition that he should
leave the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived
of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his
abilities, but was denied, from that time, the pri-
vilege of having an ambassador at the English court.
The Spanish ambassador, whom the power and
dignity of the prince he represented, exempted
from such insults as Ross had suffered, was com-

t D;gges, manded to leave England t. Mary herself was kept
163 under a stricter guard than formerly, the number

of her domestics abridged, and no person permitted

Strype, to fee her, but in pretence of her keepers t.

An 2 50. AT the fame time, Elizabeth, forefeeingtheftorm
Elizabeth
declares which was gathering, on the continent, againit her
openly a- kingdom, began to wish that tranquillity were
gai-ft the restored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's late
Qu*en's attempt against her government, ihe determined to

act, without difuife or ambiguity, in favour of the
King'b party. This resolution she intimated to the
O.:. leaders of both fations. Mary, Ihe told them,

had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conspiracies both against her crown and life, that

she

{he would henceforth confider her as unworthy of BooK VI.
protetion, and would never content to restore her"-"
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. 157'
She exhorted them, therefore, to unite in acknow-
ledging .the King's authority. She promised to
procure by her mediation equitable terms for those,
who had hitherto opposed it. But if they still con-
tinued refractory, she threatened to employ her
utmost power to compel them to submit '. Though* See
this declaration did not produce an immediate ef-Append.
feet; though hostilities continued in the neighbour-N° IV.
hood of Edinburgh; though Huntly's brother,
Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery, and good con-
dut, had routed the King's adherents in the North,
in many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery
of Elizabeth's sentiments contributed not a little to
animate one party, and to depress the spirit and
hopes of the other t. t Cald. 2;

As Morton, who commanded the Regent's for- 289, 294.

ces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy still held out theStrype, 2
town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce a day passed 76 7
without a skirmish. And while both avoided any Hoffilities
decisive action, they harraffed each other by attack- carried on
ing small parties, beating up quarters, and inter-between
cepting convoys. These operations, though littletcm'
memorable in themselves, kept the paflions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fury, which
rendered themselves regardless not only of the laws
of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of
combat, that this implacable rage appeared; both
parties hanged the prisoners they took, of whatever
rank or quality, without mercy, and without trial,
Great numbers suffered in this Ihocking manner;
the unhappy vicims were led, by fifties at a time,
to execution ; and it was not till both fides had
smarted severely, that they discontinued this barba-

rous

Bo oK V. rous practice, so reproachful to the charater ofthe
'-v-· nation '. Mean while, those in the town and castle,

572'. though they had rceived a supply of money from

Mlem. the Duke of Alva t1, began to susser for want of
218, 2zo. provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the mills
t Caid . in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
345 small garrisons in all the houses of strength around

it, scarcity daily encrealed. At last all the miseries
of famine were felt, and they muff have been soon
reduced to such extremities, as would have forced
them to capitulate, if the English and French am-
baffadors had not procured a suspension of hostilities,

Id. 36. between the two parties r.
League THOUGH the negotiation for a marriage, between
bet.-een Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had been fruit-
Erg'a-d less, both Charles and she were desirous of conclud-
ra.nce. ing a defensive alliance between the two crowns.

He confidered such a treaty, not only as the beit
device for blinding the Protestants, against whom
the conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution;
but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious mea-
sure might expose him. Elizabeth, who had hi-
therto reigned without a tingle ally, now saw her
kingdom so threatened with intestine commotions,
or exposed to invasions from abroad, that she was
extremely solicitous to secure the assistance of so
powerful a neighbour. The difficulties arising from
the situation of the Scottish Queen, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded tome
terms of advantage for Mary and her party. Eli-
zabeth reffucit to lifen to any proposition of that
kind. Her obfti.iacy overcame the faint efforts of
the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so
much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard
to Scottish affairs, a short article was inserted, in
general and ambiguous terms, to this purpose,
*' r 1. " That the parties contracting shall make no inno-

va;ions in Scotland; nor susser any stranger to en-

ter,

ter, and to foment the factions there; but it fhallBooK VI,
be lawfill for the Queen of England to chastise, by '^
force of arms, those Scots who shall continue to 1572.
harbour the English rebels now in Scotland *."
In consequence of this treaty, France and England
affeced to at in concert with regard to Scotland,
and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared
there, in name of their refpetive sovereigns. By
their mediation, a truce, for two months, was
agreed upon, and, during that time, conferences
were to be held between the leaders of the opposite
factions, in order to accommodate their differen-
ces, and restore peace to the kingdom. This truce
afforded a seasonable interval of tranquillity to the
Queen's adherents in the South; but in the North,
it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon
had frill maintained his reputation and superiority
there. Several parties, under different officers,
were sent against him. Some of them he attacked
in the field; againfl others he employed stratagem;
and as his courage and conduct were equal, none
of his enterprizes failed of success. He made war,
too, with the humanity, which became so gallant
a man, and gained ground by that, no less than
by the terror of his arms. If he had not been
obliged, by the truce, to suspend his operations,
he would, in all probability, havebrought thatpart
of the kingdom to submit entirely to the Queen's
authority +.

NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuc- Proceed.
cess, Mary's interest was on the decline, not only ings i

England

in her own kingdom, but among the English. No-agains
thing could be more offensive to that nation, jea-Mary.
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the profped of
the Spanish yoke, than her negotiations with the
Duke of Alva. The parliament, which met in
May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdoml; and after a solemn confe-

.Digges, 7o, 191. Camld. 4l4.

t Crawf. Mem.

renca

Boo VI. rence between the Lords and Commons, both
,- ~~ houses agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her

;"" guilty of high treason, and to deprive her of all

right of succession to the crown. This great cause,
as it was then called, occupied them during the
whole feflion, and was carried on with much una-
nimity. Elizabeth, though she applauded their
zeal, and approved greatly of the course they were
taking, was satisfied with shewing Mary what she
might expect from the resentment of the nation
but as she did not yet think it time to proceed to
the most violent extremity against her, she pro-
rogued the parliament *.

The h THESE revere proceedings of the English par-
enehft liament were not more mortifying to Mary, than
her in- the coldness and neglet of her allies the French.
terest. The Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came

over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a
shew of interesting himself in favour of the Scot-
tifh Queen; but, instead of soliciting for her liber-
ty, or her restoration to her throne, all that he
demanded was a flight mitigation of the rigour of
her imprisonment. And even this small request,
he urged withfo little warmth or importunity, that
no regard was paid to it f.

The maf- THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth
sacre of much fatisfacdion, and she expeted from it a great

increase of security. She now turned her whole at-
tention towards Scotland, where the animofities of
the two factions were still so high, and so many
interfering interests to be adjusted, that a general
pacification seemed to be at a great dillance. But
while she laboured to bring them to some agree-
ment, an event happened which filled a great part
of Europe with astonishment, and with horror.
This was the massacre at Paris, an attempt, to
which there is no parallel in the history of mankind,
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or for
the cruelty and barbarity, with which it was put

D'Ewe's Jour. 206, &c. j Jebb. z. 512.

in

in execution. Bythe most solemn promises of safety B o oK VI
and of favour, the leaders of the Protestants were '-
drawn to court; and though doomed to deftruc- I'572
tion, they were received with caresses, loaded with
honours, and treated, for seven months, with every
pofible mark of familiarity, and of confidence. In Aug. 24.
the midst of their security, the warrant for their
deflrution was issued by their Sovereign, on whose
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their
countrymen, their fellow citizens, and companions,
imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten thousand
Protestants, without diftinaion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were sent to other parts of
the kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time,
applauded in Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanks-
givings were offered to God for its success. But
amongst the Protestants it excited incredible horror;
a striking picture of which is drawn by the French
ambalfador at the court of England, in his account
of his first audience after the maflacre. " A gloomy
sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the cham-
bers of the royal apartment; the ladies and cour-
tiers were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep
mourning, and as I passed through them, not one
bestowed on me a civil look, or made the least
return to my salutes*."

BUT horror was not the only paflion, with whichDetrimcn-

this event inspired the Protestants; it filled themtalto Ma-
with fear. They confidered it as the prelude tor1' inte-
some greater blow, and believed, not without much
probability, that all the Popish Princes had confpir-
ed the deftrulion of their fee. This opinion did
no small ditfervice to Mary's affairs in Scotland.
Many of her adherents were Protestants; and,
though they wished her reftoratibn, were not wil-

* Carte, 3 522.

ling,

BooK VI. ling, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which
'-- rthey profelfed. They dreaded her attachment to

I2 a religion, which allowed its votaries to violate the

most solemn engagements, and prompted them to
perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A general
confederacy of the Protestants seemed to them the
only thing that could uphold the Reformation
against the league, which was formed to overturn it.
Nor could the present establishment of religion be
long maintained inBritain, but by aftric union with
Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations,
in espousing the defence of it, asacommon caused.

The Re- THE Regent took hold of this favourable con,
gent en- juncture for negotiating a general peace. And as
detvo urs he laboured for this purpose, with the utmost zeal,
both par- and the adverse fation placed entire confidence in
ties. his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have fail-

ed of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy
came so near to an agreement with him, that scarce
any thing remained, except the formality offigning
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the dif,
appointment he met with in his pretensions to the
Regency; his abilities, his wealth, and the patron-
age of the court of England, gave him greater wa4y
with the party, than even the Regent himself; and
he took pleasure in thwarting every measure pur-
sued by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and
his associates recovered any share in the adminiftra-
tion, his own influence would be considerably di-
minilhed ; and the Regent, by their means, would
regain that ascendant, which belonged to his f a-
tion. With him, concurred all those, who were in
poiTelfion of the lands, which belonged to any of
the Queen's party. And his ambition, and their
avarice, fruitrated the Regent's pious intentions,
and retarded a blessing so necessary to the king-
dom, as the establishment of peace +.
* D;g::s, 244, 267. i Mfelv. 233. CrawF. Mem. 237.

SUCH

S uc H a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition, BooK VL
v.hich reigned among his party, made a deep im- -r'"-'
preflicn on the Regent, who loved his country, and Hi5s dath.
wvifhed for peace with much ardor. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on
a fettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper,
of which he died on the zgth of Otober. He was,
perhaps, the only perfun in the kingdom, who
could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without
envy, and have left it without lols of reputation.
Notwithstanding their mutual animofities, both
factions acknowledged his views to be honourable,
and his integrity to be uncorrupted *. * Crawf.

No competitor now appeared against Morton.Mem.z4t.
The Queen of England powerfully supported his Morto
claim, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, Regent
and the jealousy of the nobles, he was elected Re- Nov. 24.
gent; the fourth, who, in the space of five years,
had held that dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the firtf of

January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-
I ing the negotiations with the opposite party, which
had been set on foot by his predecessor. They
produced no effects, however, till the beginning
of the next year.

BEFoRE we proceed to these, some events, hither-
to untouched, deifrve our notice.

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept

prisoner in Lochleven, ever since his flight into
Scotland in the year I569, was given up to Lord
Hunfdon Governor of Berwick; and being carried
to York, suffered there the punishment of his rebel-
lion. The king's party wele so sensible of their de-
pendence on Elizabeth's protection, that it was
scarce poflible for them to refuse putting into her
hands a person who had taken up arms against her.
But as a ium of money was paid, on that account;
and shared between Morton and Douglas of Loch-

leven,

BooK VI leven, the former of whom, during his exile in
'-'--' England, had been much indebted to Northumber-

J'SZ land's friendship, the abandoning this unhappy

nobleman, in such a manner, to certain deitruc-
tion, was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary
action '.

Affairs THIS year was remarkable for a considerable in-
of the novation in the government of the Church. Soon

urc after the Reformation, the Popish Bishops had been

confirmed by law in poffeflion of part of their be-
nefices; but the spiritual jurifdition, which-belong-
ed to their order, was exercised by fuperintendants,
though with more moderate authority. On
the death of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's,
Morton obtained from the Crown a grant of the
temporalities of that fee. But as it was thought
indecent for a layman to hold a benefice, to which
the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Doug-
las, re&or of the university of St. Andrew's, to be
chosen archbishop; and allotting him a small pen-
sion out of the revenues of the fee, retained the
remainder in his own hands. The nobles, who
saw the advantages they might reap from such a
pracice, supported him in the execution of his plan.
It gave great offence, however, to the Clergy, who,
initead of perpetuating an order, whose name and
power was odious to them, wished that the reve-
nues which had belonged to it, might be employed
in supplying such parishes, as were still unprovided
with fettled pastors. But on the one hand, it would
have been rash in the Clergy to have irritated, too
much, noblemen, on whom the very existence of
the Protestant Church in Scotland depended; and
Morton, on the other, conduced his scheme with
such dexterity, and managed them with so much
art, that it was, at last, agreed, in a Convention
composed of the leading men among the Clergy,
together with a committee of privy council, " that
the name and office of archbishop, and bilhop,

* Crawf. MIr. 55, 222. Camd. 445.

should

should be continued during the King's minority, BooK VI.
and there dignities be conferred upon the best qua-
lified among the Protestant Ministers; but that 57.
with regard to their spiritual jurifdiEtions, they
should be subjea to the general assembly of the
Church." The rules to be observed in their election;
and the persons who were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the Dean
and Chapter in times of Popery, were likewise par-
ticularly specified . And the whole being laid
before the General Assembly, after rome exceptions
to the name of Archbisop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and
a protestation that it should be confidered only as
a temporary constitution, till one more perfet could
be introduced, it obtained the approbation of that
court t. Even Knox, who was prevented from
attending the Assembly by the ill state of his health,
though he declaimed loudly against the Simoniacal
padtion, to which Douglas owed his preferment,
and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out
with age and infirmities, to an office, which re-
quired unimpaired vigour both of body and mind,
seems not to have condemned the proceedings of
the Convention; and in a letter to the Assembly,
approved of some of their regulations with refpeA
to the election of Bishops, as worthy of being care-
fully observed t. In consequence of the assembly's
content to the plan agreed upon in the Convention,
Douglas was installed in his office, and at the fame
time, an archbishop of Glasgow, and a bishop of
Dunkeld were chosen from among the Protestant
Clergy. They were all admitted to the place in
parliament, which belonged to the ecclesiastical
order. But in imitation of the example set by
Morton, such bargains were made with them by
different noblemen, as gave them poffeflion only
of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to
their fees §. § Spotfw,

*Cald. 2. 305. 1 Id. 354. 1 See Appendix N° V.
VOL. II. C SooN

BooK VL SOON after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox,
`v'* the prime instrument of spreading and establishing
Nol572 the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life,
Death and in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif-
characer intereftednefs, were virtues which he possessed, in
of Knox. an eminent degree. He was acquainted, too, with

the learning, cultivated in that age; and excelled
in that species of eloquence, which is calculated to
rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too severe, and the impetuosity of his
temper exceflive. Rigid and uncomplyinghimfelf,
he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.
Regardless of the diftincions of rank and charac-
ter, he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony
and vehemence, more apt to irritate, than to re-
claim. This often betrayed him into indecent and
undutiful expressions, with refpea to the Queen's
person and conduct. Those very qualities, how-
ever, which now render his charader less amiable,
fitted him to be the instrument of Providence for
advancing the Reformation among a fierce people,
and enabled him to face dangers, and to surmount
opposition, from which a person of a more gentle
spirit would have been apt to shrink back. By an un-
wearied application to study, and to business, as
well as by the frequency and fervor of his public
discourses, he had worn out a constitution, natu-
rally strong. During a lingering illness, he disco-
vered the utmost fortitude; and met the approaches
of death, with'a magnanimity inseparable from his
character. He was constantly employed in acts of
devotion, and comforted himself with those prof-
pects of immortality, which not only preserve good
men from desponding, but fill them with exulta-
tion in their last moments. The Earl of Morton,
who was present at his funeral, pronounced his
eulogium in a few words, the more honourable
for Knox, as they came from one whom he had

often

often censured with peculiar severity. " Therelies BOOK VI.
He, who never feared the face of man *."

THOUGH Morton did not desire peace fromfuch * s'p572t

generousmotives as the former Regent, helaboured, 266.
however, in good earnest, to eftablifl it. The pub- Cald. 2.
lic confusions and calamities, to which he owed his 273'
power and importance when he was only the second The Re-
perfor. in the nation, were extremely detrimental to gent treats
him, now that he was raied to be the first. While with the
so many of the nobles continued in arms against Queen's
him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble, party
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of
extinguishing the flame, which she had kindled, and
kept so long alive in Scotland 5. She had difco-t Digges,
vered the alliance with France, from which she had 299.
expected such advantages, to be no foundation of
security. And though appearances of friendship
still fubfified between her and that court, and
Charles daily renewed his protestations of inviolable
adherence to the treaty, she was convinced, by a fa-
tal example, how little she ought to rely on the pro-
mises or oaths of that perfidious Monarch. Her
ambassador warned her that the French held a
secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in
Scotland, and encouraged them in their obftinacyt. t Id. 296,
The Duke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that 312
kingdom, with less disguise. She was persuaded
that they would embrace the first serene interval,
which the commotions in France and in the Ne-
therlands would allow them, and openly attempt to
land in Scotland. She resolved therefore, to pre-
vent their getting any footing in the island, and to
cut off all their hopes of finding any alfiftance there,
by uniting the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the His over-

Regent to carry on his negotiations with them toturcs re-
great advantage. They were now divided intotwo je'ted by

Maitland
factions. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe- and Kir-

C 2 rault,kaldy.

Boox\. rault, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were
'"-' the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their
1573. extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-

lowers, rendered the former considerable. The lat-
ter were indebted for their importance, to their per-
fonal abilities, and to the strength of the castle of
Edinburgh, which was in their poffeflion. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in the
lame treaty; but, as he dreaded that the Queen's
party, if it remained entire, would be able to thwart
and embarrass his administration, he resolved to di-
vide and weaken it, by a separate negotiation. He
made the first overture to Kirkaldy, and his affo-
ciates, and endeavoured to renew the negotiation
with them, which, during the life of his predecef-
for, had been broken off by his own artifices. But
Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of go-
vernment, to be very different from those of the
fcrmer Regent. Maitland confidered him, as a
personal and implacable enemy. They received
repeated afiurances of protetion from France.
And though the siege of Rochelle employed the
French arms at that time, the fame hopes, which
had to often deceived the party, frill amused them,
and they expected that the obflinacy of the Hu-
gonots would soon be subdued, and that Charles
would then b. at liberty to act with vigour in Scot-
land. Mean while, a supply of money was sent,
and if the castle could be held out till Whitfunday,

Di'ges effectual aid was promised . Maitland's genius
3i14 delighted in forming schemes, that were dange-

rous; and Kirkaldy poffefied the intrepidity, necef-
fary for putting them in execution. The castle,
they knew, was so situated that it might defy all
the Regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would
not violate the treaty with France, by fending for-
ces to his afliftance; and if the French should be
able to land any considerable body of men, it might
be possible to deliver the Queen from captivity, or

at

at leafi to balance the influence of France and Eng- BOOK VI.
land in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from ' '
the dishonourable dependence on the latter, under 573
which it had fallen. This splendid, but chimerical
projec, they preferred to the friendship of Morton.
They encouraged the negotiation, however, because
it served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame
purpose, that the whole of the Queen's party should
be comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy should
retain the command of the castle, fix months after
the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the
Regent to reje&t the former; his penetration disco-
vered the danger of complying with the latter ; and
all hopes of accommodation vanished a. * Melv.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to 235, &c,

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever, to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty
with Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of
arms frill continued with them.

THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, Accepted

and listened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke by Chatel-
was naturally unsteady, and the approach of old herault

and Hunt-

age increased his irresolution, and aversion to action. ly
The miseries of civil discord had afflited Scotland,
almost five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration of any former contest. The war, instead
of doing service, had been detrimental to the
Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion.
to the kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party
had gained much honour; both had suffered great
losses; and had exhausted their own estates in waft-
ing those of their adversaries. The commons were
in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a
peace, which might terminate this fruitless, but
deftrutive quarrel.

A GREAT ftep was taken towards this desirable Articlesof
event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, between the treaty

C 3 the Peb. z3.

Boo VI. the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and
1,v- Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil-

, A73 legrew, Elizabeth's ambaflador *. The chief arti-
pend. NC cles in it were these; that all the parties compre-
VI. hended in the treaty should declare their approba-

tion of the Reformed religion, now eftablilhed in
the kingdom; that they hffould rubmit to theKing's
government, and own Morton's authority as Re-
gent; that they should acknowledge every thing
done in oppoftion tothe King, since his coronation
to be illegal; that, on both fides, the prisoners who
had been taken should be set at liberty, and the
lands restored to their proper owners; that the aft
of attainder pafled against the Queen's adherents
should be repealed, and indemnity granted for all
the crimes, of which they had been guilty since
the 5th of June, 1 567; and that the treaty should
be ratified, by the common content of both par-

+ Crawf. ties, in parliament .
sieem 251 KIRKALDY, though abandonedby hisaffociates,
the cafl!e who neitherdifcovered solicitude nor madeprovifion
of Edin- for his safety, did not lose courage, nor entertain
burgh. any thoughts of accommodation t. And though

all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he fill
resolved to defend the caitle, in the Queen's name;

t Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who

joined with Kirkaldyin the defence of the castle, and who was
himself ffrongly attached to their party, asserts that Kirkaldy of-
sered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but that
all his offers were rejected by the Regent. Melv. 240. But as Eli-
zabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous of restoring peace
in Scotland, and her ambassador Killegrew, as well as the Earl
of Rothes, used their utmost endeavours to persuade Kirkaldy to
accede to the treaty at Perth, it seems more credible to impute
the continuance of hostilities to Kirkaldy's obstinacy, his distrust
of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive

testimony of Spotfw. 269, 170. Camd. 448. Johnft. His. 3,4.
Digges, 334. Crawford's account agrees, in the main, with
theirs, Mem. 263.

and to wait the arrival of the promised succours. BooK VI.
The Regent was in want of every thing necessary 'v-/
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who de- '573
termined, at any rate, to bring the ditfentions in
Scotland to a period, before the French could find
lei flre to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him
ftificient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with I500 foot, and a considerable train
of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all his April 25.
forces; and trenches were opened and approaches
regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great fum of
money, remitted to him from France, and which
fell into the Regent's hands, through the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man of that
age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
despair. Three and thirty days he resifted all the
efforts of the Scots and English, who pushed on
their attacks with courage, and with emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications
were battered down, and one of the wells in the
castle dried up, and the other choaked with rub-
bish. Even then his spirit was unfubdued, and he
determined rather to fall gloriously behind the last
intrenchment, than to yield to his inveterate ene-
mies. But his garrison was not animated with the
fame heroic or desperate resolution, and rising in a
mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered May 29.
himself to Drury, who promised, in the name of
his mistress, that he should be favourably treated.
Together with him, James Kirkaldy his brother,
Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few
citizens of Edinburgh, and about 160 soldiers were
made prisoners *. * Cald. 2.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in 408

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac- reawlf.4
company them into the Low -countries, and enter- Mem.265.
ing into the service of the States, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military

C 4 virtue,

Boo s v. virtue, which has always been the charafteriftic of

- the Scottish Nation.

F.evie- of THUS by the treaty with ChatelheraultandHunt-
the cha- ly, and the surrender of the castle, the civil wars in
raeser of Scotland were brought to a period. When we re-
both p-- view the state of the nation, and compare the

strength of the two factions, Mary's partizans
among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers, and in power. But these
advantages were more than counterbalanced by
others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents, which
times of action form, or call forth, appeared chiefly
on the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boast
of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur-
ray, tempered with wisdom ; the profound sagacity
of Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating ad-
dress of Maitland; or the successful valour of Kir-
kaldv; all which were, at firfi, employed in lay-
ing the foundations of the King's authority. On
the one fide, measures were concerted with pru-
dence, and executed with vigour on the other,
their resolutions were rash, and their conduct fee-
ble. Thepeople,animatedwithzealfor religion, and
prompted by indignation against the Queen, warm-
ly fuipported the King's cause. The Clergy threw
the whole weight of their popularity into the fame
scale. By means of there, as well as by the powerful
interposition of England, the King's government
was finally established. Mary loft even that shadow
of sovereignty, which, amidit all her sufferings she
had hitherto retained among part of her own sub-
jects. And as she was no longer permitted to have
an ambassador at the court of England, the only
mark of dignity which she had, for some time, en-
joyed there, she must henceforth be confidered as
an exile stripped of all the enfignsof royalty; guard-
ed with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally
deserted or forgotten in the other.

KIRKALDY

KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Dru- Boox VI.
ry's custody, and were treated by him with great - -
humanity, till the Queen of England, whose prison- Kiral3
ers they were, should determine their fate. Morton put to
insisted that they should susser the punifihment due death.
to their rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that
so long as they were allowed to live, he did not
reckon his own person or authority secure; and
Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his
promises in her name, gave them up to the Re-
gent's disposal. He first confined them to separate
prisons; and, soon after, with Elizabeth's content,
condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hang-
ed at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did August 3.
[not expect to be treated more favourably, prevent-
ed the ignominy of a public execution, by a vo-
luntary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil,
after the old Roman fashion *." * Melv.

W'HILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance 242.
on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At
the fame time her health began to be much impair-
ed by confinement, and want of exercise. At the
intreaty of the French ambassador, Lord Shrews-
bury her keeper was permitted to carry her to Bux-
ton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her
imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been created
Baron of Burleigh, and Lord High Treasurer of
England, happened to be there at the fame time.
And though no minister ever entered more warmly
into the views of a sovereign, or gave stronger
proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than this great
man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust of every
person, who approached the Queen of Scots, that
her suspicions extended even to him; and while
Mary justly reckoned him her most dangerous ene-
my, he found some difficulty in persuading his own

mistress,

Boo VI. mistress, that he was not partial to that unhappy
'--- Queen *
1573 THE duke of Alva was this year recalled from

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppressive administration rouzed a fpi-
rit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhaust-
ed its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory.
Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a milder
temper, and of a less enterprizing genius. This
event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
quietude, occasioned by Alva's negotiations with
the Scottish iQeen, and his zeal for her interest.

T574- THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in pro.
ens ad- found peace, many of the evils, which accompany
miniftra- civil war, were still felt. The restraints of law,
tion be- which, in times of public confusion, are little re-
comes odi- garded even by civilized nations, were totally de-
oUs. spifed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to the

regular administration ofjuftice. The difordersin
every corner of the kingdom were become intoler,
able; and under the protection of the one, or the
other faction, crimes of every kind were commit-
ted, with impunity. The Regent set himself to
redress these, and, by his industry and vigour, order
and security were re-established in the kingdom.
But he loft the reputation, due to this important
service, by the avarice which he discovered in per-
forming it; and his own exations became more
pernicious to the nation, than all the irregularitie
which he restrained t. Spies and informers were
every where employed; the remembrance of old
offences were revived; imaginary crimes were in-
vented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and de-
linquents were forced to compound for their lives,
by the payment of exorbitant fines. At the fare
time, the current coin was debated t; licenseS were

fold

Strype 2. 248, 288. t See Append. N° VII.

: The ccrruption of thecoin, duringMorton's administration,

was very great. Although the quantity of current money coin-
ed out of a pound o: Bullion, was gradually increased by former

princes;

fold for carrying on prohibited branches of com- Bo o VI.
ierce, unusual taxes were imposed on commodities; -- --
and all the refinements in oppression, from which, s74-
nations so imperfectly polished as the Scots are ufu-
ally exempted, were put in practice. None of these
were complained of more loudly, or with greater
reason, than his injustice towards the church. The
thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy re-
ceived their subsistence, had always been slowly
and irregularly paid to collectors, appointed by
the General Assembly; and during the civil wars,
no payment could be obtained in several parts of
the kingdom. Under colour of redressing this
grievance, and upon a promise of affligning every
MIinifter a flipend within his own parish, the Re-
gent extorted from the Church the thirds to which
they had right by law. But the Clergy, instead
of reaping any advantage from this alteration,
found that payments became more irregular and
dilatory than ever. One Minister was commonly
burdened with the care of four or five parishes, a
pitiful salary was allotted him, and the Regent's
insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this

vear, was a new misfortune to the Scottish Queen.
Henry III. who succeeded him, had not the fame
attachment to her person, and his jealousy of the
house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Queen
Mother, greatly alienated him from her interest.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault must 1575.

Jan. 22.

princes; the standard of fineness suffered little alteration, and
the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame, with what is now
used. But MDrton mixed a fourth part of alloy, with every
pound of silver, and funk, by consequence, the value of coin,
in proportion. In the year 1581, all the money coined by him
was called in, and appointed to be recoined. The standard
was restored to the fame purity as formerly. Ruddim. Praef.
to Anders. Diplom. p. 74.

Crawf. Mewm. az7. Spotfw. 273. Cald. 2. 420, 427.

likewise

BOO VI. likewise be confidered as some loss to Mary. As

V^-' the parliament had frequently declared him next
'575- heir to theCrown, this entitled him to great refpea

among his countrymen, and enabled him, more
than any other person in the kingdom, to counter-
balance the Regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scottish and English
marches, a scuffle happened, in which the English
were worited; a few killed on the spot; and Sir
James Forrester, the warden, with several gentle-
men who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
Elizabeth and the Regent were too sensible of the
advantage, which resulted from the good under-
standing that fubilfted between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

Attempts THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was
of the in some danger of being disturbed by another
gainft the cause. Though the persons, raied to the dignity
Episcopal of bishops, possessed very small revenues, and a
order. very moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to

whom the Regent and all his measures were be-
come extremely odious, began to be jealous of that
order. Knowing that corruptions steal into the
Church, gradually, under honourable names, and
upon decent pretences, they were afraid that, from
such frall beginnings, the hierarchy might grow,
in time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever.
The chief author of these suspicions was Mr. An-
drew Melvil, a man, distinguished by his uncom-
mon erudition, by the severity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life ; and being more attentive to
the ends which he pursued, than to the means
which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and
imprudence with which he carried them on. A
question was moved by him in the assembly,

' whether

" whether the office of bishop, as now exercised in BOOK VI.
the kingdom, was agreeable to the word of God?" "'
In the ecclesiastical judicatories, continual com- 57
plaints were made of the bishops, for neglect of
duty, many of which, their known remissness too
well juitfied. The bishop of Dunkeld. being ac-
cufed of dilapidating his benefice, was found guilty
by the assembly. And the Regent, instead of
checking, connived at these disputes about Eccle-
fiaftical government, as they diverted the zeal of
the Clergy from attending to his daily encroach-
ments on the patrimony of the Church '.

THE weight of the Regent's oppreflive admini- 1576.
ftration had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the He irri-

·, i -jji i i. i~~~~i-tates forne

lower, and middle rank; but he began now to of the
take such steps, as convinced the nobles, that their nobles.
dignity would not long exempt them from feeling
the effeCts of his power. An accident, which was
a frequent cause of disTention among the Scottish
nobles, occasioned a difference between the Earls
of Argyll and Athole. A vaflal of the former had
made tbme depredations on the lands of the latter.
Athole took arms to punish the offender; Argyll,
to proteCt him; and this ignoble quarrel they were
ready to decide in the field, when the Regent,
by interposing his authority, obliged them to dif-
band their forces. Both of them had been guilty
of irregularities, which, though common, were
contrary to the letter of the law. Of there the
Regent took advantage, and resolved to found on
them a charge of treason. This design was re-
vealed to the two Earls by one of Morton's re-
tainers. The common danger, to which they
were exposed, compelled them to forget old quar-
rels, and to unite in a close confederacy, for their
mutual defence. Their junction rendered them
formidable; they despised the summons which the
Regent gave them to appear before the court of
justice ; and he was obliged to desist from any fur-

'Cald. Assemblies, 1574, &c. Iohnft. Hist. 15.

they

Bo K VI. ther prosecution. But the injury he intended made

6 a deep imprelfion on their minds, and drew on him

1576 revere vengeance .
1577. NOR was he more successful in an attempt, which

he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton with the
guilt of having formed a conspiracy against his life,
Though those, who were supposed to be his ac-
complices, were seized and tortured, no evidence
of any thing criminal appeared; but, on the con.
trary, many circumstances discovered his inno
cence, as well as the Regent's secret views, in im-
puting to him such an odious design t.

Theytrn THE Scottilh Nobles, who were almost equal to
their eyes their Monarchs in power, and treated by them
tkeKing. with much diftinEtion, observed these arbitrary

proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indigna-
tion. The people, who, under a form of govern.
ment extremely simple, had been little accustomed
to the burden of taxes, complained loudly of the
Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn their eyes
tow ards the young King, from whom they expected
the redress of all their grievances, and the return
of a more gentle, and more equal adminiitration.

Tsjes's JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age
education The Queen, soon after his birth, had committed
2ad difpo- him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the

civil wars, he had resided securely in the cattle of
Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's bro-
ther, had the chiefdireEtionof his education. Un-
der him, the famous Buchanan ated as preceptor,
together with three other masters, the most emi-
nent the nation afforded, for skill in those sciences,
which were deemed necessary for a prince. The
young King hiewed an uncommon pafiion for
learning, and made great progress in it. And the
Scots fancied that they already discovered in him,
all those virtues, which the fondness or credulity
of subjects usually ascribe to princes, during their
minority. But as James was still far from that age,

Crawf. Iemr. z. t. Crawf. Mem. 28-.

at

at which the law permitted him to assume theBooK VL.
reins of government, the Regent did not sufficient- ~
ly attend to the sentiments of the people, nor re- 1577-
fle, how naturally these prejudices in his favour
might encourage the King to anticipate that period.
He not only neglefed to secure the friendship of
[those who were about the King's person, and who
Ipoffeffed his ear, but had even exasperated some
ofthem, by personal injuries. Their resentment
concurred with the ambition of others, in infusing He is fu-
into the King early fulpicions of Morton's power, picious of
and designs. A King, they told him, had often the Re-
reason to fear, seldom to love, a Regent. Prompt- poer.
ed by ambition, and by interest, he would endea-
vour to keep the prince in perpetual infancy, at a
distance from his fubjedts, and unacquainted with
business. A small degree of vigour, however, was
sufficient to break the yoke. Subjeets naturally
reverence their Sovereign, and become impatient
of the temporary and delegated jurifdiEtion of a Re-
gent. Morton had governed with a rigour, un-
known to the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The
nation groaned under his. oppreflions; and would
welcome the first profpet of a milder adminiftra-
tion. At present, the King's name was scarce
mentioned in Scotland, his friends were without
influence, and his favourites without honour. But
one effort would discover Morton's power to be as
feeble, as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt
would put himself in poffefion of his just authority,
and rescue the nation from intolerable tyranny. If
he did not regard his own rights as a King, let
him liftem, at least, to the cries of his people*.

THESE suggestions made a deep imprefflon on the A plot
young King, who was trained up in an opinion formed

' -

that he was born to command. His approbation gai"tR the
of the design, however, was of small consequence, egent.
without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls

* Melv. 249.

of

BOOK VI of Argyll and Athole, two of the most powerful

wv of that body, were animated with implacable re-
'577 fentment againit the Regent. To them the Cabal

in Stirling cattle communicated the plot, whichwas
on foot; and they entering warmly into it, Alex-
ander Erskine, who, since the death of his brother,
and during the minority of his nephew, had the
command of that fort, and the custody of the
King's person, admitted them secretly into the
King's presence. They gave him the fame ac-
count of the misery of his fubjefts, under the Re-
gent's arbitrary administration; they complained
loudly of the injustice, with which themselves had
been treated; and besought the King, as the only
means for redressing the grievances of the nation,
to call a council of all the nobles. James consent-
ed, and letters were issued, in his name, for that
purpose; but the two Earls took care that they
should be sent only to such as were known to bear

Spotfw. no good will to Morton .
278.

15-8. THE number of there was, however, so incon-
!arch 4. fiderable, that, on the day appointed, far the great-

er part of the nobles assembled at Stirling; and so
highly were they incensed againit Morton, that
although on receiving intelligence of Argyll and
Athole's interview xvith the King, he had madea
feint as if he would resign the Regency, they ad-
viled the King, without regarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his office, and to take the adminiftra-
tion of government into his own hands. Lord Gla-

He rfigns mis the Chancellor, and Herreis, were appointed
hi- office to signify this resolution to Morton, who was, at
n/d rc- that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence.

Nothing could equal the joy, with which this un-
expected resolution filled the nation, but the fur-
prize cccafioned by the teeming. alacrity with
which the Regent descended from so high a fta-
tion. He neither wanted sagacity to foresee the
danger of rcfignirg, nor inclination to keep pof-

fefrion

reion of an office, for the expiration of which the BOOK VI
law had fixed so distant a term. But all the four- '--'
ces, whence the fation, of which he was head, de- '578
rived their strength, had either failed, or now sup-
lied his adversaries with the means of humbling
inr. The Commons, the city of Edinburgh, the
Clergy, were all totally alienated from him, by
his multiplied oppressions. Elizabeth, having late-
ybound herself by treaty, to fend a confideralle
ody of troops to the assistance of the inhabitants
r the Netherlands, who were itruggling for liber-
, had little leisure to attend to the affairs of Scot-
and; and as she had nothing to dread from France,
n whose councils the princes of Lorrain had not,
t that time, much influence, she was not difpleaf-
d, perhaps, at the birth of new factions in the
ingdom. Even those nobles, who had long been
oined with Morton in faction, or whom he had at-
ached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindsay,
uthven, Pitcarn the secretary, Murray of Tillibar-
in comptroller, all deserted his falling fortunes,
nd appeared in the council at Stirling. So many
oncurring circumstances convinced Morton of his
wn weakness, and determined him to give way
a torrent, which was too impetuous to be resist-
d. He attended the chancellor and Herreis to E- March 12.
inburgh, was present when the King's accep-
ane of the government was proclaimed and, in
e pretence of the people, surrendered to the king,
1 the authority to which he had any claim in
irtue of his office. This ceremony was accom-
anied with such excessive joy and acclamations of
he multitude, as added, no doubt, to the anguish,
hich an ambitious spirit must feel, when compde-
d to renounce supreme power; and convinced
lorton how entirely he had loft the affections of
is countrymen. He obtained, however, frori the
ing an at, containing the approbation of every
thing done by him in the edrcife of his office,
VOL. 11. D and

BooK VI and a pardon, in the most ample form, that his

8'- ' fear or caution could devise, of all past offences
'"8. crimes, a-d treasons. The nobles, who adhered

to the King, bound themselves, under a great
penalty, to procure the ratification of this as, in
the firit parliament *

Continues A coUNCIL of twelve Peers was appointed to
to-Watch assist the Ki-ig, in the administration of affairs.
ions of And Morton, deserted by his own party, and un-
the ad- able to struggle with the faction, which governed
verse par-.abfolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and
VT- seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occu-

pied only in the amusements of a country life. His
mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all the
uneasy reflecions, which accompany disappointed
ambition; and intent on schemes for recovering
his former grandeur. Even in this retreat, which
the people called the Lion's-den, his wealth and a-
bilities rendered him formidable. And the net,
Counsellors were so imprudent as to rouze him, by
the precipitancy with which they hastened to ftip
him of all the remains of power. They required
him to surrender the castle of Edinburgh, whjich
was still in his poflefion. He refilled at firftto do
so, and began to prepare for its defence; bt the
citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms, and re-
pulled a part of the garrison, which was sent outto
guard a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to
give up that important fortress, without resistance
This encouraged his adversaries to call a parlia
ment to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply thei
demands upon him, in such a manner, as con-
vinced him that nothing less than his utter ruin
would fatisfv their inveterate hatred.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began

already to decline. The Chancellor, the ablest and
most moderate man in the party, having been

Spotfw. 278. Crawf. Mem. 289. Cald. 2. 5z2.

killed

killed at Stirling in an accidental rencounter be-BooK VI.
tween his followers, and those of the Earl of Craw-"-'
so d; Athole, who was appointed hisfucceffor in ,S78.
th high office, the Earls of Eglinton, CPOfhnefs,
a:ld Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at
court were either avowed papiits, or suspected of
leaning to the opinions of that fed. In an age,
when the return of popery was, so much, and so
justly, dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And
as Morton had always treated the papists with ri-
gour, this unseasonable indulgence made all zea-
lous Protestants remember that circumstance in his
administration with great praise *. * Spotfw.

MORTON, to whom none of these particulars283S

were unknown, -thought this the proper juncturehi; former
for letting to work the instruments, which he had authority.
been preparing. Having gained the confidence of
the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother,
he insinuated to, them that Alexander Erskine had
formed a plot to deprive his nephew of the go-
vernment of Stirling-caftle, and the custody of the
King's person; and easily induced an ambitious
woman, and a youth of twenty, to employ force
to prevent this supposed injury. The Earl repair-
ing suddenly, to Stirling, and being admitted, as
usual, into the castle with his attendants, seized the
gates early in the morning, and turned out his un-
cle, who dreaded no danger from his hands. The April 26.
soldiers of the garrison submitted to him as their
governor, and, with little danger, and no effusion
of blood, he became master both of the King's per-
son, and the fortress t. t Cald. ^

AN event so unexpected occasioned great con-535.

fternation. And though Morton's hand did not
appear in the execution, he was universally believ-
ed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own
safety, to change their measures, and instead of
pursuing him with such implacable resentment, to

D 2 enter

BooK VI. enter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
'- - farv, fill so capable of creating them trouble. Four

17 were named, on each fide, to adjust their differ-

ences. Thev met not far from Dalkeith. And
when thev had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too sagacious not to improve the
advantage, v.hich their security and their attention
to the treaty afforded him, set out in the night-time
for S:iili';g, and having gained Murray of Tillibar-
May 24. din, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into the

castle; and managing matters there with his usual
dexterity, he soon had more entirely the command
of the fort. than the Earl himself. He was like-
wife admitted to a feat in the privy council, and
acquired the fame ascendant in it .

As the time appointed for the meeting of parlia-

ment at Edinburgh now approached, this gave him
tome anxiety. He was afraid of carrying the young
King to a city whose inhabitants were so much at
the devotion of the adverse faction. He was no less
unwilling to leave James behind at Stirling. In or-
der to avoid this dilemma, he issued a proclatna-
tion, in the King's name, changing the place of
meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-caftle. This
Athole and his party represented as a ftep alto-
gether uncoiftitutional. The King, said they, is
Morton's prifpner the pretended Counsellors are his
slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may
repair without fear, and where they may deliberate
withfreedom, is absolutely necessary for fettling the
nation, after disorders of such long continuance.
But in an assembly. called contrary to all form, held
within the walls of a garrison, and over-awed by
armed men, what 'safety could members expect?
what liberty could prevail in debate ? or what be-
j: ;z5 nefit result to the public? The parliament met,

however, on the day appointed, and notwithftand-

* Cald. z. 536.

ing

iog the protestation of the Earl of Montrose and Bo oK VI.
Lord Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded ,.
to business. The King's acceptance of the govern- 5/
ment was confirm'-d; the adt granted to Morton,
for his security, ratified; rome regulations, with re-
gard to the numbers and authority of the privy coun-
cil, were agreed upon; and a pension for life grant-
ed to the Countess of Mar, who had been so inftru-
mental in bringing about the late revolution*. * Cald. 2.

MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their followr- 547.

ers, took arms, upon the specious pretence of re-t Par. .
cuing the King from captivity, and the kingdom Arg.lland
from opprefflon. James himself, impatient of the Athole
servitude in which he was held, by a mari whom he take arms
had long been taught to hate, secretly encouraged again1
their enterprize; though, at the fame time, he was
obliged not only to disavow them in public, but to
levy forces against them, and even to declare, by
proclamation, that he was perfectly siee frori any
constraint, either upon his person, or his will. Both
fides quickly took the field. Argyll and Athole
were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus,
Morton's nephew, met them with an army o000 Aug. i
strong; neither party, however, was eager to en-
gage. Morton distrusted the fidelity of his own
troops. The two Earls were sensible that a tingle
vietory, however compleat, would not be decisive;
and as they were in no condition to undertake the
siege of Stirling-caftle, where the King was kept,
their strength would Coon be exhausted, while Mor-
ton's own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen
of England, might furnish him with endless re-
sources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Eli-Elizabeth
zabeth had Cent into Scotland to negotiate an ac- negotiates
commodation between the two factions, a treaty an accom-
was concluded, in consequence of which, Argyll betweaen
and Athole were admitted into the King's pretence; them.
some of their party were added to the privy council;

D 3 and

Boos VI.and a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring
'~-8.all remaining differences to an amicable issue *
Craw8f So soon as James assumed the government into
Mt:m. his own hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dun-
3c-. fermling to inform Elizabeth of that event; to of-

ser to renew the alliance between the two kingdoms;
and to demand poffeifion of the estate, which had
lately fallen to him, by the death of his grandmo.
ther, the Countess of Lenox. That Lady's second
ion had left one daughter. Arabella Stewart, who
was born in England. And as the chief objection
against the pretensions of the Scottish line to the
crown of England, was that maxim of English law,
which excludes aliens from any right of inheritance
within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by granting this
demand, would have established a precedent in
James's favour, that might have been esteemed de-
cifive, with regard to a point, which it had been
her constant care to keep undecided. Without sus-
fering this delicate question to be tried, or allowing
any new light to be thrown on that, which she con-
fidered as the great mystery of her reign, she com-
manded the rents of the estate to be sequestered by
Lord Burleigh, master of the wards; and by this
method of proceeding, gave the Scottish King early
warning how neceflary it would be to court her fa-
vour, if ever he hoped for fuccefsin claims of greater

Can.dc. importance, but equally liable to be controverted'.
461 AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty,
I ;9 the contending nobles were at last brought to orme

agreement. But it was followed by a tragical event.
AP-! z4. Morton, in token of reconcilement, having invited

the leaders of the opposite party to a great enter-
tainment, Athole the chancellor was, soon after,
taken ill, and died within a few days. The fymp
toms and violence of the disease gave rife to strong
ilfpicions of his being poisoned; and though thi
ph) ficians, \ ho opened his body, differed in opinion

5 to the cause of the distemper, the Chancellor'sBooK VI.
Relations publickly accused Morton of that odious"--"-~
crime. The advantage which visibly accrued to '579
im, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and
erse from all his measures, was sufficient proof of
is iilt to the people, who are ever fond ofim-
uting the death of eminent persons to extraor-
inary causes *. * Spotfrw.
THE office of Chancellor was bestowed upon3o6.
rgyll, whom this preferment reconciled, in a greatM°'rt°o"'
easure, to Morton'sadminiftration. He had nowple ed
covered all the authority he possessed during hisigs a-
egency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, thegainft th.
wer and cabals of his enemies. None of theta'iil' of
reat families remained to be the objeEts ofhis jea-Hamilton,
ufy. or to obftrut his designs, but that ofHamil-
ton. The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had
never recovered the shock, which he received from
the ill success of his passion for the Queen, and had
now altogether loft his reason. Lord John, the fe-
cond brother, was in poffefiion of the family estate.
Lord Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of
them young men, ambitious, and enterprising,
Morton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; the
courtiers hoped to share their spoils among them;
and as all princes naturally view their successors
withjealoufy and hatred, it was easy to infuse these
pallions into the mind of the young King. A pre-
tence wasat hand tojuftify the most violent proceed-
ings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth,
did not extend to those, who were accessary to the
murder of the Regents Murray or Leriox. Lord
John and his brother were fufpeted of being the
authors of both there crimes, and had been inclu-
ded in a general act of attainder on that account.
Without Summoning them to trial, or examining
la single witness to prove the charge, this attainder

D 4 was.

Boos. VI. was now thought sufficient to subject them to all
'-~"- the penalties, which they would have incurred by

579 being formally convicted. The Earls of Morton,

Mar, and Eglinton, together with the Lords'Ruth-
ven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commission
to seize their persons and estates. On a few hours
warning, a considerable body of troops was ready,
and marched towards Hamilton, in hostile array,
Happily, the two brothers made their escape,
though with great' difficulty. But their lands were
confiscated; the castles of Hamilton and Draffan
besieged; those who defended them punished. The
Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his fitua-
tion, of committing any crime, was involved, by
a shameful abuse of law, in the common ruin of
his family; and as if he, too, could have been guilty
of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These pro-
ceedings, so contrary to the fundamental princi-
ples ofjuftice, were all ratified in the subsequent

Crawf. parliament.'
Mem.31i. ABOUT this time Mary sent, by Naue her fecre-
jSjtt. tary, a letter to her son, together with some jewels

of value, and a vest embroidered with her own
hands. But as she gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without

t Cr2-.-f. being admitted into his prefence-t.
Merr..314 THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti-
Ncg. ta- cu!ar reason to fear any attempt of the Popish prin-
tons for a
nanrrige ces, in Mary's favour, fheftill continued to guard
between her with the fame anxious care. The acquisition
Elizabeth of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of
2Pd "es the Netherlands, on the other, fully employed the
Aicron councils and armsof Spain. France, torn in pieces

by intestine commotions, and under a weak and ca-
pricious prince, despised and distrusted by his own
subjects, was in no condition to disturb its neigh-
bours. Elizabeth had long amused that court by
crr) ing on a treaty of marriage with the Duke of

AlenFon,

Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at theBooK VI..
age of forty five, she really intended to marry a" ""
Prince of twenty ? whether the pleasure of being '579'
flattered and courted, made her liften to theaddref-
fesoffo young a lover, whom she allowed to visit
her at two different times, and treated with the most
distinguishing refpet? or whether considerations
of interest, predominated in this, as well as in every
other tranfation of her reign, are problems in his-
tory which we are not concerned to resolve? Dur-
ing the progress of this negotiation, which was
drawn out to an extraordinary length, Mary could
expect no afliftance from the French court, and
seems to have held little correspondence with it.
And there was no period in her reign, wherein Eli-
zabeth enjoyed more perfect security.

MORTON seems, at this time, to have been equal- Two fa-

ly secure; but his security was not so well founded. vourites
He had weathered out one storm, had crushed hisgai"anaf-

cendant

adversaries, and was again in poffeflion of the foleover
direction of affairs. But as the King was now ofJames.
an age, when the character and dispositions of the
mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become
visible, the smallest attention to there might have
convinced him, that there was reason to expect new
and more dangerous attacks on his power. James
early discovered that exceflive attachment to fa-
vourites, which accompanied him through his whole
life. This paflion, which naturally arises from in-
experience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at
hisage, far from being culpable; nor could it well
be expected that the choice of the objects, on whom
he placed his affetions, hould be made with great
flill. The most considerable of them, was Efme
Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second
brother of the Earl of Lenox. He was difbtn-
iiilled by the title of Lord D'Aubign6, an estate

in

BooKs VI.in France, which descended to him from his an-
C--'"- ceftors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward

5 -9. of their valour, and services to the French crown.
Sept. 8 He arrived in Scotland, about this time, on pur-

pose to demand the estate and title of Lenox, to
which he pretended a legal right. He was re-
ceived, at firif, by the King, with the refpea due
to so near a relation. The gracefulness of hisper-
son, the elegance of his dress, and his courtly be-
haviour, made a great impression on James, who,
even in his more mature years, was little able to
resist there frivolous charms; and his affection flow-
ed with its ufualrapidity, and profusion. Within a
few days after Stewart's appearance at court, he.
was created Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl,
and then Duke of Lenox, Governor of Dumbarton
castle, Captain of the guard, firif Lord of the bed-
chamber, and Lord High Chamberlain. At the
fame time, and without any of the envy, or emu-
lation which is usual among candidates for favour,
Captain James Stewart, the second son of Lord
Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But not-
withstanding this union, Lenox and Captain Stew-
art were persons of very opposite characters. The
former was naturally gentle, humane, candid;
but unacquainted with the state of the country,
and miised, or misinformed by those, whom he
trusted ; not unworthy to be the companion of the
young King, in his amusements, but utterly dif-
qualified for acling as a Minister, in directing his
affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices,
which render a man formidable to his country,
and a pernicious counsellor to his Prince; nor did
he pol'ess any one virtue, to counterbalance there
vices, u:ilefs dexterity in conducting hisown designs,
and an enterprising courage, superior to the sense
of danger, may pats by that name. Unrestrained
by religion, regardless of decency, and undifmay-
cd by opposition, he aimed at objecs, seemingly

unat-

unattainable; but under a Prince, void of experience, B o oK VI.
and blind to all the defects of those, who had gain--""-'
ed his favour, his audacity was successful; and '5'79
honours, wealth, and power, were the reward of
his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employingThevla-

their whole address, to undermine Morton's creditbo°r to
which alone obstruCted their full poffeflion of pow-uMdrtomnn
er. And as James had been bred up with an a-authority.
version for that nobleman, who endeavoured ra-
ther to maintain the authority of a Tutor, than to
ac with the obsequiousness of a Minister, they
found it no difficult matter to accomplish their de-
sign. Morton, who could no longer keep the
King shut up within the walls of Stirling-caftle,oaob.,7.
having called a parliament to meet at Edinburgh,
brought him thither. James made his entry into
the capital, with great solemnity; the citizens re-
ceived him with the loudest acclamations of joy,
and with many expensive pageants, according to
the mode of that age. After a long period of
thirty seven years, during which, Scotland had
been fubjeAed to the delegated power of Regents,
or to the feeble government of a woman, and had
suffered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the
insolence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to
fee the sceptre once more in the hands of a King.
Fond even of that shadow of authority, which a
Prince of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered
themselves, that union, order, and tranquillity would
now be restored to the kingdom. James opened
the parliament with extraordinary pomp, but no-
thing remarkable pased in it.

THESE demonstrations, however, of the people's

love and attachment to their Sovereign, encourag-
ed the favourites to continue their insinuations a-
gains: Morton; and.as the King now resided in the
palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his fubjecls
had access, the cabal against the Earl grew daily

stronger,

BooK VI stronger, and the intrigue, which occasioned his

-- fall, ripened gradually.

,5°"8On MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and
.M.orton
endea- endeavoured to put a stop to the career of Lenox's
vurs to preferment, by representing him as a formidable
prevent enemy to the Reformed Religion, a secret agent
them. in favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the

house of Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every
rumour of this kind, spread the alarm among the
people. But Lenox, either out of complaisance to
his master, or convinced by the arguments of rome
learned Divines, whom the King appointed to in-
ftruca him in the principles of the Protestant Reli-
gion, publickly renounced the errors of Popery,
in the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a
member of the Church of Scotland, by signing her
Confession of Faith. This, though it did not re-
move all suspicions, nor silence tome zealous preach-
ers, abated in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufation °.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that

Morton was preparing to seize the King's person,
and to carry him into England. Whether despair
of maintaining his power, by any other means, had
driven him to make any overture of that kind to
the English court, or whether it was a calumny,
invented by his adversaries to render him odious,
cannot now be determined with certainty. As he
declared at his death, that such a design had never
entered into his thoughts, the latter seems to be
most probable. It afforded a pretence, however,
for reviving the office of Lord Chamberlain, which
had been, for tome time, disused. That honour
was conferred on Lenox. Alexander Erskine, Mor-
ton's capital enemy, was his deputy; they had
under them a band of Gentlemen, who were ap-
pointed conflantly to attend the King, and to guard
his person T.

* Cra-f. Mem. 319. Spotfw. 308. f Id. 320.

MORTON

MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemiesBooK VI.
intended to insinuate, by such unusual precautions ---
for the King's safety; and as his last resource, ap- 1580.
plied to Elizabeth, whose proteaion had often stood iterpofes
him in stead, in his greatest difficulties. In confe-in his be
quence of this application, Bowes her envoy accuf- half.
ed Lenox of pratices against the peace of the two
kingdoms, and insisted, in her name, that he should
instantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered by the
Counsellors, as an affront to the King, and an en-
croachment on the independence of the kingdom.
They affe&ced to call in question the Envoy's pow-
ers, and upon that pretence, refused him farther
audie:ce; and he retiring in disgust, and without
taking leave, Sir Alexander Home was sent to
expoifulate with Elizabeth on the subjet. After
the treatment which her Envoy had received, Eli-
zabeth thought it below her dignity to admit Home
into her presence. Burleigh, to whom he was
commanded to impart his commission, reproached
him with his Master's ingratitude towards a bene-
factrefs, who had placed the crown on his head,
and required him to advise the King to beware of
sacrificing the friendship of so necessary an ally, to
the giddy humours of a young man, without ex-
perience, and frongly fifpeated of principles, and
attachments, incompatible with the happiness of
the Scottish nation.

THIS accusation of Lenox hastened, in all pro-Morton
bability, Morton's fall. The as of indemnity,accured of
which he had obtained when he resigned the Re-the mur-
gency, was worded with such scrupulous exatnefsiate King.
as almost screened him from any legal prosecution.
The murder of the late King was the only crime,
hich could not, with decency, be inserted in a
ardon, granted by his son. Here Morton fLill
ay open to the penalties of the law. And Captain
reward, who shunned no action, however defpe-

rate,

Boos VI.rate, if it led to power, or to favour, entered the
'---' council-chamber, while the King and nobles were

'58o. assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Mor-

c 30ton of being accessary, or according to the language

of the Scottih law, art and par t, in the conspiracy
against the life of his Majelfy's father, and offered,
under the utual penalties, to verify this charge by
legal evidence. Morton, who was present, heard
this accusation with firmness; and replied with a
disdainful smile, proceeding either from contempt
of the infamous character of his accuser, or from
consciousness of his own innocence, " that his
known zeal, in punishing those who were fufpeted
of that deteflabie crime, might well exempt him-
seif from any fulpicion of being accessary to it, ne-
verrhelefs, he would cheerfully submit to a trial,
either in that place, or in any other court; and
doubted not but his own innocence, and the malice
of his enemies, would then appear in the clearef
light." Stewart, who was fill on his knees, began
to enquire how he would reconcile his bestowing
so many honours on Archibald Douglas, whom he
certainly knew to be one of the murtherers, with
his pretended zeal against that crime. Morton
was ready to answer. But the King commanded

,iST. both of them to be removed. The Earl was con-
Tn. 2. fined, first of all, to his' own house, and then

committed to the cattle of Edinburgh, of which
Alexander Erskine was Governor; and as.if it had
not been a sufficient indignity to fubjedt him to the
power of one of his enemies, he was, soon after,
carried to Dumbarton, of which Lenox had the
Jan. 8S. command. A warrant was, likewise, iflued for

apprehending Archibald Douglas; but he, havine
received timely intelligence of the approaching
danger, fled into England*.

Crawf. Mema. 323.

TH
64

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these violentBooK VI.

proceedings not to hatred against Morton alone, "~'-
but to the ancient enmity between the houses of '58
Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that a
conspiracy was now formed for the destruCtion of
the whole name, was ready to take arms in order to
reciue his kinsman. But Morton absolutely sorbad
any such attempt, and declared, that he would ra-
ther fuTer ten thousand deaths, than bring an im-
putation on his own chara&er by seeming to de-
cli:'e a trial*.

ELIZ A B ETH did notfailtointerpofe, with warmth, Eliza-
in behalf of a man, who had contributed so much heth',

illea.ures

to preserve her influence over Scotland. The late;norderto
transactions in that kingdom had given her greatfave him.
uneasiness. The power which Lenox had acquired
independent of her was dangerous; the treatment
her ambassadors had met with, differed greatly from
therefpeft, with which the Scots were in use to re-
ceive her ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an in-
tention to sow the feeds of discord between the two
nations, and to seduce James into a new alliance
with France, or into a marriage with rome Popish
Princess. Full of there apprehensions, she ordered
a considerable body of troops to be assembled on
the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph
as her ambassador into that kingdom. He addref-
fed himfelfnot only to James, and to his council,
but to a Convention ofeftates met at that time. He
began with enumerating the extraordinary benefits
which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottish na-
tion: That without demanding a single foot of
land for herself, without encroaching ons the liber-
ties of the kingdomr in the smallest article, lhe had,
at the expence of the blood of her subjects, and the
treasures of her crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, established among them true

Johnft; 64. Spotfw. 311.

Religion,

Boo .VI.Religion, and put them in possession of their an-
'-- cient rights: That from the beginning she had pro-

t58i. tected those, who espoused the King's cause, and

by her assistance alone, the Crown had been pre-
ferred on his head, and all the attempts of the ad-
verse faction baffled: That an union, unknown to
their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had subsisted for a long period of years, and
though so many Popish Princes had combined to
disturb this happy slate of things, her care, and
their constancy, had hitherto defeated all there es-
forts: That she had observed, of late, an unusual
coldness, distrust, and estrangement in the Scottilh
Council, which she could impute to none but to
Lenox, a subje't of France, a retainer to the house
of Guise, bred up in the errors of Popery, and frill
fufpeted of favouring that superstition. Not satis-
sied with having mounted so fast to such an un-
common height of power, which he exercised with
all the rashness of youth, and all the ignorance of
a stranger; nor thinking it enough to have depriv-
ed the Earl of Morton of the authority, due to his
abilities, and experience, he had conspired the ruin
of that nobleman, who had often exposed his life
in the King's cause, who had contributed more
than any other subjet to place him on the throne,
to resist the encroachments of Popery, and to pre-
ierve the union between the two kingdoms. If any
zeal for religion remained among the nobles in
Scotland, if they wished for the continuance of a-
mity with England, if they valued the privileges
of their own order, he called upon them, in the
name of his mistress, to remove such a pernicious
counsellor as Lenox from the presence of the young
King, to rescue Morton out of the hands of his a-
vowed enemy, and secure to him the benefit of a
fair and impartial trial: And if force were necessary
towards accomplishing a design so salutary to the
King and kingdom, he promised them the protec-

tion

tion of his Mistress in the enterprize, and whatever Bo oK VI.
afliftance they should demand either of men or-"-
money *. 1582.

BUT these extraordinary remonstrances, accom-
panied with such an unusual appeal from the King
tc his fubjeAs, were not the only means employed
by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and against
Lenox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour
which many of his subjeCts had displayed in the
service of the States, to enter into a long detail of
the restless enterprizes of the Popish Princes against
the Protestant Religion; to beseech him to adhere
inviolably to the alliance with England, the only
barrier which secured his kingdom against their
dangerous cabals; and above all things, to diftrufc
the insinuations of those, who endeavoured to
weaken or to dissolve that union between the Bri-
tilh nations, which all the Protestants of Europe
beheld with so much pleafuret.

JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the James de-
dcftrucion of their enemy to liften to these remon- termines
ftrances. The officious interposition of the Princet° proceed.

.'"~ -""'""' .""y " ,

" Cagainft

of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's mef- him.
sage and her avowed attempt to excite fubjets to
rebel against their Sovereign, were confidered as
unexampled insults on the Majesty and indepen-
dance of a crowned head. A general and evasive
answer was given to Randolph. James prepared to
assert his own dignity with spirit. All those fufpea-
ed of favouring Morton were turned out of office,
some of them were required to surrender them-
selves prisoners; the fencible men throughout the
kingdom were commanded to take arms; and
troops were levied, and potted, on the borders.
The English ambassador finding that neither the
public manifesto which he had delivered to the Con-
vention, nor his private cabals with the nobles,

* Cald. 3. 6. Strype, 2. 621. t Cald. 3. 9.
VOL. II. E could

Boo K VI.could excite them to arms, fled in the night-timeout
'c y' of Scotland, where libels against him had been daily

I . published, and even attempts made upon his life.

In both kingdoms every thing wore an hostile as.
pec. But Elizabeth, though fhewifhed to havein-
timidated the Scottish King by her preparations,
had no inclination to enter into a war with him,
and the troops on the borders, which had given
such umbrage, were soon dispersed *.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for

Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his enemies
drive on their schemes for his deftruAion. Captain
Stewart his accuser was first appointed Tutorto
the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and
estate of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced
some frivolous claim, were conferred upon him.
The new-made Peer was commanded to condua
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh; and, by
that choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate
he might expet, but had the cruel mortification
of feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with
honours, in reward of the malice with which he
had contributed to his ruin.

He is tried THE records of the court of Jufliciary at this
and con- period are loft. The account which our historians
demied. give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfac-

tory. The whole proceedings seem to have been
violent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order
to extort evidence, tortured several of the Earl's
domestics with unusual cruelty. During the trial,
great bodies of armed men were drawn up in diffe-
rent parts of the city. The jury was compofedof
the Earl's known enemies; and though he challeng-
ed several of them, his objeEtions were over-ruled.
After a short consultation, his peers found him
guilty of concealing, and of being art and part in
the conspiracy against the life of the late King. The
firfl part of the verdict did not furprize him, but
he twice repeated the words art and part with some

Crawf. Mem. 32z. Strype, 2. App. 118.

vehemence,

tehemence, and added, " God knows itis not so." BOOK VI.
The doom, which the law decrees against a Trai-'v~-'
tor, was pronounced. The King, however, remit- I58l
ted the cruel and ignominious part of the sentence,
and appointed that he should susser death next day,
by being beheaded *.

DURING that awful interval, Morton poffeled His death.
the utmost composure of mind. He fupped chear-
slily ; flepta part of the night in his usual manner,
and employed the reft of his time in religious con-
ferences, and in aCts of devotion, with some Mini-
fters of the city. The Clergymen who attended
him, dealt freely with his conscience, and pressed
his crimes home upon him. Wrhat he confelfed
with regard to the crime for which he suffered is
remarkable, and supplies, in some measure the im-
perfection of our records. He acknowledgd, that
on his return from England, after the death of Ri-
zio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy
against the King, which the Queen, as he told him,
knew of and approved; that he solicited him to
concur in the execution of it, which, at that time,
le absolutely declined; that, soon after, Bothwell
himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their solicitations to the fame purpose, he
had required a warrant under the Queen's hand,
authorising the attempt, and as that had never been
produced, he had refused to be any farther concern-
d in the matter. " But, continued he, as I neither
consented to this treasonable a&, nor assisted in
the committing of it, so it was inpofible for
me to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could
I make the discovery ? The Queen was the au-
thor of the enterprize. Darnly was such a
changeling, that no secret could be safely com-
municated to him. Huntly and Bothwell, who
$Spotfw. 314. Johnft. 65. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald. 3. 45

E 2 " bore
I

______

BooK VI.- bore the chieffway in the kingdom, were them.
-'"-~ '" selves the perpetrators of the crime." These

58'' circumstances, it must be confessed, go some length

towards extenuating Morton's guilt; and though
his apology for the favour he had ihewn to Archi-
bald Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the con.
fpirators, be far less fatisfatory, no uneasy reflec-
tions seem to have disquieted his own mind on
that account *. When his keepers told him that
the guards were attending, and all things in readi-
ness, " I praise my God, said he, I am ready like-
" wife." Arran commanded these guards; and e-
ven in those moments, when the most implacable
hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies
could not forbear this insult. On the scaffold, his
behaviour was calm; his countenance and voice
unalterld; and after some time spent in devotion,
he suffered death with the intrepidity, which be-
came the name of Douglas. His head was placed
on the public gaol of Edinburgh; and his body,
after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, covered with
a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters
to the usual burial-place of criminals. None of his
friends durst accompany it to the grave, or disco
ver their gratitude and refpeEt by any fymptomr
of sorrow t.

Odious ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, that
conduct o audacious in his public conduEt, Goon after drew th
Arran.

attention of his countrymen, by his infamous mar
riage with the Countess of March. Before he gre~
into favour at court, he had been often entertainer
in her husband's house, and without regarding th
laws of hospitality or of gratitude, carried on
criminal intrigue with the wife of his benefado%
a woman young and beautiful, but, according t
the description of a cotemporary Historian, " is
tolerable in all the imperfections, incident to 11

* Crawf. Merm. App. 3. t Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotfw. 31

sex

sex." Impatient of any restraint upon their mutualBo oK VI.
desires, they, with equal ardor, wished to avow-~-'
their union publickly, and to legitimate, by a mar- ls8'
riage, the offspring of their unlawful pfilion. The
Counterc petitioned to be divorced from her hus-
band, for a reason, which no modest woman will e-
ver plead. The judges, over-awed by Arran, pafwed
sentence without delay. And this infamous scene
was concluded by a marriage, solemnized with
great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of men with
the utmost horror *. Spotfw.

A Parliament was held this year, at the openin,3 25.

\>O. 24.

of which some disputes arose between Arran and
the Earl now created Duke of Lenox. Arran,
haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition, began to effeEt an equality with the Duke
under whose protection he had hitherto been con-
tented to place himself. After various attempts
to form a party in the council against Lenox, he
found him fixed so firmly in the King's affecions,
that it was impossible to shake him, and rather
than lose all interest at court, from which he was
banished, he made the most humble fubmiflions to
the favourite, and again recovered his former cre-
dit. This rupture contributed, however, to ren-
der the Duke frill more odious to the nation. Du-
ring the continuance of it, Arran affected to court
the Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for
the Protestant Religion, and laboured to confirm
the suspicions, which were entertained of his rival,
as an emissary of the house of Guise, and a favour-
er of Popery. As he was supposed to be acquaint-
ed with the Duke's most secret designs, his calum-
nies were listened to with more credit, than was
due to his character. To the fame cause, we
mufft ascribe several acts of parliament uncom-
monly favourable to the Church, particularly one,
which abolished the practice, introduced by Mor-

E 3 ton,

Boor VI ton, of appointing but one minister to several pa-
t-^--,---~ ri n es.

Nco notice hath been taken for some years of Ec-

tical as- clefiaftical affairs. While the civil government un-
fairs. derwent so many extraordinary revolutions, the

Church was not free from convulsions. Two oh-
jects, chiefly, engroto d the attention of the Clergy.
The one was the forming a system of discipline, or
Ecclefialfical polity. After long labour, and many
difficulties, this was at last brought to some degree
of perfection. The Assembly solemnly approved
of it, and appointed it to be laid before the privy
council, in order to obtain the ratification of it in
parliament. But Morton. during his adminiftra-
tion, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into
execution; and by starting difficulties, and throw-
ing in obje&ions, prevented it from receiving a le-
gal sanction. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The bishops werefo
devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
promotion, that the funEtion itself was by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed
a featin parliament, and diftinguiihed by the titlesof
honour, these not only occasioned many avocations
from their spiritual employments, but soon render-
ed their characters and manners extremely diffe-
rent from those of the Clergy in that age. The no-
bles viewed their power with jealousy; the popu-
lace confidered their lives as profane; and both
wished their downfall with equal ardour. The per-
fonal emulation between Melvil and Adamson, a
man of learning, and eminent for his popular elo-
quence, who was promoted, on the death of Dou-
glas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingled it-
self with the palffons on each fide, and heightened
them. Attacks were made, in every a.fTembly, on
the order of bishops; their privileges were gra-

dually

dually circumscribed; and at last an as wa paf-BooK VI.
fed, declaring the office of bishop, as it was then -'
exercised within the realm, to have neither founda- 158'
tion nor warrant in the word of God; and requir-
ing, under pain of excommunication, all who now
pofieffed that office, instantly to resign it, and to
abstain from preaching or adminiftring the sacra-
ments, till they should receive permission from the
allembly. The court did not acquiesce in this de-
cree. A vacancy happening, Coon after, in the fee
of Glasgow, Montgomery Minister at Stirling, a
man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by
the blemishes in his charater, to have alienated the
people from an order already beloved, than to re-
concile them to one which was the object of their
hatred, fruck up an infamous bargain with Lenox,
nd on his recommendation was chosen Archbishop.
The Presbytery of Stirling of which he was a mem-
er, the presbytery of Glasgow whither he was to
be translated, the General Assembly, vied with
ach other in prosecuting him on that account. In 1582
rder to screen Montgomery, James made trial
lboth of gentle and of rigorous measures, and both
|ere equally ineffeEual. The General Assembly
vasjuft ready to pronounce against him the fen-
ence of excommunication, when an Herald enter-
d and commanded them, in the King's name, and
under pain of rebellion, to stop further proceed-
gs. Even this injuntion they despised. And
Ihough Montgomery, by his tears, and seeming pe-
itence, procured a short respite, the sentence was
lat lat ifued by their appointment, and published
n all the churches throughout the kingdom.
THE firmness of the Clergy in a collecive body,
as not greater than the boldness of rome indivi-
uals, particularly of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
hey inveighed daily againcf the corruptions in the
dminitration, and, with the freedom of speech
dmitted into the pulpit in that age, named Le-

E4 nox

74 1 ir^, 1b1 LU K
Boos VI.nox and Arran as the chief authors of the grie.
--v--'vances, under which the church and kingdom
158z' groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained

to the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
the clergy. In order to check the boldness of
their discourses, James issued a proclamation, comn.
manding Dury one of the most popular Ministers,
not only to leave the town, but to abstain from
preaching in any other place. Dury complained,
to the judicatories of the Church, of this encroach-
ment upon the immunities of his office. They ap-
proved of the doctrine which he had delivered; and
he determined to disregard the royal proclamation,
But the magistrates being determined to compel
him to leave the city, according to the King's or-
ders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, after
proteftirg publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, a-
gainft the violence, which was put upon him. The
people accompanied him to the gates, with teals
and lamentations; and the Clergy denounced the
vengeance of heaven against the authors of this
outrage *.

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; the

authority of its judicatories called in question,
and the liberty of the pulpit restrained, whena
sudden revolution in the civil government procur-
ed them unexpected relief.

His fr- THE two favourites, by their ascendant over the
vcurites King, pofliefed uncontrouled power in the king-
engage dom, and exercifedit with the utmost wantonness,
the King

unpo - James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil,.the

pular feats of Lenox and of Arran, and was attended by
meaiures. iuch company, and employed in such amusements,

as did not suit his dignity. The services of
those, who had contributed most to place the Crown
on his head, were but little remembered. Many
who had opposed him with the greatest virulence,
enjoyed the rewards and honours, to which the

Cald. Affemb. 1576- 1582. Spotfw. 277, &c.

otllel

others were entitled. Exalted notions of regal pre-BooK VI.
rogative, utterly inconsistent with the constitution'-"-'"
of Scotland, being instilled by his favourites into '582
the mind of the young Monarch, unfortunately
made, at that early age, a deep impreflion there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent
errors in the government of both kingdoms*. Cald. 3.
Courts of justice were held in almost every county, '52-
the proprietors of land were called before them,
and upon the slightest neglect of any of the nume-
rous forms, which are peculiar to feudal holdings,
they were fined with unusual and intolerable ri-
gcur. The Lord Chamberlain revived the obsolete
jurifdition of his office over the Burroughs, and
they were fibjeaed to exadtions no less grievous.
A design eeemed, likewise, to have been formed
to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alli-
ance with her, which all good Protestants esteem-
ed the chief security of their religion in Scotland.
A close correspondence was set on foot between the
King and his mother, and considerable progress
made towards uniting their titles to the Crown, by
such a treaty ofaflbciation, as Maitland had pro-
jefed; which could not fail of endangering or di-
minifhing his authority, and must have proved fa-
tal to those, who had aóted againit her with great-
eft vigour t. f Cald. .

ALL there circumstances irritated the impatient '57

spirit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to tole-br en,-
rate no longer the insolence of the two minions, Orfpr,: a-
to ftnd by, while their presumption and inexperi-gai':.
ence ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth,them.
who, duing the administration of the four Re-
gents, had the entire direction of the affairs of
Scotland, felt herself deprived ofall influence in
that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and
w\as ready to countenance any attempt to rescue
the King out of the hands of favourites, who were
leading him into meafilrcs, so repugnant to all her
siews. The Earls of Mar and Gleucairin, Lord

Ruthven,

75

Boor VI. Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lind-

-"- fay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the Mailer
15 2. of Oliphant, with several Barons and gentlemen

of distinc'tion, entered into a combination for that
purpose; and as changes in administration, which,
among polished nations, are brought about slowly
and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
rude age effected suddenly and by violence, the
King's situation, and the security of the favourites,
encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

Seize the JAMES, after having resided for Come time in
King's Athole, where he enjoyed his favourite amusement
person at of hunting, was now returning towards EdinBurgh,
Ruthven. -"

with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven-
castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeaed no
danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport.
Aug. 2:. The multitude of strangers whom he found there

gave him some uncafinefs; and as those who were
in the secret arrived every moment from different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces in,
creased his fears. He concealed his uneasiness,
however, with the utmost care; and next morn-
ing prepared for the field, expecting to find there
tome opportunity of making his escape. Butjuft
as he was ready to depart, the Nobles entered his
bed-chamber in a body, and presented a memorial
against the illegal and opprefiive actions of his two
favourites, whom they represented as most dan-
gerous enemies to the religion and liberties of the
nation. James, though he received this remon-
ftrance with the complaisance which was necessary
in his present situation, was extremely impatient to
be gone; but as he approached the door of the a-
partment, the Tutor of Glamis rudely stopped him.
The King complained, expoftulated, threatned, and
ending all these without effeEt, burst into tears.
" No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better children

weep than bearded men." These words made a
deep impre;fion on the King's mind, and were never

forgotten.

forgotten. The conspirators, .without regarding his o o K VI.
tears or indignation, dismissed such of his followers'-'-
as they fufpe&ed; allowed none but their own party '582.
to have access to him; and though they treated
hiin with great refpe&t, guarded his person with
the utmost care. This enterprize is usually called,
by our historians. The r'aid of Ruthven *.

LENOX and Arran were astonished to the last de-Commit
gree at an event so unexpected, and so fatal toArran to
their power. The former endeavoured, but with-P'ro'n
out success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from
captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity,
mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
ad befallen the King, and, with a few followers,
ode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable
,dv of the conspirators, under the command of
ie Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose
him, he separated himself from his companions,
sd with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
castle. At the fight of a man so odious to his coun-

, the indignation of the conspirators rose, and
ihalit death muff have been the punishment of his
ahnlefs, if the friendship of Gowrie, or rome other
:auie not explained by our historians, had not saved
life, so pernicious to the kigdom. He was con-
ined, however, to the castle of Stirling, without
eing admitted into the King's presence.
THE King, though really the prisoner of his own Commalnd
Ubjects, with whose conduct he could not help dif-Len°x t1
vering many symptoms of disgust, was obligedk;ngdom.
publish a proclamation, signifying his approba-
ion of their enterprize, declaring that he himself
as at full liberty, without any restraint or violence
iered to his person; and forbidding any attempt
ginft those concerned in the Raid of Rutbven, un-
r pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. Aug. 28.
the fame time, he commanded Lenox to leave
cotland before the zoth of September -.
Cald. 3. 134 Spotfw. 320. Melv. 357. -- Cakl. 3. 135d, ' 8.

BooK VT. SOON after, Sir George Carev, and Bowes, arrir.
'"- ~'ed as ambaifadors from Elizabet!. The pretext
The Con- of their embalfy was to inquire after the King's
fpirators safety; to encourage and countenance the confpi-
counte- rators was the real motive of it. By their inter-
.anced b- ceflion, the Earl of Angus, who, ever fincethe
Eh beth. death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile, ob-

tained leave to return. And the accelilon of a no-
bleman so powerful and so popular strengthened

Caid. ;. the faction .
I5:. LENOx, whose amiable and gentle qualities had

procured him many friends, and who received pri-
vate assurances that the King's favour towards him
was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at firfl,
to pay no regard to a command, extorted, by vio-
lence, and no less dilagreeble to James, than it
was rigorous with regard to himself. But the pow.
er of his enemies, who were masters of the King's
person, hllo were secretly supported by Elizabeth,
and openly applauded 'b the Clergy, deterred him
from an enterprize, the ficcefs of which was du-
bious, and the danger certain both to himself, and
to his Sovereign. He put off the time of his depar-
ture, however, by various artifices, in expeftatioa
either that James might make his escape from the
conspirators, or that fortune might present some
more favourable opportunity of taking arms foi
his relief.

Their Ox the other hand, the conspirators were ex-
conducA tremely solicitous not only to secure the approba-
bpp roed tion of their countrymen, but to obtain some lega
i_:-:ji sanction of their enterprize. For this purpose, them
.-d i Con- published a long declaration, containing the motive
xv--'ion of which had induced them to venture on such an i;.

.. regular ftlp, and endeavoured to heighten the pub

lic indignation against the favourites, by represent
ing in the strongest colours, their inexperience an
infolerce, their contempt to the nobles, their vio
laiion of the privileges of the Church, and thel

opprefio:

orprefiion of the people. They obliged the King, ooK VI.
Itwho could not with safety refuse any of their de-'""'-
imaands, to grant them a remission in the most am- 1l582
Ilie form; and not satisfied with that, they applied
to the Alfembly of the Church, and easily procured
an aft, declaring, "t that they had done good and
acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign, andOst. 13.
to their native country;" and requiring all sincere
protestants to concur with them in carrying for-
ward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add
the greater weight to this alt, every Minister was
enioined to read it, in his own pulpit, and toinflicd
the censures of the Church on thole who set them-
felies in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven-
tion of estates, assembled a few days after, pafled
an at to the fame effed, and granted full indemnity
to the conspirators for every thing they had done *.

JANIES was conduded by them, first to Stirling,Lenox's
and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe departure
and though he was received every where with thefn Scot-
external marks of refped due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
e restraint no less ftrid, than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lenox, as-
ter eluding many commands to depart out of the
kingdom, was at laif obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for lome time in the neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had 1fill intended
to make one effort towards restoring the King to
liberty. But either from the gentlenels of his own
disposition, averse to bloodshed and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause, unknowni
to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for
France, by the way of England. The King iflied ec. 3o.
the order for his departure, wit', no lecs reluctance
than the Duke obeyed it. An 1 both mourned a
fcparation, which neither of them had power to
prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguish of his mind,

*Cald. 3. 177, 187, 200. Spotif. 322.

threw

BooE VT.threw him into a fever. In his last moments, he
'-x''difcovered such a firm adherence to the Protestant

1 8z. faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im.

putation of an attachment to Popery, with which
he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland*. As
he was the earliest, and best beloved, he was, per-
haps, the most deserving, though not the most able
of all James's favourites. The warmth and tender.
ness of his master's affection for him was not aba-
ted by death itself. By many acts of kindness and
generosity towards his posterity, the King not only
did great honour to the memory of Lenox, but
let his own character in one of the most favourable
points of view.

Mary's THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived
anxiet? a-James of liberty, made great noise over all Europe;
son her and at last reached the ears of Mary in the prison

to which Lhe was confined. As her own experience
had taught her what injuries a captive prince isex-
posed to susser; and" as many of those, who were
now concerned in the enterprize against her son,
were the fame persons whom she confidered as the
chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natu-
ral for the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that
the fame calamities were ready to fall on his head;
and such a prospect did not fail of adding to the
distress and horror of her own situation. In the
anguiih of her heart, she wrote to Elizabeth, com-
plaining in the bitterest terms of the unprecedented
rigour, with which ihe herself had been treated,
and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the
mercy of his rebellious fubjefts; nor permit him to
be involved in the fame misfortunes under which
(he had so long groaned. The peculiar vigour and
acrimony of stile, for which this letter is remark-
able, discover both the high spirit of the Scottill
Queen, unfubdued by her sufferings, and thevio-

Spots,-. 324.

lence

lence of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices andBooK VI.
severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the end""'--
she had in view, and accordingly it neither procured '582
any mitigation of the rigour of her own confine-
ment, or any interposition in favour of the King*.

HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated 1i58s.

the Princes of Guise, was often obliged to courtAmbtafla-
their favour, interposed with warmth, in order todorsarrive

from

extricate James out of the hands of a party so en-France
tirely devoted to the English interest. He com-andEng-
manded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambaifadorland.
at the court of England, to repair to Edinburgh,
and to contribute his utmost endeavours towards
placing James in a situation, more suitable to his
dignity. As Elizabeth could not, with decency,
refilie him liberty to execute this commiflion, she
appointed Davison to attend him into Scotland as
her Envoy, under colour of concurring with him
in the negotiation, but, in reality, to be a spy upon
his motions, and to obftrudt his success. James,
whore title to the Crown had not hitherto been re-
cognized by any of the Princes on the Continent,
was extremely fond of such an honourable embassy
from the French Monarch; and, on that account,
as well as for the fake of the errand on which he
came, received Fenelon with great refpet. Thejanuar. .
nobles, in whose power the King was, did not
relish this interposition of the French court, which
had long loft its ancient influence over the affairs
of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed at the
danger to which religion would be exposed, if the
Princes of Guise should recover any alcendant over
the public councils. And though the King tried
every method for restraining them within the
bounds of decency, they declaimed against the
court of France, againit the Princes of Guise, a-
gainft the ambassador, against the entering into
a:'y alliance with such notorious persecutors of the

CaQmd. 489.

Church

BooK . Church of God, with a vehemence, which no re.

bY3 m gular government would .now tolerate, but which
'183 was then extremely common. The ambassador,

watched by Davison, distrusted by the nobles, and
exposed to the insults of the Clergy, and of the pen.
pie, returned into England without procuring any
change in the King's situation, or receiving any
ani\¥ er to a proposal which he made, that the go.
vernment should be carried on in the joint name
of Tames, and the Queen his mother *.

James es- \'IEANWHILE, James, though he diffemrbled
capes ut witl great art, became every day more uneafj
hands of under his confinement; his uneasiness render.
the con- ed him continually attentive to find out
fpirators. proper opportunity for making his escape; and tc

this attention, he at last owed his liberty, whicl
the King of France was not able, nor the Q!eer
of England willing, to procure for him. As thi
conspirators had forced Lenox out of the kingdom
and kept Arran at a distance from court, the]
grew secure; and imagining that time had re
conciled the King to them, and to his situation
they w atched him with little care. Some occafi
ons of discord had arisen among themselves; an(
the French ambassador, by fomenting there, durina
the time of his residence in Scotland, had weaken

t Camd. ed the union, in which alone their safety confiftedj
4s-. Colonel William Stewart, the commander of th

band of gentlemen, who guarded the King's pa
son, being gained by James, had the princip
merit in the scheme for reiforing his maftert
liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit tot
June :-. Earl of ,.arch his grand uncle, James was permi

ted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's. Th
;e might not create any suspicion, he lodged
first, in an open defenceless house in the town, b
pretendi:g a curiosity to fee the castle, no soon
\v-as he entered x ith some of his attendants who
he could truAl, than Colonel Stewart command

*C'!'. 3. Zo-. Sporf\.. 324. See Append. No. VIII.

t

the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of BooK VI.
his train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll,--"~'
lHuntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others 1583
to whom the secret had been communicated, en-
tered the town with their followers; and though
Mar, with several of the leaders of the faction,
appeared in arms, they found themselves so far
out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of re-
covering poffeflion of the King's person, which had
been in their power somewhat longer than ten
months. James was naturally of so soft and duc-
tile a temper, that those who were near his person,
commonly made a deep impreflion on his heart,
which was formed to be under the sway of favou-
rites. As he remained implacable and unrecon-
ciled to the conspirators, during so long a time,
and at a period of life when resentments are rather
violent than lasting, they mufft either have im-
proved the opportunities of insinuating themselves
into favour with little dexterity, or the indignation,
ith which this first insult to his person and au-
thority filled him, muff have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. Resolves
He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James however,
Melvil, and his wisest counsellors, to act with the'° *tea'
tmoft moderation. Having called, into his pre-mndera
ence, the leaders of.both factions, the neighbour- tion.
ng gentry, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs,
he Ministers, and the heads of colleges, he de-
lared, that although he had been held under re-
iraint for some time by violence, he would not
impute that as a crime to any man, but without
emembering the irregularities, which had been so
requent during his minority, would pass a general
ct of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeCs with
iftinguifhing and equal affection. And as an evi-
ence of his sincerity, he visited the Earl of Gow-
ieat Ruthven castle, and granted him a full par-
don of any guilt he had contracted, by the crime
c:)mmitted in that very place*.
Vot. IL F BUT22-

BooK \'. BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent
'-"-'and moderate plan. His former favourite, the
But -^2?Earl of Arran, had been permitted for some time
r-,gai-. o reside at Kinneil, one of his country feats. As
a^-._c ii s focn as the King felt himfelfat liberty, his love for
over h.. -,iim began to revive, and he expressed a strong

desire to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed
the return of a minion, whole insolent and over-
le-aring temper they dreaded, as much as the na.
tion detested his crimes. James, however, con-
tinued his importunity, and promising that he
firould continue with him no longer than one day,
t!':v were obliged to yield. This interview re-
ki-dl;-d arcient af'fetion; the King forgot his
promise; Arran regained his ascendant over him;
ar.d ithin a few days resumed the exercise of pow-
cr, w ith all the arrogance of an undeferving fa-
vourite, and all the rashness peculiar to himself'.

a-d the THE firif effect of his influence was a proclan;a-
K:rg pur-tion with regard to those concerned in the Raidof
S;e; ano- Rith-'en. They were required to acknowledge
t.ir plan. their crime in the humblest manner; and the King

promised to grant them a full pardon, provided
their futuie conduct were such, as did not oblige
him to remember past miscarriages. The tenor oi
this proclamation was extremely different from the
aEt of oblivion, which the tonfpirators had been
encouraged to expect. Nor did any of them reckr.
it safe to rely on a promise, clogged with fucha:
equivocal condition, and grantedby a young Prince,
under the dominion ofa Minister void of faith, re-
gardlefs of decency, and transported by the de
fre of revenge, even beyond the ufiual ferocity 0,
his temper. Miany of the leaders, who had at si
appeared or.ln at court, retired to their own honfes
.an'd foreseeing the dangerous PfLorm which was ga
therir g, began to look out for a retreat in forei(
countries T.

d. 28. j ó. C-n EL. 33IZA.
M;v. 2-4. + Id. 278. Spo:ifw 3z6. Cakd. 3. 33°.

ELIZABETH, who had all along protected theBooK vI.
conllpirators, was extremely disgusted with measures'--'"'
which tendcd so visibly to their deftruEtion, andEIl7a83
wrote to the king a harsh and haughty letter,;,eth'sfoli-
reproaching him in a ffile, very uncommon arhongcitations
Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to0 behial

of the

court, and with imprudence in proceeding so rigo- cf,
roully againif his best and most faithful fubjets.tors.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that pro-Augult 7.
mises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
out of fear, were no longer binding, when there
w.ere removed; that it belonged to him alone to
c'loofe what Ministers he would employ in his ser-
vice; and that though he resolved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it
was necessary, for the support of his authority, that
filch an insult on his person should not pass altoge-
ther uncenfured *. * Melv.

EL Z A B ETH s letterwas quickly followed byV ral-279.
inghanm her secretary, whom Ihe appointed her am-S.P' ;.'
baflador to James, and who appeared in the Scot-l,;,,,, e-
tifl court, with a splendor and magnificence, wellbaffl into
calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince. Scotand
\Wailingham was admitted to several conferences
with Jamnes himself, in which he insisted on the
lame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former answers.

| AFTErR suffering several indignities, from the ar-

rogar.ce of Arran, and his creatures, he returned
to England, without concluding any new treaty
with the King. Walsingham was, next to Bur-
l:igh, the Minister on whom the chief weight of
the English administration refted; and when a per-
s,:i of his rank, ftept so far out of the ordinary road
c;f business, as to undertake a long journey, in
,i1. old age, and under a declining state of health,
fibme affiir ofconfequence was tippofed to be the
cr :ie, or some important event was expeted to b.-
tlhe eicth( of this measure. But as nothing confpi-

F 2 CUOUs

BooK VI. CUOUS either occasioned, or followed this embassy,
-'"" it is probable that Elizabeth had no other intention

'583. in employing this sagacious Minister than to dif-

cover, with exactness, the capacity and disposition
of the Scottish King, who was now arrived at a
time of life, when, with some degree of certainty,
conjectures might be formed concerning his charac-
ter, and future conduct. As James possessed ta-
lents of that kind, which make a better figure in
conversation, than in action, he gained a great deal
by this interview kwith the English secretary, who,
notwithltandirng the cold reception he met with,
gave such an advantageous representation of his a-
bilities, as determined Elizabeth to treathim, hence-
forward, with more decency and refpeft .

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to protect the confpira-

tors rendered lames more violent in his proceed-
ings against them. As they had all refused to ac-
cept of paidon, upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation,
to surrender themselves prisoners. The Earl of An-
gus alone complied; the reit either fled into Eng-
land, or obtained the King's license to retire into
foreign parts. A Convention of estates was held, the
members of which, deceived by an unworthy arti-
fice of Arran's, declared those concerned in the
Raid of Rttbzrben to have been guilty of high trea-
son; appointed the act passed last year approving
of their conduct to be expunged out of the records;
and engaged to support the King in prosecuting the
fugitives with the utmost rigour of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done

any thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age,
among mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled
state of government, must be acknowledged to have
been guilty of an aft of treason against their fove-
reign; and James, who considered their condut in
this light, had good reason to boast of his clemency.

* Melv. 293. Cald. 3. 258. Jebb. 2. 536.

mh lle

when he offered to pardon them, upon theirconfer-BooK VL.
sing their crime. But, on the other hand, it must f -
be allowed that, after the King's voluntary pro- '583.
mise of a general oblivion, they had rome reason
to complain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
out the most unpardonable imprudence, have put
their lives in Arran's power. 1584.

THE interest of the Church was confiderablyTheCler-

asseted by there contrary Revolutions. While theg favour
conspirators kept possession of power, the Clergythecsl'
not only recovered, but extended their privileges. and irri-
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be trate the
unlawful, they took some bold measures towardsKing
exterminating the Episcopal order out of the
Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's dex-
terity in perplexing and lengthening out Mhe process
for that purpose, than to their own want of zeal,
that they did not deprive, and perhaps excommu-
nicate all the Bishops in Scotland. When the King
recovered his liberty, things put on a very different
asped. The favour bestowed upon Arran, the ene-
my of every thing decent and sacred, and the ri-
gorous prosecution of those nobles who had been
the most zealous defenders of the Protestant cause,
were confidered as sure presages of the approach-
ing ruin of the Church. The Clergy could not con-
ceal their apprehensions, nor view this impending
danger in silence. Drury, who had been restored
to his office as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh,
openly applauded the Raid of Ruthven in the pul-
!pit, at which the King was o. enraged, that, not-
withstanding some symptoms of his fubmiflion, he
commanded him to resign his charge in the city.
Mr. Andrew Melvil, being summoned before the
privy council.to answer for the doftine he had ut-
tered in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused of
comparing the present grievances of the nation
with those under James III. and of intimating ob-
quely that they ought to be redressed in the fame

F 3 manner,

BooK VI manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave
' S~~ with greater firmness. He declined the jurisdiction

4. of a Civil court, in a cause which he maintained

to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Presbytery of
which he was a member had, as he contended, the
sole right to call him to account for words fpokea
in the pulpit; and neither the King nor council
could iudge, in the first instance, of the doctrin
delivered by Preachers, without violating the im-
munities of the Church. This exemption from
civil jurisdiction was a privilege, which the Popilh
Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of whatever contri-
buted to increase the lustre or power of their body,
had long ftrugiled for, and had at last obtained.
If the fame plea had now been admitted, the Pro-
tentant C_ rgv would have become independent on
the civil magistrate; and-an order of men extreme-
ly useful to society while they inculcate those du-
ties'which tend to promote its happiness and tran.
quillity, might have become no less pernicious b)
teaching, without fear or controul, the most dan.
gerous principles, or by exciting their hearers t(
the most desperate and lawless aftions. The Kin!
jealous to excess of his prerogative, was alarmes
at this daring encroachment on it; and as Melvil
by his learning and zeal, had acquired the reputa
tion and authority of head. of the party, he refolv
ed to punish him .with the rigour which that pra
eminence rendered necessary, and to discourage, b
a timely severity, the revival of such a dangeroi
clain. Melvil, however, avoided his rage, by fl)
ing into -England; and the pulpits resounded wil
complaints that the King had extinguished tl
light of learning in the kingdom, and deprive
the Church of the ableitan-roft faithful guardsj
of its liberties and discipline *.

THESE violent d-clamations of the Clergy,

gainft the mea!ures of the court, were extreme
acceptable to the people. The conspirators, thou

* Spotfw. 330. Cald. 3. 3c4.

dri~

driven out of the kingdom, still possessed great in-BooK VI.
fluence there; and as they had every thing to fear'-v--
from the resentment of a young prince, irritated by '58s4
the firious counsels of Arran, they never ceased
foliciring their adherents to take arms in their de-
fence. Gowrie, the only person among them who
had ubibmitted to the King, and accepted of a par-
don, soon repented of a ftep, which loft him the
esteem of one party, without gaining the cofi-
dence of the other; and, after iuffering many mor-
tifications from the King's neglet, and the lilgh-
tiness of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave
Scotland, and to reside in France. While lie wait-
ed at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a fchemc for fur-
prifing the castle of Stirling. In his situation, lit-
tie persuasion was necelfary to draw him to engage
in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage,
and lay ready to take arms on the day fixed, by
the conspirators, for the execution of their enter-
|prize. His lingering so long at Dundee, without
any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the
court, proved fatal to.himfelf, and disappointed the
fuccefsof the conspiracy. Colonel William Stew-
art Ihrrounded the house where he lodged with a
body of soldiers, and, in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two:days after, Angus, Mar, and
Giamis, seized the castle of Stirling, and ereting
their flandard there, published a manifesto declar-
ing that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove, from the King's pretence, a minion, who
had acquired power by the most unworthy actions,
and who exercised it with the most intolerable info-
lence. The account. of Gowrie's imprisonment
struck a damp upon their spirits.. They imputed it
to treachery on his part, and fufpefted that, as he
had formerly deserted, he had now betrayed them.

F 4 At

Boo VI. At the fame time, a fum of money, with which
1---` Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being

I 584 duly paid, and their friends and vassals coming in

slowly, they appeared irresolute and disheartened;
and as the King, who aated with'great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 20,ooo men,
they fled precipitately towards England, and with
difficulty made their escape*. This rash and feeble
attempt produced such effects, as usually follow
di appointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the
cauf for which it was undertaken, but added
strength and reputation to the King.; confirmed
Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
measures with more boldness, and greater success.
Gowrie was the first victim of their resentment.
After a very informal trial, a jury of peers found
him guilty of treason, and he was publickly be-
headed at Stirling.

May :. To humble the Church was the King's next
A 'ald ftep. But as it became necessary, for this purpose,

h to call in the aid of the legislative authority, a par-

liament was hastily summoned; and while so many
of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom,
or forbidden to appear in the King's pretence; while
Arran's haughtiness kept some at a distance, and
intimidated others; the meeting consisted only of
those, who were absolutely at the devotion of the

Sever- court. In order to conceal the laws which were
_,ws a- framing from the knowledge of the Clergy, the
£a i n the
Church. Lords of the Articles were sworn to secrecy; and

when some of the Ministers, who either fufpeaed,
or were informed of the danger, deputed one of
their number to declare their apprehensions to the
King, he was seized at the palace-gate, and car-
ried to a distant prison. Others, attempting to
enter the parliament houRe, were refused admit-

_Home's Hil. of House ofDougl. 376. Spotfw. 330.

tance;

- - 7 - ^ - ---
I

tance ; and such laws were passed, as totallyBooK VI.
overturned the constitution and discipline of theC'-'"a
Church. The refuting to acknowledge the jurif-M5'8
diCtion of the privy council; the pretending an
exemption from the authority of the civil courts;
the attempting to diminish the rights and privi-
leges of any of the three estates in parliament,
were declared to be high treason. The holding
Assemblies, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, with-
out the King's permiflion or appointment; the
uttering, either privately, or publickly, in ser-
mons, or in declamations, any false and fcanda-
lous reports against the King, his ancestors, or mi-
niters, were pronounced capital crimest.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross of
Edinburgh, according to the ancient custom, Mr.
Robert Pont, Minister of St. Cuthbert's, and one
of the Lords of session, solemnly protested against
them, in the name of his brethren, because they
had been passed without the knowledge or con-
sent of the Church. Ever since the Reformation,
the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories had both
been esteemed sacred, In the former, the Clergy
had been accustomed to censure, and admonish,
with unbounded liberty. In the latter, they exer-
cifed an uncontrouled and independent jurifdition.
The blow was now aimed at both these privileges.
These new statutes were calculated to render
churchmen as inconsiderable as they were indi-
gent; and as the avarice of the nobles had strip-
ped them of the wealth, the King's ambition was
about to deprive them of the power which once
belonged to their order. No wonder the alarm
was univerfa], and the complaints loud. All the
Ministers of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and
fled into England. The most eminent Clergymen,
throughout the kingdom, imitated th i- ce:..:.nple.
I'Dcolation and astonishment appear.'.; i: every

5 Cald. 3. 365. t Parl. 8. Ja . .

FV.-

BooK VI.part of the Scottish Church; the people bewaied
' '" 'the loss of Pastors, whom they esteemed; and full

5 14 of coniternation, at an event so unexpected, open-

ly expressed their rage against Arran, and began
to suspect the King himself to be an enemy to the
Reformed Religion .

* Spotfw. 333-
. . .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

T HE

# BOOK VII.

T 1T TT
H I S T O R Y

O F
ISCOTLA ND.

B O OK VII.

HILE Scotland was torn by intestine Fac-Boo3KVT.

IW tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru-'--
mou of a project in agitation for setting Mary at Thr584
liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Cheshire gentle- mortons
man, was fufpeted of being deeply concerned in conspiracy
thedefign, and on that suspicion he was taken intoagai"nt
custody. Among his papers were found two lifts,Elizabeth'
one of the principal harbours of the kingdom, with
an accouut of their situation, and osthe depth of
\.ater in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman
Catholics in England. This circumstance confirm-
ed the suspicion against him, and rome dark and
deiperate conspiracy was supposed just ready to
brealk out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence,
and declared that the two papers were forged by the
Qeen's Ministers, in order to intimidate or insnare
him ; and he even endured the rack with the utmost
fortitude. But being brought a second time to the
place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he
lot only acknowledged that he had held a secret
corretpondence with the Queen of Scots, but dif-
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng-
land. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to
furnish troops, and to condutd the entcrprize. The

Pope

BooKVII.Pope and King of Spain were to supply the money

"r-'"neceiTary for carrying it on; all the English exiles
'584. were eager to take arms; many of the Catholicsat

home x ould be ready to join them, at their landing;
Mendoza, the Spanish ambai-ador, who was the
life of the conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting
the spirit of disaffection among the English, or in
haftering the preparations of the Continent; and,
by his command, he had made the two lilts, the
copies whereof. had been found in his poffeiion.
This confellion he retra-ted at his trial; returned
to it again, after sentence was palled upon him;
and retracted it once more at the place of execu.
tion .

To us in the present age, who are alfifted in form-

ing our opinion of this matter, by the light which
time and history have thrown upon the defignsand
characters of the Princes of Guise, many circum-
stances in Throgmorton's confeflion appear to be
extremely remote from truth, or even from proba-
bility. The Duke of Guise was, at that juncture,
far from being in a situation to undertake foreign
conquests. \ithout either power or office at court;
hated by the King; and persecuted by the favou-
rites, he had no leisure for any thoughts ofdifturb-
ing the quiet of the neighbouring states, and his vai
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying
the foundation of that famous league, which shook
the throne of France. But about the time Eliza.
beth detected this conspiracy, the close union be.
tween the house of Guise and Philip II. was remark-
able to all Europe, and as their great enterprize a-
gainfi Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they en-
deavoured to conceal that under their threatenings to
inv-.de England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared
to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, whoknew
hujv ardentr!'- al the parties mentioned by him wilh-

ed
* Jloi:n.liedi, 137I o

ed her downfall, thought that she could not guardBooKVII.
her kingdom with too much care. The indiscreet'"'
zeal of the Englilh exiles increased her fears. NotD,58n4', of
atisfied with incessant outcries against her feverityMary'sad-
towards the Scottish Qieen, and her cruel perecu-herents a-
tion of her Catholic fubjeers, not thinking it enoughlgaint Eli-
that one Pope had threatened her with the sentence z
of excommunication, and another had actually pro-
rounced it, they now began to disperse books and
writings, in which they endeavoured to persuade
heir disciples, that it would be a meritorious adti-
on to take away her life; they openly exhorted the
raids of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holo-
jfernes, and by such an illustrious deed, to render
their own names honourable and sacred in the
Churchi, throughout all future ages*. For all *Camd.
:hefe reasons, Elizabeth not only inflicted the pu-497-
lfhment of a traitor on Throgmorton, but corn-
anded the Spanish ambassador instantly to leave
:rngland; and that she might be in no danger of
eing attacked within the island, she determined
ouse her utmost efforts, in order to recover that
fluence over the Scottilh councils, which she had
or some time entirely loft.
THERE were three different methods, by v.'hichSlheenlea-
lizabeth might hope to accomplish this; either byvo"rs to
turnilhing such effectual aid to the banished nobles, re ln-
s would enable them to resume the chief diretion influence
faffairs; or by entering into such a treaty within Scot-
lary, as might intimidate her son, who being now land, by

gaining

ccuftomed to govern, would be apt to agree to gArran
ny terms, rather than resign the sceptre, or admit
n associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl
fArran, to secure the direction of the King his
after. The last was not only the easiest, and
eedieft, but most likely to be ifccefsful. This
izabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying

the

BoosVI.Ithe other two altogether aside. With this view,
'- she sent Davison one of her principal secretaries, a

man of abilities and address, into Scotland. A
Mi.ifler so venal as Arran, hated by his country.
men, and holding his power by the most precarioui
of all tenures, the favour of a young Prince, ac-
cepted Elizabeth's offers without hesitation, and
esteemed the acquisition of her protetion to be the

Au i most solid foundation of his own greatness. Soo:
'3- after, he consented to an interview with Lord

Hundfon the Governor of Ber\wick, and being h
roured with the pompous title of Lieutenant Gene-
ral for the King, he appeared at the place appoint.
ed, with a iplendid train. In Hundfon's pre.
fence, he renewed his promises of an inviolable
and faithful attachment to the English interest, and
atiured him that James fho:lld enter into no nego-
tiation which might tend to interrupt the peace
between the two kingdoms; and as Elizabeth be.
gan to entertain the fame fears and jealousies con-
cerning the King's marriage, which had formerly
disquieted her with regard to his mother's, he uns
dertook to prevent James from listening to arn
overture of that kind, till he had previously o&
tained the Queen of England's consent *

Se 're THE bar.ihed lords and their adherents soon fel
prcceec- the effects of Arran's friendship with England. A
Lng: -, Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge inhe
g: thhe
br..:i'ej cominions, and several of her Ministers were of o!
Lo-s . rincn that she ought to employ her arms in defenc

of their caule, the fear of this was the only thing
which restrained James and his favourite, from prc
ceeding to f;ch extremities agai: n them, as migi
hlave excited the pity or indignation of the Englild
a:d h1ave prempted them to exert themfel-es wil
,; .t -igour in their bhlalf. But every apprehenfionl

:-. this kind being now removed, they ventured to c

C !:J. 3 49i :*.:i; ;5. Se Appznd. No. IX.

a parliame:

a p.rliament, in which an at was passed, attaint-BOOKVII.
ing Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of-v-'-
their followers. Their estates devolved to the Crown, '584'
and according to the praftice of the Scottish Mo-
narchs, who were obliged to reward the fa&ion
which adhered to them, by dividing with it the
spoils of the vanquished, James dealt out the great-
er part of these to Arran, and his associates.*

NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigo- Against
rous. All Ministers, readers and professors ottheCler-
Coileges were injoined to subscribe, within forty gy.
days, a paper testifying their approbation of the
law\s concerning the church enacted in last parlia-
ment. Many, overawed, or corrupted by the
Court, yielded obedience; others flood out. The
stipends of the latter were sequestered, some of the
more aAive committed to priibn, and numbers
compelled to fly the kingdom. Those who com-
plied, fell under the suspicion of adting from mer-
cenary or ambitious motives. Those who suffered,
acquired high reputation, by giving such convincing
evidence of their firmness and sincerity. The ju-
dicatories of the Church were almost entirely sup-
prelTed. In rome places, scarce as manyMinifters
remained, as to perform the duties of religious wor-
ship; they soon funk in reputation among the peo-
ple, and being prohibited not only from discoursing
of public affairs, but obliged, by the jealousy of
the adminiifration, to frame every sentiment and
exprellion in such a manner, as to give the court
no offence, their sermons were deemed languid,
insipid, and contemptible; and it became the ge-
neral opinion, that together with the most virtuous
of the nobles, and the most faithful of the Clergy,
the power and vigour of Religion were now banish-
ed out of the kingdom t.

Cald. 3. 527. t IbiJ. . 589.

M:K1 A N-

BooVhII. MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying ononeo

"--v-, those fruitless negotiations with the Queen of Scot
I 84. which it had become almost matter of form to re:

new every year. They served not only to amure
that unhappy princess with some profpea of libel
ty but furnished an apology for eluding the foll
citations of foreign powers in her behalf; andwer
of use to overawe James, by shewing him thatfi
could, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to di
pute his authority. These treaties she fuffered.to
proceed to what length she pleased, and never want
ed a pretence for breaking them off, when they I
came no longer necessary. The treaty now on so
was not, perhaps, more sincere than many whi
preceded it; the reasons, however, which rende
it ineffectual were far from being frivolous.

New con- As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Flandc
fpiracy towards Scotland, the (hip on board of which
aga:nfEli- was a paifenger happened to be chased by pirate
zabeth. who, in that age, often infested the narrow fe

Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces foi
papers in his custody, and threw them away; bll
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blh
them back into the ship, and they were immediat
ly taken up by some of the passengers, who carl
them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. H
with great industry and patience, joined them tg
ther, and they were found to contain the account
a plot, said to have been formed by the King.
Spain, and Duke of Guise, for invading Englai
The people \were not yet recovered from the
and anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy, in wh{
Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his disc
veries appeared now to be confirmed by additioni
evidence, not only all their former apprehenfijo
recurred, but the corfternation became genei
and excefiive. As all the dangers, with whid

Englan

ngland had been threatened for some years, flowed 3 o KVII.
itcher immediately from Mary herself, or from those ~
;ho made use of her name tojuRfify their infurrec- 1584'
ions and conspiracies, this gradually diminished
'e compaflion due to her situation, and the Eng-
li, iiftead of pitying, began to fear and hate her.
,!,abth, under whose wife and pacific reign the
i;gilh enjoyed tranquillity,and had opened sources
f \ ealc unknown to their ancestors, was extreme-
vbelvedr b, all her peop!e; and regard to her safe-

n, n: leis i!.n to thei; own interest, animated

iem against the Scottish Queen. In order to dif-Occafi.ns
ourage her adherents, it was thought neceflary toan alfocia-
onvince them, by some public deed, of the attach-tion !n op-

· ,

.' rn · ?Iitl

.p.hnon to

nent of the English to their own Sovereign, andp^ary.
hat any attempt against her life would prove fatal
o her rival. With this view, an Association wasOa. 9i
ramed, the subscribers of which bound themselves
y the most solemn oaths, " to defend the Queen
; against all her enemies, foreign and domeftici
and if violence should be offered to her life, in
" order to favour the title of any pretender to the

Crown, they not only engaged never to allow or
acknowledge the person, or persons, by whom,
or for whom, such a detestable at should be com-
mitted, but vowed, in the presence of the Eter-
" nal God, to prosecute such person, or persons,
" to the death, and to pursue them, with their
' litnoft vengeance, to their utter overthrow and
" excirpation*." Persons of all ranks filbfcribed
!his :ombination, with the greatest eagerness and
.mnaiimitv t.

MARY confidered this combination, not onlyas Which
in avowed design to exclude her from all right ofgreatlya-
icc'li]on, but as the certain and immediate fore-'a""s 1
".iuer of her deftrution. In order to avert this

4 State Trials, i. 122. t Camd. 499.
VoL. II, G i

Boo KVII.fbe made such feeble efforts as were still in her pow,
"'-'L'er, and lent Naue her secretary to court, with offers

of rrore entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth,
in every point, which had been the occasion of their
long enmity, than all her sufferings hitherto had
been able to extort *. But whether Mary adhered
inflexibly to her privileges, as an independent Sove-
reign, or yielding to the necelfity of her situation,
endeavoured, by conce!]ions, to tooth her rival, she
was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was impu-
ted to obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign
aififtance; her corceflions were either believed to
be insincere, or to flow from the fear of some im-
minent danger. Her present willingness, however,
to comply with any.terms was so great, that Wal-
fingham warmly urged his mistress to come to a si-
nal agreement with her. But Elizabeth, was perfuad-
ed, that it was the spirit railed by the alfociation,
xwhich had rendered her so passive and compliant.
She alt a s imagined that there was something my-
fterious and deceitful in all Mary's acions, and sus-
pected her of carrying on a dangerous correfpon-
dence with the English Catholics, both within and
without the kingdom. Nor were her suspicions
altogether void of foundation. Mary had, about
this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield,
urging him to haften the execution of what she calls
the Great Plot or Defignlment, without hesitating on
.account of any danger in which it might involve
her life, which she would most willingly part with,
if, by that sacrifice, she could procure relief for so
great a number of the oppressed children of the
sac is Church t. Instead, therefore, of hearkening to the

overtures which the Scottish Queen made, or grant-

;' t h

g-reaer ing any mitigation of the hardships of which she
r:gc-. complained, Elizabeth resolved to take her out of

the hands of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and to ap-

Camd. ibld. 5 Strype, 3. 246.

point

point Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury, toBoo KVlI.
be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his"'r-
trift rwith great fidelity, during fifteen years, but, 15 84
at the finme time, had treated Mary with gentleness
and refpeat, and had always sweetened harsh com-
man:ds, by the humanity with which he put them
in execution. The fame politeness was not to be
cxpctcd from men of an inferior rank, whose
revere vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recom-
mendation to that employment, and the only me-
rit by which they could pretend to gain favour or
pr-ferment +. - Ca!tod.

As james was no less eager, than ever, to deprive 3. 500
tile banihed nobles of Elizabeth's protection, hene fa
appointed the Master of Gray his ambassador to the vourite of
court of England, and entrusted him with the.con-theKing's.
dut of a negotiation for that purpose. An honour
for which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy
of the Earl of Arran. Gray possessed all the talents
of a courtier; a graceful person, an infinuatirin ad-
dress, boundless ambition, and a restless aid in-
triguing spirit. During his residence in France; he
lid been admitted into the most intimate familiarity
with the Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his
favour, had renounced the Protestant Religion, and
rofcleed the utmost zeal for the captive Queen,
who carried on a secret correspondence with him,
om which she expected great advantages. On his
eturn into Scotland, he paid court to James with
xtraordinary assiduity, and his accomplifllmeants
dd not fail to make their usual imprellion oil the
ning's heart. Arran, who had introduced him!,
egan quickly to dread his growing favour; and
attering himself, that absence would efface anv
ntiments of tenderness from the mind of a young
rince, pointed him out, by his malicious praises,
s the most proper person in the kingdom, for an

G z cmbaffy

Boo.Vln.emba/ y of such importance: and contributed to
'*J - raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften his
r$%' fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dexterity

in discovering the proper inttruments for carrying
on h-r designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and by
presents, to secure Gray to her interelt. The for-
mer flattered his vanity, which was great; thelat-
ter supplied his profuferefs, which was ifill greater.
He abandoned himself without reserve to Eliza-
beth's direc&ions, and rot only undertook to retain
the King under the influence of England, but acted
as a spy upon the Scottish Queen, and betrayed to
her rival every secret, that he could draw from her
by his high prctenfions of zeal in her service*.

His inte- GR Y'S credit with the English court was ex-
reftv. ih tremely galling to the banished nobles. Elizabeth
n cour no longer thought of employing her power to restore
of Eng-
land, themj ihe found it easier to govern Scotland, by

corrupting the King's favourites; and in compli-
ance with Gray's solicitations, she commanded the
exiles to leave the north of England, and to remove
Dec. 31. into the heart of the kingdom. This rendered it

difficult for them to hold any correspondence with
their partizans in Scotland, and almost impossible
to return thither without her permillion. Gray, by
gaining a point \which James had so much at heart,
riveted himtelf more firmly than ever in his favour;
and bv acquiring greater reputation, became capa
ble of serving Elizabeth x ith greater success t.

is^-. ARRAN had now pofeifed, for some time, all
Arran's the power, the riches, and the honours, that his
,io,^ id immoderate ambition could desire, or the fondnefi
minfocnce of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality to-

wards his favourites, could bestow. The office o
Lord Chancellor, the highest and most important i:

O Strype, 3. 30. Melv. 316.

- Cald. 3. 643.

th

the kingdom, was conferred upon him, even dur-BooKVII.
ing the life of the Earl of Arg) y, who succeeded""''
Athlole in that dignity'; and the public beheld,, cf85;
with astonishment and indignation, a man educatedoffic. of
as a soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, and a con-State,
temnerlofjuftice, appointed to preside in parliament, APP. 447-
in the privy council, in the court of session, and
intrusted with the supreme disposal of the property
of his fellow-fubjects. He was, at the fame time,
governor of the castles of Stirling and Edinburgh,
the two principal forts in Scotland; Provoff of the
city of Edinburgh; and as if by all these accu-
mulated dignities his merit were not sufficiently re-
compenfed, he had been created Lieutenant Gene-
ral over the whole kingdom. No person was ad-
mitted into the King's presence without his permif-
sion; no favour could be obtained but by his me-
diation. James, occupied with youthful amuse-
ments, devolved upon him the whole regal autho-
rity. Such unmerited elevation increased his natu-
ral arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was
no longer content with the condition of a subje&c,
but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his
title to the Crown was preferable to that of the
King himself. But, together with these thoughts
of royalty, he retained the meanness, suitable to
his primitive indigence. His venality as a judge
was scandalous, and was exceeded only by that of
his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made her-
self a party in almost every question which came to
be decided, employed her influence to corrupt, or
to overawe the judges, and almost openly dictated
their decisions t. His rapaciousness as a Minifler
was insatiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of

t Cald. . 33Xi. Scotfiarvet's Staggering State, 1

G ? i

Bo oK\II. so many offices, with the estate, and honours which
,---Y- belonged to the family of Hamilton; or with tile

' greater part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to

his fhlare; he grasped at the poffellions offeveralof
the nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to exchange
part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil;
a-d becanufe he was unwilling to quit an ancient in-
h ria-:ce for a pofell'loi so precarious, he stirred up
aSai.fit him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of John.
fton, and i;-olved that corner of the kingdom in
a civil war. He committed to prison the Earl of
Athole, Lord Home, and the Master of Cafliis;
the first, because he would not divorce his wife,
a daughter of the Earl of Gowrie, and entail his
estate on him; the second, because he was unwilling
to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his
estates; and the third, for refuting to lend him mo-
ney. His spies and informers filled the whole coun-
try, and intruded themselves into every company.
The nearest neighbours distrusted and feared each
other. All familiar society was at an end. Even
the common intercourses of humanity were inter-
rupted, no man knowing in whom to confide, or
where to utter his complaints. There is not per-
haps in history, an example of a minister so univer-
sally detestable to a nation, or who more justly de-
sered its deteitation *.

ARRAN, notwithstanding, regardless of the fen-

timents, and despising the murmurs of the people,
gave a loose to his natural temper, and proceeded
to acts still more violent. David Home of Argat:,
and Patrick his brother, having received letters from
one of the banished Lords, about private bufinelS,
were condemned and put to death, for holding cor-

*Spotfw. 337, 338.

refpondence

ObF C O i L A N D. Io0

refpondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drum-BooKVII.
lhiaftll, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of-'"
honour and reputation, were accused of having 585'
ccnlpired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the
King's person. A single witness only appeared;
tlth evidence they produced of their innocence was
iunnwevrable; their accuser himself not long after
acklnoxledged that he had been suborned by Arran;
and all men believed the charge against them to
be groundless: they were found guilty, notwith-Feb. 9.
ft;nding, and suffered the death of traitors*.

ABOUT the fame time, that there gentlemenParry's
were punished for a pretended confpirac-, Eliza-cnfpi'acy
blt!h's life was endangered by a real one. Parry, glant
a Doctor of laws, and a Member of the Houre of
Conmmons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a re-
solute spirit, had lately been reconciled to the
Church of Rome; and fraught with the zeal of a
new convert, he offered to demonstrate the fin-
ccrit) of his attachment to the religion which he
had embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal
Alien had published a book, to prove the murder
of an excommunicated Prince to be not only law-
fuil, but a meritorious aCtion. The Pope's Nuncio
at Venice, the Jesuits both there and at Paris, the
E:glifh exiles, all approved of the design. The
Pope himself exhorted him to persevere; and grant-
ed him, for his encouragement, a plenary indul-
gence, and remifiion of his fins. Cardinal di Como
wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But
though he often got access to the Queen, fear, or
lume remaining sense of duty, reitrained him from
perpetrating the crime. Happily, his intention
teas at last discovered by Nevil, the only person
in England, to whom he had communicated it;
{a:l e heimfelf having voluntarily confessed hisMarch 2
g:;lit, he suffered the punilhment which it deferv-
' i tp'fw. 338. Cald. 3. 794. State trials, Vol2. 103.

G 4 THESE

BocKVli. THESE repeated conspiracies against their Sove.
'-'"'reign awakened the indignation of the Englilh
A fe5ere parliament, and produced a very extraordinary
statute, statute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the
which Queen of Scots. By this law the afiociation in de-
proved fa-fence of Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was
al to Ma- further enacted; " that if any rebellion shall be

excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted

" to the hurt of her Majesty's person, by orfor any
"person pretending a title to the Crown, the Queen
" flall empower twenty-four perfoi:s,. by a com-
"mition under the Great Seal, to examine into,
"and pars sentence upon such offences; and after

judgment given, a proclamation shall be iifued,

"declaring the persons whom they find guilty,
" excluded from any right to the Crown; and her
" Majety's fubjecs may lawfully pursue everyone

of them to the death, with all their aiders and

" abettors: And if any design against the life of
" the Queen take effect, the persons, by orfor whom
"such a detestable act is executed, and their iiies,
"being any wife assenting or privy to the fame,
" shall be disabled for ever from pretending to the
" Crown, and be pursued to death in the like man-
" ner '." This act was plainly levelled at the Queen
of Scots; and whether we confider it as a voluntary
exprefflon of the zeal and concern of the nation for
Elizabeth's safety, or whether we impute it to the
influence, which that artful Princess preserved over
her parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile
it with the general principles ofjuftice or humani-
ty. Mary was thereby rendered accountable not
only for her own actions, but for those of othersi
in consequence of which, the might forfeit her
right of fuccefflon, and even her life itself.

' State trials, Vol. I. i 23.

MARV

M,,RY justly confidered this a&t, as a warning BooKVIr.
to prepare for the worfl extremities. Elizabeth's-~
miniiters, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, T'he ri
to rake away her life; and suffered books to begntr with
publilhed, in order to persuade the nation, that which flhe
this cruel and unprecedented measure was not only w'1S treat-

necefary, but just . Even that short period of'r 'in
er days which remained, they rendered uncom-
ortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which
it was in their power to inflict. Almost all her ser-
ants were dismissed ; flie was treated no longer
Witll the respect due to a Queen; and though the
gour of seventeen years imprilonment had broken
her constitution, she was confined to two ruinous
chambers, scarce habitable, even in the middle of
minmer, by reason of cold. Notwithstanding the
cantinefs of her revenue, fie had been accustomed
o distribute regularly some alms among the poor
n the village adjoining to the caitle. Paulet, now,
efilfed her liberty to perform this pious and hu-
ane office, which had afforded her great confola-
inl, amidf her own fifferings. The castle, in
hihich she resided, was converted into a common
rion; and a young man, fulpeetd of Popery,
as confined there, and treated under her eye,
ith such rigour, that he died of the ill usage.
he often complained to Elizabeth of rhofe multi-
!ied injuries, and expoftulated as became a wo-
an, and a QOeen; but as no political reason now
bliged that Princess to amuif her any longer wi!t
llacious hopes, far from granting her any redrels,
e did not even deign to give her any anfver. The
ing of France, closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom
e depended for aliiftance, was afraid of espousing
lary's cause, with any warmth ; and all his soli-
citations in her behalf were feeble, formal, and in-
ficacious. But Caftelnau the French ambaitldor,
hlole compallion and zeal for the unhappy Queen

supplicd

* S-5rpe, 3. 299.
1

10o7

BooKVlTI.upplied the defects in his instructions, remonftra.
'-'"'ted with such vigour against the indignities to

, 5" which she was exposed, that, by his importunity,

he prevailed at length to have her removedto
Tuthbury ; though she was confined, the greater
part of another winter, in her present wretched ha.
bitation *.

A breach NEITHER theinfults of her enemies, northene-
btirvnd glecn of her friends, made such an imprefilon on
her on. Mary as the ingratitude of her son. James had

hitherto treated his mother with filial refpet, and
had even entered into negotiations with her, which
gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her
intercfi that this good correspondence should con.
tinue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland,
found his favour with the King greatly encreafedi
by the success of his embassy, persuaded him to
write a harih and undutiful letter to his mother, in
which he exprefly refused to acknowledge her to
be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs s
connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruelre-
quital of her maternal tenderness overwhelmed Ma-
ry with sorrow and despair. " Was it for this, said
" he, in a letter to the French ambassador, that
"have endured so much, in order to preserve for
" him the inheritance, to which I have ajuft right?
"I am far from envying his authority in Scotland.
" I desire no power there; nor wish to set my foot
" :n that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
" of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
"loved with too tender affection. Whatever he

either enjoys, or expects, he derived it from me.
From him, I never received alliftancc, supply,
or benefit of any kind. Let not my allies trea

"him any longer as a King; he holds that dignity
" by mv consent; and ifa speedy repentance doe
"not appeate my just resentment, I will load him

2 with
* Jzth. ;. 2 ;-G->95

1o9
( with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown,BooKVn.

, with all my pretensions, to one, who will receive'--
", them with gratitude, and defend them with vi- 1585'
, °our *." The love which James bore to his mo-
ther, whom he had never known, nay, whom he
had been early taught to confider as the most a-
bandoned person of her sex, cannot be supposed
ever to have been ardent ; and he did not now take
any pains to regain her favour. But whether her
indignation at his undutiful behaviour, added to
her bigotted attachment to Popery, prompted Ma-
ryat any time to think seriously ofdifinheriting her

on; or whether these threatnings were uttered in
a udden sally of disappointed affection, it is now
no cafy matter to determine. Some papers which
are fill extant seem to render the former not im-
probable t.

CARES of another kind, and no less difquieting,Dange-
ccupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm, whichrlls ituLa-
le had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end ;tin"t h;
and flch storms were gathering in every quarter,
filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring
ations had undergone revolutions, extremely to
ierdifadvantage. The great qualities, which Hen-
vIII. had dilplayed in his youth, and which raised
he expectations of his fubjests so high, vanished on
isafcending the throne ; and his acquiring supreme
lver leems not only to have corrupted his heart,
t to have impaired his understanding. He loon
oft the esteem and affection of tile nation; and a
if divided between the aufterities ofa fuperrtitious
evotion, and the extravagancies of the most diffo-
ute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as
e was odious on account of his rapacioutnefs, his
rofufion, and the fondness with which he doted
n Iany unworthy minions. On the death of his
1i) brother, those sentiments of the people burst

out
* Jhlb, a. 57. See Append. No. X. t See Append. No. XL

BooKVII.out wiih violence. Henry had no children, and

'-- - l though bur thirty two years of age, the fuccefflon
'85' of the Crown was already confidered as open. The

King of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal
family, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was

From the a zealous Protestant. The profpe&t of an event, so
progreis fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne
0o the of France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe,and

ue; the Duke of Guile, countenanced by the Pope, and

aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the de.
fender of the Romiih faith, and the affertor of the
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In or.
der to unite the party, a bond of confederacy was
formed, diftirguifhed by the name of the Hely
Leagu e. All ranks of men joined in it with emula
tion. The spirit spread with the irrefiftible.rapi.
dit-, which was natural to religious passions, i
that age. The deftrlc-ion of the Reformation not
only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to b
the obje&t and with of the whole party; and the
Duke of Guise, the head of this mighty and zealos
body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far fu.
perior to that, which the King himself possessd

Fr!n i'e pPhilip 11. by the conquefl of Portugal, had greatli
P. 'rit, increated the naval power of Spain, and had atlI

reduced under his dominion all that portion ofti
Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean moun
tains, and which nature seems to have destined
form one great monarchy. William Prince of a
range, who firif encouraged the inhabitants of th
Netherlands to alTert their liberties, and whose wis
d'nm and valour formed and protected the rifin
common wealth, had fallen by the hands of an allfi
fin. The ftiperior genius of the Prince of Parni
had given an entire turn to the fate of the wari
the Low-Countries; all his enterprizes, concerts
with co,-)lummate skill, and executed with eq
bravcrv, had been attended with success; andt'
Duitch, reduccd to the la-st extremity, were on

pc--

point of falling under the dominion of their ancient BooKVII.
master.

NONE of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth H :r15*e
had hitherto owed her security, existed any longer and vigo-
She could derive no advantage from the jealousy, rous con-
wlhich had subsisted between France and Spain dun.
Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
ofGuife, had an equal sway in the councils of both
kingdoms. The Hugonots were unable to contend
wit the power of the league; and little could be
expeted from any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
lo.g employ the arms, or divide the strength of
Spai.. In this situation of the affairs of Europe, it
became necessary for Elizabeth to form a new plan
f conduc; and her wisdom in forming it, was
not greater than the vigour with which she carried
iton. The measures, most suitable to her natural
temper, and which she had hitherto purfied, were
cautious and safe; those (he now adopted were en-
terprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but
was not afraid of war; and was capable, when
compelled by necessity, not only of defending her-
self with spirit, but of attacking her enemies with

boldness, which averted danger from her own
ominions. She immediately furnished the Huge-
nots with a considerable supply in money. She
arried on a private negotiation with Henry III.
who, though compelled to join the league, hated
the leaders of it, and wished for their deftru&tion.
She openly undertook the protection of the Dutch
commonwealth, and sent a powerful army to its
aiftance. She endeavoured to form a general con-
federacy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to
the Popilh league. She determined to proceed with R ,r I..c
the utmost rigour against the Queen ofScots, whose to pliuni,
fufierings and rights afforded her enemies a ipecious Mlar., *i.
pretence for invading her doriinions. She refolv.d .Stogai'lhe

to King

Boo KVI1.to redouble her endeavours in order to effect a closer
'--v-'union with Scot!and, and to extend and perpetuate
'55' her influence over the cou-cils of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce mnof

of the Scottish courtiers, to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother former-
ly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden the Justice Clerk,
who had tIfccceded Gray as the King's resident at
London, were the persons in whom she chiefly con-
2ay 29. fided. In order to dired and quicken their motions

mhe dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along with Eel-
lenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well-
bred, and entertaining; he excelled in all the ex-
ercifes, for which James had a pafion; and amused
the young King by relating the adventures he had
met with, and the observations he had made, du-
ring a long residence in foreign countries; but un-
der the veil of thele superficial qualities, he con-
cealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. Hefoon
grew into high favour s ith James, and while lihe
was seemingly attentive only to pleasure and diver-
lions, he acquired influence over the public coun-
cils, to a degree which was indecent for a stranger
to possets*.

Propofesa NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable
league to the nation, than the proposal he made of a ftrii
with Soot- s
h2d . alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of

the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarming
progress of the popish league leemed to call on all
Protefta!.t Pri, c's, to unite for the preservation of
JU,; 29. their commor. faith. James embraced the overture

vwith warmth, and a Convention of estates impow-
ered him to conclude fich a treaty, and engagedto
ratify it in parliamentt. The alacrity with which
James concurred in this measure, must not be
wholly aicribed either to his own zeal, or to Wot-

toc'
-· . -..' :;'. 5I S} potf.v. 39,.

ton's address; it' was owing in part to Elizabeth'sBooK VII.
liberality. As a mark of her motherly affection for'--"-J
the young King, she fettled on him an annual pen- 1585'
on'of 5000 pounds; the fame fum which her fa-
hier lhd allotted her, before she aCcended the throne.
Thls citcumftance, which she took care to mention,
endred a fium, which in that age was far from be-
in. inconsiderable, a very acceptable present to the
j-.r, whose revenues, during a long minoiity, had
en :,lmoft totally dissipated*.
Br T the chief object of Wotton's intrigues, wasuder-
o ruin Arran. While a minion so odious to the mines Ar-
ation continued to govern the King, his afliftanceran'spow-
ould be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And"e
holugh Arran, ever since his interview with Huns-
ane, had appeared extremely for her interest, (he
ould place no great confidence in a man, whose
onducd was so capricious and irregular, and who,
otwithftanding his proteflations to the contrary,
ill continued a secret correspondence both with
ary, and with the Duke of Guile. The bariifh-
dLords were attached to England from affection,
swell as principle, and were the only persons a-
ong the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency,
e could thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left
ondon, they had been summoned thither, under
lour of vindicating themfelyes from his accufati-
ns, but, in reality, to concert with him the moit
roper measures for restoring them to their coun-
. Wotton pursued this plan, and endeavoured
ripen it for execution; and it was greatly facili-
ted bv an event, neither uncommon nor confide-
ble. Sir John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherll,
e English and Scottish wardens of the middle
arches, having met, according to the custom of
eborders, about mid-fummeran affray arose, and
ord Ruflel, the Earl of Bedford's eldft son, hap-

pcned

* Cald. 3. 305.
i

BooKVII.pened to bj killed. This scuffle was purely acci.
'"- ~denta!, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a de.

585s sign formed by Ker, at the instigation of Arran, t

involve the two kingdoms in war. She insisted tha
both of them should be delivered up to her; an(
though James eluded that demand, he was obligee
to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aber.

Asias the deen. During his absence from court, Wotto;
baiilied and his aflbciates carried on their intrigues withou

interruption. By their advice, the banished noble
endeavoured to accommodate their differences wit
Lord John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatel
herault's two sons, whom Morton's violence ha(
aob. 16. driven out of the kingdom. Their common sus

ferings, and common intereit, induced both partie
to bury in oblivion the ancient discord, which ha
fubfifred between the houses of Hamilton and Doug
las. By Elizabeth's permission, they returned
a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, wh
had again recovered favour, inlifted on puttingtb
kingdom in a posture of defence. But Gray,. E
lenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted all. hi
measures. Some neceltary orders they prevente;
frnm being ilTued; others they rendered ineffeald
by the manner of execution ; and all of them wea
obeyed slowly, and with reluftance*.

W\OTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame tinr

big with another and more dangerous plot. H
had contrived to fcize the King, and to carry hi
by force into England. But the design was happ
lv discovered; and in order to avoid the puniib
ment his treachery merited, he departed withoi
aki~.g leave -.

Tnev re- M AN:W HILE the banished Lords hastened td
,":. i:o execution of their enterprize; and as their frie;

?lerand vassals were no;, ready to join them, they e

c,,.:'i tered Scotl.ird. W\hcrever thcv came, they we
s, ',-: weicomred as the deiv-erers of their country, a

.pcttv. 3;ic -t Mic'.. 335.

the most fervent prayers were addressed to Heaven BooKVII.
for the luccefs of their arms. Thley advanced, with-"-v -
out losing a moment, towards Stirling at the head 1585
of io,ooo men. The King, though he had as-
tirnbled an army superior in number, could not
venture to meet them in the field, with troops,
loose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at
best, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor
W\ras either the town or castle provided for a siege.
The gates, however, of both were shut, and the
nobls encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame nightNovem. 2.
ihey furprized the town, or more probably it was
betna\ed into their hands; and Arran, who had
undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save him-
ls by a precipitate flight. Next morning they in-
efted the castle, in which there were not provi-
Sons for twenty-four hours; and James was necef-
tated immediately to hearken to terms of accom-
odation. They were not so elated with- ilccefs,
s to urge extravagant demands, nor was the King
nwilling to make every reasonable conceftion.
)hey obtained a pardon in the mors ample form,
all the offences they had committed; the princi-
al forts in the kingdom were, by way offecurity,
nt into their hands; Crawford, Montrose, and
lonel Stewart were removed from the King's
refence; and a parliament was called, to eflablifh
anquillity in the nation *
THOUcH a great majority in this parliarrient con-A Parlia-
fted of the confederate nobles, and their adhe-me'h'lhd'
nts, they were far from discovering a vindictiveD c' to.
rit. Satisfied with procuring an aft, restoring
cm to their ancient honours and estates, and ra -
fying the pardon granted by the King, they seem-
\itling to forget all past errors in the adminifira-
,!l, and spared James the mortification of feeing
sIsiniifers branded with any public note of in-
m!. Arran, alone, deprived of all his honours,

* Cald 3. 795

VoL. II H itripped
i

-'r. i

' ,
T T .

BooKVIi.ftripped of his borrowed spoils, and declared an

-v'--jenemy to his country by public proclamation, funk
15 5 back into obscurity, and must, henceforth, be

mentioned by his primitive title of Captain James
Stewart. As he had been, during his unmerited
prosperity, the object of the hatred and indignation
of his countrymen, they beheld his fall without
pity, nor did all his sufferings mitigate their resent-
ment in the least degree.

Church THE Clergy were the only body of men, who
isalrs. obtained no redress of their grievances by this re-

volution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
affected to be confidered as guardians of the privi-
leges and discipline of the Church. In all their
manifestos they had declared their resolution to re-
store these, and by that popular pretence, had gain-
ed many friends. It was now natural to exped
some fruit of theie promises, and some returnsof
grati rude towards many of the most eminent preach-
ers who had suffered in their cause, and who de.
manded the repeal of the laws passed the preceding
year. The King, however, was resolute to main
tain these laws in full authority; and as the noble
were extremely solicitous not to disgust him,
insisting on any disagreeable request, the claims
the Church in this, as well as in many former i
stances, were sacrificed to the interest of the lai
The Ministers gave vent to their indignation in
pulpit, and their impatience under the difappoi
ment broke out in some expreflions, extremely di
relpectful even towards the King himself .
:E. THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, feltth

effects of their anger. The Provincial Synod
Fiie lummoned him to appear, and to anxver.f
his contempt of the decrees of former aflembli
in presuming to exercise the function of a Bilho

Spotfw. 343.

A:

And though he refused to acknowledge the jurif-BooKViX.
didion of the court, and appealed fiom it to the"-""'
|King, a fcntence of excommunication, equally in- 56.
decent and irregular, was pronounced against him.April ij.
Adiamon, with no less indecency, thundered his
nrchiepifcopal excommunication against Melvil, and
some other of his opponents.

Sonl after, a general assembly was held, in {which
t)e King, with some difficulty, obtained an act
permitting the name and office of a Bilhop frill to
continue in the Church. The power of the order,
hevever, was considerably retrenched. The ex-
ercife of discipline, and the inspection of the life
and doftrine of the Clergy, were committed to
Prefbyteries, in which Bishops should be allowed
rn) other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as
erpetual moderators. They themselves were de-
clared to be fubjest, in the fame manner as other
altors, to the jurisdiction of the General assembly.
nd as the difcuflion of the Archbilhop's appeal
ight have kindled unusual heats in the assembly,
tat affair was terminated by a compromise. He
enounced any claim of Supremacy over the Church,
nd promised to demean himself suitable to the cha-
acer of a Bishop, as described by St. Paul. The
fiembly, without examining the foundations of
he sentence of excommunication, declared that it
oiild be held of no effect, and restored him to all
he privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pro-
oi:ced. Notwithstanding the extraordinary ten-
ernefs ihewn for the honour of the fynod, and the
elicacy and refpesl, with which its jurifdidfion
as treated, several members were to zealous as to
rteft againit this decision *.

isTHl. court of Scotland was now filled with per--A leaie
::s lbo warmly attached to Elizabeth, that thel.ndJc tn

land cen-
cluded.
Cald. 3. S94. Spotfood., 346.

league
A TN r

BooKVII. league between the two kingdoms, which had been
'"'"/"'propostd last year, met with no interruption, but

Is6. frcm D'Efneval the French Envoy. James him
u'P 5. self first offered to renew the negotiation. Eliza-

beth did not susser such a favourable opportunity to
sip, anr.d instantly dispatched Randolph to conclude
a tr-:at-, which !he so much desired. The danger
to which the Protestant religion was exposed, by
the late combination of the Popi(h powers for its
destruction, and the necessity of a ftrid confederacy
among those, who had embraced the Reformation,
n order to obftrua their pernicious designs, were
mentioned as the foundation of the league. The
chief articles in it were, that both parties should
bind themselves to defend the Evangelic Religion;
that the league should be offeniive and defensive
Lgainft all, who shall endeavour to disturb theex-
ercife of religion in either kingdom; that if oneof
th: two parties be invaded, the other, notwithftand-
ing any former alliance, should not, diretly or in-
d:recti.v, assist the invader; that if England be in-
vadtd in any part remote from Scotland, James
fiould aiift the Queen with 2000 horse, and 5ooo
foot; that if the enemy landed or approached within!
fixtv miles of Scotland, the King should take the
feld with his v hole forces, in the fame manner, as
he xould do in defence of his own kingdom. E!-
zabeth, in return, undertook to act in defenceof
Scotland, if it should be invaded. At the fame
time, she affuredrthe King that no frep should be
taken, -which might derogate in an- degree from

'r:fw. i his pre:enfions to the English Crown *. Elizabeth
;' '* exprefied great satisfaction \ ith a treaty, which rer-

dered Scr-land an useful ally, inflead of a dange-
r;us -r.-ghbour, a:nd afforded her a degree offec!-
rit)0 on that fide, v.hich all her ancef;trs had aimned

. i,

,t, lmt.none of them had been able to obtain. BooK VT.
Zeal for religion, together with the blefings of'-'~'
eace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a 'iS
considerable period, had so far abated the violence
of national antipathy, .that the King's conduc was
universally acceptable to his own people *.

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time,
xpoded James to much and deserved censure. This
lan was deeply engaged in the conspiracy against
he life of the King his father. Both Morton and
innv one of his own servants, who suffered for that
rime, had accused him of being present at the mur-
ier. He had escaped punishment by flying into
England, and James had often required Elizabeth
o deliver up a person so unworthy of her protec-
ion. He now obtained a license, from the King
imfelf, to return into Scotland, and after under-
ing a mock trial, calculated to conceal rather
han to detect his guilt, he was not only taken into
ivour by the King, but sent back to the court of
ngland, with the honourable charadter of his am-
aF-dor. James was now of such an age, that his
outh and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse
r this indecent tranfaftion. It muff be irnputed
the excessive facility of his temper, which often
d him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of
is own dignity and reputation .
NOT long after, the inconsiderate affeciion ofR;faofBa-
eEnglilh Catholics towards Mary, and theirbington's
placable resentment against Elizabeth, gave rifec°nPi'"cY
a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the oneizbth
een, left an indelible stain on the reputation of
e other, and presented a fpetlacle to Europe, of

* C:md. 513. f See Append. No. XII. t Spotfw.
. Cald. 3. 917.

A o - ^ T . XT 7_
i

which
H 3

BooKsVll.which there had hitherto been no example in the
'~.-'~ hiftorv of man.kind.

!5 6" DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson,

priefis educated in the seminary at Rheims, had
adopted an extravagant and enthusiastic notion, thai
the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dictated
immediately by the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion
they instilled into Savage, an officer in the Spanilh
.pril 26. army, noted for his furious zeal, and daring cou

rage; and persuaded him that no service could be
so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life
of an excommunicated Heretic. Savage, eager to
obtain the Crown of martyrdom, bound himself,
by a solemn vow to kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a
trafficking priest, had at that time come overto
Paris, and solicited Mendoza the Spanish ambaf-
fador there, t9 procure an invasion of England,
while the affairs of the league were so prosperous,
and the kingdom left naked by fending so manyol
the Queen's best troops into the Netherlands. Pagel
and the Er.glilh exiles demonstrated the fruitless
ness of such an attempt, unless Elizabeth were sirs
cut of, or the invaders secured of a powerful co,
currenee on their landing. If it could be hopd
that either of these events would happen, effectmul
May 15. aid was promised; and in the mean time Ballard

was sent back to renew his intrigues.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Ba.

bir.gon, a young gentleman in Derbyshire, ofh
plentiful fortune, and many amiable qualities, wh(
having contracted, during his residence in France
a familiarity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, ha
been recommended by him to the Queen of Scots
He conculrred with Paget in confidering the deatl
of Elizabeth as a neceilary preliminar- to any inva
fian. Eallardc gave him hopes that an end woull
fbon be put to her dass, and imparted to himSa
vage's vow, who w as now in Lon.don waiting li

an opportunity to strike the blow. ButBabingtonBooKVIt.
thought the attempt of too much importance, to'-'5
redv on a single hand for the execution of it, and '156.
rop"ofed that five resolute gentlemen should be join-
red ith Savage in an enterprize, the success of
which was the foundation of all their hopes. He
cffered to find out persons willing to undertake the
f Xrvice, whose honour, secrecy, and courage, they
might safely trust. He accordingly opened the
matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury,
Charles Tinley, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Hlenrv Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all
of them, except Polly, whose bustling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of good
families, united together in the bonds of private
friendlhip, strengthened by the more powerful tie
of religious zeal. Many consultations were held;June.
their plan of operations was at last fettled; and their
different parts afligned. Babington himself wasThe
appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots; Salifburyfcheme of
with some others, undertook to excite several coun-fpirators
ties to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the
mod dangerous and important service of all, fell to
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. And
Ib totally had their bigotted prejudices extinguished
the principles of honour, and the sentiments ofhu-
manity fuiitable to their rank, that without scruple
or compuncion, they undertook an ation, which
is viewed with horror, even when committed by
the meanest and most profligate of mankind. This
attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no less
honourable than it \ as desperate, and in order to
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a picture
drawn containing the portraits of the fix allalfins,
with that of Babington in the middle, and a motto
intimating that they were jointly embarked in tome
hazardous design.

H 4

Boo.V!I. Ti;- conl-pirato;s, as appears by this wanton and
-'-"r"impndent initanct: of vanity, seem to have thought
Discover- a discover) fcairce poilihle, and neither diftlufted the
cd hv fidelity of their companions, nor doubted the fuc-
\\ al;i:.g- cels of their undcrtaling. Bult while they believed
hain. that their machinations were carried on with the

most profound and impenetrable secrecy, every ftep
they took was fully known to Walsingham. Polly
was one of his spies, and had entered into the con.
fpiracy sith no other design than to betray hisaffo-
ciatcs. Gilbert Gifford, too, having been sent
over to England to quicken the motions of the con.
fpirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
gave him flire intelligence of all their projccts. That
vigilant minister immediately imparted the disco-
verics which he had made to Elizabeth and with-
nut communicating the matter to any other of the
Connfellors, they agreed, in order to understand
the piot more perfectly, to wait till it was ripened
into some form, and brought near the point ofexe-
cution.

T;ev ar- AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and cri-
fei7edl andmiiral to expocf her own life, and to tempt Provi-
pu"ni l'c dence any farther. Ballard, the prime mover in the

-gu5 4 whole confpirac- , was arretced. His associates,

difc.ncertcd anid firuck with aftoniihment, endea-
voured to save themselves by flight, But, withina
few da s, all (,f them, except Windsor, were seized
in diffircn: pl:icesof the kingdom, and committed
to the Tower. Though they had. undertaken the
part, the- \x anted the firm and determined fpiritol
alTaiTins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, dif
covered all they k;e;w. The indignation of the
people, andi their impatience to revenge flch anex-
ecrable ccmbination aga'nlt the life of their Sove-
Sn:. .-' reign, haffened their trial, and all (f them suffered

the death of traitors'.

Canmd. 5:;. SateTTri.ls, Vci. 1. I1o.

THIS

TF1 s far Elizabeth's conduct may be pronnunc-, onnox VI
cdl blo)t prudent and laudable, nor can she be ac-''--J
ctlfcd of violating any law of humianity, or oftak- 581'
ig any precautions beyond what were ncceflary
for her own fifety. But a tragical fecne followed,
gith regard to which, posterity will paRs a very dif-
fcrcnlt judgment.

'THi: frantic zeal of a few rash young men ac-Manry is
counts fufficicntly for all the wild and wicked de-,cr.l;,rd ,f
gins which they had formed. But this was not thlch' i":l
ight, in which Elizabeth and her Miniftrs c!rlc''','
o place the conspiracy. They represented Babing- tlhc ,-,,
on and his a;fficiates to be inftrumcnts employed Ipilrlcy.
v the Qucen of Scots, the real though fecrct alu-
Ihlr of so many attempts against tihe life of Eliza-
bthl, and the peace of her kingdoms. They pro-
ucccl letters, which they ascribed to her, in fLip-
ort of this charge. Tlefe, as they gave out, had
oine into their lands, by the following Jingiilar,
,nd mysterious method of conveyance. Giflbrd,
rnhis return into England, had becn intrufltd by
onCe of the exiles with letters to M;ry ; but in or-
cr to make a trial of his fidelity or addrics, they
'erc o-,ly blank papersmade up in that form. Thele
ing farely delivered by him, he was afterwards
mployed without farther i'cruplc. Walfinghamn
aving found means to gain this man, he, by his
crmillion, and the connivance of Paulet, bribed a
radelfnan in the ilnighbourliood of Chartiv, wli-
hcr Mary had been conveyed, who (lcpollted the
:cis in, a hole in the wall of the castle, covered
ith a loo'se stone. Thence tihey were taken by the
.~': , and in the fame manner, her anfwvers rc-
;r'led. All these were carried to Wallingham,
pc;i(d biy him, decyphcred, fialed again so dIcxtc-
rin\ that the fnrut could not be perceived, and
bn:; tranifnirtcd to the pcrtlo:s to iwom they were
trccted. Two letters to B .Ehintion, with :.'cral
M cicndoz;a, Pager, Enli ;-ld, a;d the E: .lifl

fgi.ives,

BoovVTI.fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It was
'- "-'given out that in these letters Mary approved of the

15s6. conspiracy, and even of the affaflination; that he

directed them to proceed with the utmost circum.
fpection, and not to take arms till foreign'auxilia-
ries were ready to join them ; that fle recommend.
ed the Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the
young Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons
to conduct and to add reputation to their entel-
prize; that ihe advised them, ifpoffible, to excite
at the fame time some commotion in Ireland; and
above all, besought them to concert with care the
means of her escape, suggesting to them several ex-
pedien-ts for that purpose.

The in- A.L theie circumstances were opened at the trial
dignaion of the conspirators. And while the nation was u!-
of the
Englifi der the influence of those terrors which the affocia-
againt hertion had raised, and the late danger had augmented,
on that they were believed without hesitation or enquiry
account, and spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for hel

religion was well known ; and in that age, exam-
ples of the violent and sanguinary spirit whichit
inspired, were numerous. All the cabals againfl
the peace of the kingdom for many years had been
carried on in her name; and it now appears evi-
dently, said the Englilh, that the safety of the one
Queen is incompatible with that of the other. Why
then, added they, should the tranquillity of Eng-
land be sacrificed for the fake of a stranger ? WhyI
is a life ii" dear to the nation exposed to the repeat,
ed assaults of an exasperated rival ? The cafe sup
posed in the association, has now happened, thela
cred perfln of our Sovereign has been threatened
and why fhou! d not an injured people execute tha

.'"r've t :itru revenge, which they had vowed ?
proceed to NO fc'-inments could be more agreeable tha

urtnotth'efe to EI;', ab£eh and her Ministers. They themr
xtcir-'- felye
A-._

,feves had at first propagated them among theBooKVII.
people, and they now served both as an apology,- -'
and a motive for their proceeding to fiuch extremi- 156
ties against the Scottish Queen, as they had long
meditated. The more injuries Elizabeth heaped
on Mary, the more fle feared and hated that un-
happy Queen, and came at last to be persuaded
that there could be no other security for her
own life, but the death of her rival. Burleigh and
Walfi'gham had promoted so zealously all her mea-
filres with regard to Scottish affairs; and had at-
ed, with so little reserve, in opposition to Mary,
that they had reason to dread the mbft violent ec-
sets of her resentment, if ever Ihe ihould mo.int
the throne of En.gland; and therefore they endea-.
voured to hinder an event so fatal to themfielves,
by confirming their Mistress's fear and hatred of
the Scottish Queen.

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unufiiall-Ierdo-
vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her i-e,- sic-,
norant of the discovery of the confpiracv. Sir.7

;.

Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with
whiclh fie was loaded as acceflary to that crime;
.<nd he furprized her with the account, jift as lhe
had got on horseback to ride out along with her
Ikeepers. She was struck with aftonihmlent, and
x;ould have returned to her apartment, but she
vas not permitted; and in her absence, her pri-
vate closet was broke open, her cabinet and pa-
pers were seized, fealed, and sent up to Court.
Her principal domeffics, too, were arrested, and
co.mmitted to differert keepers. Naulc and Curle,
her two tecrctaries, the one a liaive of France,
the otha f. Scotland, were carried prilb:cers to
Lou.don. All the money in her custody, amo;-:-t-
i:g to little more than 2c0o pounds, was ficureci
And after leading her about, for iome days, from

o:.

I25

Boo VII.one gentleman's house to another, she was con.
'- -veved to Foh'eri.gav, a strong castle in Northamp.

IS6
' tonfhire .

Dcihbe- No farther evidence could now be expe&ed a-
rate ccn- gainft Mlary, and nothing remained but to decide
cerming -hat should be her fate. \Vith reg.rd to this, E-
t:'.d 'of lizabeth and thole Miniffers in whom she chiefly
proceed- confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but
ing. there was still great variety of sentiments. among

her other Coun;ellors. Some thought it sufficient
to difmiis all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
under filch close reftrai:!t, as would cut off all pof
Jbility of corresponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her constitution, broken by long
confinement, and her spirit dejected with so man'
cares, could not long ftipport such an additional
load, the Queen and nation would soon be deliver-
cd from all their fears. But though it might be
easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impofi-
ble to diminilh the reverence which the Roman Ca-
tholics had for her name, or to extinguiifh thecom-
paeion with xwhich they viewed her sufferings;
while these continued, insurrections and invasions
would never be wanting for her relief, and the on-
ly effect of any new rigour would be to render
them more frequent and dangerous. For this rea-
son the expedient was rejecled.

Deter- A PUBLIc-and legal trial, though the most in-
neIs o exampled, was judged the most unexceptionable

tr her ,r
pF'btickly method of proceeding, and it had, at the fame

time, a femnblance ofjuftice, accompanied with an
air of dignity. It was in vain to search the an-
cient records, for any statute or precedent, to jul-
tify such an uncommon ftep, as the trial of a so-
reign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom
in arms, bu: had fled thither for refuge. The

C..rd. 517.

proceedinlgs

proceedings against her were founded on the atBooKVII.
oflatc Parliament, and by applying it in this man-'"
ner, the intention of thoue who had framed that '586
severe fratutte became more apparent *.

ElIZABETH resolved that no circumiftance of
pomp or solemnity lhould be wanting, \s hich could
rc!der this tranfaftion such as became the dignity
of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
comnillion under the great feal, forty persons, the
most illuitrious in the kingdom, by their birth or
offices, together with five of the judges, to hear
and decide this great cause. Many difficulties were .
farted by the lawyers, about the name and title
by which Mary fmould be arraigned; and while
the elfentia.ls ofjuftice were so grotly violated, the
empty forms of it were the objects of their care.
hey at length agreed that she Lhould be ftiled,
Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King
of Scots, commonly called Queen of Scots, and
D; Dowager of France +."
AFTER the many indignities which she had
atel, suffered, Mary could no longer doubt but
hat her deftrudion was determinel. Sihe expect-
d, every moment, to end her days by poifun,
rby some of those secret means, usually employ-
d againt captive Princes. And left the malice of
ier enemies, at the fame time that it deprived hce
flife, Ihould endcavour likerwilf to blast her re-
ctation, flie wrote to the Duke of Guise, and
indicated herself, in the strongest terms, froim
le imputation of encouraging or of being ac-
:llr'! to the confpilacy for afliainatiing Eliza-
tlli t. In the solitude of her priibn, the strange
rl)iii n11 of bringing her to a piblic trial had not

(amild. iq5 loohnr: II;. 11 , . S:r-pe, t. .6z.
. b, 2. 3j.

reached

i:oo: V!I. reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing f0
,-'"~ unprecedented, and so repugnant to regal Maie.

r6' sty, once enter into her thoughts.

Th e tr'i . ON

0 e eleventh of Odcober, the commififoners

.' F .rhe- appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay.
r -"say. Next morning they delivered a letter from her to

Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproachesand
accuilations, she informed her, that regard to her
own safety had, at last, rendered it necefary to
make a public enquiry into her conduct, and there.
fore required her, as she had lived so long under
the protecsion of the laws of England, to submit
now to the trial, which they ordained to be taken
x.-re- of her crimes. Mary, though furprized at this

- ar mefage, was neither appalled at the danger, nor
^ unm-indful of her own dignity. She protested, in

the molf folernn manner, that she was innocent of
the crime laid to her charge, and had never coun.
tenanced any attempt against the life of the Queen
of England; but, at the fame time, refused to ac-
knowledge the jurifdiAion of her commiffionera

I came into the kingdom," said ihe, " an inde.
"pendent Sovereign, to implorthe tQeen'saflif-

tance, not to subjeCt myself to her authority,

" Nor is my spirit so broken by its pat misfor-
" tunes, or to intimidated by prefeht dangers, a

to stoop to any thing unbecoming the Majefy
" f a crowned head, or that will disgrace thean-

ceftors from i horn I am descended, and the son
to whom I shall leave mv throne. If I must be

"tried, Princes alone can be my Peers. The
"O Queen of England's subjects, however noble
"their birth rmay be, are of a rank inferiorto
" mine. Ever since my arrival in this kingdom,

I have been cofin!:d as a prisoner. Its laws ne-
ver afforded me an- protection. Let them not

" ::o.' be pervctled, in order to take away my

c i
I_ .

u r _3 U - I b sl IN u. 129

THE commiflioners employed arguments and in-Boo KVII.
treaties to overcome Mary's resolution. They e-'--
ven threatened to proceed according to the forms 1556.
of law, and to pass sentence against her on account
of her contumacy in refusing to plead; she persist-
ed, however, for two days to decline theirjurif-
dicion. An argument urged by Hatton, the Vice-
Chamberlain, at last prevailed. He told her, that
by avoiding a trial, she injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of
etting her innocence in a clear light; and that no-
thing would be more agreeable to them, or more
acceptable to the Queen their Mistress, than to be
convinced, by undoubted evidence, that she had
been unjustly loaded with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible should impofeConfents
on the unwary Queen, or that flle, unaiifted, at however
that time, by any fiiend or counsellor, flould nott do so.
be able to detec and elude all the artifices of E-
lizabeth's ablest minifiers. In a lituation equally
melancholy, and under circumstances nearly fimi-
ar, her Grandson, Charles I. refused, with the ut-
mo!t firmness, to acknowledge the usurped jurif-
dition of the High Court of Justice and pofte-
ity has approved his conduct, as suitable to the
dignity of a King. If Mary was lets constant in
er resolution, it must be imputed solely to her
nxious desire of vindicating her own honour.
AT her appearance before the Judges, whooa. ,4.
ere feated in the great hall of the castle, where
hey received her with much ceremony, she took
care to protest, that by condescending to hear and
o give an answer to the accusations, \hich should
beoftered against her, the neither acknowledged
hie ljrildidtion of the court, nor admitted of the
n!ildity in tijfice of thote acts, by which they pre-
1'cdcd to trv her.

Triln

BsOm.VI-. The Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, e

'--~ddeavoured to vinedicate the authority of thecouri
Tb.ccu- THEN the Queen's Attorney and Solicitoi
fiioi,; - pened the charge against her, with all the circu
glirn her. stances of the late conspiracy. Copies of hei

ters to Me:ndoza, Babington, Englefield and-
get were produced. Babington's confeflion, tho
of Ballard, Savage, and the other conspirators, t
gether with the declarations of Naue and Cu
her secretaries, were read, and the whole rang
in the moit specious order, which the art of '
lawyers could devise, and heightened by ev1
colour their eloquence could add. '

MIx.RY listened to their harangues attentivel

and without emotion. But at the mention oft
Earl of Arundel's name, who was then confisil
in the Tower, on f.frpicion of being acceffaryi.
the ccnfpiracv, the broke out into this tenderiai
generous exclamation: "Alas! how much h'

the noble house of Howard suffered sor-i|

"fake!" -

Herde- \\-HEN the Queen's council had finished, Mq
'DC'c fRood up, and with great magnanimity, and eq}

presence of mind, began her defence. Shebew
ed the unhappiness of her owrfituation, .that,'a
ter a captivity of nineteen y'ears, during which
had ftufered treatment no less cruel than unmen
ed, ihe was at last loaded with an accufati
\v'hich tended not only to rob her of her right
f:,ccefion, and to deprive her of life itself, but
tra:;lIit her name xwith infamy to future ag]
That, \.ithout' regarding the sacred rights of so!
rcint'', she was now fiubjeted to laws frame
against private persons; though an anointed Quee
commanded to appear before the tribunal of fu
iects; and, liKe a common criminal, her hono0
exposed to th!e petulant tongues of lawyers, ci
fable of tvrefting her words, and of mifreprefenf

inig

a, her actions: That, even in this difhonourableBooKVll.
tuation, fle was denied the privileges usually '---
ranted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her '586'
iwn defence, without the presence of any friend
kith whom to advise, without the aid of council,
in without the use of her own papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in
he accusation. She absolutely denied any corref-
n:;dence with Babington: The name of Ballard
'as not so much as known to her: Copies only of
her pretended letters to them were produced:
shongh nothing lels than her hand-writing or sub-
cnption was sufficient to convit her of such an
}dious crime: No proof could be brought that
he letters were delivered into her hands, or that
.ny answer was returned by her direction: The
onfeffions of wretches condemned and executed
r such a detestable action, were of little weight;
ar or hope might extort from them many
ings inconsistent with truth, nr ought the ho-
ourof a Qgeen to be stained by such vile tefti-
[ony. The declaration of her Secretaries was
ot more conclusive: promises and threats might
afily overcome the resolution of two strangers;
norder to screen themselves, they might throw
he blame on her; but they could discover nothing
o her prejudice, without violating, in the first
lace, their oath of fidelity; and their perjury,
one instance, rendered them unworthy of cre-
it in another: The letters to the Spanilh ambaf-
ador were either nothing more than copies, or
ontained only what was perfetly innocent: " I
have often," continued fie, " made such effortr
' for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural to
a human creature. And convinced, by the fad
experience of so many years, that it was vain to
expect it from the ILlltiCC or generosity of the
Q(een of England, I have frequently solicited
VoL. II. I " flretig

rr - t - - - .

BoOKX'I." foreign Princes, and called on all my friends to

ó--,- " employ their whole interest for my relief. I
'86. " have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the

English Catholics some mitigation of the rigour
with which they are now treated; and if I could

"hope, by my death, to deliver them from op
"pre!ffon, I am willing to die for their fake. [

wish, however, to imitate the example of Esther,
" not of Judith, and would rather make intercef-

sion for my people, than shed the blood of the
" meanest creature, in order to save them. I have

often checked the intemperate zeal of my ad-
"herents, when either the severity of their own

persecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of
' injuries which I have endured, were apt to pre-
" cipitate them into violent councils. I haveeven

warned the Qeen of dangers to which these

"harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn
" out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the
"prospect of a Crown is not so inviting, that I
" hould ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I

am no ifranger to the feelings of humanity,
"nor unacquainted with the duties of religion,

and abhor the detestable crime of aflaffination,
" as equally repugnant to both. And, if everI

have given consent by my words, or even by
" my thoughts, to any attempt against the life of

the Queen of England, far from declining the
judgment of men, I shall not even pray for the
" mercy of God .

Two different days did Mary appear before the

judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-
tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered
with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

Sentence THE commififoners, by Elizabeth's express
gainft command, adjourned, without pronouncing any
her.
Oaob. 2
.

Camd. 520, &c.

sentence,

sentence, to the. Star Chamber in Weftmihfter.Bo'oKVIl.
1xhel aluiembled in that place, Naue and Curie'--"
were brought into court, and confirmed their for- 1586.
mer declaration upon oath. And after reviewing
their whole proceedings, the commilioners una-
nirnoufly declared Mary '* To be aeceffary to Ba-
- bington's conspiracy, and to have imagined di-
, verse matters, tending to the hurt, death, and
, deitrution of Elizabeth, contrary to the express
, words of the statute, made for the security of
| the Queen's life*."

IT is no easy matter to determine whether theirregula-

iniuftice in appointing this trial, or the irregulari-rit"1e
tv in conducing it, were greatet and most sla-te tria
grant. By what right did Elizabeth claim autho-
rity over an independent Queen? Was Mary
bound to comply with the laws of a foreign king-
dom? How could the subjects of another Pnnce
become her judges? Or if such an insult on royal-
tv were allowed, ought not the common forms
ofjuftice to 'have been observed ? If the testimony
of Babington and his associates was so explicit,
vhvy did not Elizabeth spare them for a few weeks,
and by confronting them with Mary, overwhrelhn
her with the full conviction of her crimes ? Naue
and Curle were both alive, wherefore did not.they
appear at Fotheringay, and for what reabon were
they produced in the Star-Chamber,. where Mary
was not present to hear what they deposed? Was
this suspicious evidence enough to condemn a'
Queen? Ought the meanest criminal to have
been found guilty, upon such feeble.and inconclu-
fie proofs ?
IT was not, however, on tie evidence produ-
cd at her trial, that the sentence againf Mary

* Carnd. 525.

BooKsVI.was founded. That served as a pretence to jufli-
'- fy, but was not the cause of the violent iteps ta.

1586. ken by Elizabeth and her Ministers towards he

deftru&ion; and was employed to give some ap
pearance ofjuftice, to what was the offspring o
jealousy and fear. And the nation, blinded with
resentment against Mary, and solicitous to secure
the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defects in the proof, but grasped
at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had been
irrefragable demonstrations.

The par- THE parliament met a few days after fentenc
liament was pronounced. against Mary. In that illuftrioui
the fe- alfembly more temper and discernment, than are
tence, to be found among. the people, might have beer

expected. Both Lords and Commons, however,
were equally under the dominion of popular pre.
judices and palTions, and the fame excesses ol
zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation, arc
apparent in all their proceedings. They entered
with impatience upon an enquiry into the confpi.
racy, and the dangers which threatened the Queen'!
life, and the peace of the kingdom. All the
papers, which had been produced at Fotheringay,
were laid before them. And after many vio
lent invectives against the Queen of Scots, bod
houses, unanimously, ratified the proceeding!
of the commiflioners by whom she had been tried,
·and declared the sentence against her to bejuf

zndde- and well founded. Not satisfied with this, the)
mand the presented a joint address to the Queen, beseech
execution J . '
o ir. ing her, as she regarded her own safety, the pre

servation of the Protestant religion, the welfar
and wishes of her people, to publish the sentence
and without farther delay to infitt on a rival, n
less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punifhmen
which she had merited by so many crimes. Th!

requef

request, diAated by fears unworthy of that greatBooKVII.
ATeembly, was enforced by reasons still moreun--"'
worthy. They were drawn not fromjuftice, but l586.
from conveniency. The most rigorousconfinement,
i; was pretended, could lot curb Mary's intri-
guing spirit; her address was found, by long expe-
rience, to be an overmatch .for the vigilance and
i.-aloufy of all her keepers: The severest penal laws
could not restrain her adherents, who, while they
believed her person to be sacred, would despise
any danger to which themselves alone were ex-
poled: Several foreign Princes were ready to fe-
cond their attempts, and waited only a proper op-
portunity for invading the kingdom, and asserting
the Scottish Queen's title to the Crown. Her life,
for these reasons, was incompatible with Eliza-
beth's safety; and if she were spared out of a false
clemency, the Queen's person, the religion and
liberties of the kingdom, could not be one mo-
ment secure. Necessity required that she should
be sacrificed in order' to preserve there; and to
prove this sacrifice to be no less just than necef-
fary, feverat examples in history were produced,
and many texts of scripture quoted, but both the
one and the other were misapplied, and distorted
from their true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptableEliza-

to Elizabeth than an address in this strain. It ex-beth's dif-
tricated her out of a situation, extremely embarraf-fi"nuati
sing; and, without depriving her of the power of
sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival withlefs
appearance of blame. If she chore the former, the
whole honour would redound to her own clemency.
If she determined on the latter, whatever was rigo-
rous might now seem to be extorted by the folici-
tations of her people, rather than to flow from her
own inclination. Her answer, however, was in a

I 3 stile,

BoogVIl.was founded. That fersved as a pretence to julli.
'-" fy, but was not the cause of the violent steps ta.

'586. ken by Elizabeth and her Ministers towards her

deitruction; and was employed to give some ap
pearance ofjuftice, to what was the offspringof
jealousy and fear. And the nation, blinded with
resentment against Mary, and solicitous to secure
the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defects in the proof, but grasped
at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had been
irrefragable demonitrations.

The par- THE parliament met a few days after fenter.ce
liament r as pronounced, against Mary. In that illustrious
the fen- assembly more temper and discernment, than are
tence, to be found among. the people, might have been

expected. Both Lords and Commons, however,
were equally under the dominion of popular pre-
judices and passions, and the fame excesses of
zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are
apparent in all their proceedings. They entered
with impatience upon an enquiry into the confpi.
racy, and the dangers which threatened the Queen's
life, and the peace of the kingdom. All the
papers, which had been produced at Fotheringav,
were laid before them. And after many vio
lent invectives against the Queen of Scots, both
houses, unanimously, ratified the proceedings
of the commiflioners by whom she had been tried,
·and declared the sentence against her to bejult

andde- and well founded. Not satisfied with this, the'
etnd the presented a joint address to the Queen, beseech

. ing her, as she regarded her own safety, the pre

servation of the Protestant religion, the welfar
and wishes of her people, to publish the sentence
and without farther delay to inflit on a rival, na
less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punifhmei
which she had merited by so many crimes. Thi

requefl

request, ditated by fears unworthy of that greatBooKVI.
Aifembly, was enforced by reasons still more un-'-v- '
worthy. They were drawn not from justice, but 1586.
from conveniency. The most rigorousconfinement,
it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intri-
guing spirit; her address was found, by long expe-
rience, to be an overmatch for the vigilance and
i-aloufy of all her keepers: The severest penal laws
could not restrain her adherents, who, while they
believed her person to be sacred, would despise
any danger to which themselves alone were ex-
poled: Several foreign Princes were ready to fe-
cond their attempts, and waited only a proper op-
portunity for invading the kingdom, and aflerting
the Scottish Qeen's title to the Crown. Her life,
for there reasons, was incompatible with Eliza-
beth's safety; and if she were spared out of a false
clemency, the Queen's person, the religion and
liberties of the kingdom, could not be one mo-
ment secure. Necessity required that she should
be sacrificed in order' to preserve there; and to
prove this sacrifice to be no less just than necef-
fary, feverat examples in history were produced,
and many texts of scripture quoted, but both the
one and the other were misapplied, and distorted
from their true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptableEliza-

to Elizabeth than an address in this strain. It ex-beth's dif-
tricated her out of a situation, extremely embarra-filat
sing; and, without depriving her of the power of'
sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with lets
appearance of blame. If the chore the former, the
whole honour would redound to her own clemency.
If she determined on the latter, whatever was rigo-
rous might now seem to be extorted by the folici-
tations of her people, rather than to flow from her
own inclination. Her answer, however, was in a

I 3 itile,

BouKoVI.ftilee, which she often used, ambiguous and evasive,

-'""'under the appearance of openness and candor; full
I'b6' of such profeflions'of regard for her people, as ferv-

ed to heighten their loyalty ; of such complaintsof
Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated to excite
their indignation; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep
alive their fears. In the end, she besought them
to save her the infamy and the pain of deliveringup
a Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment;
and to confider whether it might not flill be pofiible
to provide for the public security, without forcing
her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily un-

derflood. The Lords and Commons renewed their
former request, with additional importunity, which
was far from being either unexpeted, or offensive.
Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
and having obtainea such a public fanftion of her
proceedings, there was no longer any reason for
protracing this scene of dissimulation; there was
even some danger that her feigned difficulties might
at last be treated as real ones; hfe therefore ad-
journed the parliament, and reserved in her own
hands the sole disposal of her rival's fate *.

France in- ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceed-
terpofes ings against Mary with aftonifhinerit and horror;
beebrinf and even Henry III. notv ithftanding his known
behais 1 of

0 II
Iary. aversion to the haufe of Guise, was obliged to in-

terpofe in her behalf, and to appear in defence of
the cbmmon rights cf royalty. Aubefpine his refi-
denr-ambalTador, and Bellievere who was sent with
an -exraordinary.cornmiffion to the fame purpose,
interceded for Mary with great appearance of

* Ca.rmd. 5zó. D'Eves, 375.

warmth.

OF SCOTLAND. i37

warmth. They employed all the arguments whichBooKVll.
the cause naturally suggested; they pleaded from'---
jufice, from generosity, and humanity; they inter-NO 5S2
mingled reproaches and threats. But to all these
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and hav-
ing received tome intimation of Henry's real un-
concern about the fate of the Scottish Queen, and
knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, fle
trusted, that there loud remonstrances would be
followed by no violent resentment*.

SHE paid no greater regard to the folicitationsJamnes en-
of the Scottish King, which, as they were urgeddeavours

·

to save his

|ith more .sincerity, merited more attention.mother's
Though her commissioners had been extremely life.
carefl to sooth James, by publishing a declaration
that their sentence against Mary did, in no degree,
erogate from his honour, or invalidate any title
hich he formerly poffefled; he beheld the indig-
ri:ies to which his Mother had lren exposed with
lialconcern, and with the sentiments which be-
ame a King. The Pride of the Scottish nation
asrouzed, by the insults offered to the blood of
heir Monarchs, and called upon him to employ
he most vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to
evenge the Qieen's death.
AT first, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth
could venture upon an acfion so unprecedented,
'hich tended so visibly to render the persons of
rinces less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
hich degraded the regal dignity, of which, at
ther times, she was so remarkably jealous. But
sfoon as the extraordinary steps which she took
licovered her intention, he dispatched Sir Wil-

' Camd. 531.

14 a

liam
I 4

Boo:KVl liam Keith to London; who, together withDoug.
^"'-'J'las his ambafiador in ordinary, remonstrated, in

586. the strongest terms, agai:ft the injury done to an

independent Queen, in fubjecaing her to be tried
like a private person, and by laws to which she
owed no obedience; and besought Elizabeth not to
add to this injury, by suffering a sentence unjust
in itself, as well as dishonourable to the King of
Scots, to be put in execution*.

ELIZABETH returning no anfwerto theferemon.

itrances of his ambassador, James wrote to her with
his own hand, complaining in the bitterest terms
of her conduct, not without. threats that both his
duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce
her friendship, and to act as became a son when
called to revenge his mother's wrongst. At the
fame time he assembled the nobles, who promised
to sand by him in so good a cause. Heappointed
ambassadors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in
order to implore the aid of there courts; and took
other steps towards executing his threats with vi.
gour. The high strain of his letter enraged Elia-
beth to such a degree, that she was ready to difmifi
his ambassadors without any reply. But his prepa-
rations alarmed and embarrassed her Ministers, and
at their intreary she returned a soft and evasive an-
fwer, promising to liften to any overture from the
King, that tended to his mother's safety; and to
suspend the execution of the sentence, till thear-
rival of new ambassadors from Scotland X.

* See Appendix, No. XIII.
t Birch. Mem. 1. 52.
t Spotvood, 25x. Cald. 4, 5.

MEANWHILE

MEANWHILE, she commanded the sentence a-BooKVII.
gainft Mary to be published, and forgot not to in-'-''
form the people, that this was extorted from her De'cem.6.
by the repeated intreaties of both houses of parlia-The fen-
ment. At the fame time, she dispatched Lordtencea-
Blickhurft and Beale to acquaint Mary with thega'nftMa-
sentence, and how importunately the nation de-l ruedb
manded the execution of it; and, though the had
not hitherto yielded to these solicitations, she ad-
vised her to prepare for an event, which might be-
come neceflary for securing the Protestant religion,
as well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary
received the meffege not only without symptoms
of fear, but with expressions of triumph. " No

wonder, said (he, the English should now thirit
" for the blood of a foreign Prince, they have often

offered violence to their own Monarchs. But
"after so many sufferings, death comes to me as

a welcome deliverer. I'am proud to think that
, my life is esteemed of importance to the Catholic
"religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing
"to die ."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, MaryShe is
was stripped of every remaining mark of royalty. treated

with the

The canopy of itate in her apartment was pulled utmost H-
down; Paulet entered her chamber, and approach-gour.
ed her person without any ceremony; and even ap-
peared covered in her presence. Shocked with
these indignities, and offended at this gross famili-
arity, to which she had never been accustomed,
Mary once more complained to Elizabeth; and at
the fame time, as her last request, intreated that
bhe would permit her servants to carry her dead
body into France, to be laid among her ancestors,
in hallowed ground; that some of her domestics
might be present at her death, to bear witness of

Cand. 528. Jcbb, 291.

1~' ~ her

BooVII. her innocence, and firm adherence to the Catholi:

'--" faith; that all her servants might be fufferedto

leave the kingdom, and to enjoy those small lega-
cies, which she should bestow on them, as tefti.
monies of her affection; and that, in the mean
time, her almoner, or some other Catholic Priest
might be allowed to attend her, and to aiift herin
preparing for an eternal world. She besought her
in the name of Jesus, by the foul and memory of
Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their
near consanguinity, and the royal dignity with which
they were both invested, to gratify her in thele
particulars, and to indulge her so far as to signify
her compliance by a letter under her own hand.
tWhether Mary's letter was ever delivered to Eliza-
beth is uncertain. No answer was returned, and
no regard paid to her requests. She was offered a
Proteflant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them
(he rejeted, and without any clergyman to direct
her devotions, she prepared, in great tranquillity,
for the approach of death, which she now believed
to be at no great distance *.

1587. JAMES, without lofinga moment, fentnew am-

James re- batadors to London. These were the mafterof
ew hi Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In order to remove
folicita- ry
osin her Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Mafler
behalf. would become bound that no conspiracy fhouldbe
Janoaryi. undertaken against her person, or the peace of the

kingdom, with Mary's content; and for the faith-
ful performance of this, would deliver some of the
most considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hosta-
ges. If this were not thought sufficient, they pro-
posed that Mary should resign all her rights and
pretensions to her ion, from whom nothing inju-
rious to the Protestant religion, or inconsistent with

* Ca..d 5S. Jebb, 2. 295.

Elizabt h':
rtZu~

Elizabeth's safety, could be feared. The formerBooKVIl.
proposal Elizabeth rejedced as insecure; the latter, as'-""
dangerous. The ambassadors were then inftruted to
[talk in an higher tone; and Melvil executed the
ommitiion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray,
itl. lis usual perfidy, deceived his Master who
irufted him with a negotiation of so much impor-
ance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was em-
kyed to lave. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth,
execute the sentence against her rival. He often
peated the old proverbial sentence, " The dead
annotbite." And whatever should happen, he
ndertook to pacify the King's rage, or at least to
revent any violent effects of his resentment *.
El IZABE'rH, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp-Eliza-
ms of the most violent agitation and disquietude beth's
mind. She shunned society, she was often found yand ,Y
na melancholy and muting posture, and repeat-lulation.
rg, with much emphasis, these sentences which
e borrowed from tome of the devices then in
gue; At ser aut feri; ne feriare, feri. Much,
o doubt, of this apparent uneasiness must be im-
tired to dissimulation; it was impossible, however,
at a Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth,
ould venture on an ation, which might expore
ermemory to infamy, and her life and kingdom
danger, without refleting deeply, and hesitating
g. The people waited her determination in sus-
nfe and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal
ould iubfide, rumours of danger were artfully
vented, and propagated with the utmost indus-
v; Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was ac-
fedof having iuborned an afialfin to murder the
en. The Spaniih fleet was said by rome to be
ready arrived at Milford-haven. Others affirmed
' Sotfw. 352. Mlrdin, 568. See App nd. No. XIV.

that

I
i

BooxVTI.that the Duke of Guise had landed, with a tIrong
'--"-'army, in Susex. Now, it was reported that the

58 Northern Counties were up in arms; next day

that the Scots had entered England with all their
forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was
on foot for seizing the Queen, and burning the cit,.
The panic grew every day more violent; and
the people, aftonilhed and enraged, called forthe
execution of the sentence against Mary, as the only
thing which could restore tranquillity to the king.
dom '.

Warrant WHILE these sentiments prevailed amongher
for Mary's subjects, Elizabeth thought Ihe might safely venture
figed. to itrike the blow, which (he had so long meditat-
Feb. r. ed. She commanded Davison, one of the fecred.

ries of itate, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and
her behaviour, on that occasion, plainly fhewedtha
it is not to humanity, that we must ascribe her for
bearance hitherto. At the very moment ihe wa
subscribing the writ which gave up a woman,
Queen, and her own nearest relation, into the han
of the executioner, (he was capable of jeing
" Go, fays (he to Davison, and tell Walfinghan
what I have now done, though I am afraid he wi
die for grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiet
was how to secure the advantages which would arii
from Mary's death, without appearing to haY
given her consent to a deed so infamous. Sh
often hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well ast
some other courtiers, that now was the time todi
cover the sincerity of their concern for her fafet
and that hfe expected their zeal would extricateh
out of her present perplexity. But they werewi
enough to seem not to understand her meani
Even after the warrant was signed, fme cornmand
a letter to be written to Paulet, in less ambig

Cand. 533, 534.

us terms; complaining of his remissness in fparingBooKVll.
so long the life of her capital enemy, and begging"-
Iim to remember at last what was incumbent on 7-
him as an affectionate fubjedt, and to deliver his
Sovereign from continual fear and danger, by short-
ening the days of his prisoner. Paulet, though ri-
gorous and harsh, and often brutal in the discharge
f what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity.
He rejeced the proposal with disdain; and lament-
ing that he should ever have been deemed capable
of ating the part of an affaflin, he declared that
the Qeen might dispose of his life at her pleasure,
but he would never stain his own honour, nor leave
an everlasting mark of infamy on his posterity,
by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a crime.
On the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became
extremely peevish; and calling him a dainty and
pecifefellow, who would promise much, but per-
form nothing, she proposed to employ one Wing-
field, who had both courage and inclination to
(rike the blow . But Davison remonstrating
against this method, as no lets dangerous than dif-
honourable, the again declared her intention that
the sentence pronounced by the commiflioners
should be executed according to law; and as Ihe
had already signed the warrant, she begged that
no farther application might be made to her on
that head. By this the privy counsellors thought
themselves sufficiently authorised to proceed; and
prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for the
Queen's safety, or inifigated, as is more proba-
ble, by the apprehension of the danger to which
they would, themselves, be exposed, if the life of
the Queen of Scots were spared, they assembled in
the Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their

* Biogr. Britan. Article DavifJon.

hands,

BoorVII hands, empowered the Earls of Shrewsbury and
-~~ Kent, together with the high Sheriff of the Coun,.

1587. to fee the sentence put in execution.
MIary's ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls
behaviourarrived at Fotheringay, and demanding accefsto
deaher the Queen, read in her presence the warrant for ex-

ecution, and required her to prepare to die next
morning. Mary heard them to the end without
emotion, and crossing herself in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghof,
'- That foul, said she, is not worthy of thejo)sof
Heaven, which repines because the body must en-
dure the stroke of the executioner; and though!
did not expect that the Queen of England would
set the firit example of violating the sacred person
of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that
-v.hich providence has decreed to be my lot." And
laying her hand on a bible, which happened to be
near her, she solemnly protested that she was inro-
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carried
on against Elizabeth's life t. She then mentioned
the requests contained in her letter to Elizabeth,
but obtained no satisfactory answer. She entreated
with particular earnestness, that now in her last
moments, her Almoner might be suffered to attend.
her, and that she might enjoy the confolationof
thole pious infitutions prescribed by her religion.
Even this favour, which is usually granted to the
vilest criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two Earls, with difficulty suppressed
their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrewl-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and
* Camd. 534. Strype, 3. 361, 364. 1 Jebb, 2. 301.

burst

burl out into the most passionate expreffionsBooKVII.
*f tenderness and sorrow. Mary, however, not -----
5nly retained perfet composure of mind, but en- 1587.
deavoured to moderate their exceflive grief. And
falling on her knees, with all her domeifics round
her, she thanked Heaven that her sufferings were
1ow so near an end, and prayed that she might
e enabled to endure what frill remained with de-
cency, and with fortitude. The greater part of
he evening she employed in fettling her worldly
fairs. She wrote her Testament with her own
and. Her money, her jewels, and her cloaths,
e distributed among her servants, according to
eir rank or merit. She wrote a short letter to
eKing of France, and another to the Duke of
uil', full of tender but magnanimous sentiments,
d recommended her foul to their prayers, and
erafflicted servants to their protetion. At sup-
e, the eat temperately, as usual, and converted
ot only with ease, but with chearfulnefs; fie drank
every one of her servants, and asked their for-
ivenefs, if ever she had failed in any part of her
ty towards them. At her wonted time she went
bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the
orning she retired into her closet, and employed
considerable time in devotion. At eight o'clock,

High Sheriffand his officers entered her cham-
, and found her still kneeling at the altar. She
mediately started up, and with a majestic mien,
d a countenance undismayed, and even clearful,
vanced towards the place of execution, leaning
two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in
mourning habit, but with an elegance and fplen-
r, which she had long laid aside, except on a
w festival days. An Agnus Dei hung by a po-
ander chain at her neck; her beads at her girdle;
d in her hand she carried a crucifix of ivory.
tthe bottom of the stairs the two Earls, attend-

ed
as A \ s

BocKVII.ed by several gentlemen from the neighbouring
v-'~^ Counties, received her; and there Sir Andrew Mel.

1587. vil, the master of her hourhold, who had been ft.

cluded, for some weeks, from her pretence, was per.
mitted to take his last farewell. At the fight ofa
Mistress whom he tenderly loved, in such a situation,
he melted into tears; and as he was bewailing he
condition, and complaining of his own hard fatei
being appointed to carry the account of fuchi
mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied, "Weep
not, good Melvil, there is at present greater caue
for rejoicing. Thou shalt this day fee Mary Stuan
delivered from all her cares, and such an end put
to her tedious sufferings, as she has long expeaed.
Bear witness that I die constant in my religioni
firm in my fidelity towards Scotland; and unchang.
ed in my affection to France. Commend metomrn
son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious toh
kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; and G
forgive all those who have thirsted, without caui,
for my blood."

.WI TH much difficulty, and after many intreatie

she prevailed on the two Earls to allow Meld
together with three of her men servants, and tM
of her maids, to attend her to thefcaffold. Itiw
erected in the fame hall where she had been trid,
railed a little above the floor, and covered, aswn
as a chair, the cushion, and block, with bat
cloth. Mary mounted the ffeps with alacrity, k-
held all this apparatus of death with an unalter
countenance, and signing herself with the crofs,l
fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrantfo
execution with a loud voice, to which the liftene
xk ith a careless air, and like one occupied in oth
thoughts. Then the dean of Peterborough beg
a devout discourse, suitable to her present cond
tion, and offered up prayers to Heaven in herh
half; but the declared that she could not in col

fcier.

f:ienc( hearken to the one, nor ioin with the other ;Bo o KI.
and filing on h-r lknees repeated a Latin prayer.
\\When the Dean lad finilhed his devotions, lhe with 1587'
an audible voic,, and in the Engilifh tongue, re-
cmmended unto GCd the atficed ifat: of the
Church, and piayed for profp.rity to her son, and
for a long life, and peaceabic reign to Elizabeth.
She dcclared that she hoped for nmrcy only through
the death of Chrilr, at the foot of xwhofe image fne
n-'ow willingly fed her blood; and lifting up, and
killing the Crucifix, ibe thus addrefTed, " As thy
arnms, 0 Jesus, were extended on the Cross; io
\vith the outft:rcchled arms of thy mercy, receive
me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off
her veil, and upper garments; and one of the exe-
cutioners rudely endeavouring to anfli, she gently
checked him, and said, with a smile, that ihe had
not been accustomed to undress before so many
fpecators, nor to be served by such valets. With
calm but undaunted fortitude, she laid her neck on
the block; and while one executioner held her
hands, the other at the second stroke, cut off her
head, which falling out of its attire, discovered her
hair already grown quite gray, with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up still streaming
with blood, and the Dean'crying out, "So perish
all Q(een Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of Kent
alone answered Amen. . The reft of the spectators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capable, at that moment, of any other sentiments,
but those of pity, or admiration *.

SuCH wasthe tragical death of Mary Queen ofSn:i-
Scots, after a life of forty-four years and two'l1 o.f

, hllorian';

months, almost nineteen years of which she paflednc1ra_
in captivity. The political parties which wereingher.
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have

Camd. 534. Spotfw. 355. Jebb. 2 300 Strype, 3. 383.
Voni. II K sub-

147

Bodo'nl.fubfifted, under various denominations, ever since

-''"that time. The rancour, with which they were
1587i at first animated, hath descended to succeeding

ages, and their prejudices, as well as their rage,
have been perpetuated, and even augmented. A-
mong Historians, who were under thedominionof
all these paflions, and who have either ascribed to
her every virtuous and amiable quality, or have im.
puted to her all the vices, of which the human
heart is susceptible, we search in vain for Mary's
real character. She neither merited the exagge-
rated praiies of the one, nor the undiftinguifhing
censure of the other.

Her cha- To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost
rater. elegance of external form, she added those accom-

plifhments, which render their impreflion irrefifi-
ble. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and capa.
ble of speaking and of writing with equal ease and
dig ity. Sudden, however, and violent in all her
attachments; becauie her heart was warm and un-
ilffpicious. Impatient of contradition; because
{he had been accustomed from her infancy tobe
treated as a Queen. No stranger, on fomeocca-
licns, to dilimulation; which in that perfidious
court where Ihe received her education, was rec-
koned among the necessary arts of government.
Not infenlible of flattery, or unconscious of that
pleaifure, with which almnft every woman beholds
the influence of her own beauty. Formed withthe
qualities which we love, not with the talents that
we admire; Ihe was an agreeable woman rather
than an illustrious Queen. The vivacity of her
spirit, not sufficiently tempered with found judg-
ment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not,
at all times, under the restraint of discretion, be-
trax ed her both into errors, and into crimes. To fay
that Lhe was alxwas unfortunate, will not account
tor that long and almost uninterrupted fuccellion

oI

of calamities which befell her; we must likewifeBooKVII.
add that file was often imprudent. Her paflion for -
Darnly was rafli, youthful, and exceflive. And '587.
though the sudden transition to the opposite ex-
treme was the natural effect of her ill-requited love,
a:d of his ingratitude, insolence and brutality; yet
neither these, nor Bothwell's artful address, and
importan t services, canjuftify her attachment to that
nobleman. Even the manners of the age, licenti-
ous as they were, are no apology for this unhappy
palion; nor can they induce us to look on that
tragical and infamous scene which followed upon
it, with leTs abhorrence. Humanity will draw a
xeil over this part of her characder which it cannot
approve, and may, perhaps, prompt some to im-
pute her aLtions to her situation, more than to her
dispositions; and to lament the unhappiness of the
former, rather than accuCe the perverseness of the
latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree and
n duration, those tragical diftleffes, which fancy-
as feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration;
nd whil e

we survey them, we are apt altogether to

rget her frailties; we think of her faults with less
idignation, and approve of our tears, as if they
were shed for a person who had attained much
earer to pure virtue.
W\ITH regard to the Queen's person, a circum-
ance not to be omitted in writing the history of a
c.nale reign, all cotemporary authors agree inaf-
ribingto Mary, the utmost beauty of countenance,
.d elegance of shape, of which the human form
capable. Her hair was black, though, accord-
ng to the fashion of that age, she frequently wore
rrowed locks, and of different colours. Her eyes
ere a dark grey; her complexion was exquisitely
ne; and her hands and arms remarkably delicate,
th as to shape and colour. Her stature was of
height that rose to the majestic. She danced,

K 2 the

BooKVII.he walked, and rode with equal grace. Her talte
'--so r music wasjuft, and she both sung and played

x587- upon the lute, with uncommon skill. Towards

the end of her life, she began to grow fat; and her
long confinement and the coldness of the houfesin
which she had been imprisoned, brought on a rheu.
matifm, which deprived her of the use of her limbs
No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld her person
without admiration and love, or will read her history
without sorrow.

NONE of her women were suffered to come nea

her dead body, which was carried into a roomad.
joining the place of execution, where it lay, forfome
days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from a bil.
liard-table. The block, the scaffold, the apronsof
the executioners, and every thing stained with he
blood, were reduced to ashes. Not long after E
lizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnifil
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employedil
vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did no
efface the memory of those injuries, which laid Ma
ry in her grave. James, soon after his accefioi
to the English throne, ordered her body to be re-
moved to Weftminiter-abbey, and to be depofitd
among the Monarchs of England.

Eiizzal-' ELIZABETH affected to receive the accountsi
affect to Mary's death, with the most violent emotionso:
lame-t -
Mia-'ls lurprize, and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamenta
cat.l. tion and mourning, were all employed to dii

play the reality and greatness of her sorrow. En
dent marks of dissimulation and artifice mayb
traced through every period of Elizabeth's pro
ceedings against the life of the Scottish Qnee
The commiflion for bringing Mary to a public tri
was seemingly extorted from her, by the intreat
of her privy counsellors. She delayed publiilhi

ti

- - T 11 T T (

- \ n
wT

.he sentence against her, till she was twice folicit-Boo: VII.
ec, by both houses of Parliament. Nor did she'-'-"
sign the warrant for execution without the utmost '587.
apparent relu&ance. One scene more of the boldest
and most solemn deceit remained to be exhibited.
She undertook to make the world believe that
Mary had been put to death without her know-
ledge, and against her will. And Davison, who
neither fifpeted her intention, nor his own dan-
ger, was her instrument in carrying on this arti-
ice, and fell a viAim to it.

IT was his duty as secretary of state to lay be-
fore her the warrant for execution, in order to
be signed; and by her command, he carried it -to
tle Great Seal. She pretended, however, that she
hd charged him not to communicate what she
had done to any person, nor susser the warrant
to go out of his hands, without her express permif-
ion; that, in contempt of this order, he had not
unlv revealed the matter to several of her Mini-
ters, but had, in concert with them, assembled
ier Privy Counsellors, by whom, without her
consent or knowledge, the warrant was issued, and
he Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to
putit in execution. Though Davison denied all
this, and with circumstances which bear the
rongeft marks of truth and credibility; though
t can Scarce be conceived that her privy council,
ornpofed of the persons in whom (he most' co-
ded, of her Ministers and favourites, would as-
emble within.the walls of her palace, and venture
o tranfadt a matter of so much importance With-
ut her privity, and contrary to her inclination;
yet so far did she carry her difiimularion, that,-with
a! the signs of displeasure and of rage, she banilh-
d most of her Counsellors out of her presence;

K 3 and

Boo slIl.and treated Burieigh, in particular, so harshly, and

8- 'with such ma.ks of dilguft, that he gave up him.
1587 /self for loft, and in the deepest affliction wrote to

the queen begging leave to resign all his places,
that he might retire to his own estate. Davison she
infiantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a close priloner to the Tower. He was soon after
March. brought to a solemn trial in the Star Chamber;

condemned to pay a fine of Io,ooo pounds, and to
be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure. He
languished, several years, in confinement, andne.
ver recovered any degree of favour or of power.
As her jealousy and fear had bereaved the Queen of
Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of her
conduct, Elizabeth made no scruple of facrificirg
the reputation and happiness of one of the moR
viltuous and able men in her kingdom*.

F':a beth THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name,
e.ncea,- furnished Elizabeth, however, with an apologyto
foth the King of Scots. As the profpeat of his mother's
Janes. danger had excited the King's filial care and con-

cern, the account of her death filled him with grid
and resentment. His subjects felt the difhonou0
done to him, and to the nation. In order tofooth
both, Elizabeth instantly dispatched Robert Carey,
one of Lord Hunifdane's sons, with a letter expres.
ing her extreme afflition on account of that miser.
able accident, which, as she pretended, had happen
ed far contrary to her appointment, or intention
James would not permit her messenger to ente
Scotland; and with some difficulty, received a me.
morial he sent from Berwick. It contained the tal
concerning Davison, dressed up with all the cil
Cumitances, which tended to exculpate Elizabeth

Camd. 536. Strype, 3. 370.

£a.

and to throw the whole blame on his rashness orBooKVlI.
treachery. Such a defence gave little fatisfation,'--'
and was confidered as mockery added to insult; and 5 7
many of the nobles, as well as the King, breathed
nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely so-
licitous to pacify them, and neither wanted inftru-
ments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leicester wrote
to the King, and Walsingham to secretary Mait-
land. They represented the certain deftrudtion, to
whiclh ames would expose himself, if, with the
forces of Scotland alone, he should venture to at-
tack a kingdom, so far fuperiorin power; that the
history of past ages, as well as his Mother's fad ex-
perience, might convince him that nothing could be
mere dangerous, or deceitful, than dependance on
foreign aid; that the King of France would never
v.ilh to fee the Britiih kingdoms united under one
Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince so
nearly allied to the house of Guise, with such for-
nidable power; that Philip might be a more ac-
tiveally, but would certainly prove a more danger-
ousone, and under pretence of aflifting him, would
afcet his own right to the English Crown, which
he already began openly to claim; that the fame
flatute, on which the sentence of death againfir his
Mother had been founded, would justify the ex-
cluding him from the succession to the Crown; that
the English, naturally averse from the dominion of
lrangers, would not fail, if exasperated by his hof-
tilities, to apply it in that matter; that Elizabeth
was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother
ad suffered, by her tenderness and affection to-
ards the son; and that by engaging in a fruitless
var, he would deprive himself of a noble inheri-
tance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he
must infallibly obtain. There reprefpetations,
added to the consciousness of his own weaknels, to

K 4 the
r
- _ r A - T T O

BocK\II. the 'mallnefs of 1is revenues, to the mutinous spirit

'""'of some of the nobles, to the' dubious fidelity of
!587 others, and to the inluence of that faction, which

was enrtrl- at Elizabeth's devotion, convinced
James that a war with Erniand, ho'.vever ju1,
would i:: the present mnct'ire be altoe-iher impu-
itical. A!l th-ef conriderations induced him to
itifle his resentment; to appear iatisfied with the
puniihme-nt i-iic-t-d cn Davilbli; and to prefenve
all the fembl.i-ces of frienidihp wi:h the Englili
court *. In this mani:er did the cloud whiic
threatened lilch a frorm p.alfsaway. Mary's deatb,
like that of a common criminal, remained unave-.g-
ed by any Pri.-ce; a d whatever infamy Elizabeth
might incur, she was exposed to no new danger on
that account.

D',r-ice MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to th;
o; tae NMailer of Gray, and !oft him the King's favour
't"^-' c which he had for fjme time po-ie:Ted. He was b-
Grav.

come as odious to the nation, as lavourites, wbh
acquire power without merii, ard ex-rci!e it -iti
out discretion, usually are. The treacherous par
which he had aced duriing his late embaiTy, rw
no iecret, and fiil d T.Jmes, wl o at length came
to the knowledge of it, with astonishment. The
cou:tiers observed the symptoms of diiuft arising
in the King's mind, his enemies seized the oppor-
tunity, ard Sir Wil!iam Steward, in revenge d
the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his bro-
!"ay 1e. ther Captain James, p.iblickly accused him before

a Convention of nobles, not only of having contri
buted, by his advice and fuggefrion, to take away
the life of the Queen, but of holding correfpon
dence with Popilh princes, in ord-r to fubve
the religion efiabifined in the kingdom. Gray

Soof-.S. S-rype, 3. 377

unfupport

unsupported by the King, deserted by all, andBooKVII.
conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble defence.'--
He was condemned to perpetual banishment, a 1587.
punilhment very unequal to his crimes. But the
King veas unwilling to abandon one, whom he had
o:lce fa oured so highly,. to the rigour of justice
and Lord Hamilton his near relation; and the other
rnobs 'vwho had lately returned from exile, in gra-
ti;,.' "jor the zeal with which he had served them,
ir: Icd, d warmly in his behalf.
H 1ING thus accomplished the deftrution of one
:i his enemies, Captain James thought thejunture
favourabie for prosecuting his revenge on them all.
He fligled out secretary Maitland, the most emi-
nert both for abilities and enmity to him; and of-
red to prove that he was no less accessary than
ray to the Queen's death, and had even formed
delign of delivering up the King himself into the
hands of the English. But time and absence had,
a great measure, extinguished the King's affetion
or a minion, who so little deserved it. All the
cortiers combined against him as a commo;. ene-
mV. And infiead of gaining his point, he had the
mnrtllcation .to fee the office of Chancellor confer-
cd upon Maitland, who, together with that dig-
it), enjoyed all the power and influence of a
rime Minister.
IN the AiTembly of the Church, whicl met this
ear, the fame hatred to the order of Bilhops, and
he lamejealoufy and fear of their encroachments,
ppeared. But as the King was now of full age,
nd a parliament was summoned on that occasion,
heClergy remaineld Fhtisfied with apponinting ome
ftheir number to repreient their grievances to that
curt, from which great things were expeced.
PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, JamesThe King
ttempted a work worthy of a rii:g. The eadly tounite

feudsthenobes.

Bo o KVI. feuds which subsisted between many of the great fa
'
" mJ milies, and which were transmitted from one geie

"87ration to another, weakened the strength of thi

kingdom; contributed, more than any other cir
cumftance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous fpiri
among the nobles; and. proved the occafiono
many disasters to themselves, and to their countrs
After many preparatory negotiations, he invite
the contending parties to a royal entertainmenti
the palace of Holy-rood house; and partly byhi!
authority, partly by his intreaties, obtained theih
promise to btiry their dissentions in perpetual obli.
vion. From thence he conducted them, in solemn
procession, through the streets of Edinburgh, march
ing by pairs, each hand in hand with his enemy
A collation of wine and sweet-meats was prepared
at the public Cross, and there they drank to eacs
other, with all the signs of reciprocal forgivenes
and of future friendship. The people, who were
present at a fpecacle so unusual, conceived the mol
languine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillit
established in every part of the kingdom, and tefll
sied their fatisfaation by repeated acclamations
Unhappily the effects of this reconciliation were no
correspondent either to the pious endeavours of ti
King, or the fond wishes of the people.

THE ftift care of the parliament was the fecurin

of the Protestant religion. All the laws paffedi;
its favour. since the Reformation, were ratified
and a new and severe one was enacted againftfemi
nary Priefrs and Jefrits, whose restless industry)
making proselytes brought many of them int
Scotland about this time. Two acts of th
parliament deserve more particular notice, on a(
count of the consequences with which they wa
folluoi ed.

THE one refpefted the lands of the Church. AsBooKVIL
the public revenues were not sufficient for defray-'-v-'
i:g the King's ordinary charges; as the adminiftra- Ger7i
tio:i of government became more complicated andannexati-
more cxpenfive; as James was naturally profufe,on of
and a t;annger to oeconomy; it was necessary, onChurch-
a!l ther l accJunts, to provide some fund propor-a"
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fulm
c!)t'! be levied on the Commons, who did not en-
or the benefit of an extensive commerce. The
obles were unaccustomed to bear the burden of
eavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
ere the only source whence a proper supply could
edrawn. Notwithstanding all the depredations
f :lie laity since the Reformation, and the various
devices which they had employed to seize the
hurch-lands, some considerable portion of them
emained frill unalienated, and were held either by
he Bishops who possessed the benefices, or were
ranted to laymen during pleasure. All these lands
ere, in this parliament, annexed, by one gene-
al law ", to the Crown, and the King was impow-
red to apply the rents of them to his own use.
he tithes alone were reserved for the maintenance
f the persons who served the cure, and the princi-
al manfion-houfe, with a few acres of land, by way
fglebe, allotted for his residence. By this great

icceffon of property, it is natural to conclude, that
heKing must have acquired a vast increase of pow-
r, and the influence of the nobles have suffered a
roportional diminution. The very reverse of this
ems, however, to have been the cafe. Almost
ll grants of Church-lands, prior to this act, were
hereby confirmed; and titles, which were former-
reckoned precarious, derived from thence the

* Parl. 1 . Jac. VI . c. 29.

fanrtion

BooKVII.fantAion of parliamentary authority. James \.a
," --- likewise authorized, during a limited time, to malt
1587. new alienations; and such was the facility of hi!

temper, ever ready to yield to the solicitations ol
his servants, and to gratify their moss extravaca.l
demands, that not only during the time limited
but throughout his whole reign, he was continual.
ly employed in bestowing, and his parliament ii
ratifying grants of this kind to his nobles; henac
little advantage accrued to the Crown from that
which might have been so valuable an additionto
its revenues. The Bishops, however, were great
fuffirers by the law. But at thisjunAure neitla
the King nor his Ministers were folicitousabouttih
interests of an order of mea, odious to the people,
and persecuted by the clergy. Their enemia
promoted the law with the utmost zeal. The prof.
peSt of sharing in their spoils induced all partie
to content to it; and after a ftep so fatal tothe
wealth and power of the dignified Clergy, it was
no difficult matter to introduce that change in t
government of the Church which soon after took
place '.

effer Ba- THE change, which the other statute producd
ronsad- in the civil constitution, was no less remarkable
mtted i' Under the Feudal system, every Freeholder, a0
to partb.-
nment by vassal of the Crown, had a right to be prefentia
their re- parliament. There Freeholders were, originalyi
prefen'e- few in number, but pofieffed of great and exten.

te five property. By degrees, there vast pofeflio0

were divided by the proprietors themselves, a
parcelled out by the Piince, or split by other ac.
cidents. The number of Freeholders became great
er, and their condition more unequal; betides thi
ancient Barons, who preserved their effates anr

S Spo:tfood, 365.

thei

their power unimpaired, there arose another order, ooKVIT.
i.,hole rights were the fame, though their wealth'-
aod influence were far inferior. But, in those rude '5s7.
res, when the art of government was extremely
i,-perfccR, when parliaments were seldom afiem-
bled, and deliberated on matters little interesting
o a martial people, few of the Lefr Barons took
heir feats, and the whole parliamentary jurifdic-
tion was exercised by the Greater Barons, together
:ith the Ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imi-
ating the forms of the English constitution, to
which he had been long accustomed, and defiros
f providing a counterpoise to the power of the
reat nobles, procured an act in the year 1427,
ifpenfing with the personal attendance of the lefier
arons, and impowering those in each country, to
hoofe two commillioners to represent them in par-
;ament. This law, like many other regulations
of that wife Prince, produced little effc&. All
he King's vassals continued, as formerly, possesed
of a right to be present in parliament, and, unless

rn ome extraordinary conjunitures, none but the
reater Barons attended. But by means of the
eformation, the confitution had undergone a
reat change. The ariftocratical power of the no-
bes had been much increased, and the influence
of the Ecclesiastical order, which the Crown ufal-
l employed to check their usurpations, and to
balance their authority, had diminished in pro-
portion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had been:
erected into temporal peerages; and th- Protef-
tantBifhops, an indigent race of men, and odious
to the nation, were far from pofetliing the wveight
ard credit, which their predecessors derived from
the exorbitant wealth, and the fuper.itiozs reve-
rence of the people. In this situation; the Ki;:
!'i recourse to the expedient employed by Tame:;
. aid obtained a law. reviv ing the !laaue of 1427

ai .i

Bo oVII and from that time the Commoo;s of Scotlandhave
~'-~sent their representatives to pal-liarnent. An ad,

5 s7, xhich tended to vifiblv to abridge their authority

did not pass without opposition frcm many of tn
robles. But as the King had a right to fummo.
the leITer Barons to attend in perlon, others were
apprehensive of feeing the house filled with a mnl.
titude of his dependants, and consented the more
willingly to a law, which laid them under there.
flriction of appearing only by their representatives

T 5S. THE year 1588 began with an universal expeda.
The ap- tion throughout all Europe, that it was to be dif
the Spa- tirnguifhed by wonderful events and revolutions.
niflh.\r- Several astrologers, according to the accounts of
mada. cotemporary historians, had predicted this; and

the situation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms
of Europe was such, that a sagacious observer, with-
out any supernatural intelligence, might have ha-
zarded the prediction, and have foreseen the ap
proach of some grand crisis. In France, it was evi-
dent from the afronifhing progress of the league,
conducted by a leader whose ambition was restrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
fiirmounted all diflculties; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry
Ill. that either that Monarch must submit to aban-
don the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by
some sudden and daring blow, cut off his formida-
ble rival. Accordingly, in the beginning ofthe
year, the Duke of Guile drove his Master out of
his capital cit-, and forced him to conclude a peace,
xl .ich left him only the fnadow of royalty; and
before tle year expired, he himnelf fell a vitim to
Henry's fears, and to his own fccurity. In Spain,
the operations .ere fuich as promised fomethingftlil
more u:_common. During three years, Philip had
cmip!\ cd all the power of his European dominions,
a;id exhauifted ihe trealutres of the I:Ldies, in va.t

preparatio::s

qeparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that hadBooKVII.

ver appeared in the ocean, was ready to failfrom
inon, and a numerous land army was assembled 5.
oembark on board of it. Its destination was still
nknown, though many circumstances made it pro-
ble that the blow was aimed, in the first place,
ainft England. Elizabeth had long given secret
d to the revolted provinces in the Low-Countries,
nd now openly afforded them her protetion. A
Omerous body of her troops was in their service
he Earl of Leicester commanded their armies; she
ad great sway in the civil government of the re-
blic; and rome of its moil considerable towns
ere in her poffeflion. Her fleets had insulted the
0afts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the
Vest Indies, and threatened the colonies there.
outed by so many injuries, allured by views of
mbition, and animated by a superstitious zeal for
ropagating the Romish Religion, Philip resolved
ot only to invade, but to conquer England, to
hich his descent from the house of Lancaster, and
e donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his
wn opinion, a double title.
ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and pre-Coniut
red to encounter it with the utmost intrepidity. o J a"es
hemeafures for the defence of her kingdom were cfion.
o;certed, and carried on, with the wiTdom, and
,gour, which distinguished her reign. Her chief
are was to secure the friendlfep of the King of
ots. She had treated the Queen his Mother with
rigour unknown among Princes; she had often
ld himself harshly, and with contempt; and
ough he had hitherto prudently fupprefied his
entment of there injurirs, she did not believe it
be altogether extinguilhed, and was afraid that
her prelent situation, it might burfl out with a
al violence. Philip, ieinfible how much an al-
a:ce with Scotland would facilitate his enterprize,

tu'ted James with the utmoit afliduity. He ex-

cited

BooKVII.cited him to revenge his mother's wrongs; he flat.
'"'r~tered him with the hopes of sharing his conquefls;

88' and offered him in marriage his daughter thela.

fanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland swarm.
ed with priests his emiiTaries, who seduced fomeof
the nobles to popery, and corrupted others wib
bribes ar.d promises. Huntlv, Errol, Crawford
were the heads of a faction, w-hich openly efpoifj
the interest cf Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving froa
that court, began to salemble his followers, andt
take arms, that he might be ready to join theSpa.
riards. In order to counter-balance all these, Eli
zabeth made the warmest profeliYons of friendli
to the King; and Afhby, her ambassador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promise
He assured him that his right of succession to kt
Crown should be publickly acknowledged in Eng.
land; that he fnould be created a Duke in tha
kingdom; that he should be admitted to fonm
share in the government; and receive a conGid
rable pension annually. James, it is probable, ws
too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, tor.l
entirely on these promises. But he understood
own interest in the present junture, and purfu
it with much steadiness. He rejeted an allia's
with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to adc
into his presence an ambassador from the Po0
He seized Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince
Parma. He drove many of the trafficking Priel
out of the kingdom. He marched fuddenlyt
Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and too
him prisoner. In a convention of the nobles hede
dared his reiolution to adhere inviolably toth!
league with England; and, without lifteningtot5
futgeftions of revenge, determined to at in cot
cert xvith Elizabet!h, against the common enemyr
the Proteflant faith. He put the kingdom in ape;
ture of defence, and lvied troops to obstruct t1
landing of the Spaniards. He offered to fe.nd

ari1

fador that he expeIted no other favour from the kinga'-'-
of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised l588.
to LlYflets, that when he had devoured all his corn-
panions, he would make him his last morsel*.

THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, wasAnational
not inferior to that of the King; and the extaordi-covenant
nary danger, with which they were threatened, fug-in de'"ce
efted to them an extraordinary expedient for their° ,:Ril"g
security. A bond was framed for the maintenance
oftrue reliion, and the defence of the King's per-
son and government, in opposition to all enemies
foreign and domestic. This contained a confession
f the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of
he errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises,
n the name, and through the strength of God, of
hering to each other in supporting the former,
nd contending againfl the latter, to the utmost of
heir power t. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy,
nd the people subscribed it with equal alacrity.
trange or uncommon as fnch a combination may
ow appear, many circumstances contributed, at
hat time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
amiliar to the Scots. When rouzed by any extraor-
nary event, or alarmed by any public danger,
he people of Israel were accustomed to bind them-
lves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhere to that Re-
igion, which the Almighty had established among
hem; this the Scots confidered as a sacred prece-
ent, which it became them to imitate. In that
ge, no considerable enterprize was undertaken i!
cotland, withut a bond of mutual defence, which
I concerned reckoned neceflarv for their fecuritv.
he form of this religious confederacy is plainl-
orrowed from those political ones, of which so many

*Camd. 544. Johnft. 1 9. Spotiv. 369.
t Dunlop's ColleCt. of Conieff. Vol 2. loS.
\Vm.. II . 1. inftanc;

OF SCOTLAND.

I6.3

BooKVII.inftances have occurred; the articles, stipulations
'---, aand peculiar modes of expression, are exatly the
1588. fame in both. Almofft all the considerable Popii

Princes were then joined in a league for extirpating
the Reformed religion, and nothing could be more
natural, or seemed more efficacious, than to ente
into a counter-affociation, in order to oppose the
progress of that formidable conspiracy. To theft
causes, did the Covenant, which is become so famous
in history, owe its origin. It was renewed atdiffe.
rent times during the reign of James. It was
revived with great solemnity, though with confide.
rable alterations, in the year I638. It was adopt.
ed by the English, in the year 1643, and ensor.
ced by the civil and ecclesiastical authority of both
ki Igdoms. The political purposes to which it wae
then made subservient, and the violent and uncon.
litutional measures which it was then employedto
promote, it is not our province to explain. Butat
the juncture, in which it was first introduced, eve
may pronounce it to have been a prudent andlau-
dable device for the defence of the religion andli-
berties of the nation; nor were the terms in which
it was conceived, other than might have been ex.
pected from men alarmed with the impending dan-
ger of Popery, and threatened with an invafionby
the most bigoted, and most powerful Prince in
Europe.

PHII.IP's eagerness to conquer England did not

inspire him either with the vigour or dispatch necef-
fary to ensure the success osso mighty an enterprize.
His fleet which ought to have failed in April, did
not enter the English channel till the middle of July.
It hovered many days on the coast, in expectation
of being joined by the Prince of Parma, who was
blocked up in the ports of Slanders by a Dutch

T-.e Ar- squadron. Continual disasters pursued the Spaniard;
r. a de- during that time; fucceflive storms and battlei

!t td,* - Cald. 4. 1i9. 1

,;hich are well known, conspired with their own illBooKVII.
co.idut, to disappoint their enterprize. And by'-v '
the bleffingof Providence, which watched with re- 588.
markable care over the Protestant religion, and the
liberties of Britain, the Englith valour scattered and
eftroyed the Armada on which they had arroganr-
y bestowed the name of Invincible. After being
riven out of the English seas, they were forced to
eer their course towards Spain, round Scotland
nd Ireland. Many of them suffered shipwreck on
hefe dangerous and unknown coasts. Though
mes kept his fubjets under arms to watch the
otions of the Spaniards, and to prevent their land-
ig in an hostile manner, he received with great
umanity 700 who were forced ashore by a tem-
eft, and after supplying them with neceflaries, per-
itted them to return into their own country.
ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent
n ambassador to congratulate with James, and to
mpliment him on the firmness and generosity, he
d discovered during a conjunture so dangerous.
t none of Afhby's promises were any longer re-
embered; that Minister was even accused ofhav-
g exceeded his powers, by these too liberal offers;
d conscious of his own falsehood, or ashamed of
ing dilowned by his court, he withdrew secretly
tof Scotland *.
PHI LIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own , q.
lhnefs in attempting the conquest of England, bv Plilip's in-
nasal armament, equipped at so great a diftance,"tr'gui;
d subjected in all its operation, to Me delays, Sc n
d dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas
d winds, resolved to make his attack another
rm, and to adopt the plan which the Princes of
train had long meditated, of invading England
ough Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagin-
I. might be easily wafted over from the low Coun-

* J.hnRt. 134. Cand. 548.

tries

BooK'II. tries to that kingdom, and if they could onceob
''" tamin footing, or procure afliftance there, the fron.
1589' tier of England was open and defenceless, and the

northern counties full of Roman Catholics, who
would receive them with open arms. Mean while
a descent might be threatened on the southern
coast, which would divide the English army, dif
tra& their councils, and throw the whole kingdom
into terrible convulsions. In order to prepareth
way for the execution of this design, he remittd
a considerable fum of money to Bruce, a seminar
priest in Scotland, and employed him, toget
with Hay, Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottish Jefui
to gain over as many persons of diftinftion as po

Pcpih 1no-fible to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and the an
b'es co- fil insinuations of there emissaries, induced fever
gains the of the nobles to favour a measure, which tend
King. so manifestly to the deftrudion of their count

Huntly, though the King had lately married
to the daughter of his favourite, the Duke ofLU
nox, continued warmly attached to the Ronii
Church. Crawford and Errol were animated vi
the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in
correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and
their letters to him, offered their service to
King of Spain, and undertook with the aid of 6
men, to render him master of Scotland, and
bring so many of their vassals into the field, that
should be able to enter England, with a numer
army. Francis Stewart, grandson of James
x.hom the King had created Earl of Bothw
though influenced by no motive of religion, for
frill adhaed to theProteftant faith, was promp
merely by caprice, and the restlessness of hisr
ture, tojoin this treasonable correspondence.
FDb 17. ALL these letters were intercepted in Engla3

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threatens
her own kingdom, sent them immediately tot
King, and reproaching him with his former le:

toas

toward the Popish party, called upon him to checkBooKVII.
this formidable conspiracy, by a proper severity. -'
Bt James, though firmly attached to the Proteft-Tle589
tant religion, though profoundly versed in the theo-King's
loical controversies between the Reformers and maxims

hChurch of Rome, though he had employedwithre-
imfelf, at that early period of life, in writing apoarp
ommentary on the Revelations, in which he
roed the Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless
dopted, already, those maxims concerning the
eatment of the Roman Catholics, to which he ad-
ered through the reft of his life. The Roman
atholics were at that time a powerful and active
arty in England; they were far from being an in-
onfiderable faction in his own kingdom. The
ope and King of Spain were ready to take part in
ll their machinations, and to second every effort
f their bigotry. The opposition of such a body
o his succession to the Crown of England, added
o the averseness of the Englifl from the govern-
ent of strangers, might create him many diffi-
culties. In order to avoid these, hethought it ne-
effary to sooth, rather than to irritate the Roman
atholics, and to reconcile them to his succession,
y the hopes of gentler treatment, and some miti-
ation of the rigour of thole laws, which were now
nforce against them. This attempt to gain one
arty by promises of indulgence and aats of cle-
ency, while he adhered with all the obstinacy of
disputant, to the doctrines and tenets of the other,
as given an air of mystery, and even of contra-
dtion, to this part of the King's character. The
apifts, with the credulity of a feet struggling to
obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly theirs;
ad the Protestants, with the jealousy inseparable
from those who are already in poiTffeion, viewed
every at of lenity, as a mark of indifference, or
a symptom of apoftacy. And in order to please
both, James often aimed at an exceflive rcfine-

L 3 merit,

BoorlXI ment, mingled with diffimularion, in which he

''imagined the perfection of government, and of
-9' king-craft, to consist.

Hisexcef- His behaviour on this occasion was agreeableto
fiveieniiy these general maxims. Notwithstanding the soli.
Tpitor e citations of the Queen of England, enforced by th:

zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a short
imprisonment was the only punifl merl he inflited
on Huntly and his associates. But he soon had
reason to repent an at of clemency, so inconsistent
with the dignity of government. The first ulf
which the conspirators made of their liberty, was
to afferrble their fa:llowers, and under pretenceof
remov ing Chancellor Maitland, an able Minister,
but warmlv devoted to the English interest, from
the kirg's councils and presence, they attempted
to seize James himself. This attempt being de-
feated, partly by Maitland's vigilance, and partly
by their own ill conduct, they were forced to re-
tire to the North, where they openly erected the
standard of Rebellion. But as the King's govern.
ment was not generally unpopular, or his ministers
odious, their own vairals joined them flbwly, and
discovered no zeal in the cause. And the King,
in person, advancing againtr them with such force
as he could suddenly levy, they durst not relylo
much on the fidelity of their troops, which though
superior in number, followed them with reluc-
tance, as to hazard a battle; but suffering them
to difplrfe, they surrendered to the King, and
Ari!2c. threw themselves on his mercy. Huntly, Errol,

Crawford, and Bothwvell were all brought to a pub-
lic trial. Repeated acts of treason were eafil
proved agai-lft them. The King, however, did
not permit any sentence to be pronounced; and
after keeping them a few months in confine-
ment, he took occasion, amidst the public fefti

vit'

Ivit and rejoicings, at the approach.of his mar-BooKVir.
ria'e, to set them at liberty*.

As James was the only descendant of the an-Th89'
cient Monarchs of Scotland, in the direct line; asKing's
11 hopes of uniting the crowns of the two king-marriage
orns would have expired with him; as the Earl'lidAnnC
so Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne, wasmnarL
huratic; the king's marriage was, on all these ac-
counts, an event which the nation wished for with
he utrnoft ardour. He himself was no less de-
rousof accomplishing it; and had made over-
res, for that purpose, to the eldest daughter of
rederick II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth,
1ous of every thing, that would render the ac-
eion of the house of Stewart more acceptable to
e English, endeavoured to perplex James, in the
me manner she had done Mary, and employed
many artifices to defeat or to retard his mar-
iag. His ministers, gained by bribes and pro-

fils, seconded her intentions; and though several

iferent ambassadors were sent from Scotland to
enmark, they produced powers so limited, orin-
fed on conditions To extravagant, that Frederick
ould not believe the king to be in earnest; and
upec'ing that there was some design to deceive,
ramufe him, gave his daughter in marriage to
e Duke of Brunswick. Not discouraged by this
fappointment, which he imputed entirely to the
ondut of his own Ministers, James made ad-
reires to the Princess Anne, Frederick's second
aughter. And though Elizabeth endeavoured to
ivert him from this, by recommending Catherine
e King of Navarre's sifter, as a more advantage-
us match; though she prevailed on the privy
uncil of Scotland to declare against the alliance
ith Denmark, he persisted in his choice. And
lpairing of overcoming the obstinacy of his own
'ifters, in any other manner, he secretly en-

* Spotfw. 373. Cald. 4. 103.

L 4 couraged

Bo-r V!I. couraged the citizens of Edinburgh to take armrs

"'- 'They threatened to tear in pieces the Chancellor
'j9- whom they acctifed as the person, whose artifices

had hitherto disappointed the wishes of the King,
and the expectations of his people. In confequen:
of this, the Earl Marshal was lent into Denmark,
at the head of a splendid embassy. He received
ample powers and instructions, drawn with the
King's own hand. The marriage articles were
quickly agreed upon, and the young Queen set
fail towards Scotland. James made great prepara.
tions for her reception, and waited her landing wiAi
all the impatience of a lover; when the.unwelcome
account arrived, that a voilent tempest had arifeD,
which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condi-
tion so fnattered, that there was little hope of in
putting again to sea before the spring. Thisun-
exp-eted disappointment he felt with the utmol
fenfibilitv. He instantly fitted out some fhips,and
without comrmunicating his intention to any of hi
council, failed in person, attended by the Chan-
cellor, several noblemen, and a train of 300 per-
O'ob. 2-.sons, in quest of his bride. He arrived safely in

finall harbour near Upflo, where the Queen thea
Nov. 4. resided. There the marriage was solemnized.

And as it would have been rash to trust tholi
boisterous seas, in the winter season, James ac.
cepted the invitation of the court of Denmark
and repairing to Copenhagen, passed fever
months there, amidst continual feasting, and a
mufements, in which, both the Queen and himi
fe!f had great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wide

deviation from his general character,. than this fid
den falB. His son Charles I. was capable of thal
excetffve admiration of the other sex, which arif
from great sensibility of heart, heightened by ele

a Me!v. !t2 Spotfw. 377.

galn

gance of taste; and the romantic air of his journeyBooKVII.
to Spain suited such a disposition. But James was'-
not susceptible of any refined gallantry, and always '589'
exprefted that contempt for the female charaaer,
which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with po-
litenefs, is apt to inspire. He was fretted, how-
ever, at the many obstacles which had been laid
in his way. He was anxious to secure the political
advantages, which he expected from marriage, and
earing that a delay might afford Elizabeth, and
hs own ministers, an opportunity of thwarting
him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the refu-
lution of preventing them, by a voyage from which
he expeEted to return in a few weeks. The na-
tion seemed to applaud his conduct, and to be
leafed with this appearance of amorous ardour, in
a young Prince. Notwithstanding his absence so
long beyond the time he expeted, the nobles, the
cergy, and the people, vied with one another in
ioyalty and obedience ; and no period in the King's
reign was more remarkable for tranquillity, or
more free from any eruption of those factions,
which so oten disturbed the kingdom.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLA ND,

BO O K VIII.

B o o N the first of May the King and Queen ar.
Viil. rived at Leith, and were received by thear
'"i''fubjects, with every possible expression ofjoy. The
Th ,lipg solemnity of the Queen's coronation was conduced
a;_tieenwith great magnificence; but so low had the order
Mrr;Tin of Bishops fallen, in the opinion of the public,
Xotund. that none of them were present on that occasion,

and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Minifierof
great reputation, let the Crown on heOhead, ad-
minifired the sacred unrtion, and performed the
other customary ceremonies.

THE zeal and ficcefs, with which many of the

clergy had contributed towards preserving peace
and order in the kingdom, during his absence, re-
concilcd James, in a great degree, to their persons,
and even to the Presbyterian form of government.
Augua 4.In presence of an atTembly, which met this year,

he made high encomiums on the discipline, as swel
as the doEtrine of the church, promised to adhere
inviolably to both, and permitted the assembly tt
frame such ats, as gradually aboliihed all there
mains of epiicopa! jurifdicion, and paved the wa)

fe

for a full and legal eflablifhment of the Prefbyte- B o o K
nran model .* 1

ANt: cvent happened soon after, which afforded '-
the Clergy no small triumph. Archbilhop Adam-
son, their ancient enemy, having fallen under the
King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in consequence of the act of an-
nexation, and being oppressed with age, with po-
verty, and diseases, made the meanest ftibmiflion to
the clergy, and delivered to the aflembly a formal
ecantation of all his opinions concerning Church
overnment, which had been matter of offence to
e Presbyterians. Such a confellion, from the
t learned person of the order, was confidered
a testimony, which the force of truth had ex-
ored from an adversary t.
MEANWHILE, theKing's exceflive clemency to-Difrrderr
ards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, andin the
ncouraged such acts of violence, as brought his kilgdola
owsrnment under contempt, and proved fatal to
any of his fubjeEts. The history of several years,
bout this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly
uarrels between the great families, and of murders
nd aitalinations perpetrated in the most audacious
an:;er, and with circumiftances of the utmost bar-
arity. All the defects in the feudal aristocracy
ere now felt more sensibly, thlan at any other pe-
iod in the history of Scotland, and universal license
trd anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce conlittent
ith the preservation of society. While the King,
o gentle to punish, or too feeble to act with vigour,
iffrTred all these enormities to pars with impunity.
BUT though James connived at real crimes..n ?!-
'itchcraft, which is comrnmoly an imaginary one,tenlpt of
grofled his attention, and thoi:> lufpecied of it,1"'h1^lti
th the whole weight of his authority. ManylaR''
terfons neither extremely old, nor \,';echedlv poor,
;,ich were usually held to be certain indications

Cald. 4. 204. t Spot Cfw,. 3 C'. C. .! 2 i4

olf

B o o c of this crime, but masters of families, and matrons
Vii. of a decent rank, and in the middle age of life, were
i55feized and tortured; and though their confeffior.

contained the most absurd and incredible circun.
stances, the King's prejudices, those of the clergy,
and of the people, cornpired in believing their ex.
travagancies without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of there un-
happy sufferers accused Bothwell of having consult.
ed them, in order to know the time of theKing's
death, and having employed their art, to raifetlie
storms, which had endangered the Queen's life, ad
had detained Jamrs so long in Denmark. U'pon
this evidence, that nobleman was committed to
prison. His turbulent and haughty spirit could nei
ther submit to the refraint, nor brook such ani-
dignity. Having gained his keepers, he made k
escape, and imputing the acculation to the artifice
of his enemy, the Chancellor, assembled his follow.
ers, under pretence of driving him from the King's
councils. Being favoured by some of the King'
attendants, he was admitted, by a secret passage,
under cloud of night, into the court of the palae
of Holy-rood-houfe. He advanced directly towari
the ro al apartment, but happily, before he enter
Dec :-. ed, the alarm was taken and the doors shut. Wht

he attempted to burst open some of them, and tof
fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh had time,
nln to their arms, and he escaped with the utrnm
difficulty ; owing his safety to the darkness of t
night, and the precipitancy with which he fled'

Ha retired towards the North, and the King lha

ing i-nadviiedly given a commiifion to the Earlo
Huntly, to pursue him, arid his followers, withli
and sword; he, under colour of executing tl
commiiiion, gratified his piivate revenge, ands
i1tunded the house of the Ear! of Murray, burnt
t- r, the grournd, and flew iMurray himfnlf. T

- .M',:=. :. Spoti;: 3S.
2s

rniFtr.

Imurder of a young nobleman of such promising R o o K
virtues, and the heir of the regent Murray, the dar- VIII.
ling of the people, excited universal indignation. 9
The citizens of Edinburgh rose in a tumultuous
manner; and though they were restrained, by the
care of the magistrates, from any at of violence,
tiley threw aside all refpet for the King and his
ministers, and openly insulted and threatened both.
While this mutinous spirit continued,James thought
it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his
residence for some time at Glasgow. There Huntly
surrendered himself to justice; and, notwithftand-
ing the atrociousness of his crime, and the clamours
of the people, the power of the chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and the
King's regard for the memory of the Duke of Le-
nox, whole daughter he had married, not only pro-
tecRed him from the sentence which such an odious
action merited, but exempted him even from the
formality of a public trial*.

A STEP of much importance was taken, soon af-Prcfbyte-
ter, with regard to the government of the church. rian
The Clergy had long complained of the encroach-C!hurch
ments made upon their privileges and jurifdition,,.°r, nc_ -
by the Ats of the parliament 1584, and though iiiihed by
there laws had now loft much of their force, they law.
resolved to petition the parliament, which was ap-
proaching, to repeal them in form. The juncture
for pufiing such a measure was well chosen. The
King had loft much of the public favour, by his
lenity towards the Popilf faction, and still more by
his remiTfnefs in pursuing the murderers of the Earl
ofMurray. The chancellor had not only a power-
ful party of the courtiers combined against him, but
vas become odious to the people, who imputed to
him every false ftep in the King's conduct. Both-
w'eil still luiked in the kingdom, and being fecret)y
sipported by all the enemies of Maitland's admi;,i-

Spotfw. ;3-.

firatio;n,

B o o fration, was ready, every moment, to renew hisau.
vm. dacious enterprizes. James, for all these reasons, wva
59^z. extremely willing to indulge the Clergy in theirre,

quest, and not only consented to a law, whereby the
acts 5 84 were rescinded or explained, but he carried
his complaisance till further, and permitted the par-
liament to eftablith the Presbyterian government, its
General AiTemblies, Provincial synods, Prefbyteries
and Kirk feflions, with all the different branches of
their discipline and jurisdiCtion, in the most ample
manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy,
even under the administration of Regents, from
whom they might have expected the most partial fa-
vour, could not obtain the sanction of law, in con-
firmation of their mode of Ecclesiastical govern.
ment. No Prince was ever less disposed than James
to approve a system, whose republican geniusin-
spired a passion for liberty, so repugnant to hisex-
alted notions of royal prerogative. Nor couldany
aversion be more inveterate than his, to theauftere
and uncomplying character of the Presbyterian Cler-
gv in that age; who, more eminent for zeal, than for
Folicv, often contradicted his opinions, and cenfur-
ed his conduct, with a freedom equally offenfiveto
his dogmatifi as a Theologian, and to his pride as
a King. His situation however obliged him, fre-
quently, to conceal, or to diifemble his sentiments;
and as he often disgusted his subjects, by indulging
the Popish faction more than they approved, he
endeavoured to atone for this, by conceflionsto
the Pre ,-terian Clergy, more liberal than he him-
f!s wf ould otherwise have chosen to grant .

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adhe-

rents were attainted. But he soon made a new at-
tempt to seize the King at Falkland; and James,
betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly de-
fended by others, who wifhled well to Bothwell, as
tlhe Chancellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to

* Cald. 24S, 252. Spotfw. 388.

the

the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert Melvil, and B o o K
to the irresolution of Bothwell's associates . VIII.

SCARCE;Y was this danger over, when the nation 59^
was alarmed with the discovery of a new and moreA new
formidable conspiracy. George Kerr, the Lordconfpi-
ewbottle's brother, being seized as he was readyr'aCYfthe
et fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were Lo,.d

fund in his custody, and among these, several
lanks signed by the Earls of Angus, Huntly, and
Errol. By this extraordinary precaution, they
oped to escape any danger of discovery. But Kerr's
efolution shrinking when torture was threatened, he
onfcffed that he was employed by these noblemen,
o carry on a negotiation with the king of Spain;
hat the blanks subscribed with their names were to
efilled up by Creighton and Tyrie; that they were
ntruded to offer the faithful service of the three
arls to that Monarch; and to solicit him to land
body of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the
outh of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
e first place, to establish the Roman Catholic Re-
ion in Scotland, and then to invade England,
ith the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David
raham of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland, whom
eaccufed of being privy to the conspiracy, were
ken into custody, and confirmed all the circum-
ances of his confeflion t.
THE nation having been kept for some time in '19-
ontinual terror and agitation by so many fucceflive Zeal of
npiracies; the discovery of this new danger com- peo-
leated the panic. All rajiks of men, as if the

nemy had already been at their gates, thought
emfelves called upon to stand forth in defence of
eir country. The Ministers of Edinburgh, with-
ut waiting for any warrant from the King, who
ppened at that time to be absent from the capital,
d without having received any legal commillion,
embled a considerable number of Peers and Ba-

+ Melv. 402. 1' Rrvyer, 16. lo9.

rons,

B o rorns, in order to provide an instant remedy agairf;
Xvml. the impending danger. They seized the Earl of

Anr,-s, and committed him to the castle; theyex.
'9. amnin.ed Kerr; and prepared a remonstrance to belaid

bef,-re the King, concerning the state of the nation;
and the necefiity of prosecuting the confpirato.

A.dn rro- with becoming vigour. James, though jealous o
ceedings everv encroachment on his prerogative, and offend.
0 ': .

- ged with flbjecis, who, instead of petitioning, seem.
ti-hem. ed to prescribe to him, found it neceltary, during

the violence of the ferment, not only to adopt thei
plan, but even to declare that no consideration
Ihould ever induce him to pardon those, who bad
Jan. S. been guilty of so odious a treason. He fummo7ed

the Ears of Huntly and Errol to surrender them.
fclves to justice. Graham of Fintry, whom hispenr
pronounced to be guilty of treason, he command-
ed to be publickly beheaded; and marching into
the North at the head of an army, the two Earls
together with Angus, who had escaped out of pi
son, retired to the mountains. He placed garrilor.
in the castles which belonged to them; compelld
their vassals, and the Barons in the adjacent coun
ties, to subscribe a bond containing professionsd
their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adhb
rence to the Protestant faith; and, the better toft.
c b;re the tranquillity of that part of the kingdom
co-.fittited the Earls of Athol, and Marlhal, ti
lieutenants there *

March . H . vNG r'iS nilhed this expedition, James returre
E-i7aF;: to Edinburgll, where he found Lord Borrough, a

.' c

'os extraordinary ambassador from the court of Eng

tre m the::la d. E!izab-th, alarmed at the discovery of
with ri- conlinrac,,, which she confidered as no less form
gout. dable to her own kingdom, than to Scotland, n

proached James with his former remifinefs, andu
ged him, as here ga:-ded the preservation of the Pr
zts1sat. reiigion, or the dignit- of his o.xn Cro

S??3;;. 39I. Cslld . ;I.

to pu'ilh this repeated treason with rigour; and if B o o K
I11 could not apprehend the prllbns, at least to con- VIII
fil-ate the estates of such audacious rebels. She"-"
wcakened, however, the force ofthefe requests, by
interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Both-

wcll, whom, according to her usual policy in non-

rihi:g a factious spirit among the Scottish nobles,
{f;- had taken under her protection. James abfo-
ltily refused to liften to any interceslion in favour
of one, who had so often, and with so much out-

iage, insulted both his government and his person.

W\ith regard to the popish conspirators, he declared
lisrefolution to proficute them with vigour; but
that he might be the better able to do so, he de-
manded a small fum of money from Elizabeth,
IWiclh fle, diftruftfil, perhaps, of the manner in
|clich he might apply it, shewed no inclination to
grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his
own fubjecs obliged him to call a parliament, in
rder to pass an aft of attainder against the three
arls. But before it met, Ker made his escape our
fprifon, and on pretence, that legal evidence of
heir guilt could not be produced, nothing was con-
luded against them. The King himself was uni-
erfally fufpeced of having contrived this arifice,
n purpose to elude the requests of the Q.jeen of
ngland, and to disappoint the v ifhes of his owni
eople. And therefore, in order to sooth the Cler-
y who exclaimed loudly agaitift his condid, he
a'e way to the pafling of an act, which ordained
hose who ohftinately contemned the censures of
he Church, to be declared outlaws '.
WHILE the terror excited by the Popish confpi-B- thv..ll
acy poffefled the nation, the court had been divid-fu'rPt'7e
d by two rival factions, which contended for the t: Kin.
ief direction of affairs. At the head of one was
he Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire
onfidence. For that very reason, perhaps, he had
' Cald. 4. 343 Spots. 393. Parl. 13. Jac. VI. c. 164.
VOL. II. M fallen

Bo o fallen early under the Queen's displeasure. The
VII. Duke of Lenox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree,
9, and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel,

and xwidened the breach. And James, fond.nolefs
of domeflic tranquillity, than of public peace, ad.
vised his favourite to retire, for some time, in hopes
that the Queen's resentment would subside. But
as he stood in need, in the prefentjuncure, of the
afiftar.ce of so able a minister, he had recalled him
to court. In order to prevent him from recovering
his former power, the Stewarts had recourse to
an expedient no less illegal than desperate. Hav-
ing combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame
iu!'7 24. surname, they brought him back secretly into Scot.

land; and seizing the gates of the palace, introduced
him into the royal apartment with a numerous train
of armed followers. James, though deserted by all
his courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered
more indignation than fear, and reproaching them
for their treachery, called on the Earl to finish his
treafcns, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart,
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refufehis
demands. And a few days after he signed a capitu.
lation with this successful traitor, to whom he was
really a prisoner, whereby he bound himfelfto grant
him a remission for all past offences, and to procure
the ratification of it in parliament; and in the mean
time, to dismiss the chancellor, the master of Gla-
mis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
his councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part
consented to remove from court, though heleft
there as many of his associates, as he thought sus-
icient to prevent the return of the adverse fai0on.

But it was now no easy matter to keep the King

under the fame kind of bondage, to which he had
been often subjed during his minority. Hedifco-
vercd lo much impatience to shake off his fetters

tha:

that those who imposed, durftlnotcontinue the re- Bo o o
frtaint. They permitted him to call a Convention o f III.
tile nobles at Sterling, and to repair thither himself. '
All Bothwell's enemies, and all who were defirousSHe reco-
of gaining the king's favour by appearing to be so, vers his li-
ob, ed the summons. They pronounced the insult h'rt).
offered to the King's person and authority to be high S'pt 7.
treason, and declared him absolved from any obli-
gation to observe conditions, extorted by force, and
which violated so essentially his royal prerogative.
James, however, still proffered him a pardon, pro-
vided he would sue for it as an act of mercy, and
promise to retire out of the kingdom. There conditi-
oasBothwell rejected with disdain, and betaking
himself once more to arms, attempted to furprize the
King, but finding him on his guard, fled to the
borders *

THE KING'S ardour against Bothwell, compared Sufpeaed
with his flow and evasive proceedings against theof ft;vour-
opifh Lords, occasioned a general disgust among' the
is fubjeEts; and was imputed either to an excefniverLor
ttachment to the persons of those conspirators, or
o a secret partiality towards their opinions; both
hich gave rife to no unreasonable fears. The
lergy, as the immediate guardians of the Pro-
:eant Religion, thought themselves bound, in
|ich a juncture, to take extraordinary steps for its
reservation. And the provincial fynod of Fife
appening to meet at that time, a motion was made
o excommunicate all concerned in the late confpi-
ac-, as obstinate and irreclaimable papifls. AndSept. ;,.
hough none of the conspirators resided within the
ounds of the fynod, or were subjed to its jurifdic-
ion, such was the zeal of the members, that, over-
ooking this irregularity, they pronounced against
hem, the sentence of excommunication, to which
he at oflaft parliament added new terrors. And
t this should be imputed to a few men, and ac-
ounted the ad of a small part of the Church, de-

* Cald. 4. 326. Spotl.v. 395.

M 2 putice

B o o K puties were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,

i. and to desire their approbation and concurrence.

, AN event happened, a few weeks after, which

His lenity increased the People's suspicions of the King. As
towards he was marching on an expedition against the bor-
ihem. derers, the three Earls coming suddenly into his
O" .' presence, offered to submit themselves to a legal

trial; and James, without committing them tocuf-
tody, appointed a day for that purpose. The con.
fpirators prepared to appear with a formidable train
of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean time
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons
assembling at Edinburgh, remonffrated againftthe
King's extreme indulgence with great boldness, and
demanded of him, according to the regular courft
ofjuftice, to commit to sure custody persons charg
ed with the highest aas of treason, who could no!
be brought to a legal trial, until they were absolve
from the censures of the Church; and to call
Convention of estates, to deliberate concerningths
method of proceeding against them. At the fain
time they offered to accompany him in arms to the
place of trial, left such audacious and powerfulcri-
minals mnould overawe justice, and dictate to th
judges to whom they pretended to submit. James
though extremely offended both with the irregul-
rit- of their proceedings, and the prefumptiond
their demands, found it expedient to put offt'nh
day of trial, and to call a Convention of eftates,in
order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the peo
pie. By being humoured in this point, their sus
picions began gradually to abate, and the Chancel.
lor managed the Convention so artfully, thatht
himself, together with a few other members,-wa
impowered to pronounce a final sentence uponth
'V. 26. conspirators. After much deliberation; they 0o

dained that the three Earls, and their affociati
should be exempted from all further inquiry orprc

fecutiol

tecution, on account of. their correspondence with B o o K
Spain; that, before the first day of February, they vIII
should either submit to the Church, and publickly 1593
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of
the Kingdom; that, before the first of January,
they lhould declare which of these alternatives they
;Koiild embrace; that they should find surety for
t(,cir peaceable demeanour, for the future; and that
ii the' failed to signify their choice in due time, they
lhi:ld lose the benefit of this act of abolition, and
remain exposed to all the pains of law .

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James 1594.
incurred much reproach, and gained no advantage.
Devoted to the Popish fi.iperftition, submissive to
al! the didates of their priests, and buoyed up with
hopes and promires of foreign aid, the three Earls
refuted to accept of the conditions; and continued
their treasonable correspondence with the court of
Spain. A Convention of estates pronounced them Jan. r8
to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which
were offered; and the King required them, by
proclamation, to surrender themselves to justice.
The pretence of the English ambassador contribut-
ed, perhaps, to the vigour of these proceedings. Eli-
zabeth, ever attentive to James's motions, and im-
puting his relu&ance to punish the Popish Lords to
a secret approbation of their designs, had sent to
Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger
to which he exposed himself, by this falCe modera-
i',n; and to require him to exercise that rigour,
which their crimes, as well as the posture of affairs
rendered necessary. And though the steps now ta-
ken by theKing silenced all complaints on that head,
yet Zouche, forgetful of his charater as an ambaf-
lador, entered into private negotiations with such
of the Scotch nobles, as disapproved of the King's
measures, and held almost an open correspondence
itih Bothwell, who, according to the usual artifice

Cald. 4. 33o. Sp.ti:. 397

eM > nof

B o o g of malecontents, pretended much solicitude for ie-
viIi. formi.:g the disorders of the commonwealth; and
,-_~ 9 covered his own ambition with the specious veil of

zeal againit those Counsellors, who restrained the
King from pursuing the avowed enemies of the Pro-
teftant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the name
of his MistreSs, to take arms against his Sovereign.

A new a:- MIEA;ZWVHIL-, the King and the Clergy were
tonpt of filled with muiual distrust of each other. They

F were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that his affections
leaned too much towards the Popish faction; he
fif-peted them, without good reason, of prompt-
ing Bothwell to rebellion, and even of fuppl)yng
him with money for that purpose. Little inftiga.
tion indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent
spirit as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprize. He
appeared fudderly within a mile of Edinburgh, at
the head of 400 horse. The pretences, by which
he endeavoured tojuftify this infurreftion, were ex-
tremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Po-
pery, concern for the King's honour, and for the li-
berties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own deferce; he had no infantry, and was
accompanied only with a few horsemen of Lord
Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to
encourage them to act with zeal, he promised to
proceed agai:fit the Popish Lords with the utmol
rigour of the law. Animated by their Ministers, they
ran chearfully to their arms, and advanced with the
King at their head against Bothwell; but he, not-

, ithfranding his success in putting to flight Lord

Home, who had rashly charged him with a far in-
ferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith with-
out daring to attack the King. His followers aban-
doned him soon after, and discouraged by so many
successive difappointmerts, could never afterwards
be brought to venture into the field. He betook

himse!f

imfr-lf to his usual lurking places, in the North of B o o K
Lr. elan'l; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the vii..
r:ng's remonstrances, obliged him to quit that re-"V- "'

treS~~~~~~~ 1594

ire r *.

No sooner was the King delivered from one dan-Frefli

('r, than he was called to attend to another. Thedangers
V. pish Lords, in consequence of their negotiationsfro'n the
xith Spain, received, in the spring, a supply ofmo-IoPrdi
ney fiom Philip. What bold designs this might in-April 3.
flire, it was no easy matter to conjecture. From
men under the dominion of bigotry, and whom in-
dilgence could not reclaim, the roft desperate ac-
ti,::s were to be dreaded. The' assembly of the
C;urcll immediately took the alarm; remonstrated
aginfl them with more bitterness than ever; and
i:'animoufly ratified the sentence of excommunica-
fin!, pronounced by the fynod of Fife. James him-
l!;s, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only
be generally displeasing to his own fubjeats, but give
rie to unfavourable suspicions among the Englifi,
exerted himself with unusual vigour. He called aJune 8.
parliament; laid before it all the circumstances, and

vagravations of the conspiracy; and though there

:ere but few members present, and several of there
cjnleEted with the conspirators by blood or friend-
ship, he prevailed on them by his influence, and
importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous fen-
tence the law can inflict. They were declared to
beguilty of high treason, and their estates and
honours forfeited. At the fame time, flatutes,
more severe than ever, were en-dted against the
professors of the Popish Religion.

How to put this sentence into execution, was a
uitter of greater difficulty. Three powerful Ba-
r,::s, cantoned in a part of the country almost inac-
. :ible, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
Upported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more

* Spotif . 403. Calii. 4.
. 9.

M 4

than

B o o E than an overmatch for a Scottifi Monarch. No in-

iii. treaty could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the
9 money, nece!Tary for defraying the expences of an

expedition againf- them. To attack them in per-
son, with his own forces alone, might expose him
both to disgrace and to danger. He had recourle
to the onlv expedient which remained in such a si-
t:at:on, for aiding rite impotence of Sovereign au-
thority; he delegated his authority to the Earl of
Argyll, and Lord Forbzs, the leaders of two ..Ia.s
at enmity vith the conspirators; and gave them a
cnrmmiflon to invade their lands, and to seize the
cafiks whih belonged to them. Bothwell, not-
witlftandi 'g all his high pretenfious of zeal for the
Protestant Religion, having row entered into a
c:ofe cor.federacy with them, the danger became

Battle of every day more urging. Argyll, follicited bv the
Glenlivat. King, an rouzed by the Clergy, took the field at

the head of 7000 men. Huntly and Errol met him
a. Glenlivar, v ir0 an army far inferior in number,
but composed chi fly ofgentlemen of the low coun-
tries, mounted on horseback, and who brought
oct. . .along with them a train of field-pieces. They en

countered each other with all the fur , which he-
reditary enmity and ancient rivalfhip add to undif-
ciplined courage. But the Highlanders,. difcon-
certed by the firit discharge of the cannon, to
,hich they were little accuftomned, and unable to
resist t'he impre;.n of cavalry, were soon put to
flight. And Arg !, a gallant young man ofeigh-
teen, was carried by his friends out of the field,
weepi-g with indig::ation at their disgrace, a!d
calling on them to iRand, and to vindicate the ho-
,no'r of their name '

OY the first intelligence of this defeat, James.

:ho'.:gh obligd to paw-n kis jewels in order to raise
money +, aafembled a fiall body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Ir..i-:es, Keiths, Lefieys, Forbeses, 'and other

* C. 4..rS. .:. c .:, 'm. r 186.

clarS

clans at enmity with bluntly and Errol, who hav- 13 o o K
iloloft several of their principal followers at Glen- VII1.
hba, and others refuting to bear arms against the --.
Kj-ig, in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-

;.i!s. James wafted their lands; put garrisons in
ibme of their catles; burnt others; and left the
Dtke of Lenox, as his Lieutenant in that part of
t!he kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to re-
train them from gathering to any head there, or
from infesting the low country. Reduced at last
to extreme distress, by the rigour of the season, and
the desertion of their followers, they obtained the
King's permission to go beyond seas, and gave fe-Popifh
cirity that they should neither return without hisLords ri-
!'cense, nor engage in any new intrigues againift en utof

I-' o n the king-

the Protestant Religion, or the peace of the king-doi.
den :*.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-eftablillied in
tihe North of Scotland; and the firmnels and vi-
g ur, which James had displayed in his last pro-
ceedings against them, regained him, in a great
degree, the confidence of his Protestant fLhbjecs.
Eut, he funk, in the fame proportion, and for the The Ro-
ifme reaoln, in the esteem of the Roman Cathlo-" an Ca-

tholics n-

hics. They had asserted his mother's right to thec!i'-c^ a-
Crown of England with so much warmth, that they gainit
could not, with any decency, reject his. And the Janles.
ildulgence, with which he affected to treat the
profciTors of that religion, inspired them with such
l:ip:s, that they viewed his accession to the throne
as ro undesirable event. But the rigour with
'hich the Ki.ig pursued the conspirators, and the
revere ftalutcs against Popery to which he had
given his conlent, convinced them that there hopes
uwere visionary; and they began to look about in
qucft of tome new fucceflor, whose rights they
might oppose to his. The English Papists turned
their eyes towards the Earl of Effex, whose gene-
rclus mind, though firmly eftablifled in the Pro-

Si'otf. 404. C'. Jd '2, &c.

teilant

o o teftant faith, abhorred the severities inflicted i
\ 1I. tlhat age, on account cf religious opinions. Thol;

of the fame sect, who were in exile, formed
9 bolder scheme, and one more suitable to theirlitu

ation. They advanced the claim of the Infantao
Spain; and Parfors the Jel it publi sied a book, i

:hiach, by false quotations from history, by fab.

1o:'s genealogies, and absurd arguments, ir.tr.
n.ingled withl bitter invectis-es againit the King o
Scots, he en.leavoured to prove the Infanta's tite
t? the Engli;h Crown to be preferable to his. And
Philip, tro'.h:' inolved already in a war botlh w'iL
France and En.aland, and icarce able to defend
th:e remains of the Bul-gundian Provinces againl
rte Dutch common\xeal h, cafilv graiped at thii
airy proiect. The dread of a Spaniih Pretender
to the Crown, and thl opposition which the Papisi
began to form agail'it the King's fuccefiion, co'itn-
bured not a little to remove the prejudices of tlhe Po-
teftants, a:nd to prepar e

the wa for that event.

P>.',itvel EOT H W' . Lt , x hose nanme has been so often men-

fc.r to tioned/as the dilturbcr of the King's tranqui!lity,
y ito and of the eace of the kii:gdom, was now in a

-wretclhed condition. Abandoned by the Q0cenni
England, on account of his confederacy witlht!h
Popi!h I.ords; excolnmmn:icated by the Church fn,
tle fame reafb: ; and deserted, in his distress, b!
his own followers; lie was obliged to fly for fafeti
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where
after renouncing tlhe Protestant faith, he led, man,
\ ears, an obllure a:nd indigent life, remarkable on!
fur a low' and inftamoncs debauchery. The Kinig
thoughl extremely ready to f'criaifce the ftrongeiirel
lcntment to the slightest acknrowledgmen:s, colit
never be softened b,- his futmifiions, nor be inducxd
o iiiten to a:;-y interceflion in his behalf.

T; i:. r.r tihe Kingc In2l Charcellor Maitland, a
--i::, Mini'ter, on: w-iom i he had long devolvcd thl

whole weight ofpublic affairs. As James loved him, a o o K
while alive, he wrote, in honour of his memory, a \_I.
copy of verses, which, when compared with the com- ,596
positions of that age, are far from being inelegant *.

Sco., after his death, a considerable change wasA charnge
r':adc in the adrmiriftrration. At that time, the an-in the ad-
r.al charges of gover;:ment far exceeded the King'sn"1a
revenues. The Queen was fond of expensive a-°
ulzments. James himself was a stranger to Occo-
or,.. It become necessary, for all these reasons,
o levy the public revenues with greater order and
igour, and to husband them with more care. This
rportant trust was committed to eight gentlemen
.t'helawvt, who, fiom their number, were called
;,Vvians. The powers vested in them were

1,. and ad lmoft unlimited. The King bound
;ls' !f neitder to add to their number, nor to filp-
'\ a.:y \acacy that might happen, without their
:l.:t: and kinowin;g the facility of his own tem-

a-, agred that no alienation of his revenue, no

ia..; -.f a pension, or order on the treasury, should
held valid, unless it were ratified by the fib-
riprion of five of the commifioners; all their ats
nd decisions were declared to be of equal force
irh tlie sentences of judges in civil courts; and
consequence of them, and wsithout any other
arrant, any person might be arrested, or their
odsfeized. Such extenfivejurifditiion, together
ith the absolute dilpofal of the public money,
rew the whole executive part of the government
o their hands. United among themifelves, they
,at.!ii'y undL-rmi;.ed the reft of the King's Mi-
hlts, and leized on every lucrative or honour-
le office. The ancient servants of the Crown re-

* Spotfw. 411.
t Alexander Seaton President of the Seflion, /Walter Stcwart
mmendator of Blantyre Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy,
:ll.inifay, James Elphinfton, Thomas Hani:ltl'!, John Skeiic
:: R.gi!crr, and Petcr Young Elcmc/}inar.

pined,

B o o K pined, at being obliged to quit their stations to new
\111. men. Th- favourites, and young courtiers, mur-

mured at siteing the King's liberality stinted by
their prescriptions. And the Clergy exclaimed a.
gai:nft some of them as known apostates to Popery,
and lufpecled others of secretly favouring it. They
retai ned their power, however, notmwithf.andingthis
g-neial combinatio, againr.ii them; and thevyowed
it in.irely to the order and econorny which they i,-
troduced into the adminiflration of the financ
by w-hich th- nccelrary expences of governmat
were more eas;lv defrayed, than in any other p.
riod of the kirg's reig:-

\",.'erce THE- numour of vait preparations which Phi!i[
of the na-w.as said to be carrying on at this time, filledbo:
t'i"n - Engla.d arnd Scotland with the dread of a new ia

,i:-h' vafion. Jam-s took proper measures for the d
Lorcs. fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy th

z7al of the Clergy, whose suspicions of the Kin,'
sincerity- began to revive; and as he had prrmittez
t'he wives of the banilhed Peers to levy the rentso
their eifates, and to live in their houses, the
charged him with rendering the ad of forfeiur
inefFecuaM, by ftipporting the avowed enemies
March 24.the Protellant faith. The aiTembly of the Chutc

took u:-der consideration the itate of the kingdo
and havir.g appointed a day of public fasting, the
folemnlv renewed the Covena;;t, by which the 5
tion was bound to adhere to the Protestant fait
and to defend it aain ll aggreiTors. A commi
tee, cor.fifling of the most eminent Clergymen, a
of man) Barons, and gentlemen of diftincio0
waited on the Kin;g, and laid before him a plans
the security of the kingdom, and the prefervatic
of religion. Thev urg-ed him to appropriate
estates of the ba" i:hr .1 Lords, as a fund for t
maintenance of ioldiers; to take the ftriceft p
cautions for preventir,' the return of such turb

.:nt f .hiecst into the ccntry, and to purLe all v

* £pogtfw. ..!, 4=';

vi

were filfpe&ed of being their adherents, with the Bo o
;:mnft rigour. VIII.

N'OTHING could be more repugnant to theKi!g's g6
Themes, or more disagreeable to his inclination,The
than t:efe propositions. Averse through his wholeKilg'sre-
lfc, to any course, where he expected opposition ""1ifl'f

dangr... an son 1with re-

rdanger; and fond of attaining his ends, wit th te,,t to-
.arater of moderation, and by the arts of policy,tlhm.
ie observed with concern the prejudices against
m, which were growing among the Roman Ca-
:o!ics, and resolved to make some atonement
or that part of his conduct, 'which had drawn on
:ri their indignation. Elizabeth was now well ad-
anced in years; her life had lately been in dan-
er; if any Popish competitor should arise to dif-
tc his right of fucceflion, a faicon, so powerfll
that of the banished Lords, might be extremely
ermidable; and any division among lis own fib-
idst might prove fatal, at a juncture, which would
cquire their united and most vigorous efforts. In-
cad, therefore, of the additional severities wlhIch
he atlembly proposed5 James had thoughts of mi-
gating the punishment, which they already fiif-

Ared. And as they were furrourdec, during their

edence in foreign parts, by Plilip's emiflarics;
resentment might dispose them to liften more
avourably than ever, to their filggeftions; as del-
ir might drive them to still more atrocious ac-
tons; he resolved to recall them, under certai;l con-
tio;is, into their native country. Encouraged by
'il fientiments of the King in their favour, of
ich they did not want intelligence, and wearicd
ready of the dependant and anxious life of exiles,
:y ventured to return secretly into Scotland.
0on after, they presented a petition to the King,
ggi;ng his permission to reside at their own houses,
dossering to give security for their peaceable and
utiful behaviour. James called a Convention of
Rates to deliberate on a matter of such import-
t:e, and by their ad;ice he grar:ed the petition.

So

B o o K So fc.n as they were informed of this, the menm-

Iii. bers of a committee, appointed by the last afte..
,596 'blv, met at Edinburgh, and with all the precipi-

The ra'2l tarcv of fear, and of zeal, took fiuch refolutionsas
proceed- tv tho ught neceflary for the fafet) of the kin.l
ingof'the dor,. They wrote circular letters to all the Pre
Cndpo- bvterics in Scotland; they warned them of theap
ple. proaching danger; they exhorted them to ftirup

their people to the defence of their just rights; they
commanded them to publish, in all their pulpits
the act of excommunicating the Popilh Lords; and
enjoined them to lay all those who were fufpeced
of fav-our;i Popery under the fame censure, bya
fummnary sentence, and without observing theufual
formalities of trial. And as the danger feeme
too pre.lnog to wait for the stated meetings of the
judicatories of the Church, they made choice ofthe
most eminent clergymen in different cornels ofthe
kingdom, appointed them to reside conftantlyat
Edinbu!gh, and to meet every day with the Mi-
r.iters of that city, under the name of the Stand
i,7 C-:';:.,:! f the Cburch, and vested in this body
the f.:rreme authority, by enjoining it, in imita.
tion of the ancient Roman form, to take care tha
the Church fnould receive no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconstitutional than

unprecedented, were manifest encroachments on
the royal prerogative, and bold steps toward ope
rebellion. The King's conduct, however, jufifie
in some degree such excesses. His lenity toward
the papists, so repugnant to the principles of tha
age; his pardoning the conspirators, notwithfand
ing repeated promiies to the contrary; the refpc
he paid to Lady Huntly, who was attached toth
Romi!h religion, no less than her husband; hi
corn'mittir.g the care of his daughter, the Princei
Elizabeth, to Lady Lcvirnglton, who was inseted
with the fame fuperifttion; the contempt with
which lie talked on all occasions, both of the cha.

raclte

racier of Ministers, and of their function; were a o o a
cIrcumstances which might have filled minds, not vI.
rone b) nature to jealoufl, with some suspicions; - -
rd might have precipitated into rash councils,
hose, who were far removed from intemperate
eal. But, however powerful the motives might
which influenced the Clergy, or however lau-
lble the end they had in v ievw, the conductcd their
easures with no address, and even with little pru-
ence. James discovered a firong inclination to
oid a rupture with the Church, and jealous as
e:as of his prerogative, would willingly have
ade many concefiions for the fake of peace. By
iscommand, some of the Privy Counsellors had
interview with the more moderate among the
icrgy, and enquired whether Huntly and his as-
clatesmight not, upon making proper acknow-
dgments, be again received into the bosom of the
hurch, and be exempted from any further pu-
ihment, on account of their past apoftacy an.
ealons. They replied, that though the gate of
lery stood always open for those who repented
d returned, yet as these noblemen had b1e;i
ilty of idolatry, a crime defbrving death both 1b
elaw of God, and of man, the civ il magit:rat'
auld not legally grant them a pardon; and even

lough the Church should absolve them, it was -his
.tv to infliit punishment upon them. This ir
exibility in those, who were reckoncd the most
mpliant of the order, filled the King with indig-
tion, which the imprudence and obflinacy of a
ivate Clergyman heightened into rage.
MR. David Black, Minister at St. Andrew's, d;if- : .',
rirfing in one of his sermons, according to cuF-d0t''-'
m, concerning the state of the nation, afiirmceedjlL.; '
at the King had permitted the Popish Lords to
tuirn into Scotland, and, by that aation, had dil-
'ered the treachery of his own heart; that all
P:s were the Devil's children ; that Satan had

roC.w

B o o now the guidance of the court; that the Queen
vm._ Engiand was an atheist; that the judges weremi
%.Q creants and bribers; the nobility godless anddeg|

nerate; ile Privy Counfeilors cormorants and me
of no religion; and in his prayer for the Quee
he lufed these words, We mufft pray for her f
faihion fake, but we have no cause, she will nev
do us good. James commanded him to be fu
moned before the Privy Council, to answer forfuc

Nov 1o. seditious exprefl'ons; and the Clergy, instead
The Cle-abandoning him to the punishment, which such
hi- de- . petulant and criminal attack on his superiors d
fence. served, were so imprudent as to espouse his cau

as if it had been the common one of the whole
der. The controversy concerning the immuriti
of the pulpit, and the rights of the Clergy totefti
against vices of every kind, which had been a
tated in 1584, was now revived. It was pretend
that with regard to their sacred funtion, Minifte
were subject to the Church alone; that it belong
onl- to their ecclesiastical Superiors to judge fth
truth or falfhood of dotrines, delivered in th
pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, t
King usurped this jurifdition, the church wol
from that moment, fink under servitude to thec
vil magistrate; that instead of reproving vice, wit
that honest boldness, which had often been of ad
vantage to indiv iduals, and salutary to the kin
dom, the Clergy would learn to flatter the paflio
of the Prince, and to connive at the vices
others; that the King's eagerness to punish the i
discretion of a Protestant Minister, while he was
ready to pardon the crimes of Popish conspirator
called on them to stand on their guard, and th
:ow was the time to contend for their privilege
and to prevent any encroachment on those righ
of which the church had been in poffefion ev1
since the Reformation. Influenced by these confide

rations

:tiolns, the council of the Church enjoined Black 1 o o K
:o dcline the jurifdiftion of the Privy Council. VIII.
,nd he, proud of such an opportunity to display ,596
[is zeal, presented a paper to that purpose, and
With the utmost firmness refuied to plead, or to an-
rer the questions which were put to him. In or-
Ber to add greater weight to these proceedings, the
touicil of the Church tranfrrnitted the declinature
tall the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom,
ad commanded every Minister to subscribe it, in
ernmony of his approbation.
JAMES defended his rights with no lets vigour
tat they were attacked. Sensible of the contempt
mder which his authority must fall, if the clergy
ould be permitted, publickly, and with impu-
;ity, to calumniate his ministers, and even to cen-
re himself; and knowing, by former examples,
ihat unequal reparation for such offences he might
xpeft from the judicatories of the church, he
rged on the inquiry into Black's conduet, and if-
ed a proclamation, commanding the members of
e council of the church to leave Edinburgh, and
o return to their own parilhes. Black, instead of
ubmitting, renewed his declinature; and the coun-
il, in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that
sthey met by the authority of the church, obe-
ence to it was a duty still more sacred, than that
which they owed to the King himsel'. The Privy
ouncil, notwithflanding Black's refuting to plead,
roceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry,
ronounced him guilty of the crimes of which he
ad been accused; but referred it to the King, to
ppoint what punifllment he should fufler.
MEAN while, many endeavours were uscd to
ring matters to accommodation. Almost every
ay produced some new scheme of reconcilement;
t through the King's fickleness, the obstinacy of
he Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they
11 proved ineffecual. Both parties appealed to the
Vo\l.. II. N people,

B o o : people, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accufa-
vXIII. tions, endeavoured to render each other odious,
,6_ eInfolence, tedition, treason, were the crimes with

w .hich James charged the Clergy; while they made
the pulpits resound with complaints of his exceltive
lenitr towards Papists, and of the no lets excessive
rigour, with which he opprelTed the established
Church. Exasperated by their bold invectives, he,
at last, fcntenced Black to retire beyond the river
Spey, and to reside there during his pleasure; and
orce more commanding the members of the stand-
rng council to depart from Edinburgh, he required
ail the Mlinifters in the kingdom to fubfcribea
bord, obliging themselves to submit, in the fame
manner as other fubjecrts, to the jurifdticion of the
civil courts, in matters of a civil nature.

A r-n.i. h

THIS decisive measure excited all the violent
in Ecin- pallions, xhlich possess difappoi:ted factions; and

riTsh- deeds no less violent immediately followed. These

must be imputed in part to the artifices of some
courtiers, who expected to reap advantage from
the calamities of their country, or nho hoped to
leflen the authority of the Octavians, by engaging
th:em n hostilities with the church. On one hand,
the; informed the King that the citizens of Edin-
burgh were under arms every night, and had
planted a strong guard round the houses of their
mhni--crs. James, in order to put a stop to this
imaginary infuilt on his government, iflled a pro-
clamation, commanding twenty-four of the prin-
cipal citizens to leave the town, within fix hours.
On the other hand, they .vrote. to the Ministers,
adifi-g them to look to their o'.;n safety, as
Hu.';1-- lhad been secretly admitted to an interview

ti:h the King, and had been the author of the e-

vere prFclamation, against the citizens of Edin-
b.rg'. i. The doulbted no more of the truth o

thin

* TchI' mntter; v.-ere induftriuflv aggravated hy pertlo!,
L , Wiili;:. both r iitr s to ourlue violnit uca!ui cs ili;,her r

Ll

;in:
i96

this intelligence, than the King had done of that B o K

hllich he received, and fell as blindly into the VIII
snare. The letter came to their hands, just as'5"9
one of their number was going to mount the pul-
pit. They resolved that he ihould acquaint theDec. ,7.
people of their danger; and he painted it, with all
the strong colours, which men naturally employ,
i: describing any dreadful and instant calamity.
W hen the sermon was over, he desired the nobles
and gcntlemen to assemble in the Little Church.
The whole multitule, terrified at what they had
heard, crowded thither; they promised and vowed
to sand by the Church; they drew up a petition
to the King, craving the redress ofthofe grievances;
of \hich the Clergy complained, and beseeching
im to deliver them from all future apprehensions:
f danger, by removing such of his Counsellors, as
were known to be enemies of the Protestant re!i-
gion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Burgesses,
and two Ministers, were appointed to present it.
he King happened to be in the great hall of theThe King
Tolbooth, where the court of feflion was fitting. in danger.
he manner in which the petition was delivered,
s well as its contents, offended him. He gave
n haughty reply; the petitioners inlifted with
armth; and a promiscuous multitude pressing
nto the room, James retired abruptly into another
partment, and commanded the gates to be shut
ehind him. The deputies returned to the multi-
tude, who were still alTembled, and to whom a mi-
lfter had been reading, in their absence, the frory
sHaman. Vhen they reported that the King
ad refilfed to liften to their petition, the Church
as filled in a moment with noise, threatnings,
'efe reports were altogether destitute of foundation. As their
i wlnrs svere supposed to be in danger, some of the more zea-
"i citizens had determined to defend them, by foice of arm.;.
:ch. IMen.. z 250. Huntly had been privately in Edinburgh.
:er he had an interview, if not with the King, at teaft with
mie ofhis .;inilters. Birch. Ibid 2zo.

N 2. execrations,

Bo c K execrations, and all the outrage and confusion of
RIII a popular tumult. Some called for their arms,
-'-'-some to bring out the wicked Haman; oth.er

cried, the sword of the Lord and of Gideon; and
ruhing out with the most furious impetuosity, fur-
rounded the Tolbooth, threatening the King him-
self, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom
they named, that they might tear them in pieces
The magistrates of the city, partly by authority,
partly by force, endeavoured to quell the tumult;
the King attempted to sooth the malecontents, by
promising to receive their petitions, when presented
in a regular manner; the Ministers, sensible o
their own rashness in kindling such a flame, re-
conded both; and the rage of the populace, fu
tiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all difered,
and the King returned to the palace; happy i
having escaped from an infurrefion, which, thoug
the instantaneous and unconcerted effect of pop
lar fury, had exposed his life to imminent danger
and was confidered by him as an unpardonablef
front to his authority *.

As ioon as he retired, the leaders of the malecon

tents assembled, in order to prepare their petitio
The punishment of the Popilh Lords; the remoa
of those Counsellors, who were fulpeted offavour
ing their persons or opinions; the repeal of all t
late acts of council, subversive of the authorito
the Church; together with an act approvingth
proceedings of the standing council; werethechi
of their demands. But the King's indignation w
ftli so high, that the deputies, chosen for that pui
pole, durst not venture, that night, to prefentre
queits w hich could not fail of kindling his rage 2

zi.de- enew. Before next morning, James, with all h
burgh, at tendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the feftion, aS
ani pro- other courts ofjuftice, were required to leave a cit
cdv-iw:h where it was no longer consistent either with th:

fel 'eriv

a-

'ain: he * Spotfv.-. 417, &c. Ca!d. 5. 54, &c. Birch. Mere. 2. .
c.iizcns. fatel

.ifety, or their dignity to remain; and the noblemmn B o o K
a. d barons were commanded to return to their own VIII.
houles, and not to reafemble without the King's ~6.
p.rminion. The vigour, with which the King at-
cd, struck a damp upon the spirits of his adverfa-
ries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
ftiner by his absence, and the removal of the courts
nFiju!ice, repented already of their conduct. The
Miifters alone resolved to maintain the contest.
They endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dif-
perliig; they inflamed the people by violent invec-
I:vs agai:ft the King; they laboured to procure
fihbliriptions to an association for their mutual de-
fence; and conscious what lustre and power the
i;::cion of rome of the greater nobles would add to
their cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to
Lord Hamilton, that the people, moved by the
;-ord of God, and provoked by the injuries offered
to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
r.obles had determined to protect the Proteitant Re-
liion, which owed its establishment to the piety
a:d valour of their ancestors; that they wanted on-
I; a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
rigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less
than his noble birth, entitled him to that honour:
They conjured him therefore not to disappoint their
hopes and wishes, nor to refuse the suffering Church
that aid which flhe si much needed. Lord Ha-
milton, instead of complying with their desire, car-
ried the letter directly to the King, whom this new
n:lilt irritated to fuich a degree, that he commanded
the magiftratesof Edinburghl i ftantly to seize their
Ministers, as manifcft ince:diaries, and encouragers
of rebellion. The magiitrates, in order to regain
!;e King's favour, vere preparing to obey; and
tile Ministers, vwho saw no other hope of safety, fled

I597.

towards England *. The King

THIS uniuccefsful infiurrction, instead of over-hlumbles
turning, established the King's authority. Those the power

of the
Spotfw. 451. Cald. 5. 1. Church.

N , con-

Bo o concerned in it were confounded and dilperfed.

iII.- And the reft of his fubjeCfs, in order to avoid fulti
. picion, or to gain his favour, contended who should
,an. -. be mcit forward to execute his vengeance. A Con-

vention of estates being called, pronounced thelate
insurrection to be high treason; ordained every Mi-
nifter to subscribe a declaration of his fubmifionto
the King'sjurifdicion, in all matters civil and cri-
minal; impowered magiflrates to commit, instantly,
to prison any Minister, who, in his sermons, should
utter any indecent reflections on the King's conduct;
prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet,

ithout the King's license; commanded that no
person should be elected a magistrate of Edinburgh,
for the future, without the King's approbation; and
that, in the mean time, the present magistrates
should either discover, and inflict condign punilf-
ment on the authors of the late tumult, or the city
itself should be subjected to all the penalties of that
treasonable action .

Abridges AR M ED with the authority of these decrees,James
the privi- resolved to crush entirely the mutinous spirit of his
iees ot fiubjects. As the Clergy had, hitherto, derived
ze of E-their chief credit and strength from the favourand
dinburgh. zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his first care was

to humble them. Though the magistrates submit-
ted to him in the most abject terms; though they
vindicated themselves, and their fellow citizens,
from the most distant intention of violating his roy-
al person or authority; though, after the ftriteft
fcrutinv, no circumstances that could fix on them
the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been dif-
covered; though many of the nobles, and such ot
the clerg) as still retained any degree of favour, in-
terceded in their behalf; neither acknowledgments,
nor intercelEions, were of the least availt. The
Feb. 28. King continued inexorable, the city was declared to

*Cald. 5. 147- t Ibid. 5. 149.

},ve forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to B o o K
be liable to all the penalties of treason. The capital
ns the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deserted '59
1iv its ministers, abandoned by the courts ofjuftice,
a .d proscribed by the King, remained in desolation
a;d despair. The courtiers even threatened to raze
the city to the foundation, and to erect a pillar
here it flood, as an everlasting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, ewho inter-
posed in their favour, and moved by the continual
lolicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-IMarch2 r
7zens from the penalties of law, but at the fame
Aime, he stripped them of their most important pri-
\ileees; they were neither allowed to elect their
W'!l magistrates, nor their own ministers; many
:evw burdens were imposed on them; and a great
lim of money was exacted by way of peace offer-

TAMES was, mean while, equally afiduous, andNew re-
ao lcls successful, in circumscribing the jurifdidion gulatins
of the Church. Experience had discovered that to wg'l te-

r gard to

attempt this, by ats of parliament, and fentencesth,
of privy council, was both ineffedual, and odious. Church.
He had recourse, now, to an expedient more artful,
|;1 better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclesiastical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the clergy were extreme-
lv indigent, and unprovided of legal stipends; the

lifters in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, not-

withstanding the parity established by the Prefby-
terian governme ir, had aflumed a leading in the
Church, which filled their brethren with enry;
every numerous body of men is fuiceptible of fit:
dc: and lfrong imprefions, and liable to b1 in'l,
ecced, corrupted and overawed. Induced by t.
conliderations, James thouht it pofiible to gmin, o
CLergy, whom he had in vain attempted to lubte in

* Spotfw. 4-4, 444-

N 4 Piopcr

B o o K Proper agents were let to work all over the king.
vIT1 domr; p!omifes, flattery, and threats were emplo\-
.9~- .
ed; the ufurpatin:.s of the brethren near the capital

were aggravated; the j-aloufy of their power, which
was growing in the diflant provinces, was augment.
ed; and two different General Atfemblies were held,
in both which, notxithflanding the zeal and bold-
nets, wherev ith a few leading Clergymen defended
the privileges of the Church, a majority declaredin
a-vour of thole meafurcs, which were agreeable to
the King. Many practices, which had continued
firce the Reformation, were condemned; many
points ofdi lcipli.:.e, xhich had hitherto been reckorn
ed sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the
license, with which minilters difcnurfed of political
matters, was restrained; the freedom, with which
they inveighed againfl particular persons, censured;
sentences of fumn-.ary excommunication declared
iniax, full; the convokirng a General Assembly, with-
out the King's permisiion, prohibited; and the right
of nominating ministers, to the principal towns,
vefied in the Crown. Thus, the Clergy themselves
surrendered privileges, which it would have been/
dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted toa
yoke, more intolerable than any James would ven-
ture to impose by force; while those who continu-
ed to oppose his measures, instead of their former
popular topic of the Kirn's violent encroachments
on ajurifdicion which did not belong to him, were
obliged to turn their outcries against the corrupti-
ons of their own order .

BY the authority of these aiTemblies, the Popifhl

Earls were allowed to make a public recantationof
tie ir errors; were absolved from the sentence of ex-
tercamur.ic.ation; and received into the bosom of the
nor li c. BuE't, not many years after, they relapsed
Kin, their former errors, were again reconciled to

-hurch of Rome, and by their apoftacy julified

* Spotf.v. 433. Cald. 5. 189, 233.

11

il some degree, the fears and scruples of the Clergy B o o
,itlh regard to their absolution.

THE Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the inter-~""
c-i)n of these assemblies, the liberty of returning
t, th:ir Charges in the city. But this liberty was
c,,c-d in such a manner as greatly abridged their
poer. The city wasdivided into distinct parifnes;
tte number of Ministers doubled ; persons on whose
fidlity the King could rely were fixed in the new
pa;ifes; and these circumstances, added to the au-
thrity of the late decrees of the Church, contri-
b);t"d to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefi-
aRical affairs, which James poffelfed during the re-
mrai:der of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modellhng tlre
Church, that the other transactions of this period
fcaice deserve to be remembered. The Oftavians,
envied by the other Courtiers, and splitting into
aitions among themselves, resigned their commil-
ion; and the administration of the revenue return-
inginto its former channel, both the King and the
ratlon were deprived of the benefit of their regular
and frugal oeconomy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was Dec 11.
h-'d in order to restore Huntly, and his a-Toci;ates,
to their estates and honours, by repealing the act of
orfeiture passed against them. The authority of
his supreme court was likewise employed to intro-
uce a farther innovation into the Church; but con-
frmable to the system whlich the King had now
dopted, the motion for this purpose tool its riferccltfnr-
om the Clergy themselves. As the act of general tic; rellor-
nnexation, and that eitablifhing the Presbyterian ''toafeat
overnmernt had reduced the few Eilfops, who still1 ,t' i
alrvived, to poverty and contempt; as those who
olfeed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere !ay-
n, and many of them temporal Peers, few or
oe of the Ecclefiafical order remnained to vote inl
arliament, and by means of that, the influence of

the
- T- - 1

B o o K the Crown was eonfiderably diminished there, and

l. .. a proper balance to the power and number of the
,.. nobles was wanting. But the prejudices, the nation

had conceived against the name and character of
Bishops, were so violent, that James was obliged,
with the utmost care, to avoid the appearanceofa
design to revive that order. He prevailed therefor
on the commilTion appointed by iaft assembly to
complain to the parliament, that the Church was
the only body in the kingdom destitute of its repre.
fentatives in that supreme court, where it so nearly
concerned every order to have fome,who were bound
to defend its rights; and to crave that a competent
number of the Clergy should be admitted, accord.
ing to ancient custom, to a feat there. In compli-
ance with their request, an ac't was passed, by which
those Ministers, on whom the King should confer
the vacant Bifhopricks and Abbeys, were intitled
to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy migh
conceive no jealousy of any encroachment on their
privileges, it was remitted to the General Affembl,
to determine what spiritual jurifdition or authorit
in the government of the Church these person
!hould poilela .

THE King, however, found it no easy matterto

obtain the concurrence of the Ecclesiastical judica-
tories, in \x hich the act of parliament met witha
fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived
how much lustre this new privilege would reflec
upon their order; though they were not insensible
of the great acceifion of personal power and dig-
ni:y, which many of them would acquire, by be-
irg admitted to the supreme council of the nation
their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and
to that, they la rificed every consideration of inte-
reft or ambition. All the King's profeflions of re-
gard for the present conflitution of the Church, did
r:ct convince them of his sincerity; all the device

SDotfw 45o Parlt sth lac. V. c. 235.

tha

that could be invented for restraining and circum- B o o
fcribinlg the jurifdidCion of those, who were to be VIIi
railed to this new honour, did not diminish their ~" "'°
ieaklllu a and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy
advances, and though admitted at first with mode-
rate authority, and under specious pretences, how
rapidl it extends its dominion. " Varnish over

ls scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen,
iitl what colours you please; deck the intruder
ith the utmost art; under all this disguise, I fee
the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments pre-
ailed among many of his brethren, and induced
them to reject power, and honours, with as much
eal, as ever those of their order courted them.
lany, however, were allured by the hopes of pre-
rment; the King himself and his MIinifters em-
lyed the fame arts, which they had tried so fuc-lMrch7.
esfully last year; and after long debates, and
ich opposition, the General Assembly declared
hat it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a feat
parliament; that it would be highly beneficial to
he Church, to have its represe-ntatives in that fil-
reme court; and that fifty one persons, a number
early equal to that of the Ecclesiastics, who were
ciently called to parliament, should be chosen
rom among the Clergy for that purpose. The
anner of their election, together with the powers
o be vested in them, were left undecided for the
relent, and furnished matter of future delibera-
ion'.

As the profpeft of succeeding to the Crown of 1599.
angland drew nearer, James multiplied precautionsJ'an' en-
1 order to render it certain. As he was allied to,,;, ,,irc
man: of the Princes of Germany by his man-iagc,ccf, to
e tent ambassadors extraordinary to their feveralgail a
o.irts, in order to explain the justness of his titlepartv in
o the Englilh throne, and to d&fire their ailillance,
'any. competitor should arise to dispute his un-

t Spctrv. 450. Cald. 5. 278.

doubted

Bo o doubted rights. These Princes readily ackno,.
V ii ledged the equity of his claim; but the aid the
"'"-"couaild afford him was distant and feeble. At thk
,5 . fame time Edward Bruce abbot of Kinlofs, hi

ambalTadnr at the Englilh court, solicited Eliza
beth, with the utmost w armth, to recognize hi;
title by frme pub'ic deed, and to deliver herouw
fibjecls from the calamities, which are occasionec
by an uncertain or disputed fi;cceflion. But ao,
had strengthened all the pallions, which had, hi.
therto, induced Elizabeth to keep this great quef.
tion obscure, and undecided; and a general and
evasive anlie.r .-as all that James could obtain. As
no impreflion could be made on the Q(een, theamr
baffador was commanded to found the disposition
of her si bjedts, and to try what progress he could
make in gining them. Bruce porfeiTed all the ta-
lents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite
for condicting a :.egoti:ion, no less delicate, than
importa:at. A Mi:niifer of this character wasinti-
tied to the co;nfde.:ce of the English. Many ol
the hiJ hcft rank u:; bocomed themselves to him withL
o:ut rolerve, n"d gave him repeated afTurancesol
their refoln rion to ait-rt his master's right, in oppo
fition to every pretender*. And as several pam-
phlets w ere dirperfed, at this time, in England, con-
taining obhcctio:-s to his title, James employed fom
learned men in . is kingdom to answer these cavi-l
lers, and to ex-pllin thi_ advantages which wonul
result to bo.!h kirngdoms, by the union of thi
Crown',s. The!e hooks were eagerly read, and co-
tributed not a little to reconcile the Englilh to ta
event. A book pubiifhed this year, by the Kinp
1himelf, p-.:odued an effiect till more favourabk
It was int;iud A B.ifiz-;; D;iron, and contained pre
cepts c,::.crniig the art of government, addrelTei
to Prince I-IenDry his Ibn. Notwithstanding th
great alterations and refinements in national taft
since that time, we must allow this to be no co-

* Johnft. ^:.

tenDti"'J

temptible performance, and not to be inferior to the B o o
works of most cotemporary writers, either in pu- V11-
rity of flyle or justness of composition. Even the '99
amin parade of erudition with which it abounds,
3 :d which now disgusts us, railed the admiration of
that age; and as it was filled with rholt general
railes, which speculative authors deliver for render-
ing a nation happy, and of which James could dif-
colrfe with great plausibility, though often incapa-
ble of putting them in practice; the English con-
ceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expected
an increase of national honour and prnfperity, under
a Prince so profoundly flilled in politics, and who
Rave such a specimen both of his vwidom, and of
bis love to his people t. I- Clld.

THE Queen of England's sentiments concernings otf0\-
lames, were very different from thole of her fiib-4-'
ieds. His exceflive indulgence towards the Popilil
Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Eeaton, the Popiili
Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scot-
land at the time of the Reformation, to the poffcf-
sion of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap-
pointing him his Ambaflador at the court of France;
the applause he bellowed, in the Eafilicon Doron,
on those who adhered to the Queen his mother,
Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of a
mind alienated from the protestant religion; and
fufpeEted that he would soon revolt from the pro-
frcion of it. These suspicions seemed to be fuil Accrufl
confirmed, by a discovery which came from thel '" 0'
Master of Gray, who resided at that time in Ital-y, ,,ll'
and who, rather than susser his intriguing spirit tOiiio i

rc

beidle, demeaned, himielf so far as to adt as a fp,- 1opI
fr the Engliif court. He conveyed to Elizabeth
tile copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Cie-
ment VIII in which the Kingl, after many exprel-
so::s of regard for that pontiff, and of gratitude
frr his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
;':e Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in or-

der

o o der to render the intercourse between the courtof
mIII- Rome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he
'--'solicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop

"9 of Vaizon, a Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardi-

nal '. Elizabeth, who had received, by another
chan:.el , some imperfect intelligence of this cor-
refponder.ce, was filled with just furprize, and im-
mncdiate!y dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to in-
quire more fully into the truth of the matter, and
to reproach James for an action so unbecominga
Protestant prince. He was no less astonished at the
accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing
but the consciousness of innocence could infpirc, as.
firmed the vwhole to be a mere calumny, and the
letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpose
to bring his sincerity in Religion to be fufpeBted.
Eiphinglton the Secretary of state denied the mat-
ter with equal solemnity. It came to be known by
a very singular accident, which happened some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth
had received was well founded, though at the fame
time the King's declarations of his own innocence
were perfec&ly consistent with truth. Cardinal Bel,
larmine, in a reply which he published to a contro-
verfia! treartile, of which the King was the author,
accotled him of having abandoned the favourable
sentiments which he had once entertained of the
Roman Catholic religion, and as a proof of this
quoted his letter to Clement VIII. It was impoffi-
bUe, a:-v lo ger, to believe this to be a fi&ion; and
it ;was a matter too delicate to be passed over with-
oult itrict inquiry. James immediately examined
Elphinglgto, and his confe!lion unravelled the whole
m-yfterv. He acknowledged that he had fhuffledin
this letter among other papers, which he laid before
the King to be ligned, w ho, fufpeting no such de-
ceit, fublcribed it together with the reft, and with-
out knowing mwhat it contained; that he hadno
other motive, how\ Lvcr, to this ac:ion, but zeal for

* Cxa. ;- ± t Wnv-. Meni. vol. i. 37, 52.

1,;

Iis majesty's service; and,~by flattering the Roman B o o I
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the v_'_ .

ng's government, he imagined that he was pa-"YJ
rng the way for his more easy accefiion to the 599
nglifh throne. The Privy Council of England
entertained very different sentiments of the Se-
cretary's condut. In their opinion, not only the
in's reputation had been exposed to reproach,
but his life to danger, by this rash imposture; they
een imputed the gun-powder treason to the rage
ad dilappointment of the Papists, upon finding
at the hopes which this letter inspired were fruf-
rated. The Secretary was sent a prisoner into
cotland, to be tried- for high treason. His peers
und him guilty; but, by the Queen's intercef-
on, he obtained a pardon *.
ACCORDING to the account of other historians,
mes himself was no stranger to this correfpon-
erce with the Pope; and, if we believe them, El-
higfton being intimidated by the threats of the
nglilh council, and deceived by the artifices of
e Earl of Dunbar, concealed some circumstances
his narrative of this tranfaftion, and falsified
hers; and, at the expence of his own fame, and
ith the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a
eil over this part of his master's conduct t.
BUT whether we impute the writing of this let-Jamc .-.
er to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King'sgreat

nomand, it is certain, that, about this time, P"'.s:'
ames was at the utmost pains to gain the friend-"on,ajn
p of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary Catholic,
recaution towards facilitating his accellion to the
nglilh throne. Lord Home, who was himself a
apit, was entrusted with a secret commifiion to
e Popet; the Archbishop of Glasgow was an
Wire inifrument with those of his own religion §.
he Pope expressed such favourable sentiments
th of the King, and of his right to the Crown 'o
l Spri\fw. 456, 507. JohnM . 448. t Cald. vol v. 32 '.

l \." . i inw. M
\\ ci. svol ii 5-. C a'!id. Iol. vi. 14

EnglardLa

B o o England, that James tlhought himself bound, so
, UIL- years after, to acknowledge the obligation in apu
* 1-99. li manner*. Sir James Lindsay made great p

grefs in gaining the Engliih Papists to acknowled
his MaieRft's title. Of all these intriguesElizabe
received cbicure hints, from different quarter
The more imperfectly the knew, the more violend
fne thilpecaed the King's designs; and the natui
jealou!,s of her temper increasing with age, fheo
lerved his conduct with greater solicitude than eve

6,co. THE quefions with regard to the electionan

'>!.::2, power of the representatives of the church, w
I-Ii x-g finally decided this year, by the General Affembl
x,,\:+e- which met at Montrose. That place was chose
-,-A to as most convenient for the ministers of the nort

among whom the King's influence chiefly lay. An
ch rch. al:itough great numbers resorted from the northe

provinces, and the King employed his whole in
reft, ara the authority of his own presence, togai
a maijrity, the following regulations were withd
ficulty agreed on. That the General Affemblyfh
recommend fix persons to every vacant benefic
which gave a title to a feat in Parliament, out
.-hom the King shall nominate one¢ that thep
son io elected, after obtaining his feat in Parliamen
lhall neither propose, nor content to any thing the
that may affect the interest of the church, witho
special i:lructiors to that purpose; that he f
be an\v. erable for his condu&t to every General
enl-rbly; and submit to its censure, without appe
'.;n pain of infamy and excommunication;
he fin!l ditcharge the duties of a Pastor, in apat
cular congregation; that he shall not usurp anye
c!efiafticai jurisdiction, superior to that of his othi
brethren; that if the church inflict on him thecer
sure of deprivation, he hall, thereby, forfeithisfa
in Parliament; that he shall annually resign his con
miilfion to the General Assembly, which may ber
so.ed to hi.:n, cr not, ns the AiTembl, with t

· Ca2. vol. v. 6-+.,

King's approbation, shall judge most expedient for B o o K
the good of the Church *. Nothing could be more VIII.
repugnant to the idea of Episcopal government, ",ó
than these regulations. It was not in consequence
of rights derived from their office, but of powers
conferred by a commiflion, that ecclesiastical per-
sons were to be admitted to a feat in Parliament;
they were the representatives, not the superiors of
the clergy. Destitute of all spiritual authority, even
their civil jurisdiction was temporary. James, how-
ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able
to fake offthefe fetters, and gradually acquire all
e privileges which belonged to the episcopal or-
er. The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And
e contended for, and they opposed the nomina-
tion of there commifioners, not so much on ac-
count of the powers then vested in them, as of those,
o which it was believed they would soon attain t.
DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an
nufual tranquillity. The clergy, after many ftrug-
es, were brought under great subjeCtion; the Po-
ifh earls were restored to their estates and honours,
y the authority of Parliament, and with the con-
nt of the church; the reft of the nobles were at
ace among themselves, and obedient to the royal
uthority; when, in the midst of this security, theGowry'.
ing's life was exposed to the utmost danger, byconfpi-
conspiracy altogether unexpected, and almost in-racy
xplicable. The authors of it where John Ruthven
arl of Gowry, and his brother Alexander, the
ns of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
584. Nature had adorned both there young men,
pecially the elder brother, with many accormplifh-
ents, to which education had added its most ele-
ant improvements. More learned, than is usual
mong persons of their rank ; more religious, than
common at their age of life; generous, brave,
popular; their countrymen, far from thinking them
:apable of any atrocious crime, conceived the most

'Spotfw. 453, 4.7. CaJ. vol v. 368. t SpoIfw. 454.
VL 11. II. ftnguine

B o o sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwith.
VIIi. standing all these noble qualities, some unknown
1600 imotive engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we

adhere to the account commonly received, must
be transmitted to posterity, as one of the most
wicked, as well as one of the worst concerted, of
vwhich history makes any mention.

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who re.

fided during the hunting season in his Palace of
Falkland, was going out to his sport early in the
morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruth.
ven, who with an air of great importance, told the
King, that the evening before he had met an un.
known man, of a suspicious afpedt, walking alone
in a bye path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, 2
pot filled with a vast quantity of foreign gold; that
he had immediately seized both him and his trea.
sure, and without communicating the matter to
any person, had kept him confined and bound in
solitary house; and that he thought it his duty t
impart such a singular event, first of all to his Ma.
jefty. James immediately fufpeded this unknown
person to be a trafficking priest, supplied with f
reign coin, in order to excite new commotions i
the kingdom; and resolved to impower the Magi
ftrates of Perth to call the person before them, ani
inquire into all the circumstances of the story
Ruthven violently opposed this resolution, and Titl
many arguments urged the King to ride direvtyt
Perth, and to examine the matter with his Owi
eyes. Mean while the chafe began; and James
rnotwithftanding his passion for that amufemenl
could not help ruminating on the firangenefs of th
tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At last, h
called him, and promised when the sport was ove
to set out for Perth. The chafe, however, coi;t
nued long; and Ruthven, who all the while kel
close by the King, was still calling on him to mal'
halte. At the death of the Buck, he would r.

allo

allow James to stay till a fresh horse was brought B o o K
him; and observing the Duke of Lenox and the VIIi.
Earl of Mar preparing to accompany the King, he r76e -
entreated him to countermand them. This James
refused; and though Ruthven's impatience and
anxiety, as well as the apparent perturbation in his
whole behaviour, raied some suspicions in his
mind; yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's folici-
tations, prevailed on him to set out for Perth. When
within a mile of the towns Ruthven rode forward
to inform his brother of the King's arrival, though
he had already dispatched two messengers for that
purpose. At a little distance from the town, the
Earl attended by several of the citizens, met the
King, who had only twenty persons in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's enter-
tainment; the Earl appeared pensive and embar-
raffed, and was at no pains to atone, by his cour-
tefy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he
treated his guests. When the King's repast was
over, his attendants were led to dine in another
room, and he being left almost alone, Ruthven
v!hifpered him, that now was the time to go to the
chamber where the unknown person was kept.
James commanded him to bring Sir Thomas Erf-
kine along with him; but, instead of that, Ruth-
ven ordered him not to follow: and conduting the
King up a stair-case, and then through several
apartments, the doors of which he locked behind
lim, led him at last into a small ifudy, in which
there flood a man clad in armour, and with a sword
and dagger by his fide. The King, who expected
to have found one difarnied and bound, started at
the fight, and enquired if this was the person; but
Ruthven fiatching the dagger from the girdle of
the man in armour, and holding it to the King's
breast, " Remember, said he, h.ow unjustly my fa-

ther suffered by your command you are now
" my prifoncr; submit to my disposal without re-
" fiiance, or outcry, or this dgger shall instantly

0 ? " avenge

Bo oK " avenge his blood." James expoftulated witl]
VIII. Ruthven, intreated, and flattered, him. Theman
160o' whom he found il the study, flood, all the while,

trembling, and dismayed, without courage eitherto
aid the King, or to second his aggreflor. Ruthven
protested that if the King railed no outcry, his life
should be safe; and moved by some unknown rea.
son, retired in order to call his brother, leaving to
the man in armour the care of the King, whom he
bound by oath, not to make any noise during his
absence.

WHILE the King was in this dangerous situation,

his attendants growing impatient to know whither
he had retired, one of Gowry's attendants entered
the room hastily, and told them that the Kinghad
just rode away towards Falkland. All of them
ru!hed out into the street; and the Earl, in theut-
most hurry, called for their horses. But, by this
time, his brother had returned to the King, and
swearing that now there was no remedy; he be-
hoved to die; offered to bind his hands. Unarmed
as James was, he scorned to submit to that indig-
nit); and closing with the assassin, a fierce ftrug-
gle ensued. The man in armour stood as formerly,
amazed and motionless; and the King dragging
Ruthven towards a window, which during his ab'
fence he had persuaded the person with whom he
was left, to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted
voice, " Treason! Treason! Help! I am mur-
dered!" His attendants heard, and knew the voice;
ard saw, at the window, a hand which grasped the
King's neck w ith violence. They flew with preci-
pitation to his afffitance. ' Lenox and Mar with the
greater number, ran up the principal stair-case,
where they found all the doors shut, which they
battered with the utmost fury, endeavouring to burst
them open. But Sir John Ramfey,entering by a back-
stair, which led to the apartment where the King
was, found the door open; and rushing upon Ruth-
ven, who was frill struggling with the King, struck

him

him twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards B o o K
the stair-case, where Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir , .
Hugh Herries met, and killed him; he crying with ^600
'his last breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this
action." During this scuffle, the man, who had been
concealed in the study, escaped unobserved. To-
gether with Ramsey, Erskine, and Herreis, one
W\ilson a footman entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to shut the
door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn sword in each
hand, followed by seven of his attendants well
armed, and with a loud voice threatned them all
with infiant death. They immediately thrust the
King into the little study, and shutting the door up-
on him, encountred the Earl. Notwithitanding the
inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced
Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having re-
ceived several wounds, immediately fled. Three of
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the con-
flit. A dreadful noise continued still at the opposite
door. where many persons laboured in vain to force
a passage; and the King being afiured that they were
Lenox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened
on the inside. They ran to the King, whom they
unexpectedly found safe, with franfports of congra-
tulation; and he, falling on his knees, with all his
attendants around him, offered solemn thanks to
God for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger,
however, was not yet over. The inhabitants of the
town, whose Provost Gowrie was, and by whom he
sas extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the
house, threatning revenge, with many insolent and
opprobrious speeches against the King. James en-
deavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by
speaking to them from the window; he admitted
their magistrates into the house; related to them
the whole circumifances of the fadft and their fury
rufiding by degrees, they dispersed. On searching

03 the

B o o K the Earl's pockets for papers, that might discover
i i. his designs and accomplices, nothing was found but
16oo. a small parchment bag, full of magical charaders

and words of enchantment; and if we may believe
the account of the conspiracy published by the
King, " while there were about him, the wound
"of which he died, bled not; but as soon as they
" were taken away, the blood gushed out in great

abundance." After all the dangerous adven-

tures of this bufv day, the King returned in the
evening to Falkland, having committed the dead
bodies of the two brothers to the custody of the
Magistrates of Perth.

The n.o- NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the
t'e nt. King gave of all the circumstances of this confpi-

-racy against his life, the motives which induced the

eafil ex- two brothers to attempt an action fT detestable, the
p:'r.ed. end they had in view, and the accomplices, on

whose aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
The words of Ruthven to the King gave some
grounds to think, that the desire of revenging their
father's death had instigated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it
is scarce probable that they could impute them to
the King, whose youth and fubjetion, at that
time, to the violence of a faction, exempted him
from being the object of resentment, on accountof
actions which were not done by his command,
James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs|
which the father had suffered, by benefits to his chil-
dren; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour,
acknowledged it with the warmest expreffions.o
gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being
convicted ofaffifting him in this assault on theKing'
servants, were executed at Perth; but they could
give no light into the motives, which had prompt
ed their master to an acion so repugnant to these
acknowledgments. Diligent search was made for
the person concealed in the itudy, and from him
great discoveres were expected. But Andrew Hen-l

derfoa

derfon the Earl's steward, who upon a promise of B o o K
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as VII.
much a stranger to his master's design as the reft; 6oo
and tho' placed in the study by Gowrie's command,
he did not even know for what end that fiation had
been assigned him. The whole tranfaftion remain-
ed as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two bro-
thers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme
.ithout either confidant or accomplice, with un-
exampled secrecy as well as wickedness.

AN accident, no less strange than the other cir-Sprot's
cumftances of the story, and which happened nined'e°ove-

ries con-

years after, discovered that this opinion, howevercerning it
plausible, was ill founded; and that the two bro-
dhers had not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among fe-
veral persons that he knew some secrets relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought the
matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary,
and partly forced from him by torture. According
to his account, Logan of Reftalring, a gentleman of
an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was
privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent
interviews with him, in order to concert the plan of
their operationsi the Earl had corresponded with
him to the fame purpqfe; and one Bour, Logan's
confidant, was trusted with the secret, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour
were now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had
read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan, on
that occasion; and in confirmation of his teftimo-
ny, several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fa-
tal to himself had prompted Sprot to steal from
among Bour's papers, were produced*. These

0 4 were

Logan's letters were five in number, One to Bour, ano-
ther to Gowrie, and three of them without any direction ; nor

could

B o o K were compared, by the privy council, with paper,
v11i of Logan's hand writing, and the resemblance was
i6o-. manifest. Persons of undoubted credit, and well

qualified to judge of the matter, examined them,
and swore to their authenticity. Death itfelfdid
not exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones were
dug up, and tried for High Treason, and by a fen-
tence, equally odious and illegal', his lands were

forfeited,

could Sprot discover the name of the person to whom they
wvere written. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Hs-
r.ourable. It appears from this, however, and from other
words in the letter, Crom. 95, that there were several persons
privy to the conspiracy. The date of the first letter is July

S8th. Mr. Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan
only five days before. Ibid. It appears from the originalfum-
runs of Forfaulture againit Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he
had letters addressed to him with regard to a conspiracy equally
dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not
read. " Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, dicti Georgii
"opera in legendis omnibus fcriptis ad eum miffs, vel perti-
"nentibus, utebatur." This is altogether strange; and no-
thing but the capricious charaeter of Logan can account fcr
his choofing such a confidant.

* By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High-

Treason might be tried even after death. This practice was
adopted by the Scots, without any limitation, Parl. 1540. c. 69.
But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
he dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper reftric-
tions, by an a& A. D. 1542. which has never been printed.
The words of it are, " And because the said Lords (i. e. the
Lords of articles) think that the said ad (viz. in 1540) too ge-
neral, and prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore la-
tutes and ordains that the said at Shall have no place in time
coming, but against the heirs of them that notoriously commit
or /hall commit lefe Majesty against the King's person, againit
the realm for averting the faime, andagainft them that Jhall hap-
pen to betray the King's army allenarly, and being notourly
known in their time; and the heirs of there persons to be called
and judged within five years after the decease of the said per-
sons committers of the said crimes; and the said time being
hvpaft, the said heirs never to be pursued for the-fame." The
fenrence against Logan violated this statute in two particulars.
He was not notourly known during his life to be an accomplice
:n the crime for which he was tried; and his heirs were called in
question more than five years after his death. It is remarkable,
t.-t this statute teems not to have been attended to in the par-

liament

2r9

otrfeited, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot B o o K
was condemned to be hanged for misprision oftrea- VII.
son. He adhered to his confeflion to the last, and 6
having promised, on the scaffold, to give the spec-
tators a sign in confirmation of the truth of what he
had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he-
as thrown off the ladder by the executioner *.

But

lient which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumstance
ierves notice. As it is a maxim ofjuftice that no person can
tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of
heir forms, and often absurd in their devices for preserving
hem, they contrived that in any process against a dead person,
s corps or bones flhall be presented at the bar. Examples of
is occur frequently in the Scottish history. After the battle
fCorrichie, the dead body of the Earl of Huntly was pre-
nted in parliament, before sentence offorfaulture was pro-
ounced againif him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gow-
ieand his brother were preserved, in order that they might be
rouced in parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with
he fame rule, were dug up. Mackenz. Crim. Law. Book i.
it. 6. §. 22.
° It appears that Archbishop Spotfwood was present at the
secution of Sprot. Crom. 1 5: and yet he seems to have given
credit to his discoveries. The manner in which he speaks of
mis remarkable: " Whether or not I should mention the ar-
raignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at
Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His confeflion, though volun-
tary and constant, carrying small probability. The man de-
poled, &c. It seemed to be a very fiction, and a mere in-
vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he shew the
letter, nor could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went
about the treason so secretly, would have communicated the
matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 508.
otfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which
gan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
[cyof his letters. He himself was probably present in par-
ient at the trial. The earl of Dunbar, of whom he always
eaks with the highest respect, was the person who dire&ed
e process against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration a-
inft the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithstanding all these
iumnfiances, is surprising. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the King's
socate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, re-
feats the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely con-
aing; and in an original letter of his to the King 21ft of
ae 609. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the man-
:n which the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on.

- When

B o o BUT lthough it be thus unexpectedly difcovere(
Vtn. that Gowrie did not act without aflociates, little ad
'ód-- itional light is thrown, by this discovery, on thi

motives and intention of his conduEt. It appear
almost incredible that two young men of fulch dif
tinguifhed virtue, should revolt all at once, fron
their duty, and attempt a crime so atrocious, asth,
murder of their Sovereign. It appears ftiil mor
improbable, that thev fhotlld have concerted the;
undertaking with so little foresight and prudence
If they intended that the deed f1ould have remain
ed concealed, they could not have chosen a mori
improper scene for executing it than their own house
If they intended that Henderson should have ftruc!
the blow, they could not have pitched on a mra
more destitute of courage, that must dire&t th
hand of an aflaffin; nor could they expect thathe
unsolicited, and unacquainted with their purpose
would venture on fich a desperate action. If Ruth
ven meant to stab the king with his own hand, mwh
did he withdraw the dagger after it was pointeda
his breast ? How could he leave the king, afterfuc
a plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not pre
pofterous to commit him to the keeping of such
timid and sa!le afolciate, as Henderson ? For wha
purpose did he waste time, in binding thehandsc
an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dil
patched with his sword? Had Providence permil
ted them to embrue their hands in the bloodc
their Sovereign, what advantage could have accrt
ed to them by his death? And what claims orpn

" When the probation of the summons was referred to t

Lords of Articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one voi
the said summons to be so clearly proved, that they seemed
contend who fhculd be able mort zealously to express the.fa
rfction of his heart, not only by the most pithy words, but
tears of joy , dilvers of the belt rank confefling, that that wbel
of they doubted at their entry into the house was now son
r.ifet, thatthey behoved to esteem them traitors, who thot
any longer renf'e to declare their assured resolution of theUt
of that treason."

tenfic

tensions could they have opposed to the rights of his B o o K
children*? Inevitable and instant vengeance, to- V, .
gether with perpetual infamy, were the only con- 16oo.
lfquences they could expe&t to follow such a crime.

ON the other hand, it is impossible to believe that
the King had formed any design againit the life of
the two brothers. They had not incurred his in-
dignation, by any crime; and were in no degree,
the objeEts of hisjealoufy or hatred -, nor was he of

0 % spirit

* It has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's
death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
of England, as the son of Dorothea Stewart daughter of Lord
Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce from
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third hulband.
Burnet Hist. of his own times. But this assertion is ill founded.
: appears, from undoubted evidence that Lord Methven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen
Margaret, but of Jannet Stewart Lord Methven's second wife, a
daughter of John Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though
Gowrie had really been descended from the blood royal of Eng-
l2nd, the King had at that time a son and a daughter; and be-
fides them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of
Lenox had a preferable title to the Crown of England.
I Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to to Sir Ralph Winwood, im-
putes the death of the two brothels to a cause not mentioned by
any of our Historians. " Out of Scotland we hear that there
s no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence betwixt the
King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery
of some affection between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother
(who was killed with him) was the truefl cause and motive of
that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. I. 274. Whether the follow-
ing passages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that
hulpicion, is fibmitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 22,
1602, he mentions the return of Goowric's two younger brothers
into Scotland, and adds, " The coming in of these two, and
the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and
flrnithing MIrs. Beatrix [their fitter] with such intormation as
Sir Thomas Erlkine has given, hath bred great suspicion in the
King of Scots that they come not in but upon oome dangerous
plot." In another letter, January I, 1603. " The day of
writing my last, Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by the Lady
Paill5, and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into
he court in the evening, and flowed in a chn!llber prepared for
her by tl:e Queen's direction, where the Q:en had much time

and

.221

B o o a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for rash anddel:
VI]] perate valour, as to have attempted to murder them
6oo. in their own house, where they were surrounded

with many domeltics, he only with a slender and
unarmed train; where they could call to theirafifit.
ance the inhabitants of a city, at the devotion of
their family, while he was at a distance from all aid;
and least of all would he have chosen for his affo
ciates, in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and
the Ik$e of Lenox, the former connected in cloe
friendship with the house of Gowrie, and thelatter
married to one of the Earl's filters.

A conjec- WHICHSOEVER of there oppofitefyftemsween.
ture con- brace; whether we impute the intention of murde
cerning
the intn- to Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficultie
tion of the arise, and we are involved in darkness, mystery, and
confpira- contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole
tors- conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by

deriving it from a more remote cause, we maydif
cover it to be less criminal.

To keep the King of Scots in continual depen-

dance, was one great obje& of Elizabeth's policy.
In order to this, she Sometimes toothed him; and
sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites;
and when she failed of attaining her end by theie
meansfhe encouraged the Clergy to render anyad-
miniitration she diftrufted'unpopular, by decryi
it, or stirred up some fation of the nobles to o
pose, and to overturn it. They, unacquaintedwitl
the arts of undermining a Ministry by intrigues
had recourse to the ruder practice of renderin
themselves masters of the King's person, that the
might thereby obtain the directions of his counci

and conference with her. Of this the King got notice, an
ihewed his di'like thereof to the Queen, gently reproving he
fcr it, and examining quietly of the Queen's servants of t
fame, and of other matters thereunto belonging with fuchdi
cretion and f- zre- r equires such a matter.

Those

Those nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of B o o
Ruthven, were instigated, and supported by her. VII.
Bothwell, in all his wildattempts, enjoyed her pro- Ivo._
tetion, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connections which James had been forming of late
With the Roman Catholic Princes, his secret nego-
tiations in England with her fubjeas, and the max-
ms by which he governed his own kingdom, all
ontributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded
0me great Revolution in Scotland to be approach-
ag, and it was her interest to prevent it. The
arl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful of the
cottifh nobles, and descended from anceftorswarm-
y attached to the English interest. He had adopt-
dthe fame system, and believed the welfare of his
ountry to be inseparably connected with the fubfif-
ence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
uring his residence at Paris, he had contracted an
timate friendship with Sir Henry Neville, the
ueen's ambaflador there, and was recommended
yhim to his Court, as a person of whom great
e might be made*. Elizabeth received him, as
e passed through England, with distinguished
arks of refpet and favour. From all there cir-
umifances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of
e conspiracy against the King was formed at that
me, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevail-
din that age; and from the letters of Nicholson,
izabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to be
elitute of foundation. An English ship was ob-
ved hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the
rth of Forth. The Earl's two younger brothers
ed into England, after the ill success of the confpi-
cy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And James
fifelf, though he prudently concealed it, took
eat umbrage at her behaviour. None, however,
Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt
e King's person, but only to circumscribe his au-
writ, and to thwart his schemes. His life was

' \'ir-w. 1. 156.

the

B o o s the surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained tl

I. Popish pretenders to her Crown, and their abettor
1600. from desperate attempts, to which their impatiernc

and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged themon
To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sove.
reign, would, onherpart, have been an at of theut.
most imprudence. Nor does this seem to havebee
the intention of the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven,
first of all endeavoured to decoy the King to Perd
without any attendants. When these proved more
numerous than was expected, the Earl employeda
stratagem in order to separate them from the King,
by pretending that he had rode away towardsFalk.
land, and by calling hastily for their horses, that
they might follow him. But shutting James up
mean while in a distant corner of thehoufe, andby
attempting to bind his hands, their design feemsto
have been rather to seize, than to affaflinate himn
And though Gowrie had not colleted his followers
so as to have been able to detain him long a prifl
ner, in that part of the kingdom, by open forcn
he might soon have been conveyed aboard the Engi
lifh ship, which waited perhaps to receive him, ani
he might have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a honl
of Logan's, in which, according to many obfcurt
hints in his letters, some rendezvous of the conlpil
rators w\as to be held. Amidst the furprize andtn
tor, into which the King muff have been thrown b
the violence offered to him, it was extremely na,
ral for him to conclude that hislife was fought. I
was the interest of all his followers to confirm hin
in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in orde
to add to the importance and merit of their owl
services. And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid
ed by the credulity and wonder, which the con
templation of any great and tragical event, whe
not fully understood, is apt to inspire, augmente
the vholle tranfadion. On the other hand, thee)

travagani

travagance and improbability of the circumifances, B o o K
which were added, detracted from the credit of VIII.
tlofe, which really happened; and even furnished'-6 '.
retences for calling in question the truth of the
whole conspiracy.

THE account of what had happened at PerthMany dif-
reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy coun-believe'he
cil commanded the Ministers of that city inftantlyaC ..t.cd
to afemble their people; and after relating to them ' the
the circumstances of the conspiracy formed againftKing.
the King's life, to return public thanks to God, for
the protedion which he had so visibly afforded him.
But as the first accounts transmitted to Edinburgh,
written in a hurry, and the circumstances of the
conspiracy were but imperfectly known, and the
paiions which it excited strongly felt, were indif-
tint, exaggerated, and contradictory, the Mi-
nifters laid hold of this; .and though they offered
to give public thanks to God for the King's safety,
they refused to enter into any detail of particulars,
or to utter from the chair of truth, what appeared
to be frill dubious and uncertain.

A PEW days after, the King returned to Edin-
burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public cross, in which he recited all the circum-
tfances of the conspiracy; though James himself,
in their hearing, confirmed his account; though he
commanded a narrative of the whole tranfaftion to
be published; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, still continued incredulous,
and unconvinced. Their high esteem of Gowrie,
their jealousy of every part of the King's conduct,
added to some false and many improbable circum-
lrances in the narrative, not only led them to sus-
pect the whole, but gave their suspicions an air of
credibility. But at length, the King, partly by
arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they
iere convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He

could

B o o c could be brought no further than to declare, that
VIIi. he reverenced the King's account of the tranfation
6o00. but could not fay that he himself was persuaded0s

the truth of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a
single man would have been little regarded, butas
the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread among
the people, the example of one, in so high reputa.
tion for integrity and abilities, was extremely dan.
gerous. The King was at the utmost pains tocon.
vince and to gain Bruce, but finding it impoflibleto
remove his doubts, he deprived him of his bene.
fice, and after repeated delays, and many attempts
towards a reconcilement, banished him the king.
dom .

Proceed- THE proceedings of parliament were not retard.
ings of ed by any scruples ofthisfort. The dead bodies of
parn a- the two brothers were produced there, according to
gainii thelaw; an indictment for High Treason was preferred
confpira- against them; witnesses were examined; and, by
tors. an unanimous sentence, their estates and honours

were forfeited; the punishment due to Traitors
was inflicted on their dead bodies, and as if thepu-
nifhment hitherto in use did not express sufficient
detestation of their crimes, the parliament enated
that the surname of Ruthven should be abolished;
and in order to preserve the memory of the King's
miraculous escape, and to declare the sense which
the nation had of the divine goodness, to all future
ages, appointed the fifth of Augulft to be observed,
annually, as a day of public thanksgiving t.

THOUGH

* Spotfw. 461, &c. Cald. 5. 389, &c.
- A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, theKing

publi iled a di/fourfe of their vile andunnaturalconf piracyag ain
/-s lif. In the year 171 3, George Earl of Cromertie publil-
ed an " Historical account of the conspiracy by the Earlof

Govrie, and Robert Logan of Reftalrig against KingJames
V I." He seems not to have fcen the account which the

King himnelf had given of that matter, and borrows the whole
hi':orical part from Spotfwood, ard other authors; but hehas
extracted from the public records the depoitions of the wi-
nc.rls p-rduced by the King's Council, in order to make good

· 0 thi.

' THOUGH Gowrie's confpiracyoccafioneda sudden B o o K
r.d a great alarm, it was followed by no confe- VIII.

quences ,60o

t' cnerge againR the two brothers and Logan their afrociare.
'r-i thice two treatiles our knowledge of all the material cir-
sllances of the conspiracy is derived. Thile evidence w.l:h
c: contain, one would expet to be authentic and decisive,
n accnnnt of a fat, fti!! recent, published by rcval authori-
, and( the original depnfitions of persons c:namined in presence
tle llighcft court in the nation, ought to convey a degree
eridence seldom attained in hiforical relations, and to ex-
I.Je all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But a, every thing
",;, regard to this tranfaOit' n is dark and problcmatical, the
,-'; account and the depofiions of the wirneffi-s not only vary
: contil:,tl; each other in so man' circumntances, that n-ich
1, i, iiti !c!'t for hesitation, and hitlorical fcepticilhi. The
'!:nre of -Henderfnn iS the fullest and most iimportant, but ia
:.: t F:'rticulars the King's account and his are contradicory.
\rc;ingto the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was hold-
':le (ligger at his brea', " the fellow in the study stood
,ting and tremb!ing." Disc. ti. But Hcnderlon fays that
e inilelf wrefled tthe dagger out of Mr. Rllthren's hand. Disc.
Crrm. o. PHenderfon likewise bcatcd to his wife that he
j t!hat dav twice fared the King from being stabbed. Disc.
Crrin. 53. 11. The King atrerts that Henderson opened
"':indonw during Mr Ruthven's absence. Disc. 23. lender-
:. dpofes that he was only attempting to open it when Mr.
n,;hn returned, and that during the ftruggie between the
;,g and him, he opened it. Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III.

crr may believe the Kinz, the fellow in the Itudy flood,
:;!lg the itruggle. behind the King's back inaAcive and tremb-
g all the time. Disc. 27. But Henderson affirms that he
:.'ched away the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted
t;:nl the King ; that he pulled hick Ruthven's hand while he
· endearvuring to stop the King's mouth, and that he open-
! t'" window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52. IV. By the King's ac-
T;:, iMr. Ruthven left him in the lludv, and went away in
i:;r t mneet with his brother, and the Eail came up the flairs
-''e fame purpose Dif;. 23. Henderson deposes that when
' Ruthven left the King, ' he belicves that he did not pafi
Ti the door." Cronm. 5 I. It is apparent both from the situ-
cn of the house, and from other circumstances, that there
," nst poLibly have been any interview between the bro-
:-; -. thi time. Disc.
Mtn.ierfon was twice exarmined, first at Falkland before the
:;' cJnncil in August, and next at Edinburgh before the par-

nt in November. Not to mention ofme leTser variatiorn
'";en there depositions, we flball point out two which are re-
'.. 11j P markable.
I

B o o c cences of importance; and having been concerte,
jII b-y the t.wo brothers, either without any afrociate

615o. or \with such as were unknown, and chose to remai

mnarkable.. . In his fir ft deposition Mr. Henderson relates themo
material circuniilarce of the whole in thele words. " Mr Rut}
" en pulled out the deponent's dagger and held the fanme

'his .\laiefil's hrcat, laving, -rmc..- rer ys: of my fatherm'sn
" d.r; ._)s Ia.'.' n-.~ diefcr ii, and minting to his Highntis

heart, with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame outr
Mr Ruthven's hand, and swore that as Ged flall judgerL
f oul, that if Mr. Ruthven ha4 retailed the dagger in l
"hand, the space a man mnay go fix steps, he would have ri;

ken the King to the hilts .with it." Dilc. 52. But athi4

cond ex:.mlnnat;.,n he varied from this in two material circu=
fances. Firfi. the w.ords which he at that time put in Mr. Roti
ven's mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breait ar
¢" Sirs yu r:t /!l e my priloner; re'nemhcr o' ngy fathers deant
Secondly-, wien he threatened him with death, t was only ode
ter him irom n:aking any jnolle, " He'd)surtrongue, or by Cir;
" jou lkal!d;e." 2 In his firlt dcpuftiion, the words of Mi
Ruthven when he returned to the chamber where he had i!
the King, are, " There is no remedy, by God yu mauf die." BG
in his second deporfition, " By God there is no remedy, andol
"sered to bind his Majelty's hands." Cronl. 51. The mae
rial wordsys u muif die are omitted. The first deposition lea
plainly to intimate that it v.was Ruthvcn's intention to murdL
the King. 'he second would lead us to conclude that he b
nu other defirn tihan to detain hin ai a prisoner.

There are likcw ife fonme remarkable cot,tradictions in the t

timonies of the olther witnefles. i. In the discourse publi.fi
by authority it is insinuated that the tumult of the inhabita,
was raised agairft the King. and that it required some art
ta2ci?' them. Dic. 32. The Duke of Lenox confirms thib
his depofi;ion. Crom. 44. An ac. of privy council fummoe
ing the magi;t a;cs of Perth to anLfwer for that riot is still ecta
And yet Andrew R,-, one of the Baillies of the town, depot
that he himself railed the people, and that they took arms
order to affif the King. Croin. 66 2. Henderson depofestb
he gave an cvalive arifwer to Mr. lhn Mloncrief, who c
quired w,.here he had been that m.,rning, because the Earl hI
commanded lim nt to let any man know that he had been
Falkland. Dik c. 14 Moncrief deposes to the fame purpol
Crom. 64. :And vet George HFa). afterwards Lord Kinnot
nrn. Chncelicr o: S-.Ctard, and Pecr Hay, denofe that t
1 trl, in t'ci;r prc:r.rce, aihcd Hend-rfon, ' \V lrnl he ser
. :hi the Ki-.g .-t F--':x:.'d "' Croni. -o, it W\iich quest.

lo:

b, the danaer was over, as soon as discovered. But B o O K
iot long after, a conspiracy broke out in England v ,-.
ainft Elizabeth, which, though the first danger ,60.
.as instantly dispelled, produced tragical effests,
i!d rendered tle close of that queen's reign dismal
'd unhappy. As James was deeply interested in
at event, it merits our particular notice.
THE court of England was, at this time, divided'Efex's
ctween two powerful factions, which contendedC"fPira'
rthe fuipreme direction of affairs. The leader ofcY nzae'n
oee one as Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Effex; Sir
obert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
as at the head of the other. The former was the
oft accomplished, and the most popular of all the
::glifh nobles; brave, generous, affable; though
nptuous, yet willing to liften to the councils of
oie lwhom he loved; an avowed, but not an im-
acable enemy; a friend no less constant, than
arm; incapable of disguising his own sentiments,
ofmiifreprefenting those of others; better fitted
a camp, than for a court; and of a genius that
alified him for the first place in the administration,
ith a spirit which scorned the second, as below his
erit. He was soon diftinguiflled by the OQeen,
io, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred
him, even in his earliest youth, the highest ho-
urs. Nor did this diminifi the esteem and as-
cion of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity,
was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and
darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
::d, educated in a Court, and trained under a fa-
ir, deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infi-
ating, industrious; and though pofeTfed of ta-
rts, which fitted him for the highest offices, he
d not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
:n to prove that he did not aim at keeping that journey a

P 2

but

B o o s but availed himself of every advantage, which hi:
Vil. own address, or the mitlakes of others afforded hirr
* .ó~. Txwo luch men xwere formed to be rivals, and ene

mies. Ei'-x diipilfd the arts of Cecil, as low ar.
bale. To Cecil, the Earl's malganimity appeare
to be pre imptio and follv. All the military me:
excc.t Raleigh, favoured Eflcx. Most of t!!
-courtiers audhered to Cecil, whoie manners rnmo
r.eas - rele-ibied their own.

Hi- corre- As Eiizabeth advanced in Years, the ftruggleb;
t-vrdcret een thr fe facti!ons became more violent. Elfex, r
$c-c.thh order to ftrernthe:i himfeif, had early courted rhi

i-. friendfnip of the King of Scots, for whose righte,

fuccel ion he was a zealous advocate, and held:
close cerrefpondence both \with hirm, and with h:
principal Mlinifters. Cecil, devoted to the Queel
alone, role daily to new honours, by the alfiduitvo
his services, and the patience, with which he expec
ed the reward of them. While the Earl's highfpi
rit and impetuosity- sometimes exposed him to check
from a Mistress, who, though partial in her asec
tion towards him, could not easily bear contradic
tion, and conferred favours often unwillingly, an
always llowly. His own solicitations, however, si
conded maliciously by his enemies, who wifhedt
remove him at a diilance from court, advanced hir
to the command of the army employed in Irelant
against Tvrone, and to the office of Lord Lieut
nant of that kingdom, with a commiflion armo
unlimited. Hiss tccefs, in that expdittion, did a
cqual either his own promises, or the expetatcoi
of Eizabetuh. The Qli ecn, peevilh from her dila]
pointment, and exasperated against ElTex by thea
tlfces of his enemies, wrote him a harth letter, t!
of accucatio:,s an.d reproaches. Thele, his imp
tient fcirit could not bear, and, in the firit tranfpol
of his refr.t;m;nr, he proposcd to carry over ap
of ,:s arrmv into E;giand, and by driving his er
-.;cs :rc l i-c Ohe Q c's p:elencc, to reinflate 1111

'ls in favour, and in power. But, upon more ma- B1 o K
i!re tlhoughts, he abandoned this raflhdefign, and VlIt.
K!ina fail wnith a few officers, devoted to his per- ,C6
tun, landed in England, and pofied direcly to court.
E;i7abeth received him, without any symptom either
oiaffection or of dilpleafire. By proper complian-
es and acknowledgments, he might have regained
sformer ascendant over theQueen. But he thought
hmfelf too deeply injured to libmit to there. Eli-
:bth, on the other hand, determined to subdue
i3 haiughty temper; and though her severity drew
iom him the most humble letters, fie confined him
:othe Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commis-
:oners to try him, both for his conduct during his
'vernment of Ireland, and for leaving that king-
nm without her permillion. By their sentence, lie
l:, flupended from all his offices, except that of
alter of the horse, and continued a prifoiner dur-
-, the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having

irtified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not fiuf-
r the sentence to be recorded; and soon after al-
ow'd him to retire to his own house. During there
raladcions, which occupied several months, EfTex
.Ictunted between the allegialnc he owed to his
aereign, and the desire of revenge; and some-
in:s leaned to the one, and sometimes to the other.
none of the intervals when the latter prevaild, he
nta meifenger into Scotland to encourage the
i;g to aftert his own right to the fuccefion by
rc of arms, and to promile that, belides the as-
itance of the Enrl and all his friends in England,
ord luuntjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
ould join him with 5000 men, from that king-
om. But Ja.lmes did not choose to hazard the lose- James's
ga ki:gdom, wi was just ready to fall into catitus
s har.c.-, 1by a premature attempt to seize it.c'-
luittjoy, too, declined the enterprize, and EfTcx
.pred more dutiful ichemes; all thoughts ofam-

P bitilon

- R r r A -
V _

B o orR bition appearing to be totally effaced out of ihis
viii mind.
,6o., THIS moderation, which was merely the effect

The wil.d of diiguft and disappointment, was not of long con.
a!tcnrts tinuance. And the Queen, having not only re-
of Lifex. fused to renew a lucrative grant, which she had for.

rnerly bestowed, but to admit him into her presence
that new injury drove a temper, naturally impail.
ent, and now much fretted, to absolute despair
His frierds, irrtead of soothing his rage, or re-
ftrainir.g his impetuosity, added to both, by thei
imprudent and interested zeal. After many anxi
ous consultations, he determined to attempt tore
dress his wrongs by violence. And confcioushov
unpopular such an enterprize would be, if it ap
peared to proceed from motives of private reveng
alone, he endeavoured to give it the femblarceo
public utility, by mingling tle King of Scotland'
intereit with his own. He wrote to James, tha
the faction which now predominated in the Eng
lifh court, had resolved to support the pretenfio
of the Infanta of Spain to the crown; that ti
places of the greatef{ importance in the kingdo
were put into the hands of his avowed enemies
and that unless he sent ambassadors, without delay
to infill on the immediate declaration of his rig
of fuccelion, their measures were so well concert
that all his hopes would be desperate. James, wh
knew how disagreeable such a proposal would bet
the Q(een of England, was not willing ralhlyt
expole limlelf to her displeasure. But Effex, blin
ed by resentment, and impatient for revenge, aba
doned himself to the(ie pallions, and afted like
man guided by frenzy or despair. With twov
three hundred followers, incompleatly armed, hea
tempted to aliault a throne, the best eftablifbedi
Europe. Sallying at their head, out of his ow
houle, he called on the citizensof London, if th
cither valued 1is ife, or v.iilcd to preserve thekii;

do

!

darn from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take Bo o K

n-:, .nd to follow his standard. He advanced VIIi
I -'; '":P palace, with an intention to drive Cecil t~~.

1.; l Ca:ticn out of the Queen's pretence, and to
t;, a de-laration of the Scottish King's right of
i:cc"o o' *, But, though almost adored by the
c'!i, n t a man would join him in this wild en-
rti' ze. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted
bi\ rme of his own attendants, and almost fur-
r..::ded by the troops, which marched under dif-
freet leaders into the city, he retreated to his own
:tf!e; and without any bold effort, suitable to his
,relnt condition, or worthy of his former reputa-
1on for courage, he surrendered to his enemies.
As soon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he
ppointed the Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kin-
:'s, to repair as his ambassadors to the Court of
Gnland. The former of these was the person, by
Lole means Effex had carried on his correfpon-

wc witl the King. He was a passionate admi-

:roftllc Earl's character, and disposed to attempt
'erv thing that could contribute to his safety.
rice, united in a close friendship with Mar, was
radv to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the
!rpofe of the embaf'y less friendly to Effex, than
he choice of the ambassadors; they were com-
anded to solicit, in the warmest manner, for the
rl's life, and if they found that the King, by a-
[.ing his fi-iends, could either promote their de-
gs, or contribute to their safety, they were im-
p]overed to lay alide all disguise, and to promise
'at he would put himself at their head, and claim
'hat was due to him, by force of arms -. But be-
're the ambassadors could reach London, EffexHisdeath.
ad tiffered the punishment he merited by his trea-
r. Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in or-
.r to obtain his pardon, hastened his death. E-
zabeth continued, for some time, irresolute con-
:ring his fate, and could not bring herself to

.
Mem.r z. 4-7. -- lohnft. 289. Birch. Mem. 2. g ro.

P 4 con-

B o o g co-ign into the hands of the executioner, a ma,
l'11 .u'x, ho had once pofflTeed her favour so intirely, \vil
,6ci. cut a painful firuggle between her resentment a

gainft i:is late rr.iconduct, and her ancient affc:
on towards him. The diftreis to which hewi
no.w reduced tended naturally to soften the former
.-hile it revived the latter with new ten:derness; a
the interce.Tion of one faithful friend, who had i
terefr x'th the Queen, might perhaps have fa;'
his life, and have procured him a remiflion, whic
of ;hecrlf, 'ne v, as alamed to grant. But thisgo
nercus nobleman had at that time no such friei
A-.d Elizabeth, folcited inceliantly by lier Mir
it rs, and offend-d with the hatightineis of ElT
\who, 2as (Ce inmagi:ied, scorned to sue for pardos,j
lit commanded th!e sentence to be put in executi
,No sooner \as the blow fsruck, than she repen,
of h1r own ral'h-elf, and bev.ailed his death vi
.te d-epeft lorrow. Tames always confidered hi
as one, who had ltllen a martyr to his fervice,a
after !is acceliion to the Englilh throne, rcftorci
son to his honujis, as twl! as all his afbociates in.

- Ca~--. cO):fpiracy, and diltinguilhed them with hisfavor
S- ;u). THE Sor:tilf ambailadors, finding that thl e)l
''. arsir-ced too late to execute the chief bufines co
c'r:. es rited to their charge, not only concealed thatp
r.i inr:r- f their Instructions, w ith the utmost care, butco

-': -atiul!ated the Q~jeen, in their Maftcr's name,

her-' heappv escape from such an audacious contpirac
Elizabeth, though no ifrar-ger to the King's cor;
fpo.dcrice with Effex, or to that nobleman'sine
tion of aTerting James's right to the Crown, \i
r.ot willing th-at these 11ould be known to the p,
pie, and, for that ralfon, received the congratut
tions of the Sotti!ll ambassadors with all polrE
marks of credit and good will; and in order
tooth James, and to prelerve the appearances
union between the two courts, increased the fublt
which she paid him annually. The ambaitad
resided for rome tire in E .gl; nd, and were empic

- TT T- YT T ~ r ro x

ed, .ith great fucceis, in renewing and extending B o rO
the itrigues, which Bruce had formerly entered il-
to ithith e English nobks. As Elizabeth advanc- 60o
,c in years, the Englilh turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
each other in courting the favour of their future
Mlonarch. Assurances of attachment, profeflions
of rcgard, and promil'es of support, were offered to
iamrs from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil
Iimnllf, perceiving what hopes ElTex had founded
on the friendfip of the Scottihb King, and what
ad\antages he might have derived from it, thouglht
ii prudent to Itand no longer at a distance fi-om a
Plince, who might io soon become his NM/ailer. But
bking sensible, at the fame time, how dangerous
lsuch an intercourse might provc, under a Mifislrels
:at:lrally jealous, and whose jealou!\ grew ftcrolner
vaith old age; though he entered i!nto a correfpon-
dc::ce with him, he carried it on with all the secre'cy
a:;d caution necessary in his fituaiion, and peculiar
to his character. And James, having gained the
nan wuhofe opposition and influence le hadl hhilierto
ciltiln dreaded, waited, in p ,'rset lf;cutity, tili ihai
c\clt ilhould happen, which would open' liis w\xny tI
tIhc throne o .England. It wais, w-ith fomne difi-
!iit)y, that lie refi laill:'d, witliin proptr hounds, lls
adhcrents in that kingdoom, wvlo labouring to d!-
itiinguilh themielves by that officious zeaL, with
i;hicli a Prince, who has a inear prolpedt of mount-
;g tlle throne, is always lerved, urged him to al-
la a motion to be made in parliamert for declar-
,::g lis right of fuccellion to the Crown. Jam'-s
prudently discouraged that design; but it was \ith
)o finall fitistfation that he (qblerved the alcendant
hlic was acquiring in a court, whose dictates he had
bhen, io long, obliged to obey; and which had ci-
t'her prescribed or thwarted every ftep he had taken
.i'.lri:g the whole courle of hlis reign '

Suotfwi. 467, 471. Birch. MeR.:. 2. 514.

N T-

Bo °o NOTrWTHSTANDING theviolent ftrugglesoftie

¥l.- political factions which divided the court, and the
f02. ' frequent revolutions which had happened there,
Anripts since the king first took the reins of government into
to civPr his own hands, Scotlard had enjoyed unuftial trap..
-e"- quillit-, being undisturbed by any foreign enemv,

and free from an intestine commotion of long co,.
tinuance. During this period, James endeavoured
to civilize the Highlanders and the Isles, a part of his
dominio:ns almost totally neglected by former Mo-
narchs, though the reformation of it was an object
highIfy wnrthy of their care. The long peace with
Enlarnd had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of refrain.
ing their depredations, often no less ruinous to their
coluntrr men, than to their enemies. The inhabi.
tants of the Low Country began, gradually, to for-
get the use of arms, and to become attentive to the
arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
natural fierceness, averse from labour, and inured
to rapire, infested their more industrious neighbours,
bv their continual incurfrons. James being folici-
tous not only to repress their inroads, but to render
ihem ulfS ful iubjects *, had at different times enacted
manr- \.ile laws extremely conducive to these ends.
All landlords, or Chiefs nS Clans, were enjoinedto
permit no persons to reside in their estates, who
could not find sufficient surety for their good beha-
viour; they wvere required to make a lift ofallfu-
picious perlons under their jurisdiction, to bind
themselves to deliver them up to justice, and to i.-
dmnrifr those, who Ihould susser by their robberies;
and, in order to afiertain the faithful performar.ce
of these articles, the chiefs themselves were obliged
to give hostages to the King, or to put pledges in
his hands. Three towns, which might serve asa
retreat for the induRfrious, and a nursery for arts
and commerce, were appointed to be built in diffe-
rent parts of the Highlands one in Cantyre, anc-

F Pas3 Dor. 159.

ther in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewis; B n o K
and, in order to draw the inhabitants thither; all vit.
ite privileges of Royal Boroughs wele to be con---' "°
fcrred upon them. Finding it, however, to be no
Calv matter to inspire the inhabitants of those coun-
tries with the love of industry, a resolution was
taken to plant among them, colonies of people from
the more industrious countries. The firit experi-
ment was made in the ille of Lewis; and as it was
advantageously situated for the sithing trade,a source
from which Scotland ought naturally to derive great
wealth, the colony tranlported thither xwas drawn
out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well
lkliled in that branch of commerce. But before
they had remained there long enough to manifest
tle good effects of this institution, the iilanders, en-
raged at feeing their country occupied by those in-
tmuders, took arms, and iurprizing them in the
night-time, murdered some of them, and compel-
led the reft to abandon the settlement. The King's
attention being soon after turned to other objects,
iehear no more of this salutary project. Though
James did not pursue the design, with that steady
application and perseverance, without which it is
i:npollib!e to change the manners of a whole peo-
pie, he had the glory, however, not only of hav-
ing firit conceived the thought, but of having firfl
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the Island .
ArTER having long enjoyed a good state of health, Elza-
i:e effect of a found conititution, and the reward ofleth's
iincommon regularity and temperance, Elizabethlaflil!nefs
began this winter to feel her vigour decrease, and to anddeath.
b Ilenfible of the infirmities of old age. Having ,6,
removed on a very stormy day from Weflminifter toJan. 31.
Richmond, whither she was impatient to retire, her
crTmplnints increased. She had no formed fever;
h-r pulse was good; but she eat little, and could
ric si p. Her distemper seemed to proceed from

Par!. 1587, i94, 1597. Spotfw-. 468.

a deep

-T r r" c - r nt
T r-

Bio o a deep melancholy, which appeared both in her

!!1. counte-ance and Deha.:iur. She delighted in soli-
,6oy tude, the lat conitanl) in the dark; and was of

ten drov. n-d in tears.

No sooner wvas the Queen's indisposition known,

than perbo:;s of aii ranks, and of all different sects
and partics, redoubled their applications to the King
of Scots, and vied w ith each other, in profeilionsot
attachment to his perlon, and in promires of sub-
rn;ilon to h!is government Even lome of her own
servants, weary of the length of her reign, fond of
novet c, impatient to get rid of the burden of
gratitude for pals benefits, and expeting to Ihare in
the liberalirt of a new prince, began to desert her.
And crowds of people hurried towards Scotland,
ea-gr to pre-occupy the favour of the fucceflbr, or
aftrid ci heing too late in paying homage to him.

N I E A N H I L E, the Queen's di leaie increased, and

her mela:chol¥ appeared to be fettled and incurable.
Various co'-iecturts were formed concerning the
causes of a disorder, from which fie seemed to be
exempted by the natural cheer fulnels of her tempr.
Some imputed it to her being forced, contrary to
her i::cination, to pardon the Earl of Tyrone,
whote rebe'lloin had for many years created her li
much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from
obfer vi.g the ingratt.ude of her courtiers, and the
levity of her people, who beheld her health declin-
i.g xith most indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the accelfion of the Scottish King, wilt
an impatier. cz which they could not conceal. The
most comnmon opinion, at that time, and perhaps
the m.it probable, was that it flowed from grief for
the Ear! of ElTex. She retained an extraordinary
regard ftr t'le mnemory of that unfortunate noble-
man; and t':ou:gh ihc often complained of his ob-
ftinacv, lcidc.m mentioned his name without tears'
An accidenr happen d ioon after her retiring tC

* B:-ch.;. i:n. z. .50.

Richimond

Ricllmond, which revived her affection with new B o o
tc!,dlrnels, and imbittered her sorrows. The VIII.
Cliultcis of Nottingham, being on her death-bed, i6o
jclircdl to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
t!!i::a to her, without dilcovering which, she could
r.,t tdie in peace. When the Queen came into her
j chamber, (he told her, that while Effex lay under
rntence of dcaih, he was desirous of imploring
prlon in the manner which the Queen herself had
picl;ribed, by returning a ring, which during the
h<Icht of his favour fle had given him, with a pro-
mile that, if in any future diflrefs, he in nt that back
to lir as a token, it should intitle him to her pro-
r Cttho; that lady Scroop was the person ihe intended
o em1ploy in order to present it; that by a miilakle,
it was put into her hands inftrad of lady Scroop's;
and that she having communicated the matter to
her hlufband, one of Essex's most implacable ene-
mies, he had forbid her either to carry the ring to
tie Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The
Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged
he QOueen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now
lw both the malice of the Earl's enemies, and how
rijiuftly (ie had fufpeeCed him of inflexible obfti-
rac), replied, " God may forgive you, but I ne-
er can ;" and left the room in great emotionl -
Frrm that moment, her fpi-it funk entirely; she
c;iuld Scarce taste food; she refused all the medicines
preicribed by her phvficians; declaring tl:nt she
v.ilhcd to die, and would live no longer. No in-

treaty

t Th;s anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first puboiifhed by
Ccrrc, Meil. of Lliz p. 23; is confrmed by the teftimonv
,:e .lIauricr, Merl. 260, and by the traditional evidence of
.adv Cli.zabeth Spe!man publilhcd by Dr. Birch. Negoc. 206.
.CamCIdn mentions the Queen's grief ibr Eflex's (leall as one of
'.ecaules of her melancholv. Sonic original papers remain

P',iich prove that this was commoilyv believed at the time. Birch's

ih. 2. 2. 5o6. El'x, however, had been beheaded two years
t::re her death, and there -:emns to have been no other reason,
:~ii that which w e have aifign:ed, v.hv her sorrow lhould revive
';' i ' :nuc; h violence at so gr:at a dil'ance of tine. As the

death

- t - - - --- 1 * T
_

B o o c treaty could prevail on her to go to bed; Tfe faton
XIlL cushions, during ten days and :.ights, pensive, and.

6 silent, holding her finger almost continually in her

mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground.
The only thing to which lhe seemed to give any at-
tention, were the acts of devotion, performed in
her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and in these ihe joined with great appearance of ser-
your. \afited, at last, as well by anguish of mind,
as by long abfinence, file expired without a ftrin.
gle, on Thur'day the 24th day of March in the
70:Ih year of her age, and in the 45th of her

Ca nld. reign *
Birch. FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indiffe-
Mera. z.
r5 6 ' ~rence and diirefpec towards their Princes; but with-
Birch. out reaion; no people are more grateful than they
Negoc. to thofeC Monarchs, who merit their gratitude. The
2~6- rames of Edward III. and Henry V. are mention-

tp ed by the Englilh of this age, with the fame warmth,
4- 3:3-

as they were by those, who shared in the bleffigs
and splendor of their reigns. The memory of E!i-
zabeth is frill adored in England. And the hifto-
rians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of
her people; her sagacity in discerning their truein-
terefl; her steadiness in purlfuing it; her wifdomin
the choice of her ministers; the glory she acquired
by arms; the tranquillity she secured to her sub-
jecs; and the increaef of fame, of riches, andof
commerce, which were the fruits of all these,
death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about a fort-
night before the Qneen's death, the coincidence of these events,
together with the other evidence mentioned, adds so much pro-
bability to the ftorv related by Osborne, as will entitle it toa
place in hifltor. The only objection to the account we have
given of Elizabeth's attachment to Effex, arises from her great
age. At the age of 68, the amorous paffiors are comnlor')
abundantly cool, and the violence of all the paflions. except one,
is much abated. But the force of this objection is entirely re-
moved by an Author who has il!uflrazed marv passages in th2
English History, and adorned more. Catalogue of Roy. and
Nob. Authors. Article Elfex

jutl\-
240

iftly rank her among the mors illustrious Princss. B o oo
Even the defects in her charader, they observe, VII.
were nor of a kind pernicious to her people. Her '-,9
xcelive frugality was not accompanied with the
);e of hoarding; and though it prevented some
great undertakings, and rendered the success of
Uhers incompleat, it introduced ceconomy intoher
dlminiflration, and exempted the nation from
many burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse, or
nore enterplifing, muit hlave imposed. Her folw-

:els in rewarding her servants sometimes difcou-

raed useful merit; but it prevented the undeferving
from acquiring power and wealth, to which they
had no title. Her extreme jealousy of those prin-
ces, who pretended to dispute her right to the
Crown, led her to take such precautions, as tended
no les to the public safety, than to her own; and
to court the affecions of her people, as the firmcit
ippnrt of her throne. Such is the piture the
E;;glilh draw of this great Queen.
\HOEVER undertakes to write the History of
cotland finds himself obliged, frequently, to view
er in a very different, and in a less amiable ligl.
er authority in that kingdom, during the greater
rt of her reign, was little inferior to that, which
e possessed in her own. But this authority, ac-
uired at first by a service of great importance to
he nation, fle exercised in a manner extremely
rnicious to its happiness. By her induflry il so-
enting the rage of the two contending factions;

u lpplying the one with partial aid; by feeding

he other with false hopes; by balancing their
ver so artfully, that each of them was able todif-
rls, and reither of them to subdue the other;
e rendered Scotland long the feat ofdifcord, con-
!;ion, and bloodshed: and her craft and intrigues,
iecting what the valour of her ancestors could
ot accomplifli, reduced that kingdom to a state
tIdpendaince on England. The maxims of po-

licy,

B c o r lic., often little consonant to those of morality
v TiT may, perhaps, juiftfv this conduct. But no apo-
.60-. lo£v can be offlred for her behaviour to Queen

Marv; a scene of di:,munilation without neceilitv
a.ld of lev-critv be,-od example. In almofq all her
cther actions, Elizabeth is the object of our highef
admiration; in this, we muifl allow that flie not
cnl; laid aside the magna:imitv, which becamea
Queen, but the feelings, natural to a woman.

i-j=e THCot-Gi Elizabeth would never permit the quif.
F-'- lion cor.cerr.i- . the right of fucceslion to the Crown
FiJ of to be determined in parliament; nor declare her
Lraz,-di. own lertiments concerning a point, which fe

wished to remai n

an impenetrable myfery; h

l-ad, ho 'vvr, formcd no design of excluding the
Scottif-i King from an inheritance, to whichhis
title xwas u!doubted. A short time before her death,
she biok'e the filepce, which she had so long pre-
ferred on that fibject, and told Cecil and theLord
Admiiral, ' That her throne, was the throneof
Kings; that she would have no mean person to
nfcencl it, and that her Co.usin the King of Scot
fnould be hor fuccefflr." This fie confirmedion
h-r death-bed. And as soon as she breathed hel
hfr, the Lords of the Privy-Council proclaimr
Taines K-in of England. All the intrigues carniec

on e

by frc.reignrs, in favour of the Infanta, all thl

cabals formed within the kirngdom, to support th
ti:lcs of Ladv Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford
deifappared in a noment; and nobles, and people
forgetri'ig their ancient hostilities with Scotlard
an.l their aversion for the dominion of frrangen
teftiiccl their fatisfaaion w ith louder acclamation'
t.in were usual at the acceI;ion of their nativ
Princes. A!,idflt this tumult of joy, a motion mad
by a fw patriots, who prapofed to prescribe fort
cordition:s to the fucccffor, and to exact from hi!
the redress of some grieva.ccs, before tiey caill
him to the thrcne, was scarce heard; and Cec

y ififling it, added to his stock of merit with his B o o K
new Master. Sir Charles Percy, brother of the VIII.
arl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset ---
the Earl of Worcester's son, were dispatched to
Scotland, with a letter to the King, signed by all
he Peers and Privy-Counfellors then in London;
nforming him of the Queen's death, of his accef-
ion to the throne, of their care to recognize his title,
ad of the universal applause, with which the public
roclamation of it had been attended. They made
he utmost haste to deliver this welcome meflage;
ut were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey,
ord Hunfdane's youngest son, who setting out a
ew hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edin-
urgh on Saturday night, just as the King had gone
obed. He was immediately admitted into the
o0al apartment, and kneeling by the King's bed,
cquainted him with the death of Elizabeth, fa-
ted him King of England, Scotland, France, and
eland, and as a token of the truth of the intelli-
ence which he brought, presented him a ring,
hich his sifter Lady Scroop had taken from the
ceen's finger after her death. James heard him
ith a decent composure. But as Carey was only
private messenger, the information he brought,
rasnotmade public, and the King kept his apart-
ent till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then
istitles were solemnly proclaimed; and his own
bjefs expressed no less joy, than the Engli l, at
hisincreafe of his dignity. As his presence xwas
bfolutely necessary in England, where the people
ee extremely impatient to fee their new Sove-
ign, he prepared to set out for that kingdom,
ithout delay. He appointed his queen to follow
im within a few weeks. He committed the go-
ernment of Scotland to his Privy Council. He in-
iuffed the care of his children to different noble-
.:n. On the Sunday before his departure, he re-
ared to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing

rermon, in which the Preacher displayed the
V'JL.I.II. Q_ greatnels

B o o greatness of the divine goodness in raising him to
, II. the throne of such a powerful Kingdom withovt
1603. opposition or bloodshed, and exhorted him toex.

press his gratitude, by promoting to the utmost,
the happiness and prosperity of his fubjeEts; the
King role up, and addrelffng himself to the people,
made many profeflions of unalterable affection to-
wards them; promised frequently to visit Scotland;
aflured them that his Scottilh fubjeats, notwith.
standing his absence, should feel that he was their
native Prince, no less than when he resided among
them; and might still trust that his ears should be
always open to their petitions, which he would an-
fwer with the alacrity and love of a parent. His
words were, often, interrupted by the tears of the
whole audience; who, though they exulted at the
King's prosperity, were melted into sorrow by there

* Spotfv.'. tender declarations*.
4-o. ON the fifth of April, he began his journey,
Pfaesn with a splendid, but not a numerous train; and
of the next day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came,
throne. immense multitudes were assembled to welcome

him; and the principal persons, in the different
Counties through which he passed, displayed al
their wealth and magnificence in entertainments
prepared for him, at their houses. Elizabeth had
reigned so long in England, that most of her sub-
jects remembered no other court but her's; and
their notions of the manners and decorum suitable
to a Prince were formed upon what they had ob
served there. It was natural to apply this Pfandard
to the behaviour and actions of their new Monarch,
and to compare him, at first fight, with the Queen]
on whose throne he was to be placed. James
whose manners were extremely different from her's,
suffered by the comparison. He had not that flow]
ing affability, by which Elizabeth captivated til
hearts of her people; and though easy among a
few whom he loved, his indolence could not bcal
the fatigue of rendering himself agreeable to 3

mixed

mixed multitude. He was no less a stranger to that B o o
dignity, with which Elizabeth tempered her fami- \Vll.
liarity. And instead of that well-judged frugality, 1
with which she conferred titles of honour, he be-
flowed them with an undiitnguifhing profusion,
that rendered them no longer marks of distinction,
or rewards of merit. But these were the reflec-
tions of the few alone; the multitude continued
their acclamations; and amidst these, James en-
tered London on the 7th of May, and took peace-
able poifeflion of the throne of England.

THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from Conclu-
the earliest accounts of time, but destined, by their sion.
ituation, to form one great monarchy. And by
thisjundion of its whole native force, Great Bri-
tain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Eu-
rope which England and Scotland could never have
attained.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Mo A view of
narchs as next heirs to the English throne, thatCthe Revo-
they had full leisure to reflect on all the confe-lth, ° nfti
quences of their being advanced to that dignity. runon of
But dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to Scotland
their powerful enemy, relying on the partiality offirce the
their native Prince, and in full expectation of acceon
lharing liberally in the wealth and honours he -I.
Gsould now be able to bestow, they attended little
to the most obvious consequences of that great
event, and rejoiced at his accellion to the throne
of England, as if it had been no lets beneficial to
the kingdom, than honourable to the King. They
soon had reason, however, to adopt very different
sentiments; and from that period, we may date a to-
ta! alteration in the political conflitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Ariftocracv, which had been sub-
verted in most nations of Europe by the policy of
their Princes, or had been unde.rmined by the pro-
grefs of commerce, still ilbfifled with full force in
Scotland. Many causes had contributed grad:ua!y
to augment the power of the Scorttiil oubls; and

Q_. enve.

B o o K even the Reformation, which in every other coun-

III. try, where it prevailed, added to the authority of
'-'V-the Monarch, had increased their wealth and in-

flience. A King, possessed of a small revenue,
v.ith a a prerogative extremely limited, and unfup-
ported by a standing army, could not exercise much
authority over such potent fubjecs. He was
obliged to govern by expedients; and the laws de-
rived their force not from his power to execute
them, but from the voluntary submission of the
nobles. But though this produced a species ofgo-
vernment feeble and irregular beyond example;
though Scotland, under the name, and withallthe
outv.ard ensigns of a Monarchy, was really sub-
iect to an Aristocracy, the people were not altoge-
ther unhappy; and even in this wsild form of a con
ftitution, there were principles, which tended t
their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durIf venture upor
no act of arbitrary power. The nobles, jealousol
the King, whose claims and pretensions were many)
though his power was finall, were afraid ofirn.
tating their dependants by unreasonable exactions
and tempered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny
with a mildness and equality to which it is naturallI
a stranger. And xwhile the military genius of the
feudal government remained in vigour, thevaifal
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not onl,
free from opprefflon, but courted by their fuperio.
whole power and importance were founded ot
their attachment and love.

Bu T, bv his acceflion to the throne of Englanc

James acquired such an irnmenfe accession of wealth
of power, and of splendor, that the nobles, ani
nifhed and intimidated, thought it vain to ftruggl
for privileges which they were now unable to di
fend. Nor was it from fear alone that they ful
mitted to the yoke; James, partial to his countr
men, and willing that they should partake in 1
good fortune, loaded them with riches and !I

i~o'at

'. r - v I L 1 tN U. 247

nours; and the hope of his favour concurred with B o o K
the dread of his power, in taming their fierce and VIII.
independent spirits. The will of the Prince be-.-v""
came the supreme law in Scotland; and the nobles
itrove, with emulation, who should most implicitly
obey commands, which they had formerly been ac-
ctiftomed to contemn. Satisfied with having sub-
jected the nobles to the Crown, the King left them
in full poffefiion of their ancient jurisdiction over
their own vassals. The extensive rights, vetted in
afeudal Chief, became in their' hands dreadful
instruments of opprefion, and the military ideas on
which these rights were founded, being gradually
loft, or disregarded, nothing remained to correct
or to mitigate the rigour with which they were ex-
ercifed. The nobles, exhausting their fortunes by
the expence of frequent attendance upon the Eng-
libh court, and by attempts to imitate the manners
and luxury of their more wealthy neighbours, mul-
tiplied exactions upon the people, who durst
scarce utter complaints which they knew would ne-
ver reach the ear of their Sovereign, nor move him
to grant them any redress. And from the union
of the Crowns, to the Revolution in 1688, Scotland
~as placed in a political situation of all others the
most singular, and the most unhappy; fubjeaed at
once to the absolute will of a monarch, and to the
oppreflivejurifdistion of an Aristocracy, it lhffered
all the miieries peculiar to both these forms of go-
\ernment. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles
were slaves and tyrants; and the people groaned
under the rigorous domination of both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made
one effort to Ihake off the yoke, and to regain their
ancient independency. After the death of James,
the Scottish nation was no longer viewed by our
Monarchs with any partial affection. Charles I.
educated among the English, discovered no pecu-
liar attachment to the kingdom of which he was a

Q 3 native.

B o K native. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to

li be now in hands lets friendly, and swayed bya
~-'"~Pri:.ce with whom they had little connection,and

over whose councils they had little influence, no
longer f:bmitted with the fame implicit obedience,
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on
their order, and apprehensive of others, the re-
mains of their ancient spirit began to appear. They
complained, and rcmonftrated. And the people,
being, at the fame time, violently disgusted at the
innovations in Religion, the nobles secretly height-
ened this disgust; and their artifices, togetherwith
the ill conduct of the court, railed such a spirit,
that the whole nation took arms againif their fove-
reign, with an union and animosity of which
there had formerly been no example. Charles
brought against them the forces of England, and
notwirhftanding their own union, and the zealcf
the people, the nobles must have funk in the firug-
gle. But, the difaffeEtion which was growing a-
mong his English fubjets, prevented the King
from ac8ing with vigour. A civil war broke out
in both kingdoms. And after many battles and
revolutions which are well known, the Scottilh
nobles, who first began the war, were involved in
the fame ruin with the throne. At the Restoration,
Charles II. regained full pofiefilon of the royalpre-
rogative in Scotland; and the nobles, whose eflates
were wafted, or their spirits broken by the calami-
ties to which they had been exposed, were less able
and lets willing than ever to resist the power of the
Crown. During this reign, and that of James
VII. the dictates of the Monarch were received in
Scotland with most abject fubmillion. The po-
verty to which many of the nobles were reduced,
rendered them meaner slaves, and more intolerable
tyrants than ever. The people, always neglected,
were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on
account of their attachment to religious and politi-

cal

cal principles, extremely repugnant to those adopt- B o o K
ed by their Princes. V.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into"'"'
the government of Scotland. To increase the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole objeca
of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfare of the people. By the claim of right, their
lierrties were secured. And the number of their re-
presentatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in parliament.
As they came to enjoy more security, and greater
power, their minds began to open, and to form more
extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and of
police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which frill pre-
dominated, together with many other accidents, re-
tarded the improvement and happiness of the nation.
ANOTHER great event completed what the re-
volution had begun. The political power of the
nobles, already broken by the union of the two
crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of the
two Kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as for-
merly, of the supreme assembly of the nation, in-
itead of bearing the most considerable sway there,
the Scottish nobles are admitted into the British
parliament by their representatives only, and form
b;lt an inconsiderable part of one of those bodies in
which the legislative authority is vested. They
themselves are excluded absolutely from the house
of Commons, and even their eldest sons are not
permitted to represent their countrymen in that au-
gust assembly. Nor have their feudal privileges re-
mained, to compensate for this extinction of their
political authority. As commerce advanced in its
progress, and government attained nearer to per-
section, there were insensibly circumscribcd, and
at last, by laws no less salutary to the public, than
fatal to the nobles, they have been almost totally

Q4 abolilhed.
^ cl a1 ^ "\ T A T.

P o , abolished. As the nobles were deprived of power
x\Il. the people acquired iiberty. Exempted from bur

ders to which they were formerly subjet, screenec
from oppre-iio;:, to which they had been lo.ng ex.
pnord, and adopted into a co::fitution, whose g.
ri.,s and laws were more liberal than their own
They have extended their commerce, refined theii
rraners. made irprovements in the eleganciesol
life. and clthi'.ated the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of th!e political State of Scotland,

i:n which events and their caules have been mention.
ed rather than developed, enables us to point oul
three xras, from each of which we may datefome
great alteration, in one or other of the three diffe.
rent members of which the supreme legislative as
fimbly in our constitution is composed. At the
Arccefion, the Kings of Scotland, once the mot li-
mited, became in an inflant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic autho-
rit- which their Parliaments were unable to con-
troul, or their nobles to resist. At the Union, the
feudal aristocracy, which had subsisted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and
the Scottilh nobles voluntarily surrendered right!
and pre-emiinences, peculiar to their order, andre.
duced themselves to a condition, which is no longer
the terror anr envy of other subjects. Since lb
(nion, the Commons, anciently neglected by thei
Kings, and despised by the nobles, have emerged in
to dignity; and being admitted to a participation o
all the privileges, wvhich the English had purchafec
at the expence of so much blood, must now h
efreemed a body not less considerable in the on,
kingdom, than they have long been in the other.

THE church felt the effe¢ts of the absolute pow

er which the King acquired by his accession; ane
its revolutions too, are worthy of notice. James
during the latter years of his administration in Scot
land, revived the name and office of Bishops. Bi
the- poffelfed no ecclesiastical jurifdicion or pre

eminerce

emincnce; their revenues were inconsiderable, and B o o :
they were scarce diftinglifhed by any thing, but by 'VII.
their feat in parliament, and by being the object of~'~J
thl clcrgy'sijealoufy, and the people's hatred. The
Ka:, delighted with the splendor and authority

thich the English Bilhops enjoyed, and eager to

effec an tinion in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
i vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved
to bring both Churches to an exat conformity with
each other. Three Scotfnen were consecrated Bi-
Ihops at London. From them, their brethren were
commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
i Scotland were imposed. And though the clergy,
lesobfequious than the nobles, boldly opposed thele
inovations, James, long prafrifed and well flilled
in the arts of managing them, obtained at length
their compliance. But Charles I. a fuperititious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots,
imprudent and precipitant in all the measures he
poirfued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly the
reception of the English liturgy, and indifereetly
attempting a resumption of church lands, kindled
the flames of civil war; and the people being left
atliberty to indulge their own wishes, the episcopal
c'lrch was overturned, and the Presbyterian go-
vernment and discipline were re-established with
rew vigour. Together with monarchy, Episcopacy
'as restored in Scotland. A form of government.
f odious to the people, required force to uphold
it; and though the whole rigour of authority, and
all the barbarity of persecution were employed in
tSfiLport, the aversion of the nation was infur-
.initable, and it subsisted with difficulty. At the
Revolution, the inclinations of the people were
t:ought worthy the attention of the legislature, the
Presbyterian government was again established, and
eing ratified by the Union, is fRill maintained in
the Kingdom.

NOR
~ r r r ^ ur S

B o o K NOR did the influence of the Acceflion extendto

Xi- the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions alone; t.e

genius of the nation, its taste and spirit, thingsof
a nature still more delicate, were sensibly affected by
that event. \Vhen learning revived in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages
were in a state equally barbarous, devoid of ele-
gance, of vigour, and even of perspicuity. No
author thought of writing in languages so ill adapt.
ed to express and embellish his fentimehts, orof
erecting a work for immortality, with such rude
and perifning materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
original effort of the human mind, but was excited
by admiration of the ancients, their compositions
were esteemed not only the standards of taste, and
of sentiment, but of stile; and even the languages
in which they wrote were thought to be peculiar and
almost consecrated to learning and the muses. Not
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied; and extravagant as the at-
tempt may appear to write in a dead tongue, in
which men were not accustomed to think, and which
they could not speak, or even pronounce, thefuc-1
cess of it was astonishing. As they formed their
stile upon the purest models, as they were uninfec-
ed with those barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of
familiar conversation, the affectation of courts, in-:
tercourfe with strangers, and a thousand other causes
introduce into living languages, many moderns have
attained to a degree of elegance in their Latincom-
positions, which the Romans themselves fcarcepol-
sessed beyond the limits of the Augustan age.
While this was almost the only species of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common lan-
guage, could be brought to a nearer comparison,
the Scottish writers were not inferior to those of any
other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed to excel in prose and in verse, mnore

various,

iarious, more original, and more elegant, than that B o o K
ofalmoft any other modern who writes in Latin, VII.
refleds, with regard to this particular, the greatest
luRre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead
ongue was irksome; the unequal return for their
indutfry which authors met with, who could be
ad and admired only within the narrow circle of
he learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of
rafting half their lives in learning the language of
heRomans, began to refine and to polish their
wn. The modern tongues were found to be sus-
eptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal
othofe of the ancient ones, were at least more at-
ainable. And the Italians having first set the ex-
mple, Latin was no longer used in the works
ftafte; it was confined to books of science; and
cepoliter nations have banished it even from these.
he Scots, we may presume, would have had no
aufe to regret this change in the public taste, and
ould still have been able to maintain some equa-
itv with other nations, in their pursuit of literary
honour. The English and Scottish languages, de-
red from the fame sources, were, at the end of
he sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, dif-
:ring from one another somewhat in orthography,
hough not only the words, but the idioms were
much the fame. The letters of several Scottish
latefmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
r in purity, to those of the Englilh Ministers with
thom they corresponded. James himfelfwas maf-
te of a stile far from contemptible; and by his
example and encouragement, the Scottish language
might have kept pace with the English in refine-
ment. Scotland might have had a series of authors
inits own, as well as in the Latin language, to boast
of; and the improvements in taste, in the arts, and
n the sciences, which spread over the other polish-
nd nations of Europe, would not have been un-
lown there.

BUT,
^ ram Err s ^ o t

B o r BuT, at the very time when other nations e
vII. beginnin.g to drop the nfe of Latin in worksi
-'""taste, ard to make trial of the itrength and con

pass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to t
a kingdom. The transports of joy which the Ai
cession at first occasioned, were lbon over; and t
Scots, being at once deprived ofal! the obiects th
refine or animate a people, of the presence of the
Prince, of the concourle of nobles, of the Iplendc
and elegance of a court, an universal dejection1
spirit seems to have seized the nation. TheCoul
being withdrawn, no domestic standard of rop;iet
and correctness of speech remained ; the few cort
positions that Scotland produced were tried by tb
English flandard, and every word or phrafet;b
varied in the least from that, was condemnedt
barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had cont
nued distinct, each might have retained idioms aa
forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these, rer
dered fashionable b- the example of a court, an
supported by the authority of writers ofreputatiol
would have been confidered in the fame light vil
the varieties occasioned by the different dialectsi
the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beat
ties, and, in many cafes, used promiscuously bytt
authors of both nations. But by the Acceiino
the English naturally became the sole judges an
lawgivers in language, and rejected as folecilm
every form of speech to which their ear was not ai
customed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercour
between the two nations was inconsiderable', a!
ancient prejudices were still so violent as to preve

imitatia

A rerr-mrkab!e proof of the little intercourse betweenl

Englilh and Scots, before the urion of the Crowns, is to
found in two curious paper;, one publilled bv Haynes,
other by Str-pe. In the *-ear 1 567, Elizabeth commanded
Bishop of London to take a survey of all the ifrangers wit
the cities of London and \Beltminter. By his report, whice
verv minute, it appears that thn whole :.unber of Scots at

imitation, poflefs the means of refining their own B o O
toigue according to the purity of the English stand- vII.
vd. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into-"-'
tfrom every different source. The Clergy of Scot-
and, in that age, were more eminent for piety than
r learning; and though there did not arise many
luthols among them, yet being in pofieffior, of the
rivileges ofdifcourfing publickly to the people, and
eir lcrmons being too long, and perhaps too fre-
quent, such hasty produtions could not be elegant,
and many slovenly and incorrec modes of expref-
on may be traced back to that original. The
cadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccu-
ae, and that profeiflon having furnilhed more au-
tors, and the matters of which they treat mingling
aily in common discourse and business, many of
:o0E vitious forms of speech, which are denomi-
rated Scotticisms, have been by them introduced into
he language. Nor did either the language or pub-
ctafte receive ary improvement in parliament,
here a more libeial and more correc eloquence
might have been expeaed. All bufLnefs was tranf-
cted there by the Lords of Articles, and they were
so ervilely devoted to the court, that few debates
rose, and none were conducted with the spirit and
igour natural to a popular aflembly.
THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the
nglilh were gradually refining their language, and
their taste; in Scotland the former was much de-
,led, and the latter almost entirely loft. In the
blgi:iing of that period, both nations were emerg-
.gout of barbarity; but the distance between them,
lhicli was then inconsiderable, became, before the
tle was 58. Haynes 4'5. A furvcy of the famie kind was
|Bcde by Sir Thomias RowM, Lord Mllavn A. D. I568. The
t'- ::br (,f Scots had then increasld to 8S. Strype 4. Supplement
NJl. On the Acceflion of Juiles a conlidcrab!e number of
Tt elrpecially of the hiTher rank, relbrted to England; hut
::'., not till the union that the intercourse be:.e en the two
: x,...:' cms becaine gi eat.

end

B o o end of it, immense. Even after science had one
\I1I dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finkini

back into ignorance and obscurity; and ativeani
intelligent as they naturally are, they continued
while other nations were eager in the purfuito
fame and knowledge, in a state of languor and
stupefaction. This, however, must be imputed t
the unhappiness of their political situation, nottc
any defect of genius; for no sooner was theorne
removed in any degree, than the other beganto
display itself. The aft abolishing the power ofthe
Lords of Articles, and other salutary laws passed
at the Revolution, having introduced freedom ol
debate ii .o the Scottish Parliament, eloquence, wi
all the arts that accompany or perfect it, becamn
immediate objects of attention: and the exampl~
of Fletcher of Saltan alone is sufficient to foe
that the Scots were ifill capable of generous senti
ments, and, notwithitanding some peculiar idiom
were able to express themselves with energy, an
with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated th

two nations, and rendered them one people, th
ditfinctions vwhich had subsisted for many agesgra
dually wear away; peculiarities disappear; th
fame manners prevail in both parts of the island
the fame authors are read and admired; the fam
entertainments are frequented by the elegant aa
polite; and the fame standard of taste, and of pa
rity in language, is established. And the Scot
after being placed during a whole century, in
situation no lets fatal to the liberty than to th
taife and genius of the nation, were at once pi
in potTelfion of privileges more valuable than thli
which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; an
every obflruc'ion that had retarded their purfui
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, wa
totally removed.

A P P E N D I NI

# APPENDIX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

APPENDIX

TO THE
FIRST VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 175.)
A MEMORIAL of certain points meet for the refloring the

realm of SCOT L A ND to the ancient weale.

IPRIM.IS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity 5th Au-
that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a perpetual gust 559,
pace with the kingdom of England, or to be made one mo- Cotton.
iatchy with England, as they both make but one island, divid- Lib. Cal.
from the reft of the world. B. o. fol.
IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with 17. From
ngland, then muff it necessarily be provided, that Scotland a copy in
enot so subjec to the appointments of France, as is pre- secretary
senti, which, being an antient enemy to England, feeketh Cecil's
xavs to make Scotland an instrument, to excrcise, thereby, hand.
their malice upon England, and to make a foot-ifool thereof to
lok over England as they may.
THEREFORE, when Scotland flall come into the hands ofa
mere Scottish man in blood, then may there be hope of such
ccord; but as long as it is at the commandment of the French,
here is no hope to have accord long betwixt there two realms.
TH E R E F R E feeing it is at the French King's commandment
' reason of his wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of
otland, that until Ihe have children, and during her absence
t of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the house
f he Hamiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that
either the crown be imposed nor wafted; and on the other
e, the nobility and commnonalty ought to force that the laws
ad the old customs of the realn be not altered, neither that
he country be not impoveriflied by taxes, empreft, or new
upopts, after the manner of Frances for provision wherein,
bth bv the law of God and man, the French king and his wife
sv be moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.
AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and
tarmons joined with the next heir of the crown, to seek due
formation of such great abuses as tend to the ruin of their
untrv, which mufft be done before the French grow too strong
au insolent.
Firzr, That it may be provided, by consent of the three
.:es cf the land, that the land may be free from all idolatry

like

like as England is, for juf.itication whereof, if any free gene
ral council may be had where the Pope of Rome hath not Il
feat of judgment, they may offer to llhew their cause to bemol
agreeable to Chri:t's religion.

NExT, to provide that Scotland might be governed, ina,

r;ies and offices, hy the antient blood of the realm, withou
either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all other Prince,
govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be i
the hands of mcre Scottilh men.

TH IRD .Y, That thev might never be occasioned to entel

into wars again(t England, except England Illould give thefiri
cause to Scotland.

F IuI R T ii L Y, That no nobleman of Scot!and fiould receive

pension of France, except it were whilit he did serve in France,
for otherwise thereby the French would shortly corrupt many,
and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, that no office, abbey, living, or commodity, b

gi en to anr. but mere Scottilh men, by the assent of the three
esTates of the realm.

SIXTHLY, That there be a council in Scotland appointedia

the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in those
cafeO not rt- be direced bv the French.

SEv .- r

. 'HL. That it be by the laid three estates appointed

how the Queen's rev enue of the realm Tliall be expended, lbow
much the queen fliail have for her portion and estate du.
ring her absence, hov much shall be limited to the governance
a-d defence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to k
kept in treasure.

I:. there and such like points, if the French king andth

ouecn be found unwilling, and will withlfand these provifitn
for the v.eale of the land, then hath the three etates of tb
realm authsritv, forthwith to intimate to the said king an
atuen thi.r humnbl requests; and if the fime be not effecualiy
granted, then huimblv they may commit the governance thereo
tn the next heir of the crown, binding the fame also to obfer
the law- a-d antlert rights of the realm.

Fit- . L.Y, if the queen fliall be unwilling to this as it

:1;kr' :lie swill, in r' flect of the greedt and tyrannous affeclio
oi France. then it is apparent that Anlightv God is o!eaiedt
i.Tanfer f.-m her the rule of the kingdom for the weale ofit
-l.i '1: t.ni mul: he usea.i v.ith g- at circui:itpection, to avo;
'he ec.Dlts and troimperie of the French.

A.\o then m avh the reil!li of S-o!land confider, beingon
-rr-e free, '.-hat "-eans may be dcvifed by God's goodnefl. t
acc rd the wo reanrs, to endure lor time to come at the pieh
ti re o-: Ail.ight- God, in .whfe hands the lharts of all prta
c's be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p 1I82.)

A letter of Maitlnnd of .cthiingtol'i thus dilreed,

To IIm loving friend Janmes. Be this dLlivered at London.

I[ L':lr:RSTr ND by the las- letter I received from yc.w, t';at2z .hjanu-

,tiilcuriilg with zour couniryllern upor the lmatter of Scot-ary I ~9-
,i, :i!d coiiiinoditevs may ensew to that realm, hertaftter rgitl.t. Coit.

z: r:ecn;'!v -:lift sv:- witl zour orces, ze iindl a norbrte of the Lii. Cal.
.:..::rv adc.'il"e, donting that we fali rot at lei'th be found ix.
:-'::I- liei(sS nor mean to coltvnc;. in conft::l t ailttiee, i lb'it Fron the
i:t ait.niilc'. but only for avov ding t!ic p: 'ent danger Imakle zow original in

o:r,',;c our turlie, and after lbing del;\ered. becuinl eneniics as llis ow

b h;;ire. For pro'e quliaeoif, they allcdge thillng l:ave pall hand.
i- ..;i ws heetolbre, and a few preftcilptioanei tediling to the

i;. icid, a!l grounded upon Inifruft ; quhills, at the firl licht,
i-t; s.!c ilie:we ofapparence, but git nien w ev not the circutii-
ii' ci o' tne matter; but git they will confer the t'n;1 p2a
,i!h the prefint, confider the nature of thli cans. ands elart
o' .ur c,)ntrey, I doubt not but judgnent fla be able to banili
n t'"l. .'\nd firit, I wad v'ill z/e llioud eca::nyne the causes
o!'r old inmitye betwixt the reailis of England and Scot-
i.ni, antd quhat moved our anceltours to enter into !iiue with
iae Frenche; quhilks hv our ftorevs and regiltres ns a:ii-
q*i.s appear to be titefe. The princes of E-ig'nni, foi;le
tlr.!. r!ledging a certain kvnde of foveraint-.e over this re.t':l;
ilite tlle upon hye courage, or incited Iy' inc.r'ioni, ot cnur
srduiirares, and fentsmable ocC.ifiois, nm iny1 tvtnles en( r-
iild tlhe conqluel: of ws, and ilt 1.ar fui'th ipreilt it b6

crce orl armes, that we wer dirvven to greit. extranmite:;.
io's of our princes, our noblinten, and a good p-art of our
rii.ri, ffa that experience taught ws that iotl ( ;vl fircn; t;

i' icarlte sufficient to withlltand the force oi l' ',;:ind. 'I'he
Fr.ci:,c 7'ur auncient enemves, conlldr!ing '. ell how nature
iti l'a SI;ced x s in a iland with ov.o, that t::! nattin i a abJs
;; ?.:ino!e Englaind as wve being eneicec. fi'),chl to ;,oile ts

it-.Ui:! in liue, tending by that imeane to detouritl tc.u:
:.i : t;'r;i thie i lva.ion ol f Flarce. and occupy zow ill !i:e
c;: ce off ;'iur counlilty t hanito, otifering for tlan: eftfc to
Kt'xv.C I:!tc charge, upm v.', a.i j'r coxi.p.'!i;:g of tie\'yr

i't:-', c siii,('d a ivine to pr'p.,e the matter, liU;ll; ti r1

i''. t llli'y Oi i.iu'is laitcl; Ic(i ti\-C ait 7cur iiJn't.

n ', :ai .l
r_:it p!Cr"tId on our harles, l!:tt l! .,!'tr lid'ynie, were occu-

'. :':". tl, !: rex nged, ar i tLrnict 111 i.h v. ithi tle r .owar ot'
;'i: - :. pj.%itr againtt zour iitCrpl't lit thtnreaiter.

';i:: i

.'."as the b'.ginni"g oil' (uir conitdtersce wkhitl Frarre.

':'!'h: ';!:;', our croniice ,'',.:k :n!iti!::, .hat lotne i;l[ if!
\'s,. Ii R wv;ft.i f

-.fieft foresaw the perril, and small frute should redound to
xv; thereof at lenth: zit had affection fa blinded iugemci:,
that the advise of the mailt part owercame the best. The maile
part -f ali querc.s betwixt :-s since that tyme, at least quhen
the prcvocation came on our ivde, hes ever fallen out by then
proc; r-'rnt rather than an;v one caus off our fels: and
r.uhcn?-evcr we brack the peace, it come partly by thevr i
it- cments, partly to e!chew the conquers intended by that realm,
iut new hes God's prcvidence fa altered the cafe, zea changd
i: the plat contrary, that how hes the Frenfche taken 2our
?c!re, and we, off vervjug-ement, becumdefyrous to have>yr.
; tit-er rowme. Our e'-c are opened, we espy how uncare.
'ui .:e-.; have been of our weile at all tymes, how they made
w- ever to serve tleyr turne, drew us in maift dangerous wets
for ithyr commodite, and nevertheless wad not fcvcl:, r;i
t, 'ie:, raginit the natnur of the liguc, to contrak peace,
-a:'.'-g w-sin wer. \e lee that their support, off late zers,

*.'e, ..- grantit or any arftation they bare to ws, for pvtiethev

r. i cr' our eitate, tor reconipenfe of the lyke fi:iendlhip
'n:av.'in to thev iin in time offthevr afflictions, but for ambition,
.-.d i:-ciabie cupidite to reygne, and to mak Scotland aneac.
c. ir rv to he crown of France. This was na friendly office,
Iui iiercernar , craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportionol
t:.icr deli rv;ing; a hale rcalm for the defence of a part. W'
fe2 t.'ev:.i ma:iiiftlly attempt the thing we fufpeEted off owa;
x,\' f-;.;d z; ment the conquest olf Scotland, and they are
p a:,e'v iallen to that work; we hated zow for doubt we hid
ze innt es.'l toward; ws, and fall we love thevin, quhili'
h-ari;g the n2me ors friends, go about to bring ws in maill rie
flrv-l:.je i Gi; by zour friendly support at this tyme, ze fel
declar- tla no- on'v Cute ze not the ruyne off our country, but
v.-: il ricrie thc libertie thereof from conquelt by itrangearesj

;l' l n ,t thecc n occao all inimitie with zov., and ligue wi!i

thre.i, be taken awv.a The causes being removed, howval
the ci-:ec-ts rernane.: The fear of conquelt made ws to hale
z. - and ir -e theym, the cais changed, quhen we fee theItI
pianr!v attempt conqueil, and zow fchaw ws frendcllip, falles
nc: h b-e thtrvi, an;d tavour zow? Gif we have fchawre l
.r-.; c :.;'tance, continuing la nony yzetres in anitywith therv
o-r' ui::cime we had fa fitiall commnodite, qlhat fall nove usct
bce-.':e :,.'- h 70V.-, that of all nationes mav do ws greatell pleseui

.,' 7e w iil lav, this mater may be reconcvled, and tli

* ; , -i ,,R' before I thi.k v. ci!l peace is the end of all w.Or

l , -.r hi ;i. zc mna' be afiured, v.we v.iil never fa !ar trult tih
r.-c"rciiati;n, th:nt we x.i! be content to forego the an;ie:o
,i '.,i, r.nor do a,- thing niay bring v:s in fulpicion v- th7 z"'
C;',: -. x 'o!i, at a:.- t.-:e to ple-s. the-rin, brelak v.-ih /,
*..'::d wr.e nct, be-lides the lueic uiti: eticinaion and i::
cl.:';'.. n i oui
o l:;,, p.rp:tually cxpone our cunllliO V''

.. o!n iitl maniieft danger, and becunl a pray to theyr tyranny?
Q::ais aid could wve imlplore, being dellitute of zour frie:nd-
i.,:, gif they off new wiald attempt thevr forinar enterpri e ?
: .-ar ration Ilyglt help ws giff they wald, or wald gitF they
r..t ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will not itick hereafter to
, rhl'vr tynme off ws, quhen ldlplicfour and grudge has taken
,Ie rute on baith fydes, feing ambition has lt iipyihit ow -
,t realon, that before we had ever done any thing invgit
o5cnii theym, but by the contrary pleased thleyin by right andt
v.ra, tlhcv did not flick to attemple the lubverfion of our

i!c itate. I wald xe flinuld not e'teelme w's la barayne ot
sa .ent, that we cannot forelfe our awne peCil; or la
,.:.lichle, that we will not study by all gode mleans to enterc
;.t';e that tiling may be our litety-; <(jthiilk colfiiltes all in
It !ca'aying of zour fricndrlips. I pray 7. ow conrlide in lyke
c. ', veiecn, in the (lays of zur princes ,iss I malis noble nmino-

:. *irHenry the VI] . and king l:'.d ard the V I. mneanes wer

::.::, os.n' amnytye betwixt baith rcalm il; was not at all tyies
: .. ir'!relnci of religion the onley stay they wer not embraced ?
li. nt the craft of our clergy and power of thevr adherents
..1 : the devises of the better soir? liut now hias God off
l. !.!.cV removed that block furth off thie way : nosV is not
I'-.r': pi iac lyke to tak place an)' mare, wihen wv ar coninle
In c.tnorliry otf doctrine, and protes the fame religion with
z:':, quhillk take to be the ifravteft knot off' amitve can he
c.iilcd. Gil-' it may be a'ledged, that lIme of' our countrv-
s.n, at ony tyme, violated thevr pronlis ? gif 7e liss to wav
:h. circ.uliiltances, ze fall fynd the promiq ic rather 1rough!t on

rilcclftirc, after a great owerthraw ofi our men, thien conlmLe
o fst iii, and tending ever to our great incolmmodite and
ca.r F our haill state, at leifl fa taken. But in this c:i'e,
Ili the prelervation off our libertie be inieparal)ly joined with
!.: kcping otf proniefle, anti the violation off our favth! cat!
: na lnaill nirferable servitude. Sa that gi:tfnetlier thel feat-
0, ,'G, reverence of man, religion, otile, promlife, nor wial.i-
;;I.'!cite wes fuifiCicit to hYvid wi, vet lal te .eale oif (,lir
.. cuntrey, the mainitenance ott' oiir Ol ll Itl, tlile f'!ftt
c . -ytfi-s aind childrene fronil fiavely, c.'lp:ll Vws to k'":ie

:::: li afrured, it is trewVl anl! ii .Cl' mllet cn (.ur

; : T c..ntlinew in perpetual ainet'.' 'itlh . w ;' it lall be 'it-

,; .'.'' *!,:ir proccdjings. Gill' z.e Iec : s d;.. l', us ol it as a ,:
':: ' ,i::,nc- mlay bel devvfed, (quimliirlbv all i tl''es w!! be r -ut
'. '. .t '7'i' re he gode mneanes to di, it, tit lnilu!'r.-'! i

'

.:: pt )., itvie lirves wsvill, thl inh:l'tlr ints or' b:iitli

: i. v:iilli, Go;id t.s wriught in the peolec ilai ts on Iayth

: ! ti .l' il;i' nrr il'cnient uiion it, i.c.r i'id, ir ait t' il ,
' ;; i,' !ir. ( 'c:I;C:rie a;t o;l., to knlt it

i u , thr ii l'ttiii.k
; ....', t: . ,*,-; ;' are ill (C )ti, i i:s ', {ira' m k iu thll

R z h.!e.

hale. I hope he quha hes begun this work, mainteyned i
qut-le now, by the expecation of man, sale perfyte it.

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confultatio,

queether ze fall support ws or no. Seving the mater fpeaketl
for itsei'. that ze mon take upon zow the defence off our caus,
F:rFze have an, respect for zour awne weill. Their prepara.
tives in France, and levving of men in Germany (quheyroff]
an latdl-v advertited) ar not altogydder ordeyned for us, zeal
the marL they ihote at ; they feke our realne, but for ane
entrey to zrurs. Gif thev should direcRly fchaw hoftilitie to
zo'.'. tnhe-v k:r. zo wald malk redy for theyne ; therefor thet
dc. h- incerset meanes, to blind zow, the thing, they dare not
as .it pDanlv attempte. They feme to invade us to th'end
thi i h ving ?ITmnbled thevr hale forces fa nere zour bordours,
they !n:.'- uncin! it to attack zaw: It is ane off theyr aid fetche;,
mai:ing a sice.v to one place, to Ivghton ane other. Remem-
bcr hov: co;crtlv zour places about Boulougne were affaizrit,
anrd carr.ed avway, ze being in peace as now. How the enter-
prise of Calaiis \a fvncly dissembled, I think ze have no: si
sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent theyr policy by
prudence. Gss ze let not the Ivke disposition prefent!y in
thevyr, ze fe rath ng. It is a grosse ignorance to mifinav,
what all n?-ticrs pianely ipeks off. Tak hede ze zay not here-
after, " Had I w'ist ;" ane uncomely sentence to procede offt
-vfe rm.an's mncuth. That is onwares chanced on to zaw,
qu : k zow.- corrmnonlv wiled, that this countrey myght bed;.
v3:'ed tr.m the Freniche, and is la comnoe to pals as was minit
expeien-: tor zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken
the mnter in hand, ze mvght have fufpeted we would hrve
been o::ru-v frends, and na langer continued ftedfafte, then
purri! had apnpeared. But now, quhen off our self, we hate
concevvcd rtc hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that
the-.-r e-il d .a!i;.g ith tws hes deflrvcd our iniinitve, let Pn
man doubte but they fall fvnd ws enelnves in ernest, that f
u'.gently hes dcmeyned our countrey, and at quhais handste
c.n look for nathing but all extremitye, giffever they may get
the upper hand. Let not this occasion, fa happely offered,
efcapc zw'.-: giif ze do neglecting the present opportunitie, and
hoprng to navh ever gcde iuk comme fleaping upon zow, It :S
to be teared zour enemye waxe to great, and fa ftrang, that
at:erw.alds quhrn ze wald, ze fall not be able to put him
down; and then, to zour smart, after the tyme, ze will ac-
kno wledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat harmin
cometh c off erfight, and trusting to zour enemyes promesll.
V. e cfftr zw- the occasion, quheyrby zour former loffesmaY
be rep'.-rd. Q hilk git ze let over fivde, Iufecring ws to h
owe.rrun, quha tnen, I pray zow, fall slav the Frenfche, thl
t ev 'il nou invade zow in zour ou n boundes, lick it is their 'li
tu reygne, that th. y can neyther be conte:; with! theyr forlr:.

prekr.l

prerent, nor rell and be satisfied when they have gode luck, but
ill tlill follow on, having in theyr awne brayne cnceaved the
,age of fa great a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end?
1l ther any of a finall jugement, that he doth not Iorefee al-
ready, that theyr hail force fall then be bent agalnf( zow ?

It fall not he amis, to confider in quhat cale the Frenfche be
prefntlv. Theyr estate is not always fa calme at hame as
everv nlan thinketh. And trewly it wes not theyrgreat redines
for 'err made theym to tak this mater on hand, at this tyme,
iut rather a vayne trust in their awne policy, thinking to have
siund na refitance, theyr opinion hes deceaved theym, and
that makes them now amazed. The estates off the empire (as

heare) has futed restitution off th' Imperial towns Metz,
Ti'l, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to tome befynes; and

t hing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey, the les fit

r.:v be presently for weyr, the mare opportune efteme ve the
':i:e tor z7,v. Giff the lyke occasion were offered to the
rren!c!ie a,.'infL zow, wey, how gladly would they embrace it.
Are ze not efchamed of zour sleuth, to spare theym that hes
a!rean' conipaffed zour deftructijn, gifftheymn wer able ? Con-
fAer with zour self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against
them out with zour realme or within ? Giff quhill ze fleape,
we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to fute zoow in
7rur awne countrey, and use ws as a fote flole to over!ok-e zow.
Put some will fay, perhaps, they meanc it ntr. It is folv to
think they wald not giff they wer able, qllhen hbforc hand they

kick not to giff zour armes, and ufurpe the ftlle of zour crown.

Then quhat difference there is to camp within zowr awne
bounds or without, it is manifest, Giff twa armyes fliould
(imp in zowr country, but a moieth; albeit ye rcceaved na
c.'er harne, zit flould -owr los'e be greatar, nor all the charge
7- will nede to bestow on our support will draw to, besyd es the
di!illnour.

LS. not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for
prticular respects weill affected to the caus, move zow to fiib-
tri zour helping hand, by alledging things not apparent,
:fr that they be poflible. It is not, I grant, unpoffible that
-:e may receave conditiones of peace; but I fee little likel,-
lde that our enemyes will offer ws fik as will remove all nlif-
trui, and giff we wald have accepted others, the matter had
tine lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for
t.t they terme ws rebelles, and diffames our just querell
v':h the name of conspiracy againtl our foverayne. It is
br hrvnes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir reallne
wye ftudv to preserve, with the hazard off out lyves. We are
l &Go(l knaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as men
::?p:cihnt of rewll, or willing to fchake off the zoke of go-
::rne:ient, but ar drawre to it by neceffitie, to avovde the ty-
aarv of ltrangeares, feaking to defraude ws of lawiul govern-

!11en.,

mert. C;Gif vwe is.nld susser iftangcres to plant thermfelFcr
pa_-ac-al v in ai .the ri;rt.ht.; of ou; iealnie, forti. the fci.
p."rte, and maid:1 importali place;, a, an entre to a plain crn-
c ue:, new- in the !tinoritc o!i '.ur lverane, beyng furth of t:
rc.inmc. ho!ud v.e not I'e thougllt oncareful off the comril;,2
ai-'" bVitrlaareC of our native countrcv, and evill fuhjec& ;.,
hlr nmi te ?

Q hhat other opinion could fche have of r,:

5 1Fz: !bh;c nct ucilltv hereatter ca!l ws to accompt, as neglg.,,,
ni..:t'res 'r Gift ifrangcares fihould be thus suffered to brn::e
the chcte offcr. beare the hail rewll, alter and pervert cl:r
lawes and liberty at thc r plefour; myght not the people efRie,
our n-,b':men unv.orthv the place of counfalours \ We t-.!
r.a I.-', to fubtrak our obedience from our foverane, to defraid
ihr hernes off her dev. rrveree:ce, rents and re\enues off ;rr
crown. W\e sike nathing but thar Scotland imla) reimane, aof,
before. a fre real;;r.. ritwi hv hir hven -s and 'ir mlinifieail
borne men of the lai1; and that the fuccellion of the crow;n
mna renr.neas n- the lav.ful blir.

i u.; L no: zc fluld not fa IrtiiUl cieme the friend;hi:, Q

Sic.-l-ni. thai zc iu-,ed it not s(-orthv to be embraced. It il
be n.a in all com.sdiie for zow to be delivered offthe ano'-nc
of to n:.r z nvghtbcur. quhcis inimiten maymore trouble zcw,
then cr..t - other nation albeit twyfs as puissant, not Ive-
dry n:arche with 70o. Blf'des that ze fall not nede to is:
tr.t; inv ion ors anr. prince lackvng the commodite to invIe
70ow b;v and, on our hand. Confiderquhat superfluous charrs
7e belioto.e rn the forti,,cation and keping oi Barwick; qu.k
7e !n.a. rccuce to a ini-an sow me, hliaing ws to frendc.
The rcaimne c.; Ireland beinj of natour a gode and fertillcoup.

-rev, b' reason off the ccntinew alid unquietnes and lak o

pc!ics. ze k-ni.w- to be rather a burthen unto zow then gret
advantage; and ,irr it v.ere peaceable may be very cec.
modious. For paci:cation quha roff, it is not onknownc it
z-7-: quhat service -we ar abill to do. Refuse not thevr c-n
mcdirtetv, betides monv ma quhen they ar offred. Qnii'b
albeit I[ tudv not to amplify and dilate, yet it is na other coia-
trtv able to offer 7o- the lyke, and are the rather to be cmi
braced, for that zour anceltors, by all meanes maift ernesT?
luted our anity, and yet it was not theyr hap to colme b ir.
The mater hes ainaift carrved me beyond the boundes eFn
lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble 7ow after I have give
v, u thi rn.tc I wa!d

1 \wis that ze, and they that ar learre,

f-uid r'd-c the toa for:ncr cliations of Denioithenes, ca'k
cO-vnT! .-.c, -.R. cnrnid ere qu!hat cPunfall that .ylfe orato;

a.'c to :he A!ir"ii: , his countlmiien, in a Iyke cafe; qui.
fes so -iat ari-:te v-ih this; caufc of ours, that every v;or

:hcrec' n hl nT rls app';(d to olur purpns. There may ze larai
o , .h r- hat a. dvi: T5 so be tfliowtvd, when zour liLtghibh'uI

-.[.

iours is on fvre; Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill: From Sant
.ndrcws, the zoth ofJanuary, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 189.)
pFrt of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Si'r William Cecil, fram

the camp before Leith, 29th of April, 1560.

I WILL only, for this time, discharge myfelfof my promise An Origi-

to the earl of Huntly, who so defireth to be recommended n:ll in the

to ou, as one, who with all his heart favoureth this caufi, to the Paper Of-
u!tril.oft If his power. Half the words that came out of hislice.
niauth were able to perfuadean unexperienced man to speak far-
tcer in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to
v.ur honour to judge of him, as of a mian not unknown to you,
znd will m1)felf alwas measure nmy thoughts, as he Iilall delerve
to be spoken of. With mu h difficulty, and great perFrafion,
!i liath subscribed wvith the reft of the lords to join tleml in thii
ctiiosn; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this
cauif, he hath promised to do, with solemn proteltation, and
many words; he trufteth to adjoin many to this cause; and faith
furcd that no man flall lie where he taketh part. He hath
nis day subscribed a bond between England and this nation; he
ithb, that there was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 200.)

Randolph to Cecil, loth August 1560. From Edinburgh.

INCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last to your An Origi-
honour. I have heard of nothing worth the reporting. Atnal in the

tnis Drelent it may please you to know, that the molt part of the Paper Of-
noblesare here arrived, as your honour ihall receive their names i-e.
,n writing. The earl ofHuntly excufeth himfelfby an infirmity

l

hi leg. I-His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington,

chroen speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker as these mlcn
Ierm it. The first day of their fitting in parliamnent will be on
Thursday next. Hitherto, as many as have been prelent of the
I 1,rds have commnuned and devised of certain heads then to be pro-
pminded, as, who lhall be font into France, who into England.
h1 is much easier to find them than the other. It feemeth almoil
to be resolved upon that for Engiand the ,aIafter of Maxxwe!, and
laird of Lidington. For France, Pitarrow and the Juttice Ciel k.
.'!b.) they have consulted whom they think meetell to namil- to
the XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors must be ch.',fn.
Ticy intend very fliortly to fend away Dingwall the herald into
France, with the names of those they Ifiall chufe; and allo to
reiuire the king and queen's consent unto this pariiaient.

R 4 They

Te: l-.-ivc c'rev-'!d hov- t' lrave the contract with England con.
irr;.ed !' a.-r:ih.'ri:v 'fp''r l:innc.r ho ow aifo to have the art;cle
*f'r I- s-*. r a, n; bet;x-cen trenm and their ki.. and queen ratified
TThei; th';lr- rha- e R l.e, rPve had in cc!lomunication. Forthe
cerF.ir: a'i

o: , F tce c:-ntrr.ct w ith Er.nian: I have nodoubt; for

rr. i hel.sr ernv men vcr- like the f-mle, as the Earl of Athol,
the Eari o.f Sttrita-'d, th- I... Glalli, whlo dined vefterdav with
the I a- T- L.

The . ;r.a s rqu:!ted me thi present da to

bring hroe rntract unto him. I intend a!so, this dav, to feakun.
to the L. Gri., in cur I.. Gr.v's name, for that he pronifed in
r-v hearin. tc :i.hblrihe. and then Drefet!dy would have doneir,
if t.che r ctrac. could have h.: - had For the more alTurance
azaini ail incn;Lvenients, Iwould befi les that, that I trui it !isil
hb ratiy'd in parliament, that every noblenian in Scotland had pu;
his hand and set his fLai, which may always remain as a nots .
rronument, thr,' the ac of par!i-ment be hereafter diihn,'ul;:.
Ift i'might, therefore, itand wi:hnour advice, that 'e I' .:
rmizht be wri'-;. unto, now that tihe are h-re present to tha.:
fe*. or that I right receive from your Hor'. sone earneftch-:-:
t1 travc herein, I doubt not but it would ierve to g .cr.: ;.rp:;.
If it might he al.o known with what substantial and etieci;.-.
'.r; or charge vou delire to have it confirmed, I think n., ;"nt
cd:ccu!t'- :'ou!d bc n ade. The Earl Martlial has oft been moied

to . .hflr sh.,

he ufeth mo delavs than the men iud'gd hie w;uid.

His ion to'd me vefterdav-, thit he would speak wit' me at 'ei-
fulre, if did .lfo Druillinrick; I Iknew not 'o what purpfe: I
'ae- ca;ll-d L. .iit!- s to 1I the earnester with the L. Mlarfht!,
fc.r his auc;ori;v's fake, -wh en of late it was in corfultatioc bv
what means i; night be w-rought, that the amity between thele
twe o ra!r- nmig;h, be perpctual; and amongdisverfe men's opinion,
one i:i.! tha, he knew or no other, but by nmaking them both
one, ar'c -ta; in hope of that mo things were done, than would
othrrwi.ie have ever been granted ; the earl of Argyll advised him
e-rncftilv to flick unto that, that he had promised, that it ihould
pss' his power, and all the craf:v knaves of his council, (I am
b-.'i to us! unto vo!:r }. hisown words) to break so godly a pur-
p: c. tR'i k

ta!k liked well the afiifters, howsomever it pleased

him to sw-rm it was spoken unto. The barons, who in time pall
have been of the parliament, had yesterday a convention among
nth!e'tn is in the church. in very honest and quiet fort; they
rhought it gred to require to he restorcd unto their ancient liberty,
to }-t-ve v-'it in parliament. Theys, presented that day a bill unto
th. lo-ds to that off-ct, a copy whereof ihall be sent as soon as it
can be had. It v.-as anfv:.'rcd unto gently and taken in good
p-it. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when they
are chosen to resolve thereupon.--- Here sol/o',:s a long
ras.arofh cncernrin3g te fsrtifications of Dunbar, tEc --

'I h!3

T: present morning, 'viz. the 9th, I underflood, that thelords
,crdcd to he at the parliament, which caused me somewhat to
i' ii'r letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the report-
:unto vour Hon'. The lords, at ten of the clock, afcmbled
thriiles at the palace, where the duke lieth; fiom whence
ii de lparted towards the Talbooth, as they were in dignity.
Edch one being let in his feat, in such order as your H. hall receive
th;; in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, werelaid
the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the L. of Liding-
n began his oration. He excused his insufficiency to occupy
at place He made a brief discourse of things past, and of what
ccelity ni:n were forced unto for the defence of their country,
bat ren:edy and support it pleased God to fend them in the time
their neceflitv, how much he were bound heartily to acknow-
.e i and to requite it. He took away the persuasion that was
::'ar: men's minds that lay back, that misdeemed other things
iie meant than was attempted. He advised all estates to lay all
i:rtalrs apart, and to bend themselves wholly to the true ser-
:c .I God and of their country. He willed them to remember
eilk (ate it had been of long time for lack of government,
: iercic ofjuftice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual
tandl hea! tvfriendkflwp. and tolivewith oneanotheras members
ene bodr -He prayed God long to maiaintin this peace and
:,' ith all princes, especially betwixt the realms of England
c.:,nland, in the fear of God, and so ended. The clerk of

::.eriiinediately flood up, and afled them to what matter they
-iproceed: It was thought necessary, that the articles ofthe
ce ihould be confirmed with the common content, for that it
:!:nought necefiary to fend them away with speed into France,
10 receive the ratification of then as focn as might he. Thie
c'es being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day was
:hnted to have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and
pd' to their feal, to be sent away by a herald, who flall alfb
ng the ratification again with him. The barons, of whom I
I. above written, required an answer to their request, foie-
at vas said unto the contrary. The barons alledged for them
emnandauthority. Itvwasin theend rcfolved, that there flouid
cihfen fix to join with the lords of the articles, and that if
*' after good advisement, flould find it right and necessary for
:cnnmmonwealth, it should be ratified at this parliament for a

itli:al law. The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to
achufing of the lords of the articles. The order is, that the
piritual chute the temporal, and the temporal the spiritual,
the burgesses their own. Thev were cholen as in t;his other
r i have written. This being done. the lcrds departed and
:a p.nic! the duke, all as far as the Bow, (which is the gate

going

going out of the high street) and many down into the palace
v herehe lieth. The town all in armour, the trumpets lourdilg
and other nmufick fuc a- they have. Thus much I report uno
your honour of that I did both hear and fee. Other fr.leillitri
have not been uifd saving in times long pall the lords have had
pa-rliament robes, which are .now- v-ith them wholly out of ut

TH E nalmec ofa! r"anv earls and lords spiritual and tempo0
as are afTenmblcd at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Lords.

Erskine.
Ruthven.
Lindsey.
Somervi!l.
Cathcart.
Hume.
Li.-ingfon.
I nermeth.
Bovd. S

Ogilvy. Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

Lords Spirituil

St. Andrew's.
Dunkell.
Athens.
Thebiihop ofthelk
Abbots and Priors,
know not how mas
The Lords of the Articles.

Temporal.

The Duke.
Argvll.
Msarlhall.
Atiole.
Mh'rton
Glenca in.
Ruthven.
Erfline.
Boyd.
Lindsay.

Barons eleEted to

of the Articles.

MIaxwell.
Tillibardine.
Cunninghamhead.
Lochenvar.
Pitarrow.
Lundy.
Ten Provosts of

chief towns, wv
also are of the
tides.

So that x. ith the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 3

IT were too ln"g for me to rehearse particularly the CI
..icn, arn chistsi the affeaions of these mer, that area:
Earls.

Arran
4Argll.
Athole.
Crawford.
Callils.
Marlhall.
MNorton.
Glencalrn.
Sutherland.
Cathnefs.
Rothes.
Monteith.

Spiritual.

Athens

Lord James.
Albroath
Newsbhtttle.
Lindoris
Covw?.r.
Kinrols.
Kilwinning.

:, choioc! Lords of the articles. May it satisfy your Honr.
,i. ;ii t;ne, to' know that, by the conmmon opinion of men,
- . was not a fubftantialler or more lufficicnt number of all lbrrs
': Ui-l'.I l'In in Scotland there many years, nor 6f whiom men
:j -ra'.iil l)'pe of good to inlue. This prelent morning, 'iz.
. i::, the iL. of Lidington Imade me privy) unto your letter;
., c:,ieri , as mIuch as may be, to follow your advice. Some
ni;.: s there are. He himself is determined not to go into

'

.: -'c al!edoeth many reasons, but fpeaketh least ol that,

:.:i, tih him nIoft, which is the example of the lair, that
.:: on a !:::,rt gratefdl oeflsage than he inall carry, and itood
r-: !:tr rc'ri: with thei pl inice than he doth, an;d yet your ho-
:!' knoecthil what the mwhoile world judgeth.

':ion cf the ieffcr Barons to the Parlialent, held Aug. i 560.
NY lords, untoyour lordfilips, hunbiy means and fliovws, we lnclofed

the barons and freeholders of this realm, your brethren in Ran-

1-ri'l That whereas the causes of true religion, and com-dolph's
ron -cll of this realm, ore, in this piefent parliamenlt, to beletter to
r:i'd, ordered, and etlablihed, to the glory of God and main-Ccci!,
:ance of the comimon wealth: and we being the greatelt nunl- I Sth Aug.
: in proportion, where the said causes concern, and has been, 1 560.
c et aric ready to bear the greatest part of the charges therc-
:-!, as well in peace, as in war, both with our bodies, and with
:r nod!; and feeing there is no place where we may do better
:i.C now than in general councils and parliaments, in giving
:' tIl advice, and reason, vote and counlell for the furtherance
.r otf, for the maintenance of virtue, and punifihment of vice,
iu!c :'!d custom had been of old by ancient ats of parliatent
ircid in this realnl; and whereby wee understand that we
i1i tl le heard to reason, and vote in all causes corcerning lthe
.: rC wealth, as well in counfeils as in parliamlents ; othcr-itc
:: .!k lihat vhatfomever ordinances and flatutcs be made con-
.::: us and our estate, we not being required and fuftered to
i n andt vote at the making thereof, that the fame iliold not
'. u.' to find thereto. Therefore it wilt please your lordfliips
::;c ctnliLcration thereof, and of the charge born, atnd to he
*i. uc, since we are willing to serve truly the commilon well
:i:r.'ora', after our etate, that ye will, in thi, present par-

'i... arlti a!l couniells, where the commlon weil of the reanl

" ' trl:.: d, take our advice, counfeil and vote, io that. whith-

i: - iahlme. vour lordllips would fufier nothi;g to be palled
tci ncluded ii parlilaent or counfells aforelfid ; and that all
'i par!aiament made, inl tiii:es pail, ccncerning us for cu:
.aand rltate, and in our fivour, be at this pr'cint parliament,

coI'rnicLed,

confirmed, approved, and ratified, and aft of parliament made
thereupon. And your lordfli;ps answer humbly beseeches.

Of the futcces of this petition, the foils-wing account isgivenu

Ran.olp ; Lert. to Cecil, 19 Aug. q60o. The mattersccnciu.
ded and pail by common consent on Saturday last, in such folerm
soFt as the firit day that they assembled, are there. First, ;t'a
the barons, according to an old act of parliament, made in tre
time of James I. in the year of God i42', ihall have free voic
in parliament, this ad paiTed without any contradiction.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 209.)

A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Eng ifhl resident, to the rlg

worshipful Sir William Cecil, knt. principal secretary to th
queen's majesty.

*, Aug. T Have received your honour's letters of the firif of this mon
. 0;o. ] written at Ofres in EirTx, and also a letter unto the lordJames
Cc:t. Lib.from his kiniman St. Come out of France, in this they agr
B. to. so. both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed ofher pr
* .. pose in home coming. I assure your honour that will be aftou

adventure fora sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as '
vwhat may happen unto her upon the seas, as also how hearti
she may be received when she cometh to land of a great numner
who are utterly persuaded that she intendeth their utter rn
come when fne will; the preparance is very small whenfoer
that ihe arrive, scarcely anv man can be persuaded that flheha
any such thought in her head. I have flIown your honour's lete
unto the lord lames, lord Morton, Lord Ledington, they willledi
your honour doth, that she might be stayed yet for a space, and
it were not for their obedience fake, some of them care notth,
they nevw-r saws her face. They trav-elwhat they can to preve
the wicked devises of these mischievous purposes of herminifte
but Ifear that v.il alwavs be found that filij hujus feculi, theyd
v-hat they can to stand with the religion, and to maintain anit

.th their neighbours; they have alib need to look unto the
i ves, for their hazard is great, and that they fee there is nor
medy nor safety for themselves, but to repose themfelvesupontt
cueen's majeftiv, our sovereign's favours and support. Frien
abroad thev have none, nor many in whom they may truRi
home. There are in mind fhortlv to tr , what mav beaffured;
of the queen's majefiy, and what they may assuredly perform
that thev intend to offer for their parties. This the queen
Scotiand above all other things doubteth; this she feeketh by
means to prevent; and hath caused St. Come, in her name, e
nefly to write to charge him that no such things beattempF
before her c.-r,;ng hcme; for that it is said, that they too
ready arriced here out of England for the purpose, what ileiaa
fc -r: ver th . n"eobeiin do nmake, that they are grieved with th,

quct;'

r;ecn s reriual that cometh far from their hearts. They intend to
splfidllate with me hereupon. I have my answer ready enough
si thell. If ilhe thrust all EngliThmien out of this country, Idoubt
r,t bl!t there will be some of' her own that will bear us iome
L:rdners. O me fle lhall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth the queen's

elhst niv mliftrefs no longer to use my service in this place. By
!ctalk, as I have of late had, with the lord James, and lord of
LJ;ngton, I perceive that they are of mind that immediately of
t:e next convention, I liall repair towards you with their deter-
!toitions, and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's
sii;ce is earnestly required, and shortly looked for. Whatfoin-
X:r I desire myself, I know my will ought to be subject unto
t.e queen my sovereign's pleasure, but to content mnyfelf, would
G;d I were so happy as to serve her majesty in as mean a state as
Bor poor gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not that I do
i- my heart wax weary of her majesty's service, but because inv
: soand years require rome place of more repose and quietnels
a Inl find in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when
Ctr troubles in this country arise, or ought fliall be required of
re o the advancement of her majesty's service, that either my

i is not able to compass, or my credit sufficient to work to that
Etl, as perchance shall be looked for at my hands. As your
hnour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, so f

r!t that I Ihall find that continual favour at vour hands, that so
c as it small ifand with the queen's majeftv's pleafire, I may
u this place unto tome far worthier than I am mi'-felf, and in
hi nean season, have my course directed by your good advice
. I nay by my contrivance do fonme such service, as may be
[:eable to her majesty's will and pleasure.
THSEsE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of
(C. For the reft, where that is wiflied that the lords will
.!1v continue yet for one month, I assure your honour that
!r: is yet nothing omitted of their old and accuiltomed manner
ooing, and feeing that they have brought that into this point,
rd hould now prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.
I FIND not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I
ubi more her money, than I do her fair words; and yet can I
conceive what great things can be wrought with forty thou-
! crowns, and trcafure of her own here, I know there is no fi:re
ready means to get it. The lord of I.idington leaveth nothing
thi time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to fatisrif
urdcfire, in knowledge of the present state of things here.
batiloliever cometh of that, he findeth it ever bell, that 11e
rae not; but if flie do come, to let her know, at the first,
't flie ifi.ill find, which is due obedience, and willing service,
lh en,hrace Clrift, and desire to live in peace with her ncigh-
.ro. By fucl letters as you have ladt received, your honour

fimcvwhat

27I

fcme-. hiat un..derlar.d -;h of Mr. Knox li;::felf, and aito of oheri
%wh?.t is determined, he hin-.frf to abide the uttermoll, and tlle
nevpr to leave him un:il God have ta'kn hi; life, and thus tro,
ther with v. hat conmnfrt fol.c ver ;; vi :.' p!ease you to gie hiall
your lett;r, tl iat the queen's rnief'.y dath nno utterly condino
hi:n, or a tihe l a:i i. 'hat p:int, -ha. he is so fore chare wist;Bi:
hi; o.wn queen, that .er. imnajei vili not aIlow her doing. Idijt
not but it

' wi; be a gret. c.,ni ort unto hinm, and will cCne1nt na.' j

ofhers; his dail, -aver is for the maintenance o' u.it-it :i
F..r'-and. and t'i- _ G wd will never fuitcr m n to be so un:g::,
.a h-v anyv p;rituinln to run headlniigi nto the dettructiony
them, tilat l:?e a'. ed their li-es, and restored their countrv:o

hertv. I leave fa rther, at this time, to trouble your honour,
drliring God to fndl i-uch an anlitv between theft two rea!ol
th?.t God n:av be glorined to themn of this world. - At Eit.
burgh t.i 9,:h of Augutl, i 56r.

No. VI. (\ol. I. p. 21-.)

A letter of Qjeen Elizabeth to Qleen Mary.
To the r;_ht ex-eitent, right hiJh and mnighty princesse, oe

right dear and well b;ovsed filier and cuufin the queen
Sco,;,a;d.

6t ofR sl IG H T exce'ient, right high, and mighty princefie, ot
Aug tLP rightl dear n.d right .-ell-beloved filler and cousin, wegr
T561. P -. U v. set. Thei lord of St. Cosine hrought to us your lettr
per C)i . da.-d the Sth of 'his prelent at Abbeville, whereby ye sign..
fr.n :L a til a!h hc:;g bh the anfv.-er brought to vou bv MonficerDonvz
Corv. ve min':: have I;ad occasion to have entred into lome doubt

cur a;iltv, vet after certain purpose; palsed hetwixt you andt
anrbaf-add':r.von wou'.d assure ui of your good meaning to live'il
i'. in a:uni:, and fcr your purpcfe therein ve require us to:
cr'- it; . he p Iad S-. Colne. \k'C ha-e thcre-unto thought,
t^ .- ,-ar 2; f-,-.il.;eih. The fanic Sr. Cosine hath made liked
c:ar-.. 'n unto u. n:l your part, for your :cut in not ratifyiag
tr-. av, a. v-r.irc: ?nde to our a::lba.:'ur,. and vwe have bri
a: ;.- ce, *i.o eve.- the Ifa!ne p ints, a he canil licw vou: andifi

ii. ! .;- '., *,e '.ut leaf: in the inen ,'r cforn you niight be ir.dieo

to thini: t.'ar .;'.ur reatfon has finaiAed u;, ,"'i ral'! we afarfure'el
th-nt o : . rcro'ls your an!;. .r cannr-it h roputcJ forali
ii',- ,.' F:.r x.' r-!uitre no -e:'c:it of ro.i, but that you
pe-n-o:tr: iourI pioan!:!:u where-ut o vut: arc bound biv -our lea ::

o:. ::. ,

r

h .:.',fur tl c re';;f.! v.h-reo- ot .e fe n.) reason alledgcc:

-r:' . Ne' .h-: cor a\-e r anr th.ing.r, butt that ichi inyourev
F'~,-c:: Qz:.Q- o. ..::..
: , that '.- ii;h '. urfcii. in werds'sl

pFcch doth confess, that which your late husband's our good
b-other's ainbaffad-rs and you concluded, that which your own
nobilitv and people were made privy unto, that which indeed
made pece and quietness betwixt us, yea that, without which,
r) pert ca amity can continue betwixt us, as if it be indifferent-

Ir \eighed, we doubt not hut ye will perceive, allow and ac-

c!,!,plil,. Nevertheless, perceiving by the report of the bringer,
ri.t you mean furthwith upon your coning home, to follow
tierl the admife of your council in Scotland, we are content to
fulipcd our conceipt of all unkindness, and do allure you that
,-; lc ',ily refblved, upon this being performed, to unite a sure

ind( of amity,, and to live in neighbourhood with you as quietly,

e0,j!r', yea as affurediv in the knot of fiielndllip, as we be in

hc 'not of nature and blood. And herein we be so earnestly de-
tcerirele, that the world fliould fee if the contrary lhould fol-
w., \rrhich God forbid) the very occasion to be in you and not
nu; as the itory witneffeth the like of the king your father,
ouruncle, with whom our father fought to have knit a perpetual

rin bk inviting to come in this reaini to York, of which matter
Frl;.va' there relmain with us, and we think with you, sundry
i;zeflcs of our father's earnest good meaning, and of the error
bhereunto divers evil councillors induced your father; or finally
here it feemeth that report hath been made unto you, that we
'rcnt our admiral to the Teas with our navy to empeacheyour
r.ge, both your servants do well underifand how false that is,
owing for a truth that we have not an)y r:re than two or
ree fiipall barks upon the seas, to apprehend certain pirates,
:ng thereto entreated, and aliloft compelled, by the earnclt
nmpiaint of the ambaflhdor of our good brother the king of
in, made of certain Scottilhmen haunting our seas as pirates,
-'er pretence of letters of marque, of which matter also we
rneily require you, at your coming to vour realm, to have
ir: good consideration, and the rath-r for refpet that ough;
tieketiwixt your realrne and the countries of I' rance, o;
rKn. and of the houic of Burgundy. And so, right excellent,
h! rhigh and mighty princesse, we reconimend us to you with

r' earnelt requelt, not to neglect thete our fi'indiy :nd sifter-

circrT of friendlhip, which, bi tore G -d, ' er mean andr intend
raccm)plili. Given under our fignct at Heiicvn;ghami the 16;:
iiul], in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 244.)
i ':' of Randolph to tile right honourable Sir \Vil!im Cecil.

k;iglht, principal fecrelary to the queen's ma!iuf!. ir ri rs

F late, until the arrival of mnonfieur la Cloch, I 1hid nrotlin I 1 ;. i' -
t s (.j tht

the writing u:rto vc'.u loiur. - lBetiorc !i, comin;ril per ()Oi;c-
I, lu, lie to hilit upon, that rwe did notlhing but p:il on! Ir :r1. lihe

till (i *, ial.

time in fcafts, banquetting, makling, and running at the rin,
and such like. He brought w!ith him such a number of letters
and GLch abundance of news, that for the lpace of three lays
w.e gave ourfe!ves to nothing else but to reading of writings, an
hearing of tales many to tr'ly reported, that they might bi
compared to any that ever Luciane did wr'te de veris narraioni.
bus. Among all his tidings, for the most aflured, I fend ti,
unto your honour as an undoubted truth, which is, that the car.
dina; of Lorrain, at his being with the emperor, moved amar.
rlage between his voungetl son, the duke of Auftruche, and th
queen; wherein he hath so far travailed, that it hath already
corme unto this point, that if Iihe find it good, the laid dukeiill
cut o. hand lend hither his ambaflador, and farther proceed to
the con.ummation hereof, with as convenient speed as ma be;
.nd to the intent her mind mav be the better known, la Croc'is
lfnt unto her with this mefiHage from the cardinal, who ha!i
promiled unto the emperor, to have word again before the erd
o:f M.\a; and for this caufc la Croch is ready for his departurel
and his letter; writing both d:nv and night. This queen bhio;
befcre advertized of his toweardnes, by many means, hath foul;
far cff, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but wotU
never io plainly deal with him, that he could learn what k
meaning is, or how fille is bent. She ufeth no man's council, bu
,nly this man's that las arrived, and assuredly until the L.
LiJirgton's return, flie will do wx-hat /he can to keep that secret
and hec- uie resolution in his absence cannot be taken, file wi
for thiis rie, return !Croch with request, to have longertim
to 'd-:' ; and after, wv th e most speed she can, he fulivptr
p-!';h to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardinal, of he
mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. Ibli
not whether bh- !boe intelligence t;at he had before hisdepartur
or oince his arrival in France, divers letters have pafled betwte
her zrace and himi, xwhereof as much as it imported not grea!l
the kncwledge of, was conmmur.cated to some; as much as'.

'ilte in in f-pher, is kepz unto rhee. Whether also thl

ns lricington hath had coinfrerce with the Spaniila anblhisad
in England of this matter, or anv like, I leave it unto yourh
nnur'. gned means, to get true knowledge thereof. Guefle-'
furn' ''- in so grave matters, I wou;d ble loth to write for verii
TlI;--'.. vnaur hr.ncur mar take for truth, that the emprt
li-i;n r.;"re! - 'i h i:i'; -n, for this queen's dower, the coant"

t .'roi.' w:ich is said tn he . Crth ;o,ooo ;'anks hv year.
thi ::--. :--r asi, ti e rhingrav; v-rote a letter unto this que
cr.:: cf F.-..' n,;o Ionn since. This is all that prefentlylc
wrlte u: r- v r henore hereof; as I can come by farther knr.t
lcie, .' ;:-hi nur it.oh' bke inforncd.

I t a-',x ' r-ce,.'.i-'. ho-:r 7onour'; writings tl the Scottill' Wr
t'..; '^. .:.e inr. -h' ::r : t
hbe broughlt also letters unti t

cue,

uecn fiorn the L. of Lidington, their date was old, and con-
la;-,el only the newsof France. I perceive, diver,; ways, that
.~Ahave'n is forre closed, but Iam not so ignorant of their na-
lure, but that I know they will lay as much as they dare do, I
sill nor lay as the proverb doth, ' canis tinidus fortius latrat.'
Frnil hence I do allure them, what means fonlever they make,
c'w k\ piti!il foniever their mone he, they are like to receive but
ii;!i coniort, for all their long allie. We stand daily in doubt
eiaI r,.'c-ndliip we fliall need ourlelf, except we put better order
Iu ur t

oir milfrulid papipls, than yet we do, or know how to bring

ton pfT, tiht we may be void ol' heir conber.
To, mnorrow, the i 5th of this infant, the queen departeth of
thi tiowin, towards Edenborough. If my hap be good, you flall
ihroauihly hear some merry tidings of the Bp. ol St. Andrews;
O!a:\\ ednefday next he fihall be sarreigned, and five other priests,
y. their niafling at Easter last. Thus most humbly I take iny
leIvr; at St. Andrews the isth of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 251.)
.Leter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir WVilllam Cecil,

knight, principal secretary to the queen's majefly.

AY it please yourhonour, the 7thofthis inftant,Rowlet, ioth ofA-
this queen's fecietary, arrived here; he reporteth very pril, 1 563.

,onett!v of his good usage, he brought with him many letters Paper O:-
uato the queen that canme out of France, full of lamentation and fice from
forro.. She received from the queen mother two letters, the the Origi-
ore contained only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify nal in his
ite si:te of France as then it was, in what fort things were ac- own haniil.
corde!, and what farther was intended for the appearing of the
c:tonlr there, not miftruffing hut that ifreafon could not be had
i; thr uuecn of England's hands, but that the realni of France
sould fi-d her readv and w illing to lupport and defend the right

aliriof, a: by firiendihip and old alliance betwveen the ts o realnms

i hot li otnd.
How wel! these words do agree with her doings, your honour

i:.l confidec, and by her writings in this fort unto this quern,
.'*:ch 1 alFuFc 'our hlcnour is true) you may assuredly knovw,

t!' :othing fial'i be left undone of her part, that tima move de-

^-re or controverlie between this queen and r.ur Sovereign.
lr v'as much n iiledi at by the tiueen herlelf, how this nev.'
s:d:nl - came a!ho:t, that at this timie ile received two lnnr letters
: ':.nall v.ith her own hand, f.ivmg. all the time since her re-

i'n ie inc;er received half so nany line.;, as were in one oft 'e

v;':er, w.hih h I cain myfel'teftiit by the clueen's own saving, Pand

"L.. 'on.! ;illtirance,, where hitherto I have not been cdecived.
\ .,. II S I can

I can a!so farther aiTure your honour, that this queen hath fayed
that she knoweth now, that the fr;endfhip of the queen's majer
t .v sovereign may fiand her more in stead, than that ofher
good mother in France, and as {he is desirous of them both, f0
wili {he not lose the one for the other. I may also farther assure
your honour, that whatfomevet the occasion is, this queen hath
some what in her heart that will burst out in time, which will mani.
teti that some unkindness hath passed between them, that will
not be easy forgotten. In talk fjmetimes with myself, she faith
that the queen mother might have used the matter otherwise
than she hathdone, and doth much doubt what fllall be the fuc-
cess of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have her
will. Seeing then that presently they ifand in such terms one
with the other., I tho't it better to confirm her in that mind, (thi
queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause her to
conceive better of the other. And yet Iam assured she ihallre.
ceive as friendly letters, and as many good words from this queen,
as the other did write unto her. Whether the queen mother
wiil speak any thing unto the L. of Lidington of that purpose
:he did write unto this queen of, I kno w not, but if the do,
think it hard if your honour can get no favour thereof, at
return, or I perchance by some means here. It may, perchance,
be written only bvthat queen, to try what answer this queen will
give, or underhand what mind {he beareth unto the queens
majeftv our sovereign. The queen knoweth now that theEarl
Bothewell is sent for to London. She caused a gentleman of hers
to enquire the cause ; I answered, that I knew none other, but
that his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it
{hould be judged there. I know that she thinketh much that he
is not sent into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted thatifhe
.vere here, he would be reserved for an evil initrument. I
the Lord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour
herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his friends here, but
moth of all to himself. There comes a vulture in this realm, ii
ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p 25S.)
The oration made by Wiiliam Maitland of Lethington, younge

fecretarv for the time, in the parliament holden by our ioYe-
rein tt-.e king's mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
tire of the restitution of Umnquile Matthew Earl of Lenox.
Mti TY lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it h-

M pleased her maijeft most graciouflv to utter unto you. b

h'-r own mouth, ve nav have sufficiently conceived the caule o
this your present aincnlbly; yet having her majesty's conrandart

na"'

mcrnt to supply Iny Lord Chancellor's place. being presently as
ve fee decealed, I aml willed to express the fame fomiewhat more
at large.

NoTo Rt,

Or it is, how, in her highness's minority, a procef of

forfaltour was decreed againlt my lord ofLenox, for certain of-
fences alledged committed by him, specified in the dome and cen-
fenrient of Parliament given thereupon; by reason whereof he has
ihi- long time been exiled, and absent forth of his native country,
,0oe grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
bh d:vers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her majetly's
hs!ee, not only containing most hlumlble and due fubnui!linn,
butatr'as hearing witness of his good devotion to her Majesty
binari ral princess, and earnest affecion he had to her Higlinefs

iltotilmble lcervice, ifit fllould please her majefly of herclemen'
to) make him able to enjoy the benefit of a subject; many
ptcs might have moved her Highrefs favourably to incline to
. rqueif, as the anciency of his houle, and the firnaine he

the honour he has to appertain to her maiefty by affinity,

rcalon of my Lady Margaret her highness's aunt, and divers
uhcrhis good considerations, as also the effectuou request of her
iod ilter the Queen's Majesty of England, whose earnell com-
enIation was not of least moment, besides that of her own na-
ral, her mrajeflty has a certain inclination to pity the decay of
blc Ihoufes, and as we heard, by her own report, has a great
i more pleasure to he the inftruinent of the uphold, mainte-
nce and advancement of the antient blood, than to have mat-
rini:iltred of the decay oroverthrow of anv good race. Uporl
ioccafion, her Majesty the imore tenderic, looked upon his re-
e, and her good filler the Queen of England's ftavourable let-
r, ritten for recommendation of his caule, in consideration
tcsreofnot only has fle granted unto him her letter ofreftitution,
s-av of grace, but also licenled him to pur!le, by way or
ifcion, the remedies provided by the lanw tor such as think
.et:l-les grieved by any judgment, unordcrlv led, and to have
epnrcelc reversed; for examination whereof, it hai pleaSed her
r!i prelently to assemble you the three e!tates of this hte
fnl, by whole advice, deliberation, and decision at her Ma-
";i mind, to proceed forward upon his colilplnint, as the
:s oftllecanife, laws of the realm, and praetice oblerved in
ib cl's, w.ill bear out. I mnight here end, if the matter we

in l h:and give me not occasion to sav a few more words, not
.;ifercnt from the lime litilject, wherein I v.culti extend thz
;!ltlsl'nce's nmore largely If I feared nut to offend her high-
:. hoe prc .:nceand miodrlt nature abhors long fpraking and
'tt!1n, ar:d f wsill coimpel rie tu fuDak fulch things, as nima
:', i i:nd to anly good and p'J.rlect point ; and least it Ilould be

S 2. ricypted

compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I should omit toput
you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this, andthL
Iike demonfirations of her gentill nature; whose gracious beha.
viour towards all her fubjefts, in general, may serve for a good
proofof that felicity, we nmav lok for under her happy govern.
ment, so long as it shall please God to grant her unto us; fort
good harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be.
tween the prince and the fubjecft muff be reciproque; as by her
Maielty'- prudence we enjoy this present peace with all foreign na
t'ons, and quiernef. among vourfelves, in such fort, that ] thig
j}ftlv it mar be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age that prefentl
i:ves, was in greater tranquillity; so is it the duty of all us h
l~vitg subject to acknowledge the fame as a most high beneit
proceeding from the good government of her majesty, declarin
ci:fe!res thankful for the fame, and rendering to her maje
such due obedience, as a just prince may look for at the hands
fi.'.hfili and obedient fubjec's. J mean noforced nor unwillin
obedierce, which I know her nature does detest, but such
prnceeds from the contemplation of her modest kind of reginet
.-'i! for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A
procf have we all in general had of her Majesty's benignity the
three years, that she has lived in the government over you,
many of you have largely tafted of her large liberality and fr
dealing on the other part her highness has had large appes
arce of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to continue,
we have begun, in consideration of the many noble examples
her clerrencv above others her good qualities, and to abhor
detreO al fails bruites and rumours, which are the moftpeftie
evils that car be in any common weil, and the sowers and inv
tors thereof Then mav wve be well assured to have of her
most gracioue princefle, and ihe most faithful and loving subiec
ar fin both the head and the members, being encouraged
maintain the harmony and accord of the politic bodies, wher
I made mention hefore, as the glory thereof shall appertain toh
Maijefri, so fhiall no small praise and unspeakable conmodily
dound tlherethrough to you all universally her fubjetts.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 267.)
The perii, and troubles that may presently enfuc, and in time

come so!!ew, to the Queen's majeftv of England, and t
state of this realm. upon the marriage of the Queen of Sc
to the Lord Darnley.

IR ST, the minds of such as be affected to the Queen
Scott' either for herself, or for the opinion of her preten

to this crown, or for the desire to have charge of the form:
reiion in this realm, or for the difcontentation they have oft

Qucs

Qeen's majesty, or her succession, or of the fuccellion of any
efide the Queen of Scotts, shall be, by this marriage, erected,
nforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring their
clires to pass and to make some estimate what persons those
e, to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed;
e fame may he compafled in those forts either within the realm
) without.
THE frft are such as are specially devoted to the Qleen of
Itts, or to the Lord Darnley, by bond of bloodand alliance; as
rfi all the house of Lorrain and Guise for her part, and the Earl
iLcnox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be of their blood
dhave received displeasures by the Duke of Chatelherault and
Fheamiltons. The second are all manner ofperfons, both in
I; rtalrn and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
Rome, and mislike of the religion now received; and in these
iolortsare the fubitance of them comprehended, that fliall take
[nfort in this marriage.
kN x T therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles there
d of men shall intend to this realm.
FIRS T, the general scope and mark of all their desires is, and

'ars Ilall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to have the royal

rosn of this realm; and therefore, though the devisees may

tn amongst themselves for the compassing hereof, according to
e accidents of the times, and according to the impediments
:ch they /hall find by means of the queen's majesty's actions
go\vernments, yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and prac-
ieS, ihall wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts
ean of this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof;
din their proceedings, there are two manners to be confidered,
hereof the one is far worse than the other; the one;s intended
them, that either from malicious blindness in religion, or for
.ral affeeion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darnley, do
fluade themselves that the said queen of Scotts hath prelently
ore right to the crown than our sovereign lady the queen, of
,ich fort be all their kindred on both fides, and all such as are
esoted. to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or
!'..here; the other is meant by them, which, with less malice,
C' pet luaded that the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the
xt heir to succeed the queen's majety and her issue, of which
it few are without the realm, but here within, and yet of them,
at so many as are of the contrary, and from these two forts llall
e peril devises and practices proceed. From the first, which
ziine the queen of Scotts to haveperpetually right, are to be
! ed for these perils. First, it is to be doubted the devil wi!l
ret some of them to imagine the hurt of the life of our dear
':eeign lady, by such means as the devil fliall suggest to them,
titough it be assuredly hoped, that almighty God will, as he
th hitherto, graciously protect and prefcrve her from lich
angers. Secondly, there will be attempted, by persuasions, by

S 3 brutes.

brutes. by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds ofgo,
subjects from the queen's ma iefvy, and to counciliate then to s
queen of Scntts, and on this hehalf the frontiers of the 'orth '
be much foiicited and laboured. Thirdly, there will be attemp
ed causes of some tumults and rebellions, specially in the nort
towards Scotland, so as thereupon may follow some open entel
prize let Lb violence. Fourth! , there will be, by the said queen
council and friends, a new league made with France, or Spai
that (hail be ofnenfive to this realm, and a furtherance to tbe
title. And it is altb very likely, that they will feta foot as nan
practices as they can, both upon the frontiers and in Ireland,;
occasion the queen's maijety to encreafe and continue her chart
thereby, to retain her from being mighty or potent, and for tn
attempting of all there things, many deviles will be imagine
frcm time to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favyur totl

cucen oftScotts, but that he flhould succeed in title to the queen'
mrajetv, is not much to be feared, but that they will corten
themfnives to fee not only the queen's majesty not to marry, a
so impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts fhail hav
issue, which they will think to be more pleafible to all men, be
cause thereby the crowns of England and Scotland shall be uni;t
in one, and thereby the occasion of war fliall cease; with whid
persuasion many people may be reduced, and abused to indic
themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

THE remedies against these perils.

A Duplicate.

4th June, A fummarv of the consultation and advice given by the lordsan
.I 6g. others of the privy council. Collected out of the sundry an
Cott Lib. several speeches of the said counsellors.
Cal.B 1o.
so]. 20o. Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,

Lord Treafilrer, Mr. Vice Chamberlais

( Derby, Mr. Secretary,.
Earls of< Bedford, Cave,

. Leicester, Peter,

Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

Questions propounded were there two.
r. FTPIRST, w.hat perils might ensue to the queen's majeRty,

f this realm, of the marriage betwixt the QueenofScoti
and the Lord Darnlv.

2 What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the faa

To the First.

The perils being fundrv, and very many, were reduced i
!n":e counsellors into only one. 1. Si

1. First, that by this marriage, the Queen of Scotts, (heing
not married) a great number in this realm, not of the worst fuh-
!etls, might be alienated in their minds from their natural duties
to her imajefty, to depend upon the success of this marriage of
Scotland, as a mean to eftablifll the fucceflion of both the crowns,
inthe iflue of th. fimre marriage, and so favour all dcvifes and
prlacices, that ithou!d tend to the advancement of the queen of
Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of them,
which furthered the marriage of the lord Darnley, was laid upon
the trust of such as were papists, as the only means to restore the
religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, thatboth in this realm
and Scotland, the papists would most favour, maintain, and for-
ti' this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would for furtherance
offaction in religion, devise all means and practices that could be
within this realm, to disturb the estate of the queen's majesty,
and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchieve their
purposes by force, rather than fail. By rome other, there perils
having indeed many branches, were reduced, though somewhat
otherwise, into two forts, and these were innature such as they
could not be easily fevered the one from the other, but were knit
and linked together, naturally for maintaining the one with the
other. The first of these fort of perils was that, by this marriage
with the lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to further the
pretended title of the queen of Scotts, not only to succeed the
Queen's majesty, as in her best amity flie had professed, but that
to occupy the queen's estate, as when she was in power, Ihe did
manifefly declare.

Ti E second was, that hereby the Romifll religion should be
erecfed, and increased daily in this realm, and these two were
:oh knit together, that the furtherance and maintenance of the
titletail, in furthering of the religion of Rome within this realm
and in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion stood by
the title, for otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves of the first.) And to prove that the intention to ad-
vance the title to disturb the queen's majesty, muff needs ensue,
vas confidered that always the intention and will of any person is
mrl i maniteft, when their power is greatest, and contrary when
power is finall, then the intention and will of every person is co-
vered and less seen. So as when the queen of Scotts power was
greatest, by her marriage with the dolphin of France, being as-
terwards French king, it manifestly appeared of what mind she,
and all her friends were, uring then manifestly all the means that
cou:d be devised to impeach and dispossess the queen's majesty,
Srt by writing and publishing herfelfin all countries queen of Eng-
tand; by granting charters, patents, and commifnions with that
ile, and with the arms of England, both the French and Scotts,
which charters remain fill undefaced; and to prosecute it with

S 4 effect,

effee, it is known what preparations of war were made, and :ni
into S:otland; and wvhat other forces were affcmbled in fo;eig
countries; yea, in v.hat manner a llhameful peace was madetb
the French v. itnl king Philip, to employ all the forces of France
to pursue aii the matters b'y force, which by God's providence
and the queen's n;aietlv contrary power, were repelled; ardaf.
terw.ards, by her husband's death, her fortune and power bei.g
changed, the intention began to hide itself, and although hythe
Scott ilh queen's ccmn-:irTars an accord tas made at Edenbro;gh,
TO reform all those titles, and claims, and pretences, yet to this
day, by delays and cavillations, the ratification of that treaty hat
been deferred. And so now, as soon as ihe fliall feel her power
ihe will set the fame again abroad, and by considering of fucn re.
rors as were committed in the first, her friends and allies wi!!anmend
the fame, and proceed fubfrantially to her purpufe. By fcle i
was thought plainly, that the peril was greater of this marriage
with the lord Darnley, being a fubje& of this realm, than with
the mightiel: prince abroad; for by this, he being of this reau,
and having for the cause of religion, and other refpeas, made;
party here, should encreale by force with diminution of the power
of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could make by thefac.
tion of the papif:s, and other discontented persons here, lhould be
as it were deducted out of the power of this realm: and bythe
marriage of a f ranger, Pilecould not be assured of any part here;
so as by this marriage ihe should have a portion of her own pow-
er to serve her turn, and a fiall portion ofadverfaries at honmen
our own bowels, aiways seen more dangerous than treble thelike
abroad ; whereof the examples are in our own stories many, that
foreign powers never prevailed in this realm, but with the hep
of rome at home. It was also remembered, that feeingnow be-
fore the attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifestly seen,
that in everv corner of the realm, the fation that nioft favoureth
the Scotitih title, is grown Rout and bold, yea seen mnanifeftyiy
:his court, both in hall and chamber, it could not be (but except
good heed were fpeediiy given to it) by this marriage, and by
the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame faction would ihort-
ly ecrceafe, and grow so great and dangerous, as the redrel
thereof awould be almost delperate. And to this purpose it was
remembered, how of late in peruting of the filbftance of the
jufiices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly a
third was found fully aTured to be, trusted in the matter ofreli-
gion, upon which only fring the queen of Scotts title doth hang,
and some doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Lenox,
and his had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and there-
by made avant now in Scotland, and their party was so great in
Eng!and as the quen.'s majesty durst not attempt to contrary his
marriage. Ard in this fort, was the fum of the perils declared,

being

being notwithftandingmore largely and plainly set out, and made
so apparent by many sure arguments, as no one of the council
could deny them to be but-many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

TtlE question of this consultation was what were meet to he
cone to avoid there perills, or else to divert the force thereof
from hurting the realm ; wherein there were a great number of
particular devises propounded, and yet the motre part of them
ra reduced by some into three heads.

i. THE firif thought necessary by all persons, as the only
t'rg of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy all these per-
rii, and many others, and such as without it, no other remedy
cold be found sufficient, and that was to obtain that the queen's
ma:ely would marry, and make therein no long delay.
2. T E: second was to advance, eltablifli and fortify indeed
ie profedlion of religion, both in Scotland, and in England, and
todilninifls, weaken, and feeble the contrary.

. TH E third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to dif-

tipoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the least,
tirby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful to this realm,
a;otherwife it will be.

TH E first of these three hath no particular rights in it, but
earnef and unfeigned desire and suite, with all humbleness,
prayer to Almighty God, and advice and council to the
ten's majesty, that she would differ no more time from mar-
ae, whereby the good subjects of the realm might stay their
arts, to depend upon her majeftv, and the issue of her body,
tholut which no surety can be devised to a fcertain any person
C; ontinuance of their families or poftcrities, to enjoy that
rigch otherwise should come to them.
S co n, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both
nlth and policy were joined together, had tlhee particulars.
FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realln
te taken occasion to comfort and increase their laftion, both in
ngland, Scotland, and abroad, with a rumour and expectation
tnt the religion shall be flortly changed in this realm, by means
rat the biflhops. by the queen's majelty's commandment, have

k!ate dealt ftreightly with tome persons of good religion, be-

:'tl lhiv had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like
I-gs. !in'g .more of form and accidents, than of any fubltance,
" that it is w ell known that her majetyv had no meaning to com-
';t the cadverfaries, but only to maintain an unisornity as well il
n'os external, as in the ful[,ance, nor yet hath any intention to

a.r: any change of the religion, as it is eftablilied by laws. It
;as thought by all men very neceffarv, for the fupprei!i:g of the
:.dani arrogancy of the advei saries, indirectly hercby to notify,

by

by her special letters to the two archbiihops, that her formercon
mandnment was onlv to retain an uniformity, and not to givean;
occasion to any Derfon to misjudge of her majesty, in the chang
of any part of religion, but that she did determine firmly to min.
tain the form of her religion, as it was eftahlifhed, and to punif
such as did therein violate her laws. And in these points, fore
also wished that it might please her archbishops, that if they
ihould fee that the adversaries continued in taking occafionti
fortify their fation. that in that cafe they should use a mode.
ration therein, until the next parliament, at which time, some
good, uniform, and decent order might he devised, and eh-
blifhed, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity and gravit
might be retained amongst the clergy.

TH second means was, that the quondam hiflops, and other

which had refused to acknowledge the queen's majesty's powA
over them, according to the law, and were of late difperledh
the plague time to sundry places abroad, where it is known t,
cease not to advance their fation, might be returned to the tore
or some other prison, where they might not have such liberty
reduce and inveigle the queen's majesty's subjects, as they dailvhd

THE third means was, that where the bishops do complai

that thev dare not execute the ecclesiastical laws, to the further
ence of religion, for fear of the premunire wherewith the judge
and lavwyers of the realm, being not best asseted in religion.,
threaten them. and in many cafes let not to pinch and defac
them, that upon such cafes opened, some convenient authorfi
might be given them, from the queen's majesty, to continuedu
ring her p!ealure.

TH E fourth v-as, that there were daily lewd, injudicious an

un!awful hooks in Eng!ilh brought from beyond seas, and
boldly received, read, and kept, and especially in the north, fe
ducing of great numbers of good fubjeAs, the like boldne
whereof was never suffered in any other princess's time, that so
fireight order might be given to avoid the fame, and that it migh
be confidered by the judges, what manner of crime the fames
to maintain such books, made directly against her majesty's a
thrity, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to thela
of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, frive

and such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland, and do fen've
England. especially in the North, as curates of churches, and
such of them as are not found honest and conformable, may
banished cut of the realm, for that it appeareth they do fosw f
dition in the realm, in many places, and now will increase the
doings.

TH E sixth. where fundrv having ecclesiastical livings, are 01
the other fide the sea. and from thence maintain sedition in th

realm

,l.Tm; that livings may be better bestowed, to the commodity
,f the realm, upon good subjects.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no finall
authority in this realm in governance of all property of the realm,
might be iworn to the queen's majesty, according to the laws of
the realm, and so thereby they should for conscience fake main-
tan the queen's majesty's authority.

The particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this
marriage, or to divert the perils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely
do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by tome that these
means following might occasion the breach of the marriage.

I. TH A T the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.
4. TH AT all the wardens put their frontiers in order with
(peed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

;. THAT some noble perion, as the duke of Norfolk, or the
eIl of Salop, or such other, be sent into Yorkshire, to be lieu-
iteant general in the North.

6. TH AT preparations be made of a power, to be in readineG
to lerve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

-. THAT presently lady Lenox be committed to some place,
rhere flie may be kept from giving or receiving of intelligence.
9. TiHA T the earl of Lenox and his son may be sent for, and
tequhired to be sent home by the queen of Scots, according to the
irevtv; and if they fliall not come, then to denounce to the queen
ofScotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter with
holtiiitv; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the famr
hedone in deeds and not in flews) that the marriage will be avc.-
ded, or at the least that it may be qualified from many perils;
and whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed with speed,
hilts (he has a party in Scotland that favoureth not the marriage,
and before any league made by the queen of Scots with France
Cr Spain.

SOrtE others allow well of all these proceedings. fav;ng of
proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft, and also to
nrf.. particularities following.

io. TH AT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's refu-
t;^. fhnuld be seized, and bestowed in gift or custody, as flhall
'. :i h,.r majesty, upon good fubjefts.

1. I'H A T all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North or
!li,-here, be inquired for, and that they be, by sundry means,
t11 loonl.ed to.

12. TIAT inquiry be made in the North, who have the
Lv.ardflip of the queen's majesty's lands there, and that no

perton,

285

person, deserving mistrust, be suffered to have governance ao
rule of anr of her lubicsts or lands in the North, but only to
retain their fees, and more trusty perbfn have rule of the fame
peoples lands.

13. TH A T all frequent passages into this realm, to and from

Scotland, be restrained to all Scottilh men, saving such as have
hie conduc. or he especially recommended from Mr. Ran.
dolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. THAT some intelligencebe used with such in Scotland,

as favour not the marriage, and they comforted from time to
ume.

5. TH T the queen's majesty's houlhold, chamber, and pea.

5oners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad'and uncomely speech
used by sundry against the state of the realm.

z6. T HAT the younger son of the earl ofLenox, Mr Charles,
be removed to fcme place where he may be forth coming.

17. TH AT confidering the faction and title of the queen of

Scotrs, hath now, of long time received great favour, and con.
rinued, by the queen's majesty's favour herein to the queen of
Scotts and her miniflers, and the lady Catherine, whom the laid
queen of Scotts accompted asa competitor unto her in pretenceos
title, it may please the queen's majesty, by some exterior at, to
shew some remifTion of her displeasure to the lady, and to the
earl of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find
some change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceed-
ing therein.

18. THA T whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North, Sir
Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. TH AT -with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed
to a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that there advices being confidered by'fer

majesty, it may please her to chute which of them she liketh,
and to put them in execution in deeds, and not to pass themover
in consultations and speeches.

So R it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all means

to put their intention in execution. Some by practice, fomebr
force, when time flall serve. and no time can serve so well the
queen's majesty to interrupt the perils, as now at the first, before
coe queen of Scotts purposes to be fully fettled.

No

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 276.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edinburgh the 311t of

July, 1565.

A Y it please your lordship, I have received your lordfliip's Cott. lib.
letter by my servant, sufficient testimony of your lord- Cal. B. g.

Ila's favour towards me, whereof I think niyfelf always so fol. 216.
.fIured, that what other mishap soever befall me, I have enough An Origi-
tocomfort myself, with ; though I have not at this time received nal.
neither according to the need I stand, nor the neceflity of the
errile that I am imployed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with
patience, than trouble your lordship to be further futer for me,
when there is so little hope that any good will be done for me.
Idoubt not but your lordflip hath heard by such information,
as I have given from hence, what the present state of this
country is, how this queen is now become a married wife, and
her hutfband, the self fame day of his marriage made a king. In
their desires, hitherto, they have found so rmuch to their con-
tenent. that if the reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they
mav think themselves much happier, than there is appearance
that they flall he, so many discontented milnd, so much iif-
I ling of the filbjets to have thele matters thus ordered, and in
thi fort to be brought to pass; I never heard of anry marriage,
fn little hope, so little comfort as men do talk, was never seen,
at an time, when men should most have Ihewed themselves to
reirice, if that consideration of her own honour and well of her
country had been as appertained in so weighty a cafe. This is
now their fear, the overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie
rith the queen's majesty, and the deltrution of as many of the
nobility as she hath nifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
citarlle unto. To fee all these inconveniencys approaching, there
are a good number that may sooner lament with themselves, arnd
nuplain to their neighbours, than be able to find remedie to
help thenm, some atempt with all the force they have, but are
too weak to do any good, what is required otherways, or what
m-rans there is made your lordship knoweth; what will be an-
fieared, or what will be done, therein, we are in great doubt,
and though your intent be never so good unto us, yet do we so
iuch fear your delay, that our ruin fliail prevent your sup-
pjrt when council is once taken. Nothing so needfull, as speedy
execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly depend, in
her maiefty's hands it ifandeth to lave our lives, or to susser us
i, perii; greater honour her majesty cannot have, than in
iat which lieth in her majefly's power to do for us; the films
are not great, the numbers of men are not manv that we desire;
"nElv ill dayly be found, tho' this will be some charge; menr
grow da!yly, though, at this time, I think her majesty hlall loie

but

but few ; her friends here being once taken away, where wiil her
majeftv find the like; I speak least of that which i think is mo,
earnetrly intended by this queen, and her husband, when by hia
it was lately laid, that he cared more for the papits in England,
than h- did for the protestants in Scotland ; if therefore his hope
be so great in the papists of England; what may your lordihip
believe that he thinketh of the protestants there; for his birth, fqr
his nurritour, for the honor he hath to be of kine to the queen
my mitrrefs, if in preferring those that are the queen's majelhies
worst flubj eCs to those that are her best, he declareth what mind
he beareth to the queen's majipfies self, any man may fay it is
lenderlv rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten; he would nowi
lccin to be indifferent to both the religions, fie to use her mass,
and he to come iometimes to the preaching ; they were married
with all the folemnities of the popihi time, faring that he heard
not the mas ; his speech and talk argueth his m;nd, and yet
would he fain seem to the world that he were offome religion)
his words to all :hen, against whom he conceiveth any displeasure
how unjufi soever it be, so proud and Ipitfull, that rather he
fecmeth a monarch of the world, than he that, not long since,
we- hasve seen and known the lord Darnley; he looketh now for
ris erence of many, that have little will to give it him ; and onie
rhere are that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All
honor that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, he hath it
v. ho!! and fully; all praises that may be spoken cfhim, he
lackcth not from herself; a!! dignities that Ihe can indue him wilh,
w.hlch 2re already given and granted i no man pleafeth her that
contenteth not hinm and w-hat mav I fay more, the hath givenover
tj him her wihole - ill, to be ruled and guided as hilmfelfbett
likcth; flie can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is
againfi his wiil, a yVour lordllip may with me to perfwade thatl
should lang nm s-eif; this lalt dignitv out of hand to have been
proclaimed king, she would have it deferred untill it wereagreedby
par::a:nent, or he had been himflfofz i years of age, that things
done in hi, name might have the better authority. He would,
in no calf, have it deferred one day, and either then or neter;
-hereupon this doubt is risen anmongft our men of law whhether
Jile being cla2d % ith a hufoand, and her husband not twentyone
ears, an- thing without parliament can be of strength that is
'ne betw-een them ; upon Saturday at afternoon. thele matters
kcri l, -ng in dcba:c-ing. And hbeore the' were well resolved
*pn n, at r;ne hourca: night, bv three heralds, atfoundof the trum.
pt. i he was proclaimed king. This was the night before the
n.r: iage; rl ti;' , Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords,
a'i thia ; ere in the touin, were prelent at the proclaiming ofhill
azi'n, w'lieiiC n i' man laid so Imuch as aien, saving his father
that cried out aloud God lave his queen. The manner of the
i:.rri.i;e ,wa.s in thl, fort, upon Sunday in the nmorning between

htr

,eand fix, file was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the
chpell; fie had upon her back the great mourning gown of

b'. with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that,
Ihich Ile wore the doulfull day of the buriall of her husband;

jle way led into the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol,
ird there was fle left untill her husband came, who also was
R seieved by the fame lords, the minifler priess, two, do there
gceive thenl, the bands are asked the third time, and an inftru-
lit taken by a Notour that no man said against them, or alledg-
danv cause why the marriage mnight not proceed. The words
ire spoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich dia-
nd, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and many
rsers said over them, ihe tarrieth out the mals, and he taketh
k:£'s, and leaveth her there, and went to herchamber, whither
'ihin a space she followeth ; and being required according to the
lennity, to cast off her cares and leave alide those forrowfull
innents, and give herself to a more plealant life, after some
a,' refufall, more I believe for manner fake than grief of
rt llie suffered them that stood by, every man that could ap-
'oach to take out a pin, and so being conmiitted to her ladies,
nged her garments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the
rld, that it was not luff that moved them to marrv, butonly
necessity of her country, not, if God will, long to leave it
I:lite of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given ofals
g, to make the worst, would that it lioull be believed, that
'.'knew each other before that they came there I would not
'rlordillip should so believe it, the likelihoods are so great to
:contrarv, that if it were poflibie to fee such an aCt done, I
uild not believe it. After the marriage followeth commonly'
iat cheer and dancing: to theirdinner thc y were conveyed by
Iwhole nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried; niony
ion about the houle in great abundance, to ioch as were
fv to get any part; thev dine both at one table, Ihe upon
upper hand, there serve her thefc earls Athole fewer. M\or-
c:irser, Craufoord cup bearer; these serve him in like offices,
rs 'glington, Cassels, and Giencairn; after dinner they da'lced
'ile, and then retired theilfelvds till the hour of Tupper; and
'liev dined so do they sup, foicl dancing there was, and so

go to bed; of all this I have written to your lordilip I am
Oculatus teflis, to this, but of the verity your lordilip fiall
:red to doubt, howloever I came by it ; I wvas ent for to hav i
at the flipper, but like a currilh or uncourly tcarle I re-
idio be there; and yet that which your lordflip tlay think

mt move me much, to have had the fight of my Ilill'rls, of

Cn ihefe eighteen davs by just account I got not a light, I am
ioiil taken by all that fort as a very evil pi rfon, which in lmy
i I do well allow, and like of mlfelf ltlie better, for vet can
;; ind cither honcit or good that liketh their doings; I

leave

leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, craving pat
don for my long silence; I have more ado than I am able to di
charge; I v,-'ak now more abroad by night than by day, and tl
day too little to dilcharge myself of that which ! conceive, o
receive in the night. As your lordship, I am sure, is partake
of lIch Ictters as I write to Mr. Secretary, so I trull tha
he imall he to this, to save me of a little labour, to write th
fame again, most humbly I take my leave at Edinburgh, the 1t
day of July, 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 279.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir Willin

Cecil, knight, her majesty's principal secretary, and one o
her highncss's privy council.

d ofSept. A F T E R my hearty commendations, this day at noon,cap
I-;65. A tain Brickwell came hither, who brought with himnthl
Paper-Of- queen's majesty's letters containing her full resolution, and pi.
f cre tr-m lure for all things he had in charge to give information of, favin;
the Oligi- that for the aid of thelords of the congregation, there is nothi]
na!. determined, or as the least expressed in the fame letters, andfo

that purpose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed byhd
duke, the earl of Murray. Glencarne, and others, craving to
holpen v.-iih jco harquebufyers out of this garrison, for lth
better defence. And albeit, I know right well the goodnefsi
their cause, and the queen's majesty our sovereign's good i
and care towards them; and do also ur.dertland that it wereser
requilite to have them holpen, for that now their cause is tob
in this manner decided, and that it now standeth upon theiruti
overthrow and undoing, since the queen's part is at theldr
c5Co , and they notmuch above 00ooo; betides, thatthe que
hath harquebu-fers, and they have none, and do yet want t
power that the earl ofArgurvle lhould bring to them, whio
not vet ioined with theirs; Ihave thereupon thought goedl
prav vou to be a means to learn her majesty's pleasure in this'
hal', w hat, and how, I fliall an"swer them, or otherwiie dea
this n'atter, now at this their extrene necellity. Forontheol
iide. Iveth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow, andtl
nslit rab!e lubverfion of religion there; and, on the othersid
to aJ. eur e so great and weighty a matter as this is, (albeit itl
tut cf a fw fo!diers, for a fniall time) without good s:
runt;:. and thereby to bring. peradventure, upon ourhe'
fcrn-.e v. 'i:: warrs. and in the mean time to leave the placeuntl
nillehd, '.having in the whole but Soo) without any grant ofr:
fupplv f. r the fame; and hb that means also, to leave:
nma-ches here the nicre

- tilFitl to invaficn, while in the itm

fea:,n :...:.- ht':p;. re prparing; to this know not I what to
or i.-w to '.. Ari. o aium h n'cre I n-a.v:! thereof, a;

k.,a

'tiil. so Iniv tlimes written touching this nattcr, no reflutte
,;rni ntior cometh. And So between the writingand looking
,r:il.':i, the occasion ca!nnot pass, but must needs proceed and

. lr cccr;f God turn it to his llory; but filrcly all niens
,rin iiath rreat cause to tear it. Such a punl it is now come

,-, as tlii little rupply would do much good to advance God's
i:or, to continue her nlmjefty's great and carefill mmcnory of

';i, and to preserve a grcat many noblemen and gentlenlen.
* .'be not row helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good will s
-,;iifercion that way, I do nothing miltruft, and herein flall
;te !uch good advice, as by ay nmeans I can. 1 received firom
; lords two papers inclosed, the elfcót whereof flall appear
':n ou. For those matters that captain Brickweil brought, I

:!l irfwner you by mv next, and herewith fend you two letters
:; . R:!inolph, both received this clay. By lim you lhall
.r .'a; tlhe proteltants are retired fronm Edenbolou gh iurther off.
usa I hqpe your eflludtion for their aid l1iall conme in time, if
:clle with :eped, for that they will not now so prefentls need
t:n; and to with my hearty thanks colmnit you to God. From
r'ick, this 2d ofSept. i 565

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 279.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

PON the advertizements lately received from you, with 12 Sept.
fulc other things as came also from the lord Scrope and I ;65.

iniaas Randolph, and upon the whole miatter well confidered, P'aper Of-
ls have thus determined. W\e will, with all the lipeed that we ice.
i, felnd to ,ou 3o00 1. to he thus uifed. if vou liall certahiliy

.etlland that the e, rl of Murral hath Ilich want of money, as
:Iipreti;lg to hiln of looo 1. might ftanld hilm in flead for the
.' odiccnd hilfelf, you lliall prctrntils let himl fccr.elc' toun-
'rtadnd, ;hat you will as of yourself, let hillm Iave so mluch,
lo we wsill that you let him ha c, in the mlollt secret fort tlat
.scan, when the said ftlm llial! colme to vlu, or i you canll,
'' an good means, advance limll ie

tim art thereof betoiehantd.

The other zoool. vou llhall cause to he ktpt whole, unlpent,
be r.ot that you (hall fee neccfiory cause to imnpreft tloime

: t:ircofto the now numbers of the 6ooo tootmen, and oi0
"Liien ; orto the calling out of wages oif itch wilknen, as by
.i' e!, or otherwise, ough tt he dircl Irg .d. And whet e .eper-
:.;c, h yvur sundry i' .'ters, tlte e:.rnetlt r.tcll of the tlai
- 0 .ilS inv anld hi alioci:ate,. that thecy iightt liave, at the
:', oo ol our tolirs, to aid tlitm. And tlhat you alit
;", !!hat tho' we wiiltl not coClltlImd you to give thtlemC ald, yet
;' e would but v ,ink at 'u or doing hercin, and fLC11m to
·;1' y;'ou tJr attcmllplilg t ch lliings, as yu xm ith time help or

, 11 s out']rs

others should bring about, you doubt not but things would da
well; you flall understand for a truth, that we have no inten
tion, for many refpets, to maintain any other princes subje(l
to take arms against their sovereign; neither would we willingl
do any thing to give occasion to make wars betwixt us and thla
prince, which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give yon
any power to let them be aided with any men. But now, con.
fidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwithstanding their
humble fubmilion, and offer to be ordered and tried by lawand
jullice, which being refused to them, they are retired toDon.
frefe, a place near our weft marches, as it feemeth theretode.
fend themSflves, and adding thereunto the good intention that
presently the French king pretendeth, by fending one of histt
join with foie one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen
and to induce her to forbear this manner of violent and rigorou
proceeding againff her subjects, for which purpose, the Frenc
amaffador here with us has lately written to that queen, wher
of answer is daily looked for, to the intent in the mean time the
said lords ihould not be oppressed and ruined for lack of boam
help to defend them, we are content, and do authorize, if yo
shall fee it neceflary for their defence, to let them (as ofy vo
rown adventure, and without notifying that you have anydire.i
on therein fromn us) to have the number of 300 soldiers, to i
taken either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all yourbansj
as you fha!l fee cause. And to cover the matter the better, js
shall fend these numbers to Carlife, as to be laid there in garriion
to defend that march, now in this time that such powers areonthi
other part drawing to thcfe frontiers, and so from thence as
fliall lee cause todirectof, the fame numbers or any of them ma
nioft covertly repair to the said lords, when you shall expreflya
vertize, that you fend them that aid only for their defenceandno
therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any thingtih
may offend her person, wherein you ihall so precisely deal *il
them, that they may perceive your care to be such as if it fhoul
otherwise appear, your danger should be so great, as all thefrienr
you have could not be able to save you towards us. And lo i
a!Ture you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to pro
ceed with them, for otherwise than to preserve thern fron ruin
we do not yield to give them aid of money or men: And yet '
w ou!d not that either of there were known to be our act, bu
rather to be covered with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 287.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 1565-6.

An Origi- \ Y humble duty confidered; what to write of the prefel
nal. : itrate of the country I am so uncertain, by reason of th.

&i'.]:

iaii: alterations of mens minds, that it maketh me much flower
;..n otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
tlce good hope, that this queen would have fliewed Come fa-
our to wards the lords, and that Robert Melvin flould have re-
urned unto them with comfort, upon tome conditions. Since
tlint time, there are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Ihorneton by sea; the one fiom the cardinal, the other from
tle hiflop of Glasgow. Since whole arrival neither can there
he good word gotten, nor appearance of any good intended
Itie, except that they be able to perfwade the queen's maiefty
oar ovecrcign to make her heir apparent to the crnun of Eng-
land. I write of this nothing less than I know, that fle hath
ipoken. And by all means that fle thinketh the best doth travaile
tobring it to pass. There is a band lately devised, in which the
late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy,
,'ith divers princes of Italy, and the queen mother suspected to
be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry throughout
Chri!iandom; this band was sent out of France by Thorneton,
and is 1lbblcribed by this queen, the copy thereof remaining with
hir, and the principal to be returned very fleortlie as I hear by
mir. Stephen Willfon, a fit minister for such a devilifli devise; if,

rt coppie hereof may be gotten, that fliall be sent as conveni-
e :!i mav. Monsieur Rambollet came to this toun upon Mon-
c: he ;jpoke that night to the queen and her husband, but not
ls.; the next day he had long conferences with them both,
[. r ilthing came to the knowiedge of any whereof they in-
It:ated. I cannot speak with any that hath any hope that there
i:il beany good done for the lords by him, though it is said that
he hath very good will to do so to the uttermoll of his power.
Re is lodged near to the court, and liveth upon the queen's
ch'rges. Upon Sunday the order is given, whereat means
c'r.e to many to be prcfcnt that dayat the mass. Upon Candle-
nais day there carried their candles, with the queen, her hus-
band, the earle of Lenox, and earle Athol; divers other lords
ha-e been called together and required to be at the mars that
dI', Ionie have promilcd, as Cassels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cath-
i.-. Others have refuled, as Fleming, Levingfton, Lindlay,
{Huntley and Bothel , and of them all Bothell is the floutedt,
hi ,.ol.l thought of; it was moved in council that mass flould
ha.c been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather
;' i mpt men's minds, than intended indeed: She was of late
r I' at!again to fend Robert Melvin to negociate with such as
'.truflcth in amongst the queen's inajefly's ul)heSts, of whose
; d twiil is this way I trull that the hruit is greater than the
';:"hi hut in there matters, heI majeflv is too wife not in time

i r;

\ :'ie, and provide for the wort ; Inme iin that country are

; 'I;.' to he privie unto the bands and confederacie of which
Il'. writter,, whereof I am lure there is foine things, tho'
...::ice of all I have not heard tile truth; in this court divers

1T X quarles,

qu-rls. contentio.;, and debates; nothing so much fought as
to n:a:.;ain mi!hief and disorder. David yet retaineth itill hi
place, not w;. nout heart griet to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chicfiR b. '.uch a tellow; the queen hath utterly refufd
to (!d any good for -n lord of Argyll, and it is laid that flail be
the firJ voyage that ihe w ill make after file is delivered of her be
ing vwith child; the bruit is common that ile is, but hardly be.
hervd of many, and of this, I can assure you, that there hate
of late appeared iome tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 294.)
Pan; efa 'e:ter from the eari ofBedford and Mr. Tho. Randoip1

to the icrds of the council of England from Barwick, 27th as
2March, i ;66. An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligu'a
3. to. oI. 3-2.

i7 a. ' p'Enfe Vcur Hinsurs,

2:-~hMar. T. E. RIN G of so mavnie matters, as we do, and fynd:ng
1566. u ch vaarintie in the reports, .-e have myche ado to decerne

the veriie: which maketh us the flo-werand loother to putany
thing in wrvtnge, to the entente we wold not that your honours,
and by you the queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, fliould not be
advertifd but of the verie trothe as we can pollible. Toithi
end we tho.ught good to fend up captain Carewe, who wasia
Edinbcurge at the tyve of the last attemptate, who spoke ther,
wi.h cd'erfe. and after that with the queen's self and her huftani
cr.tfrm to ih-t, which we have learned by others, and know
.. thi: rep-,rte, we fend the fame, confirned by the parties fe!,
-t'at were there pr'ernt and aTfyfters unto there that wereesecu+
tor; of the atce.

T'H i s we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband beinl

e'-tered into a vehement 1i fDicion of David, that by hym ioeA
trl:n Ce :'.'as committed. which was molt agavnfte to the queen'i
' onc.ur. and not to be borne of his perte, tyrlte cominunicati
hs! rr nvde to George Dugias, who fv nding his sorrowes so great
fougt ai l tal he meas irn cculde to put some renedie to hisgneiff
and conr.nicating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the lkig'l
co!iimn:a: : r.t, no other wave coulde be found then thatDarh

.:cu'.d he taken out of the wave. \\ herein he was so earnell
...d dv;l:'e presscd the fame, that no refle could be had untyllil
v.-a- p:,t in execution. To this that 'vas found good, that thelori
Morr-.:n and lord Lindfave (hould be made previe to th'inter.!
tr.a t .:.e mi-ht hax e theire friends at hande, yf neade required
wi;ien caclec t tmto r.nlemble so inavnv, as thaie thought !.t
Fea-nt aganlt the tv-rne, that this determination of theirs 1noscu
be put in executione; which mwas determined the ixth ofthi

inrianr;

ifltcntc 3 dales afore the parliament flhould begyne, at which
tre thc lavyde lordes were asured, that the erles Argyle, Mror-
r,-., RIothes, and their coniplyces tholde have been forfeited,
,;ithc king could not be persuaded through this means tobetheir
irend,: W'l'1 tor the dei-re hle hade that rhis intent lhould
lake i'cc.t t,' one wave, vwas content to vielde. .. ithout all diffi-
..::,. ro t'other, with this condiiiion, that thaie ' I:.: ld give their
o-.rklj , that he might have the crown matr-imi,.;:.]. l-e was
', it. t;int to fee these things he saw, and were daylye brought
htlii cure, that he dayly prefed the said lord Ruthen, that

tlete might be no longer delaye; and to the intent that myght
iiiaifctce unto the world, that he approved the acte, was con-
tent to be at the doing of that himself.
UP N Saturdaye at night neire unto vi t of the clock the
j.- conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George Duglas, and
in; others, throwe his owne chamber by the privy itayers up
t Ilte qieil;'s chamber going to which there is a cabinet about
ilt ibot filiare; in the faine a littlelow reposing bed and a table,
ittie vhich theyr were fitting at supper the queen, the lady
Argile, and David with his capp upon his head. Into the ca-
b.;.: there coneth in the king and lord Ruthen, who willed
Daid to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The
quten liid, that it was her will. Her howfband anfl:verede, that
;' u s againtl her honour. The lord Ruthen laide, that he
t ukI lerne better his deutie, and oiFering to have taken him by
ti. ani, David took the queen by the bilchtes of her gown and
Ft.; hinm;l,' behind the queen who woli.' gladlee have saved
:,i:: But the king having looscd his hand, and holding her in
'a'slis, David was thrull out of the cabinet throw the'bed
' -inlter into the chamber .olprelfns, wh,; r ,.ere the lord Mor-
Ic., !or Li.ndfle, who intending that nii :;r to have relervcd
bi'!l, and the next day to hang him, so 1I. ?.:: being about him;
Iht herle ihyn evill will, one thrult him inz':, the boddie with a
hgger, and after hym a great many others. so that he had in
I. b., y above wonds. It is told foi certyne, that the

in. own dagger was left flicking in him. Wheather he stuck
C!l or not we cannot be here certayn. He was not tlayne in the
aea'en's plefens, as was said, but going down the ftayres out of
tle chamber cf prefens.

it F RFv reniayned a long tvme wit!: the queen her howfband

:Id tle Ic.' Riuthen. She made, as v.c here, great interceflion,
t al he 1 .ild have no harm. .SI, b!:taed rreatlee her hIowfband
!'.at v.a i!t'e -ctor of so fovl a deed. It is said, that he did
'*t '.r, .:at aDavid had ml-re campa.lie of her boddie then he
trA IK' t-ce of two months : and therelore for her honour and

i.. nvxn c'.nientillent he gave his content that he Tiou!d he taken

a~'".' " It is not' (faythe thee) " the woman's part to seek the
"' . :):ntii.' and therefore in that the fault was his own. He
'i ::...t ,lhn Il. canme, lle either wold not or made herself

'T 3 tick.

sick. " Well," faythe he, " v )u have taken your las of mt
"and your farewcil Then were pity fayth the lord Ruthen,
he is "our maieltvy's husband and nuit yield dutie to each other.

;"' ,t

r:rvw! i not,' ir.vte ihe, " leave him as well as yourirfe

"did her nufband "' Oher havednne the like. The lord Ruther
said tha .l he was lawvfully divorced from her husband. and for no
fuca- cause as the king found himleif greve. Befydes this nia
.va mean. bafFe, enernie to the nobility. shame to her, and
deilruction to herfiif andcountry " \Vell," favthe file, "L tha

(hall be dear blude to fume of you, yf his be fpylt." God

forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen ; for the more your grace fllow
yourfell oifendcd, the world will judge the worse.

Hs R husband this tnie fpeaketh little, herself continju!!y

weee;h. The lord Ruther being ill at ease and weak caielth
for a drink, and fayt':e, This I mu't do with your inajciie

Fardon,' and periuadeth her in the belt fort he could, i;t

hle would pacitv herhif. Nothing that could be said, could
pl-ife her.

I- thi, mean jime there rose a nombre in the court; to pi.

cify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who went ftraviit
the eries Huntiv, Bothl-eil and Atholl to quiet them, and toafi
sure rheirt for the k;ing that nothing was intend againit tciem
These .natvith:ianding :aking fear, when theie heard that m
lord Mur.ra weld be there the next day, and Argyle Imet
them,. Huntiv and Bo;zh.vel both get out of a window and iso
depart. Atholl had leave ot the king with Flvfh and Glandore.
(who was lately cailed Deyfley the person of Owne) to go wher
they woid, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord o
Lidington. Theie went that night to such places, where they
thought themfe!ves in molt faultie.

BL SO RE the li-g least talk with the queen, in the heringol

the io:d Ruthen ihe was contents that he fliold lie with her tha
night. We know not how he * * himself, but came not at heri
snd ex-ulf hym;ife to his friends, that he was so leepie, tha
he could not wake in due lealon.

Tn RE were in this companie two that came in with thI

king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queer
fayth would have ftroken her with a dagger, and one PatrickBs'
lentine, brother to the jufcice clerk, who also her grace faylh
offered a dag against her belly with the cock down. We harl
been earnestly in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie
but he affoureth us of the contrarie. There were in thequeet'
chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin, one or two others
They at the firfi cercring to make a defence, the lord Ruthel
drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were no
drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this lord assured.

[Th

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dun-
barCaltle, whither resorted unto the lords Huntley and Both-

Ti!: That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven find themselves

left hb the king for all his fair promises, bonds and subscriptions.
That he had protested before the council, that he was never
conlentng to the death of David, and that it is fore against his
irill:" That of the great fubltance David had there is much

f poen, some fay in gold to the value of i'"L. His ap-
"arel was very good, as it is said, z8 pair of velvet hose.
"His chamber well furnished, armour, dagger, pyftoletts,
harquebuses, 2z swords. Of all this nothing fpovld or lacked
fa ing 2 or 3 daggers. He had the custody of all the queen's
letters, which all were delivered unlooked upon. We hear
of ajuill, that he had hanging about his neck of foine price,
that cannot be heard of. He had upon his back, when he
was flayn, a night gown of damask furred, with a fatten dub-
let, a hose ofruffet velvet."

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 30o.)
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16, 1565-6.

r CA N NOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been
l between her grace and her husband, he preffeth ear-

elly for the matrimonial crown, which flie is loth hastily to
ant; but willing to keep somewhat in store, until flie know
ows well he is worth to enjoy fucha sovereignty: and therefore
;is thought that the parliament for a time ihall be deferred, but
eeoflcan write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil.

H E juftice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's4 April,
cause than any desert, and as far as I can hear the king 566. Pa-

all other in worst, for neither hath the queen good opinion of per Office
in for attempting of any thing that was against her will, nor from the
:people that he hath denied so manifelt a matter, being proved Original.
l be done by his commandment, and now himfelfto be the
;cufer and pursuer of them that did as he willed them. This
:ott, that was executed, and Murry that was yesterday ar-
igned, were both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
ian, hv one, that upon Monday last spoke with the queen, that
r.e is determined the house of Lennox Ihall be as poor in Scot-
iand as ever it was. The earl continueth tick, fore troubled in
ird; he ftaith in the abby, his son has been once with him,
and heonce with the queen, since she came to the castle. The
!ueen hath now seen all the covenants and bands that passed be-
'ween the king and the lords, and now findeth that his declara-
icn, before her and council, of his innocency of the death of

nT 4 David,

David, v-as sale; and grirvcufl;offended that, by their neami
he :hould teek to come to the crow n matrimonial.
Part oi a le:ter frem Rondó!ph to Cecil from Berwick, 2,

April, 1566.

T H ER E i- cnntinuallyv vCrv much foeerh ;f rt

i di!cord between the oqeen and her hufba.i!. ;

far that, ;ht is crmlTmonl v said a;;d believed of himself, li, air
Tame;
1 Thoerton is grne to Romr to ;ue for a divorce e .!n,
them. It is v-rv certain that aI-.levafier had not fp iker v-:r
him ;v rihi e

the!: three da-s. He is neither accolipanvect-.l

looked upon of any n-.heinan; attended upon bv certair. of.t
own Iervr.rs, and fix or L\ven of the guard; at liberty tods,
and go where and what he will, there have no hope yet anmori
t .e':::l;'e; ofquietnefs.

-- . \ ID's brother nmed Jofepl, who came t!is was

wutith lalevafier. unk-nown to any man here, is become fecretar
in tis brother's place.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 305.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 1566.

HE cueen ard her hufhand agree after the old manne

T or rather worle. .S'e cateth but very feldomn with hni

!:e'h not, nor kecpcth! cc:;'pany v ith him, nor loveth any fud
a2 love him. He i o

tO -r out of her books, as at her goingo 0

oftthe ca:'e of Edinrurgh, to remove abroad, lie knew nothin
thereof. t cannot ft' modefiv, nor with the honourofaquee
be reported what site li]d of hin,. One Hickman, an Engi
niercl:n: :here, 1av-ing a water spaniel which was very g
crae him to "'r. Jamen .el; il, v. hn afSerwards, for the pe
i :re which he sa1;, t;-e kig have in such kind of dogs, gave h
t. the king. The queen t!ereupon fell marvellouflv out i
Mc!\cil, and ciiied himn diif.lmb!er ?.nd flatterer, and said
co--ld ner ;rti one, who would give any thing to such one
'ne loved no:.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Augurs 8.

HE di:zgrecinent between the queen and her hulband ci
ti r.'eh or rather increafcth.i Rbhert Meivil draw'S

homewards. within twel-e miles of Edinburgh, could not I
where to tind the queen ; sith w-hich time ihe is come to Ed
burgh, and had not t welve horses attending on her. Ther;e w
not then, nor that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or othl
noblemuan in her co:panby. The kilg her huPfand is gone I

Dun

299

gtliiier!ning, and paffeth his time as we'I as he may; having
., his nrrv.ell, such countenance as wculd make a hufoand heavy
,.t ile heart.

Sir John Foriler to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

II HE queen hath her husband in finall eftiation, and the
earl of Lennox came not in the queen's light since the
death of Davy.

Sir John Forfler to Cecil, i i th Dec.

p HE earl of Bothweli is appointed to receive the ambaf.a-
. dors, and all things for the chrillening are at his lord-
si;'s appointment, and the fame is scarcely well liked of the
robilitv, as is said. The king and queen is prefen!lv at Craig-
rtiiar, but in little greater favour than he was all the while palt.

Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

HA T the king and tile queen agrccd wcll together two August
days, after her coming frii ---, and after my lord i 566. Ia-

crfMirra-'s coming to Edinburgh, some new discord has hap-per Office,
Sned. The queen hath declared to my lord of Murray thattfrom the
the king bears him evil will, and has said to her that he is de-Original.
teiriined to kill him, finding fault that flie doth bear him so
nuch company: and in like manner, hath willed my lord of
Murray to ipiere it at the king, which he did a few nigh's since
ir the iueen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The king
r.?T':f1'd, that reports were made to hinm. that my lord of Mur-
r.r v. is not his friend, which made him speak that thing he re-
p:nf'd; and the queen affirmed, that the king had spoken such
sardns unto her, and confessed before the whole houle, that flie
C"ud nPt he content that either he or any other fliould be un-
ricnil to ny lord of Murray. Ay lord of Murray enquired
ihe 1lie stoutly, and ifled his speech very niodelfly, In th cleail
tile the king departed very grieved he cannot bear tlat the
q'een mhould use faliiliaritv either with man or woman, and es-
{ci!ll: ithe ladies of Argui:e, MIurray, and Alarre, who keep
'it IL co!mpany with her. .My lord ol Mturrav and Bothwell
i.. . I:c.n iv c ;1 wo rds for the L. of L.edington, before the

2.,..':. '! r he a! dfi!r Jaellcs Ralloure had newv cc'me fiom Ledling-

.n, witAh his :. frer utpon fach heads' orarlicles a 1.Bothwel! and
bi. Illuld agree upcn, v'hich h. ing repnorted to the said earl in
ti', queen's precence, mad r ::f'r,' t l, (-i c e pFated wit i (ic

ad s w as desired, he iiou!! part ;s ith Ihis life. MIvl lol'l of

' s?;rit.y f:tid lloitlis to hin, t! at t:.' va a; hot' fl: lt.:n : i< ie
i.,ould iof thctliilii es ere hlie: -c- tc Lcdi; toi . '!' i. ca;uc'n Iake

nutlil ',
1

nothing, but heard both ; in these terms they parted, and since,
that I hear of, have not met. The queen after her hunting came
to Edinburgh, and carrveth the prince thence to Stirling with her,
This last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruthyen's,
who confefTed that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of
the sac. The ac;en hath alto opened to my lord of Murrar,
that money wa tecnt from the pope, how much it was, and by
v.-hon, and for what purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. 1. p. 319.)
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, r569. A

copy interlin-d by Cecil. It containsa an answer toa compiaining
letter of Mary's upon the imprisoning of the Bilhop ot Rol.
--- A FT E R this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland] how

<L patiently did I bear with many vain delays in notra-

tifving the trearv accorded by your own commifioners, whereb-
I received no Imall unkindneis, betides the manifold cause eflfl:
picion that I might not hereafter trust to any writings. Then
followed a hard manner of dealing with me, to entice my subs
jeA& and near kinsman, the lord Darnley, undercolour of private
fuirs for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty of
marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude the
fame without my atfent or liking. And how many unkind parts
accompanv'd that faE by recevi;ng of my fubjeAs that were
bae runnagates and offenders at home, and enhanfing them to
places of credit againfr my wil with many such like, I will
leave, for that the remembrance of the fame cannot but be noy-
some to you. And vet all these did I as it were suppress and
overcome with my natural inclina-ion of love towards you; and
did afterwards gadly, as you know, christen your son, the child
of mv aid kinfiuan, that had before so unloyally offended me,
both in marriage of you, and in other undutiful usages towards
me his sovereign. Hlow friendly also dealt I by messages to re
concile him, being your husband, to you, when others nouriflie
cdfccrd betwvixt vou, who as it seemed had more power to work
their purpcfes, beirg evi! to you both, than I had to do you good.
in refpeet of the ecx:i I had received. Well 1 will overpass your
hard accidcnts that fellowed for lack of following my council.
And then in your rnmo extremitv, when you was a prisoner in-
dycd, and in ca-zer of your liie foin vyour notorious evil wil
:I-rs, how far fr. rn n mind . was the remembrance of any for-
rier unk.ir..'i: -' u had fliewed me. Nay how void was I
ni refpet to *ih design- ;:-'i:ch the world had seen attempted
bh you to r'y cruvn, and the ftcurity that might have ensued

tC

o mr frate by your death, when I finding your calamity to be
.cat, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft

lsur life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatned

ine as were irritated againfl you, that I only may fay it, even
I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 333)

L:;cr of Q( Elizabeth to Q of Scots. Thus marked on the

,,rl; with Cecil's hand. -Copia Lit/e-rIrum Rlgi Majejfatis
a,d Reginam Scotorum. VIII°. prilis.

A D A M E, vous avant trop molefte par M. de Crocq, Paper Of-
je n'eufie eu si peu de consideration de vous farcher de fice.

c;rte lc;tre, Ii les liens de charite vers les ruinez, et les prieres
des milerables ne m'y contraignaffnt. Je entens que un edit a
ere divulgue de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult
juiliffier que ons efie les meurtriers de votre feu mari, et inon feu
cosuin, viennent ale faire le xi ime de ce mois. La quellechofe,
cmniei c'eit p!us honourable et neceTiaire, qui en tel cas fe pour-
ra faire, ne y eftant cache quelque miftere ou finefle, ainfi le
tre et antis du mort gentellholme m'ont humblement requis,
uceje vous priaffe de prolongue lejour, pource qu'ilz cognoiffent
cueiesiniquesfe font combines par force defaire ceque par droict
iis ne pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour
smrc.ur de vous meme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la con-
so!ation des innocens, de vous exhorter le leur conceder cette re-
cuefle, laquelle, si elleles feroit nie, vous tourneroit grandement
en foup9on, de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudricz
lolonticrs ouyr. Pour i'amourde Dieu, madame, usez de telle
incerirt & prudence en ce cas qui vous touche de si pres, que
tout ]e monde aye raison, de vous livrer comnme innocente d'mng
crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes, feriez dignement elblo)-y
hers de rancz de princesses, & non fans cause faite opprobre de
ulgaire, et plutot que cela vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois
tne sepulture honorable, qu'une vie maculee; vous voiez ma-
came, que je vous traite comme ma fille, et vous promets, que
rj en eufle, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx, queje vousdefire, coin-
me le Seigneur. Dieu me porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon
tcurdc vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera plus a honncur, ct
a Ros anlis plus de consolation, avec rnes tres cordialles recom-
!nci;iarinons conmme a icelle a qui fe louhaite le plus de bien, qui
iru? pcurra en ce monde avenir. De Weit. ce 8 jour de Jan-
ir o*en haste.

A mistake in the date correoted vith Cecil's hand VIII°.
.prilis.

No.

\o XX. (VuL. I. p. 346.)
A .etter fron! C 'and concerning the murder of king Henry

Darnley.

E. c\lor- T A-.ING, t!e c-r.m'rit. ? of this bearer Mr. Clark, 1t!i
ton's Ar- j good tn v. r'tc faiv.' .ords unto you. I have recd s.I'
chives. wrvi, froim vcu ; a.rd so :; I i.av f-en lat.-ly sent other; 'r;:
BundJe . vou, as namelh to the eiri of Bedi-i;rd of the i6h of \!av. !
No. 2. have participat the contents thereof to such 1a I thoulht inec,

this rniekle I c:a assure s-.u; the inte'iige.ce given hil'ir hr :e
French wasn un;rie, for there xw.; .aet ^"e pnpai nor protef' r
v.hich did not cop-r'n t:'-t .iltice ilhouid be done, be 'he ql:een
rmy foxr' aid anil fupp.rt, npgainft iuc aa had conlit;te::i
r-d-cr in rrur c untry; hut to fly truth, tl.e lack & coldneli
did not rife fronl :uch as v'cre ca!!ed to council, hut from foui
as should give life and execution thereunto. And further, lai:
sure vou. I never kn ex' no matter ofeftate proponed which hadlo
n'n. f-cu rers cf! all forts of nations as this had: yea, Ican lo
u-!o '-ou, ro n-an premnted the matter with greater afection,
than 'the SnDa'ila ihasl:r.dor. .And lure I aln, that no ln.n di
open'v h- c't anv other mind. but to affirm that whosoever Si
g.'iit cC th:s mu.rder, handfasted with advoutre, is unworthv
tn ISve. i !liaii rot need to tell vou, which be our lettsand
fta ,'e frIrn ail gtc: thred ,g here. You are acquainted with them
.s wveil a; I. Neds I rnuft confefR, that ho wfoever we omit oc-
cafon.s of Ibeefit, lnn-.ur and furet"-; it behuvetlh your whole
nobiiitv, ?.pn nant-!v 'such as hefore, and after the ,murder; twre
deeni;e ti. a'::.v of B'ode cil, to prof-cue w-ith sword and julfic
the punr.'I;::--t cf ihofe abn"!inalle ats, though we lend vou
hut a coli a:d, .:.i -.')lirt :u, and divrs ers ,hers, both honour-
bhe and honefl, be '-ei7l know.n to me, and fundrs others here, to
be juifriable i all ?thlr actionsani doing-;; vet think not thecon-

trarn but v-our \ ' ni d:

ltion i bleir.iled and infanmit by these do-

ings whic !*-.:" r i: 'i-d among vou. W\ at we shall dolI kno
not, neither do i v;. rie unto you assuredly, for we be fuhiec
unto n:anv nm::a;i;i. , and yet I think s'e shall either aid ou,
er continue in ahe decf, ce and safeguard of vyur prince, foas'i
apear to us that .ou mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run
the fortune o;. Frarce, x hich will be vour oswn dctiruction,
vyu be unrs viid. I knov no; one, no not one of any qual:!t
orr c:latc in to.i' r-ntrr, x. hich does allow- of the queen yoaI
fc-erc:,n '- :-:: v., i c:

gdl' ile world were rid ofher, o asthu

f:;.: e .rr e d.:.- :v. '-.z ; farther fl-.nder, that io

to lay by orie
.a .:,i~ .. .. I.;I jlrd te'C 23d of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p 353)
psrt of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgolorton to Cecil, i th of

luly, 567, from Ber-ick.
--- CR, Your letter of the 6'h of July, I received the 1oth An Or;,i-

j at Berwick, I am flrry to lee that the queen's Ma-nal.

';.;:< (!ilpfition altereth not towards the lords, for when all is Paper O-
c,:, it is they which must fiand her more in stead, than thefice.
c.t:crn her cousin, and will be better initrunients to work fIme

;acfite and qluietnefs to her majeity and her realm, than the
;ren of Scotland which is void of good fame.
Aittcr fiom Sir Nicoias Throgniorton to Cecil from Faftcaftle,

z2th of July, 1567.

IR, as yow might perceive lhv ml letter of the 1th July, Ipaper OI-
, logedt at Failcaftle that night, accornipanved with the lord fice.
FHlnec, the lord of Ledington, and jamles MIVelin, where I was
:;reate verv well, according to the Ilae of tle place, which is
I::,r to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so
i: lery strong. By the conference I hae haad with the lord of
kl.ington I find the lords his alfociates and he hath left nothing
Ln.ihnught of, which may be either to thir danger, or work thelil
"itrv, wherein they do not forget what good and harlle France
P:a.' do them, and likewise they confider the fame of F.ngland;
iti as fair as I can perceive, to be piain with vow, they find
:.c.re ptrril to grow unt( tlhem through the queens Aj ellys deal-
i,. Ithan either they do by the French, or by a.n contrary fctlion
::,!:.nclt thnmfelv'es, for they aiti ue themn!el'-es the qucen will
i.,ic Icln] in the bryers if the) run her fortoun, and though

ldo acknowledge great benefit as uill to them, as to the
iajii of England by her \hlajetiv's douils at I.eith whereof

It' .iay imututllly her iMajelly and both tlh realms have received

rri t fritit: yet upon other accidents whi ch have chanced since,
iihi have obl)erved fich things in her l\M'ljcftvs d(oings, as have
raded to the danger of such as file hath dealt withal, to the over-
,row of your own defignmlentit, and little to the lierty of any
artv ; and upon theie cc nfiderations and di'courles at length,
'rl!tilneth I tind a disposition il them, that t ther they nIliitt to
raie their bargain with France, or elle to deal neither with
r..nce nor yow, but to do what tlhesl Ihall think meet fnr their
f':e and fuerty, and to uife their relmedvs as occafi;n iliall mlove
''!i; mecaning neither to ilritate France nor Enlriand, untill
Lc!; itle as they have made their barlgain afluredly w ith one of
', so; tor they think it conivenient to proceed Aitli v.ow botli
ur a while parn paflu, for that was uly lord of Lediiittorn's

terllls.

terms. I do perceave they take the matter very unkindhl, tha,
no better answer is made to the letter, which the lords did fend
to her 'ijeftiv, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to
their fatisfacition, I have anfweredas well as I can, andhave al.
ledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with the queen, and
their uncertainiv hath occationed this that hath happened, and
therefore her NMajefy hath sent me to the end I may inform her
throughly of the slate of the matters, and upon the declaration
oftheirminds and intents to fuchpurpofes as fiall be by mepr.
poled on their Majefiys behalf unto them, they Ihall be reafona.
bly and resolutely answered. At there things the lord of Led.
ington smiled and Ithook his head, and laid it were better for u
vow would tel us alone, than neither to do us "or your selves
good, as I fear me in the end that will prove ; ST if their be any
truth in Ledington, La Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilethi
coming hither or a man of like quality, and to deliver them
their queen for ever, who shall lead her life in France inanabba
recluled, the prince at the Frenchdevotion, the realm governed
by a council of their elecion of the Scottiit nation, the so
committed to the custody of such as shall be chosen amoagl
themselves, as yet I find no great likelihood that I shall hae
access to the queen, it is objected they may not so difplealeth
French king, unleis they were sure to find the queen of England
a good friend; and when they once by my access to the queen
have offended the French, then they lay yow will make you
profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queens liberty
which wa a the first head that I proposed, they laid that thereb
they did perceive that the queen wants their undoing, for as c
the reft of the matters it was but folly to talk of them the libert
going before; but laid they, if you will do us no good, dot
no harm, and w e will provide for our selves. In the end the
said, we Ihould refute our own commodity, before they cot
cluded with any other, which I should hear of at my comai
to Edinr; by n:y next I hope to fend vow the band conclude
bv Hlanmiltons, Aryyll. Huntly, and that faction. not so mul
to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr, as that which was ea
into France; thus having no more leasure but compell'd tolea
on horfcback with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly takenm
leave of fron Fai'c-itle the z2th of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Thl ogmorton being in Scotland. By thequee

the i4th July 1567.

T RUSTY artd well beloved we greet you well, though
w e think ti :t the causes will often charge upon varie

of accidents, yet w c think, for fundrv reftects, not amils, tbt
as vow lhall deal v.ith the lords having charge of the yount
prince for the coaamitting of him into our realm, so shall y'.

a.,',

305

alti do well, in treaty with the queen, to offer her that where
her realm appearerh to be fubjert to sundry troubles from time
to tile, and thereby (as it is manifest) her son cannot be free, if
file lhall he contented that her son may enj.oy fuerty and quietness,
within this our realm, being so near as Ihe knows it is ; we flhall
not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as can
be devised for any that might be our child born of our own
bodv, and ihall be glad to fliew to her therein the trew effec of
nature; and herein the may be by yow remembred how much
good may ensue to her son to be nourilhed and acquainted with
our country'; and therefore, all things confidered, this occation
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the friends of
tiim, than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
lhall so deal with her, both to stay her indeed from inclining to
the French pradife, which is to us notorious to convey her and
the prince into France, and also to avoid any just offence,
ihat fie might hereafter conceive, if hle should hear that we
Lould deal with the lords for the prince.
SirNicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, I4th July 1 567,

from Edinburgh.

T may please your Majesty to be advertised, I did fignifie untoAn Origi-
M1 r Secretary by my letters of the I1 th and 1 zth of July, nal.

the day of mine entry into Scotland, the causes of my flay, my Paper Of-
lodgings at Faftcaffle a place of the lord Humnes, where I was ice.
olet by the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had
pafled in conference betwixt us, whileft I was at the said Fast-
tcile. Since which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid,
d t with 400 horses by their appointment for my better conduce,
I came to Edinr the i 2th of this present. The 13th being Sun-
cay appointed for a folemne communion in this town, and also a
loienine fail being publiflied, I could not have conference with
hle lords which be assembled within this town as I desired, that
ito ay the earls of Athole and Morton, the lord Hume, the
hrd of .idington, Sir James Balfour captain of the catle, Mr.
Jaiies M'- Gill and the president of the feliion.

V'

. v T H E L E s S I made mIeans by the lord of Lidington that
tlrv would use no protrate of time in nine audience, so did I
L"eiwilc to the earle of Morton, whom I met bv chance; I was
irfwcred by them both, that albeit the day were defined to
sacred exercises, fich as were there of the council would con-
I t upon any moyen touching my access unto them and nmy con-
rtence with them, and said also that in the afternoon either
tierV would come to me, or I should hear from them. About
tof the clock in the afternoon the laid 13th day the lord
f Lidington came to my lodgings, and declared unto nme

on

on the behalf of the lords and others, that they required me to
have p;aience though they had dreferred my conference \wiit
then,, s-which wa; grounded principally upcn the absence ofthe
eaics o: ',;ar, arn- Glercai r, the lords Seniple, Crighton and
others of ti- council, fayingalio that they did confider thenrat.
ters i:

wh I was on your behalf to treate with them of,

were of great importance, as they could not latisfy nor conve.
nien:iv treate wci:h me, nor give mn answer without the advice
of the iords, and others their alTsciates; the lord of Lidington
also iaid unto me, that where he perceived, by his private con.
ference s-ith me in my journey hitherwards, that I prelfed gree?!y
to hive fpeedv access to the queen their sovereign, he percei\vd,
bv the iords and others which were here, that in that nnttit
there was greatdificultyformany respect. but !pecial!v becaun
they had refused to the French ambaffadr the like accef, which
being granted unto me, might greatly offend the French, ama;.
ter wvhich thevdefired and intended to efclhew; for they didnot
fr.d bv ycur inajetivs dealings with them hitherto, that it -
hrv-:d them to irritate the French king, and to loose his fasr
and good intelligence with him: I aniwei-ed that as to their rn
fuial, made unto the Fiench anibalfador. ilorfieur de XVilleRo,
V.as dispatched forth of France be'ore thefi accidents here hap
Fened. and his ipecial errand was to impeach the queens man
age w.ith the earle of Bc.thel, (for so indeed since my comin
hithier I learned his coinmillion tended to that end, and to mate
offer to the queen of another marriage) and as to monfieurt
Crccit, he could have no order forth of France concerning thd
matters since thev happned ; and therefore they might verp ei
hold tl: n-.: fulFpeed to have corference w-ith the queen, ia
they nmight ireatc of matters in this qime without intlructionsa
so rathir do harm than g:od ; hut your majelly being advertit
of all things which had chanced, had sent me hither to tres
wvith theim, for the .eii of the realm, for the conferva-i
ofr ther honcrs and credit, and for their fuerty ; and I miigh
bo'c!v l av unto him, t;hat your maieflt had better delenr
thanr the French had. He said, for his own part, he v-as muc
lounci unto rynur :Majetv, ar.d bad alav.a found great favoursa
courtefi' in England, but to be plain 'ith you, Sir f'ayed 1
there is nct nianv of thi': afci'lihv that have found so great obil
gation at the queen -our sovereigns hands, as at the Froec
kings for the earle o .Mlortcn and Glencairn be the only perli
v. h:ch took benefit by the queens majeflv's aid at Leith, the reia
the nob'emenn were r.nt in the iAtion, and we think, said ie.l'i
cu-e- n.ii.aic!v v-ur foverel-ign i' theopinion of her own cou:,.
ani al; the ..orr, tok a-' great benefit by that charge as thler:r
oT Scorta d. or - n:- par''cu:r p lrton ; ard not to ta!.- wih 1w
as an antL '-Ta:j-, but l.; ,Sir \Nic'.L.s T'hrno:aotoro, m:'!':

M':

~Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie, found
i, u; nld favour at the queens majcftys hands, when they were
ianillhed forth of their own country ; but I woul all our whbcle
con!panv were as well willing to accon pliil the queen your
oi\eleign intents and desires as I am, for mine cwn part, I am
but one, and that of the meanest fort, and they be many no-
blenen and such as have great interell in the matter, mary vow
!iall be asSured I will impioy inylelf to imploy my credit, and

hii that I may do, to satisfy the queen your miftreis, as much as

Ireth in me, and for your own part you have a great many
friends in this aflembly, with many other good words. But for
conclusion I lmut take this foran anwelr to flay untill the other
lors were come, and thereupon I thought meet to advertize
rour itajefly what had pafled, and how far forth I have pro-
crceed; yourexpectation being great to hear from hence.

AND now to advertize your majeRs of the liare of all things,
5a I have learned since inm comling hither, it may please your
naiedly to underfiand as iolioweth.

TH E queen of Scotland reniaineth in good health in the caffle
ciLclilcvtn, guarded by the lord Lindfav and [.ochleven the
vriner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is imployed in ano-
her comiillion, because he began to fliew great favour to the
ucenand to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or
6advs, 4 or 5 gentlewomen, and 2 chamberers, whereof one
a French woman. Theearle of Buchan, the earle of Mur-
v's brother, hath also liber-ty to come to her at his pleasure
[te lords aforesaid, which have her in guard, doe keep her
-ritlraitly, and as far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedetli
h their order front these men, becaule that the queen vwill not
. aniy means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute til
nirder, nor will not content by any perlfwafion to abandon the
orcBothell for her hulband, but avoweth conflantls that Ilte
»1 liive and die with hinl; and faith that if it were put to het
oice to relinquiyfl her crown and kingdom, or the lord lio-
tii, rile would leave her kingdom a and dignity, to go as a isn-
e daillell with hint, and that ise will never confclnt that h:l
iii .nre worse, or have tiore harm than herself.
.': D as far as I can perceive, the principall cause of her de-
inuin is, for that thele lords do fee the queen being of to ser-
:i: anrietion towards the earle Bothell as ihe is, and being put

as thev fliould be compelled to he in continiall arms, and to
'eoccafron of many battles, he being with :iranilcth evtidence
orioufly detected to be the principall munridecr, and the lords
:aning prtslccution of justice againfi hilrl accorTiing to his

' irE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen arid tin,.
'a larriage not to be futfered ;fr aniv rejiucts, whiilCh tpa

sOLl, II.IU ril;.Jn

ration cannot take place if the queen be at liberty, and have
power in her hands.

TH A S do not also forget their own perill, conjoinedwihthte

danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceave, they intend
not either to touch the queen in fuerty or in honor, for thevdo
speak of her with refpea and reverence, and do affirm, as I do
learn, that the conditions aforesaid accomplished, they will
both put her to liberty, and restore her to hereftate.

TH E £E lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harqu.

huthers which be in very good order, for the entertainment of
which compasys, untill all matters be compounded, they did
sue unto vour najefty, to aid them with such fum of mony, as
hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons
writing, amounting as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand
crouns of the

TH BY were latlv advertized that the French King doth mind

to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell dez Ursine, a knight ofl
the French order, and always well affectionate to the honfeof
Guvfe, and howsoever la Forest, Villaroy, and du Crocq hav
tfed language in the queens favour and to these lords difadvm-
rage there, to your majesty laCrocq doth carry with him fuhi
matter as shall be little to the queen's advantage; so as it is
thoeght the French king, upon his coming to his pretence, nil!
rather fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen ; for they ha\e
their party so well made, as the French will rather make their
profit by them, than any other way.

H tRE WITH I fend your majesty the last bond agreed on,

and signed by the Hamiltons, the earle of Argyll, Huntly, and
fundrv others at Dumbarton.

NE VE RTH tLESS, since my coming to this town, theHa-

fr.iltens have sent unto me a gentleman of their surname named
Robert Hamilton with a letter from the biihop of St. Andrew'
and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend your ma-
iefly and mine answer unto them, referring to the bearer the
declaration of tome things, as these did by him untome.

TH F ea-le of Argyll hath, in like manner, Cent anotherunto

:ne v.iih a letter and credit, I have used him as I did the others
the coppv of both which letters I fend your majesty al!o.
The lord Harrvs hath also lent unto me but not written, and
h-v.- returned unto him in like fort.

A r. A I N s T the 2oth day of this month there is a generv. a!

fin;blv of all the churches, shires, and boroughs towns of thi
tac-im, namelv of such as be contented to tepair to these lord
to this town, where it is thought the whole slate of this mattet

:ili be handeled, and 1 fear me much to the queen's difadvano

tage ard dan-er; unless the lord of Lidington and fomeother;
.hich he hetl asseted unto her do provide Come renledy; tol
I perceive the great number, and in manner all, butchieflv
.:- c' .:n.on peopic, which have alfifted in thele doings,do grea;

dilhonce',i

ditlionour the queen, and mind seriously either her deprivation,
or her deftrufion ; I used the best means I can (confidering the
furie of the world here) to proroge this assembly, for that ap-
peareth tome tobe the best remedy: I nmay not fpeakofdiffolu-
tion of it, for that may not be abiden, and I fiould thereby bring
i i'lf into great hatred and perril. The chiefeft of the lords
which be here present at this time dare not flow so mtlch lenity
to the queen as I think they could be contented, for fear of the
lage of the people. The women be noft furious and impudent
againll the queen, and yet the men be mad enough; so as a
flranger over bufie may soon be made a facritice aniongeft them.

ITHE RE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their ad-
herents would put their force into the fields against the 24th of
this month, but 1 do not find that intent so true, as the com-
mon bruit goeth.

'H E earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trou-
ble tmong his own countrnymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by these lords much deftred here,
and I do believe your imajefty may so use himl, and direCt him,
as he Ihall be able to promote your purpose with these men.

TH E earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.
-I do find amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company
ti o strange and sundry humours.

H.AMILTONS do make show of the liberty of the queen, and
prolecute that with great earnestness, because they would have
there lords destroy her, rather than she fliould be recovered
fronl them by violence; another time they seem to desire her
liberty, and Bothell's deftruEtion, because they would conmpafs
a marriage betwixt the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

T HE earle of Argyll doth affect her liberty, and Bothell's
deftruEtion, because he would marry the queen to his brother.

AXD yet neither of them, notwithstanding their open cnn-
currance, (as appeareth by their bond) doth dicfover their
iiinds to each other, nor mind one end j Knox is not here, hut
in the weft parts, he and the reft of the itinitierq will be heic
at the great assembly, whos aullerity againit the queen I fear
as much as any man's.

BY Ibne conferrence which I had with iome of this councill,

me thinketh that they have intelligence that there is a disposition
in the queen of Scotland, to leave this realml and to retire herfell
either into England, or into France, but motl v. illingly into
England, for such - and mislikeing as flie knoweth hath
heen, and is meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment
ither to a numiber of pcrfobns deleagued, and auirthirized by her
or to fonie one or more.

.\'n it please your majeftv, I think it not amii to put vow

in remembrance, that in cnae the laid queen crni) into ltInglanr
hr vour allowance, without the French I-ing'. content, 1ile
'l.!oi loose her dowerv in France, and have lit tle or nothing

U z !arn

from hence to entertain her; and in cafe she do go into France
with the king's contentment, Ihe may be an infirument (iffhe
can recover favour, as time will help to cancell her disgrace)
either by matching with some husband of good quality, or by
iome other devise, to work new unquietness to her own country,
and io consequently to your majesty's.

TH E . E F o R E it may please your majesty to confider of this

natter. and to let me know your pleasure with convenient speed,
how I 1ilailanfwer the fame, if it be propounded unto me, ei-
ther by the cueen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end and
ccrnpofition. For I am flare, of late, the hath seemed very
cefirous to have the matter brought to pass, that flse might go
into England. retaining her estate and jurifdicion in herself,
though fl-e do not exercise it; and likewise I underfland that
fnme of thi councill which be lealt affected to her safety do think
there is no other way to save her. Thus Almighty God pre-
serve vrur maleftv in health, honor, and all felicity; at Edin'
tc i 4: July is67.
Sir Niciolas Throgmorton to queen Elisabeth the 18th of July

1567, from Edinburgh.

An Oigi- IT may pleaie vour majeftv, vow might perceave by my letters
nat. ' of the i6th, how far I had proceded with these lords, and,
Paper Of- what was their answer ; lince which time I have spoken particu-
fice. lar!y with the earle Mcrton, the lord of Lidington, and Sir

James BaliKur captain of this castle, at whose hands I cannot
perceave that as yet access to the queen to Lochleven will be
gran:ed nre, llavirg themselves still by the absence of the lords
and others their affcciates, which (thev fay) they look for within
two cavs ; and for that I find, by likelihood and apparent pre-
furrprions, that mine access to thequeen will hardly be granted,
I have thcught good not to defer this dispatch untill I have
resolute aniwer in that manner.

M.AY it therefore please your majefiy, to understand Robert

M.le vin returned from the queen in Lochleven, to this town, the
('.- c f lul .. and brought a letter from her written of her own
hand to these lords, which doth contain as I underltand matter
r. foi!owe-h-A request unto them to have consideration of her
health, and if they will not put her to liberty, to change th:
place of reftrant to the caitte of Stirling, to the end ihe might
iave ih- comfort and company of her son, and if they will not
change irr from Lochleven, ihe required to have some othet
gentlewotnen about her, naming none.

To have her apothecary, to have fom e modest minister.-

To have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work as ihe would
be cccupied about, and to have a varlet of the chamber.-Touch-
i- the government of the realm fle maketh two offers, which
ar but generally touched in her letter, the p-rticularitys bt
r. .t iFci;escd, but risered to Robert Mel in's credit, the on'

is

is to commit it only and wholly to the earle of Murray; the
other is to the lords whose names ensue, allifted with such
others, as they flall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of
Chattelrault, the earls of Morton, Murray, MarandGlencairn.

SHE hath written unto them that I might have accels unto
her.- She requireth further, that if they will not treat her
and regard her as their queen, yet to use her as the king their
fnvereign's daughter, (whom many of them knew) and as their
prince's mother.- She willby no means yield to abandon Bothell
for her husband, nor relinquifli him; which matter will do her
nolt harm of all, and hardeneth these lords to great severity
against her.

SH E yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the murder.
1 HAVE the means to let her know that your majetly hath
font me hither for her relief.

I HIAVE also perfwaded her to conform herself to renounce
Bothell for her husband and to be contented to susser a divorce
to pass betwixt them; flie hath sent me word that flie will in no
avs consent unto that, but rather die; grounding herfelfupon
thi;reafon, taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child,
Iy renouncing Bothell, flie should acknowledge herself to he
w ith child of a bastard, and to have forfeited her honour, which
flle will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her, to save her
own life and her child, to choose the least hard condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this month,
with whom I have had fomne conference, and with Mr. Craig
also, the other minister of this town.

I1 A v E perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenitv,
I find them both very austere, in this conference, what they
liall do hereafter I know not, they are furnilhed with many
arguments, some forth of the scripture, some forth of histories,
liine grounded (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, fomle
tpon pracices used in this realm, and some upon the conditions
ani oth made by their prince at her coronation.

TH F. biflop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley hath
sent hither to these lords, that his nephew the earle and folme
others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at Stirling, have fomo
communication with some appointed on this fide, aifuringthem
Ihat there is a good difpolition in the lords of the other party to
concurre with there, assuring further that they will not dissent
for trifiles or unnecessary things, and (as I am given to under-
Itand) they can be pleased the queen's restraint be continu'd, un,
till the murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the fepara-
tion of the queen and Bothell is implyed, the preservation of
the prince, the security for all men, and a good order taken for
the governance of the realm in tranquility.

CAPT A IN Clerk, which hath so long served in Denmark and
lerved at Newhaven, did the i6th of this month (accompany-
id with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier as the greater

U 5 fame

fame goeth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and such a one as had
great estimation with there lords both for hi3 skill, his hardyInes,
honeity and willingness in this action ; whereupon Clerk hath
retired himself; their quarrel was about the ship which took
B!acketer, which ihip was appointed by these lords to go to the
north of Scotland to impeach the palTage of the earle Bothell,
in cafe he went either to the isles, or to any other place; by
the death of this man this enterprize was dalhed.

THE bilhop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth
desire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

THE abbot of Killwinning hath rent for Sir James Balfour,
captaia of the castle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your nmajety in my lait, the Hamiltons now

find no matter todifever these lords and them asunder, but would
concurrin all things (yea in an- exuremity against the queen) to
as they might be assured the prince of Scotland were crouned
king, and ihould die without ifTue, that the earle of Lenox's
ion living flould not inherit the croun of this realm, as next
heir to his nephew.

A N D although the lords and counselors speak reverently, mild-

lv. and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot gather bytheir
speech any intention to cruelty or violence, yet 1 do find byin-
te;ilgence, that the queen is in very great peril of her life, by
reason that the people assembled at this convention do mind Ye-
henmently the deimrution of her.

IT is a public speech amongit all the people, and amongst all

elfates, (saving or the counselors) that their queen hath no more
liberty nor priviledge to commit murder nor adultery, than any
other private perlon, neither by God's laws, nor by thelaws
of the reaim.

THE earl Bothcl4, and all his adherents and associates, beput

to the horn by the ordinary julmice of this town, named the
lords of the leion; and cornmnadmnent given to all Ihirriffs, and
aii other officers, to apprehend hin, and all other his followers
and receiptors- The eari of Bothell's porter, and one of his
otner iervitor of his chamber, being apprehended, have con-
Tfened such sundry circumrttances, as it appearethevidently, that
ihe the said earl was one of the principal executors of the mur-
der, in his own person, accompanyed with sundry others, of
which number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
of ihem. that is to fay, two of the Ormitions of Tivotdall,
fnd one Hayborn of B-lton; the lords would be glad thatnoneot
the murderers should have any favouror receipt in England, and
hereof their desire is, that the officers upon the b ,ioer may be
warned; Bothell doth dill remain in the north parts, butthe lord
Seaton and Fleming. which have been there, have utterly aban-
doned him. and do repair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth
grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held of; and not-

withfianding

,ithilanding thefr lords have Cent an hundred and fifty harqu-
bullu" s to Stirling, to keep the town and passage from fur.
prize; ,nd so have they done in like manner to St. Johnston,
u.hich -' rihe two passages from the north, and weft to this
town, I do underitand the captain of Dunbar is much bufled in
f.-:ryingthat place, I do mervile the carriages be not impeach-
ea otherwise than they be.

OF latethis queen hath written a letter to the captain of the
laid call! - vhich bath been furprized; and thereby matter is
discovercd which maketh little to the queen's advantage.

THUs, having none other matter worthy your mnajefty's
knowle!dge, I beseech God to prosper your majesty with long
life, ;'"ect health, and prosperous felicity. At Edinburg the
1Stho; JuJy, 567.

Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable

the earl of Leicester, knt. of the order, and one of the lords
of her majesty's noil honourable privy Council.
BY my former dispatches fentto her majeftv, and Mr. Secre- 24zthof ju-

tary, since the izth of July, your lordihips might hav l;-, 167.

perceived the state of this country, and to what end there mat-Paper-Of-
ters be like to come; foasnot to trouble your lordllfiD with many fice from
words; thisqueen is like very ihortly to be deprived of her roy-the Origi-
aleftate, her son to be crowned king, and she detained inl rifon nal.
within this reaill and the fame to he governed, in the young
king's nane, by a councel, consisting of certain of the r.ohiliiy,
and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be flen that
the power and abilityto do any thing to the commodity of tile
queen's najefty, and the realm of England, will chiefly, and in
manner wholly, reft in the hands of these lords, and others itheir
alFociates, assembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's maiefty
Fill till perflt in her former opinion towards the queen of Scot-
land, (unto whom he shall be able to do no good) then I do
plainly fee that there lords and all their accomplices will become
as good French, as the French king can wifli, to all intents and
purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile.
Huntlye, andthat fation, they be already so far inchanted that
war, as there needethlittle devise to draw them to the French
devotion. Then thids is the ate of things so come to pafl of this
country, that France has Scotland now as much conjoined unto
them, to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an 'iftrurnerit
the voung prince will prove, to unquiet England, I report me to
Vour lordlhips widloms, and therefore confidering the weight of
the matter, and all the -cicumftance.%-l trutt your lordflaios will
weli bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her
najeRtv, to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of
Scotland to be in her poffelion,or,at the least, to beat herdevoti-

U 4 on.

on. And arnong'" other things, that I can imagine,for the firfide.
gree, nothing is in:,re meet to bring this to effect, than to allure
this company here afiembled, to bear her majesty their favour
Some talk hat a pa:Sed betveen the lord of Liddington and me, in
cer:ain conferences, about this matter. By him I find, that when
her maj :lfv ihall have won these men to her devotion, the princi.
rp! point that will nak: them conforiimable to deliver their prince
i::to England, vi.l reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling
i-n to the fucceflion of the crown of England, for fault of ifue
of the queen's m 'iefrv's bhdv, iome other things will also be re.
quti.ed, as the charge of the ,aid prince and hi;s train, to be at
the charge of Enldand. I do well perceive that these nen will
r.ever be brough. to d-ii-er their prince into England, without
t'-e r.rner condition, for the fuccefi-.n of Engla id; for (faith
LiJdngton) thit taking plice, the prince fiall be as dear tothe
people of England r, to the people of Scotland; and the one
viil be a; caret;: of hi:s preflrvation as the other. Otherwise,
he fiith, all things confidered, it will be reported that theScot.
i1:'men have pnt their prince to be kept in safety, as taofe
which comnit the Iheep to be kept by the wolves. So as for
cor.clu!ion, rour lordlhips may perceive here will be the scope
of this matter. As unto the delivering of him upon hostages,
be faveth, let no man think, that the condition of the fucceTi.
on not being accomplilhed, the nobility and gentry will never
content to leave themselves delfitute of their sovereign, upon
anr hostage?, neither upon any promises, nor likelihoodof good
to itluc in time to come. It were not good for yourselves (faith
he) fhat the mat:er were so handled; for then you fhouldadven-
ture al! your gocdc in one llip, which might have a dangerous
crfer cnrn.:ider;i thcr;'-nwillingnefs of the queen your sovereign
to cr,;- nr to et-zbiifiing any successor to the crown. And then,
hnw urr.mee v.-r i:, that her majesty having in her poffeflion
a.-:eadv al! fch p .fn. as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to
the crown, to ha-ve our prince also in her cufody. For so there
mnight follow, withnut good capitulations, a strange and dange-
rons itue, tha' the queen Your miAtrefs do thi:lk. that such inia-

-na:io.rs could nor proceed but from busy heads, as you have
uti e-ed unto us on her behalf. What is come to pafl since my lall
d:fpatcah, a-d how far forth things are proceeded, I refer your
Iardfhip to be informed by my letters sent unto her majesty, at
this rime. And so I pray almighty God, preserve your lord-
lhip in nmuch honour and felicity. At Edinburgh this 24th of
Jiiv, 1567.

Tr mar please Your good lordillip to make my lord Stuard
partner of this letter.

Th-

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.
TR U STY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for 6th Aug.

as much as we do cnnfider that you have now a long time 1567.

::ai'cd in those parts, without expedition in the charge com-
;[eld unto you, we think it not meet feeing there hath not
jwed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning to-
aris that lrate, which good reason would have required, that
Iou iluld continue there any longer, our pleasure, therefore,
tilat you liall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
ier lervant Middlemore unto the lords and estates ofthat realm,
ht are alfenmbled together, willing him to declare unto them,
at it cannot but seem very strange unto us, that you having
n rent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them, in
aters tending so much to their own quilt, and to the benefit
. th whole eflate of their country, they have so far forgotten .
i-nfelhes, and so slightly regarded us and our good meaning,
tonly in delaying to hear you, and deferring your access to
,equeen their sovereign, but also, which is ifrangeft ofall, in
riouchfafing to make any answer unto us. And altho' thelf
eaings be such, indeed, as were not to be looked ftr at their
tds, yet do we find their ulage and proceedings towards
heirSovereign and queen, to overpass all the reft, in so strange
degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole world
fides, cannot but think them to have therein gone so far he-
n.d the duty of fuhjets, as mufl need.; remain to their perpe-
altauche for ever. And therefore lie iiall iay, that swe have
,ught good, without consuming any longer time in vain to re-
k!e vou to our presence, requiring them to grant you lil'ence
idpalport so to do, which when you fliall have obtained, we

t:.hat you make your repair hither, unto us, with as conve-
.at speed as you may. Given, &c.

Irdorfed 6th August, 1567.

hrogrnorton to the right honourable Sir MWilliam Cecil, knight,
one of her majesty's privy council and principal secretary,
gie thefc,

SI R,
AI iA T I have learned, since the arrival of my lord o! i2th Arg.

IVVMurray, and Mons. de Linnerd, you ilhall underl-and m 671. Pa-

'nry letter to her Majesty, at this time. The French do, inr per ()tice
ber negotiations, as they do in theirdrink, put 'ater to their trnin the
:.e. As I ani able to fee into their doings, thev take it not Oli in.il.
Frsiiv to the heart how the queen sleep, wh ther f11e live

v: i, hcther lie be at liberty or in Ir'.'yn. 'Th maIalk

th"y

the.- hont at, i,, to renew their old league; and can be astej
contented to rake it of this little king, (howsoever his titieb;
and the f:;:e: .'v the order of there lords, as otherwise. Lrne.
ro:i cami !-ur -.elterdiav, and me thin.keth he will not tarrylon .
tiou rma guels hov. the French will seek to displease thefelordi
when they changed the coming of La Chapelle des Ourfinsfrl
this man, because they doubted that de ia Chappelle fhiuld
not be gratfui! t tem. being a papill. Sir, to Ipeak more
plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me thinketh the earl
of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be pa
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitter
against the tragedy, and the players therein, than he, so litl
like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling that Lidingtoo
is to go into France, which I do as much mislike, as any thing
for our pnrpofe. I can assure you the whole proteftanti
France will live and die in there mens quarrels ; and, wierh
there is bruit amongst you, that aid flould be sent to tlhea
vcrfe party, and that Martigues should come hither with f.om
force ; Mons Baudulot hath assured me of his honour, that in
f.ead ofMartigues coming against them, he vwill come with
good a foice to succour them: And if that be sent -under mre
er conduct, Robert Stuart shall come with as many to forni
them. But the con1table hath aflured there lords, that t
king meaneth no way to offend them. Sir, I pray vou tind m!
revocation convenient, and speed you to further it, for Ir
here now tono purpose, unless it be to kindle there lords im
a-ainft us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, fro
T denburgh the 1 2th of August, 56-.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.
T RL STY and well-beloved we greet you well. W

have within these two days, received three sundry le

rers of vour,. of the 2oth, 22d, and 23d, of this month, harin
no; before thole received any seven days before; and do h
bv there vour letters, that you have very diligently and large]
ad--rtileui us of all the haftv and peremptory proceedings there
which as -.'.-e .onhir.g like, so we trust in time to fee them a
colder, and to receive some reformation. For we cannot pe
cei'e. th.t thev with whcm you have dealt can answer tl
doubts ..oved b- the Hamiltons, who howsoever they tnavb
carried for ther- private refpefts, yet those things which the
move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. For if the
may not, being nohlemen of the realm, be suffered to heart
nueen their fisereign declare her mind concerning the repor
which are made of her, by fitch as keep her in captivity, ho
1-ould they beieve the reports, or obeyvther, which do repont

sr

therefore our meaning is, you thall let the Hamiltons plain-
underiland, that we do well allow of their proceedings, (as
tbrth as the fame doth concern the queen their sovereign for
r :rif) and in such things as fllall appear reasonable for us
ein to do, for the queen our sifter, we will be ready to per-
nthle faine. And where it is so required, that upon your
ming thence, the lord Scroope flould deal with the lord Her-
it impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
;pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord
rnpe hereof by your letters, and to will him to shew himself
iourable to them in their actions, that may appear plainly to
ndtothe relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
r. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that
bonyour message done to the earl of Murray, you might re-
in. o our meaning is you shall. And if there our letters ihalt
ttyou on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the
rdScroope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.
Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 357.)
Nicholas Throckmnorton to the archbilhop of St. Andrew's

and the abbot of Arbrothe.

F TFE R my good commendations to your good lordflips, 3 th A4g.
this thall be to advertize you, that the queen's majesty my , 567. Pal-

reeign having sent me hither Her ambassador to the queen herper Office,
krvour sovereign, to communicate unto her such nmtter as fonom a co-
e thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence py which
:;t them, who being detained in captivity (as your lord-Sir Nicho-
I know) contrary to the duty of all good fubjecAs, for the lls lent to
urgement of whose person, and the reititution of her to her the queen.
kni'., her majesty gave ne in charge to treat wi-th these lords

iithlcd at Edinburgh, offering them ail reasonable conditions
Im-ans as might be, for the safeguard of the young p-ince,
xpunilhment of the late horrible murder, the diflblution of
marriage betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodweli, and
r for their own sureties. In the negotiation of which mat-
:' I have (as your lordships well know) spent a long time to no
rple, not being able to prevail in any thing with thol lord;,
5i- qtuccn Ily sovereign's satisfaction. Of which fcrange pro-
cyns towards her majesty, and undutiful 'behaviour towards
or lovreign, I have advertised the queen's nme!tv; ihe (not
T? minded to bear this indignitv) hath given lie in charge to
ioare her further plealure unto thc:n, in luch for- as thy

s uell perceive her majesty doth diialiov, of t'ei, pr-Ycceei-
! and thereupon hath revoked me. And firti;er hath given
: chrarge to communicate the fame unto your lnll li:~. rc-
l::n you to let ;me know, leftore nl . i'.-parit: ' h.lio-.., ( v.icibh

h!i I

shall be, God wiiling, as soon as I have received anfwer.fr
you) what vyu and your confederates will assuredly do, tof
the oueen v-ur tovercign at liberty, and to restore her toi
former dignitv by force or otherwise ; feeing these lords ha
refufec1 all cther mediation, to the end the queen's majelt;.
sovereign may concur with your lordilhips in this honcur,:
enterprize.

A D in cafe, through the dispersion of your affociare,, vo

l^rdihips can neither communicate this matter anmengft yosi
receive refc'ution of them all by that time, it may pl-aie ra
fend me the cpinions of so many of you as may confer tog^,
within two or three davs, so as I mav have your anfwser hese
this town by Monday or Tueflay next at the farthelt. bei
the 9Ith of this Aug'il; for I intend (God willing) tode
towards England, up-.n Wednesday following. Thus I
humblv tak :e m leave of your Lord!hips at Edenburg,'

;:h of Au. ;67.

Indarlcd the 3th of Aug. 1 567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

'-i, \.~ 'rT OUR goodlordillip's letter of the 3th of Augufll l

1'- pa. 1 received the qth of the fame. For answer whereunt

r' O .e mav like vour lordship to understand, that I will fignifr u

from a co- Vou pla!nly, how far iorth I am already thoroughly inflru
pv which of the queen's majesty inv sovereign's pleasure, concerning
Sir Nicho- detention of the queen your tovereign. and concerning herrei
las fen to To the firti her majeryl hath given in charge, to ufeallkil
fecretarv of persuasion in her name, to move these lords assembled
Cecil. Edenburgh to defitl from this violent and undutiful behasic

which they use toward their sovereign. And in this part,
fides the Iilew of inanv reasons, and sundry persuasions of
cable treaty w ith them, her maiefty hath willed me to use f
plain and severe speech unto them, tending so far forth,
they would not be better advised, and reform these theirou0
geous proceedings extrcifed against their sovereign, that
thev might be ali:;rd her majelty neither would norcould
dure such an i.-.diniiy to be done to the queen, her good col
and neighbour.

A\ "D n"t:'ithRtandirg there my proceedings swith them,

have madc proTf to he little nimved thereby, for as yetne'l
w;!! they c^-fcntt to the enlargenent, neither susser me to
.-ith her. Sj a2. ' entleth to me, it is superfluous to treal
.ore vith 'i 'na a'ter this manner. Whereupon I have ac
ti'cd the cq:_-'- n:aief-: inv sovereign, expecting daily htt
Tc':v 's tu-;r 'r rri- ; and asI Ihall beadvertifed thereof, fl
r.o fai' To ligji'\ the to

e to your good lordilip; anti i

rmi.- ti:re . ill advtrtilc h-r nmaeltv also, v-hat your lord
hath v.ii:ten unc: nr: Thus with' my due co;ilen"at'io

L. F bus ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ my~~~~~~-

. oood lordlhip, I commit the amne to alniighty God, refting
,s to do you the pleasure and service that I can lawfully.
Eeliu rgh.
lInorfed 24th ofAuguft, 156-.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 367.)
acount of Lord Herries's Behaviour in the Parliament held

December 15, 1567.

F HE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the name Paper Of-

of the duke and hilnfelf their friends and adherents, (the tice.

itehimlc-lf, the earl of Caflilles, and the abbot of Kilwinning
g ailo present) to persuade the union of the whole realm in
iiiniid. Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the
.itpraife that part of this nobility diddeferve, which in the
ti;nn;]g took meanes for puniflhmnt of the earl iiothwel!,
aiiC 1leing the queen's inordinate affeition for that wicked

ard that Ihe could not be induced by their persuasion to
ie him, that in fequeftrating her person within Lochlevin,
e.vdid the duty of noblemen. That their honourable doings,
^. had not spared to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge
irnative country from the slanderous reports that were spoken
it among other nations, had well deserved that all their bre-
nliould join them in To good a cause. That he and they
whose names he did speak, would willingly, and without an.'
:pulfion, enter themselves in the fame voke, and put their
iE and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our cause.
nd if the queen herlelf were in Scotland, accompanied with
'.coo men, they will be of the fanie mind, and fight in our
irrel. HI hoped the remainder noblemen of their party,
[ntley, Arguile, and others, which had not as vet acknow-
eed the king, would come to the fame conformity, whcre-
Ashe would also earnestly move them. And if they will re-
c.hltinate, and refuse to qualify themselves, then will the
:e, he, and their friends, join with us to correct them, that
rierv.ile will not reforn themselves. So p!aufible an oration,
dimore advantageous for our party, none of ourselves could
e mamde. He did not forget to term my lord regent, by the
nieof regent, (there was no mention at all of the earl of Mur-
rv and to call him grace at every word, when his speeches
.:: directed at him, accompanying ail his words with low
'rtefies after his manner,

No. XXIV

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p 384.)
Part cf a letter from Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8thAAu

56S, from Bolton.

An Ori .- -- T) U T surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, note
nal. ) ly to favour the form, but also the chief articleoft
Paper 0- relig;in of the gospel, namelF, justification by faith only;
siee. ie ..: n reth the faults of papeftry revealed, by preaching,

ctherwife. with contented ears, and with gentle andweakred
and ieit doth not feern to like the worse of religion throw te
Part of a letter from Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 21 Sepir

ber, 1568, from Bolton.
---T T came to this queen's ears of late that she was hr

] to be lately turned to the religion of the gofpell., tot

grre.t dif:ikng cf the papists hereabouts, which thing ithe
' ih c.n-lrfed unto me, and yesterday openly in the great e
her. when the alfrembv was full, and some papists present,
took occaiion to fpcai: ofreligion, and then openly the profel
hers:!s tn be of the papitl religion, and took upon her to
tror.'.ie the at.::e, more earneltiy than the had done a greatri
a.:?re. altlho' hr defences and arguments were so weak,
the erec of her itrech was only to Ilhew her zeal; andaft
wvrn; i ;o me alone, when I Ilifliked to fee her become foe
dcnt!v backward in religion, why, said she, would youh
mc t,) lose 1 rance and Spain, and all my friends in other pa
hby cenming to change my religion, and vet I am not alT
the queen :nv good filter will be my assured friend, to thela
fac:i'n o!: ,:; honour and expectation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 386.)

Queen LlizabSth to the earl of Murray.

Pa pr O.- t I G fH -T ruflt and right well beloved cousin, we p
tce. y\9 vo.u well. \5 here we hear fay, that certain reports
'romi a Imd- i!n sundry parts of Scotland, that whatsoever lhouli
c'.'- cor- oU! :; o. upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in
r-c'e':'. r': prs-,o; to convince or to acquit the laid queen concerning

i
}*1:' rri1 :iirjc rr o, her late huffland our cousin, we havede
C;:ii. "!l:re, t' I ! h. re h-r to he r kingdom and government, we do

:.n.ch l'.: c !:,.e-ofn; as v.we cannrct indure the fame to re
an. credi;: a.n:i ;h.re'n.-cw e h.ve thought good to afiureyl
that t l e le i untrulv deviled by the authors to our d
nr"u Fni a 'c he bhae eet a!vav certified from cur laid ti.
bo:h '-.- her i. :cr. and nielliags, that ilne is by no inlA

g:

ruiltv or participant of that murder, which we wilh to be true,
i0 lurelv if the should be found justly to be guilty thereof as
blh been reported of her, whereof we would be very sorry,
en, indeed, it should behoove us to confider otherwile of her
aule than to satisfy her desire in rettitution of her to the go-
,rinwent of that kingdom. And so we would have you and
t ot:ers think, that ilould be disposcd to conceive honourably
usand our actions.
Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 391.)
r Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of October, 568, from

York.

'-^
- Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, An Origi-

mV[ L to attend upon him here Thursday last, I made my nal.

epair hither accordingly, meaning to stay here until Munday Paper Of-
et; as touching the matters of the coinmifion, that his grace fice.
nd the reft have from her highness, his grace hath imparted
mto me of all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath
iherto passed, and altho' the matters be too weighty for my
iek capacity, to presume to utter any opinion of mine own
hereof, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a
econciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious accu-
tons; my lord of Ledington also faith to me, that he could
ilh there matters to be ended in dulce maner, To that it might
done with safety; of the reft you can conceive, by the ad-
erlilements and writings, Cent up by our comiiliilioners.
letter from the Biflop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from

Yoik, October 1568.

LE I your majelly I conferred at length with A. ane Crtt. IL.i
great part of a night, who af'urit me that he had reafon-Calig. C.
aith B. this Saturday C. on the field, who determinate to i. a copy.
!n that it was the D. determinlit purpose not to end your cause
this time, but to hold the fame in fiipence, and did that vas
her power, to make the E. purlile extremity, to the cifct F.
d his adherents night utter all tlhe could to your dillionour,
tlie effect to cause you come in diflain with the hail fubjetts
this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
ing to her disadvantage. And to this effect is all her intention,
d when they have produced all they can againit you, D. will
1 appoint the matter instantly, hut transport you up in the
!nnyv, and retain you there till fihe think time to hlew you 'a-
our, lhich is not likely to be hastily, hecaulf of vour uncles
France, and the fear file has of youlfelf to be hlr unflriend.

.And

And therefore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to ihe
D. meaning that vy are informit that your fubjefts has of.
fendit you.--This in effee that your majelfy hearing the e.
tate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was informed thit
her nailrv was informed o' you, that you could not gudels re.
nirt your ubhjects in luch fort as they might credit you hereafter,
M hicih ewas a great cause of the ftav ot this controverly tob
ended. And therefore perluading her D. etfectualiy not to trult
an-. who had made tuch narration. But like as ye had rendered
x ou in her hands, as mno:t tender tn you ot any living, so prait
L.-r to take na opinion ofyou, but that ye wald use her counlsJ
in ai ;-,'ur arfairs, and wald prefer her si iendfllip to all others,
a, w-ei' uncles as others, and assure her to keep that thing ye wald
i-onmit to vour fubjecs by her advice. And if D. difcredi
¥,u. ye v.'ald be glad to satisfy her in that point be renioiar
v.-inin her realn in secret and quiet manner, where herG
pia:cd, until the time her G. were fully satisfied, and allocca
lion of dif-reci; removed from her. So that in the mean timi
your rcalml were hlden in quietness, and your true fubjecsre.
l:or-dJ and mlaintained in their own eltate, and sic other .hinig
tending to this effet And affirms that they believe that ths
nmav be occasion to cause her credit you that ve offer so far; an
it nia con.c that within two or three months flie may become
betti-;- indled to -o.ur grace, for now ihe is not well minded
and wili not ihew you any picafure for the causes foresaid.

A. B. The title of this paperis in Cecil's hand; the follow
ing key is added in another hand.

A. The :ird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. \'as the day he wrote to Ca wood.
D. The Queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 400.)
Drliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. i

I56S.

PI'er C'"- ' HE belf wav for England, but not the easiest, thatth
t r .-t 1 qu. en oi S-rts light remnai.i deprived of her crown, an

thi l.a:e cnic.nue a, it is.

TH scc nd ewav focr Eng'and profitable, and not so hard
- That the queen of S:ozts iisight be induced, by some pir

f;v.'nr.;, to azree that her son mnight continue king, becaulenh
i.- L..Lwne, and hr,:i:if to re;i::ai aob queen; and that the gq

V erIll'."

vernment of the realm tnight be committed to such perrons as
,tLi; ueen of England fliould name, iC as for the nomination of
(l.ill it might be ordered, that a convenient number of pcrfons
cScdtland fliould be firfi named to the queen ot England, in-
dr:-rcntly for the queen of Scorts, and for her son, that is to
i:,. tile one half by the queen ol Scotts, and the other by the
e;l.i of Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the child; and
ir. oi't hofc, the (ueen's inajety of England to make choice for
al: the ffiices of the realm, that are, by the laws of Scotland,
dj.',,lbi)le by the king or queen of the land.

'fTi T untill this may be done by the queen's majelly, the
acrnmnent remain in the hands of the earle of Miurrav as it is,
p(oii;lg he fliall not dispose of any offices or perpetuals to con-
iiua anv longer but to there olfered of tile premils.

Ts. T a parliament be fumlmloned in Scotland by several coxn-
nsncdlents, both of the queen of Scotts and of the young kini.

-Tn A T hostages be delivered unto England on thc) yung
k:n':s behalf, to the number of twelve persons of the carte of
.:urrav's part, as the queen of Scotts iliall name ; and llkcl ife
o0 tie queen's behalf to the like nubher as the earle of 1Murrav
jlaii naime j the fame not to be any that have by inheritance or
enice cause to be in this parliament, to remlain from the begin-
ring of the summons of that parliament, untill three months as-
ter the parliament; which hostages Iiall be pledges, that the
tiends of either part filall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this
pirliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the queen
lEnsg!and fiall devise for the government of the realm, (being
-.; to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor contrary to' the
ris of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the 1fame was
t:ore the parliament at F din'. the Decenbr. 1 56-) Ihall be
'h:!llhed to be kept and obeyed, under pain of high treafiol
I-the breakers thereof.
--THAT by the fame parliament also be itablilhed all ex-
C;ions andjudgments given againit any prfoii to the death of

l-ate king.
--T. A.xT by the fame parliament, a rem.ission be made
i cralIly from the queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and
;' ron every one fubjcct to another, fay'ng, that reftiturion
. :.d of lands and houses, and all other things heritable, that
:; becn. by either fide, taken fionm them which were the
."rs thereof at the coimmiitiilg of the queen of 8cots to Loch-

TiiAT by the fame parliament it be declared who shall be

dccfor, l t the crown next arrer the (Q of Scots and her ifue;
d::, that iuch right as the D. of Ch,t-llherault had, at the
arri;< of the Q.oi Scots w ith the lord Darnley, may be con-

- ,tnd not preludiced.
iA ST the Q of Scots may have leave of the queen's majeflv

a'iilnd, twelve months after the said pa; lianent, and that
\,j. 1i. X she

3"3

ihe ilhall not depart out of England, without special licence of
the queen's majesty.

TH A T the young king fihall be nourished and brought upin
England, tili he be years of age.

iT is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition he.

tween the queen and her subjects may be made with certain ar.
ticles. outwardly to be seen to the world for her honour, ai
though all the parts Ihould come of her, and vet for the surety
o contrarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's majetl
are to be concluded.

No XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 402.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. 568-9.

Paper Of- PT E greet vow well, we mean not, at this point, be an
e. VV w-ritir.g, to renew that which it hath pleased God to

make grevious to us and forryfull toyow: but forbearing the
fame as unmeet at this point, having occasion to comlmand yow
in our service, and yow also whileft yow are to serve us. We
require yow to confider of this that followeth with like confide.
ration and diligence, as hitherto vow have accullomate in our
ier.-ife; at the time of our last letters written to yow the four-
teenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we
had unJC -fiapdipg out of Scotlard of certain writtings sent y
her froml tler.ce into Scotland, amlongft the which one isfound
to contain great and manifeit untruths touching us and other
a!e, as i(hail and mav plainly appear unto vow by the copyof
the fame, which likewise ie le nd vow, and because at the fame
tinwe we -wre advertif.d, that it Ihould be ihortly proclaimed
in Scotla:id, though then it was not, we thought good firll t0
reni-,v tIequueen, bes re we would disclose the fiame, andthen
xpect ;he issue thereof; and now, this day by letters from our
c.asin of Hunfdon v'e are ascertained, that since that time he
ti:re unatters contained in the writing, are published in diserfe
parts of Scotland. whereupon we have thought it very meet,
fcr tht dsicharge of our honor, and to confound the falfiood
ccan:.;red in that writing, not only to have the lanme reprove
by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the copy whereof we
do hcrcv. ih fend yow, but alol in con;venlint fort tochargethat
queen therew-ith, so as f11e m.y hle Illuved todeclare the authors
thereof, and persuaders of her to wvrite in such slanderous forl
f;ch untruths of us; and in the mean fealbn, we have heri
ti..ved her commiilieoners, knowing no other whom we nayn more
probab:v Drefume to be parties hereunto, than they, untili ih:
Queen ihall name ftme other, and acquit themn; who being ge
ne.ralv charged, without exprefilig to them any particulhrity, di
u;t a:! nanner of Ireeches to dilcharge theuifelves; whcretn
our plealu-e is. tha; vc haial, after ve have w-eil perulcZd theccppi
cf this wrltting clnt to y.j\, 17peily- declare unto her, that w,

\w i

bare good underftandinggiven us ofdiverfe letters and writtings,
feit by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand, ainonglt
,bich, one fucl writting is lent with her commandment exprci-
ras now it is already publilhled, as we are much troubled in
Mind that a princess as fle is having a cause in our hands so im-
i;cated with difficulties and calanitys, Ihould either conceave
in her own mind, or allow of theml that should devise such false,
untrue, and improbable matters against us, and our honor, and
secially to have the aventure to have the lnme being known
funtrue to he publifled; and you flall also fay, becaufS we
iill not think so ill of her, as that it should proceed of her self,
but rather lihe hath been counielled thereunto, or by abuse made
t)hink some part thereof to be true, we require her, even as
le may look for any favour at our hands, that flie will diliur-
dn herself as much as truly file may herein, and name themn
which have been the authors and perfwaders thereof, and so ihe
lial make as great amends to us as the cafe may require; after
vow have thus far proceeded, and had some answer of her, whe-
ther fle shall deny the writting abfolute!y, or name any that
hre been the advisers thereof, yow fliall fay unto her that we

're fayed her comlliffioners here, until we have foume answer

hereof, because we cannot but impute to thenm some part of this
nildealing, untill by her answer the authors may be known;
and as oon as yow can have direct answers from her, we pray
ro' to return us the fame ; for as the cale (tandeth, we cannot
hutbe much disquieted with it, haviing our honour so deeply
touched contrary to any intention in us, and for any thing we
ow in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others naled in
thefame writting void of thought for the matters, to themi
therein imputed; yov may impart to the queen of Scots eilter
econtents of the slanderous letter, or Ihew her the coppy to
ead it, andyow may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop,
toiln with yow there as you Ihall think meet.
r Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Wetherby the

28th January, i 568.

- WIl. suppress my own griefss, and pass them over An Orisl-
1 withfilence, for the present learning of your majeflt nal it 1 i,

and for this queen's answer to the coppie of lhr supposed let- Pape l !-
ilient into Scotland, I mutt add this unto my brother's letter, tice
et unto Mr Secretary yefternight late in process of time. fle
,d not deny but that the firlt lines contained in the lmne coppie,
'a agreeable to a letter that flhe lathl sint unto Scotland, which
'uched my lord of Murray's promise to'deliver her son into
'ur majelty's hand ;, and to avoid that the famne hould not be
one without her conlent, made her, ihle faith, to write in that
half; ill faith alib that file wrote cihat thev should caulc a:

X z pr-

prrclamation to be made to fir her peopie to defend my lord of
Murray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her said son, and
inip-nge his rebelious government, as flie termed it, but fie
urteriv denyeth to have w ritten any of the other fanderous part
of the said letter touching your majesty ; the said also, that he
fufpedted that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the au-
thor of some Scotch letters devised in her name, but the would
not allow me to write this for any part of her answer.

No. XXiX. (Vol. I. p. 409.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the lord of

Liddington.

20ch cf A OUR letter of the id of July, I have received the 15th
Tu!vi -6o. i of the ame. For anifer whereunto you fhallunderftand,
Frm 'thet that friends here to my lord regent and you do wish such a con.
Origini! currence in all doings, as in matter and circumstances therearife

no ciltention, or at the least, no more nor other than the dif
ference of countries doth necessarily require. We here do think
convenient that as few delays be used as may be, for the con-
ft:mmarion of the matter in hand, which principally to advance,
y. ur allow-ance, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland,
i, most requisite, for you are so wife, and well acquainted with
the stare of the world, and with all our humours, as you know
that fCme do allow and disallow for reason, some for refped of
iiuhlitude, ficme for respect of persons, and so the cause is to
go fcrward as men do like to set it forward. You are not to seek
that fcme will use cautions, tome neutrality, tome delays, and
fcne will plainly impunge it. And yet all and every of there
fnrts will alter their doings, when they shall fee the regent and
htis favourers accord with the heft and greatell part there, and
aree with the wileti and strongest party here. Tho' the mat-
r°r has taken its beginning here, upon deep and weighty con-
fdcerations, for the weil of both the princes and their realms, as
well presently, as in time to come, vet it is thought most expe-
dient, that the regent and realm of Scotland, by you, fliould
prcpoie the matter to the queen our Sovereign, if you like to
use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a fear,
and no wound Cf the hurts pair. I would be glad that this n:T
ictter should come to -.our hands before the convention, whereat
i' 1-emn vcur queen's restoration and marriage to the Duke of
Norfolk l;all be propounded. either to wvnne in them both al-
!owance or rejecion. To which proceedings, because you pray
me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus, me thinkcth you ute

a pro-

a propofterous order, to demand the consent of such persons, in
fuich matters, as their minds to a good end hath rather been felt
or prepared, and therefore there mluft needs follow either a uni-
versal refifal, or a factious division amongst you, whereby a blou-
piering intelligence must needs come to queen Elizabeth of the
intended marriage fi-om thence, which ought to have been fe-
crerely and adviledly propounded unto her highness; hereby
you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majcfty fiall be
ntdle inexorable and so bring the matter to such pase, as this
which ihould have wrought surety, quietness, and a stay to both
queens and their realms, fliall augment your calamity, and throw
us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy
di'ilion amongst ourselves; for you may not conjecure that the
nmtter is now in deliberation, but expecteth good occasion for
executing; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly of the ma-
naging of this matter, as to think we have not call the word,
or to enter therein so far without the alliftance of the nohility,
the alell, the wisest, and the mightiest of this realm except
queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been concealed until you,
as the fittefd minister, might propound it to her, on the behalf
of the regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far maifer
WVoodes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's assec-
tiong, and master secretary's, to aftift the regent and to fuipprefs
the queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but I do
asuredlv think, that her majefly will prefer her surety, the
tranquillity of her reign, and the conservation of her people,
before anydevice, which may proceed from vain discourse, or
imperfections of palions, and inconsiderate affections. And as
for Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to
go too fast afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and
fpeciallv when the reliques he of no great value or power. If
I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and constancy,
as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently, you may
repose as well of him in this matter, as of the duke of Norfolk,
the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrews-
bury, and the refl of the nobility; all which do embrace and
protefte the accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according to
'our advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame
7cn! and care of his well-doing that I owe to him, whon I love
adJ honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto him the queen
ft Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he feemeth
to he well fatisfy'd . Ifyour credit be as I trust, haften your
coming hither, for it is very'neceffary that you were here pre-
lntfly. Q, Elizabeth both doth write to my lord Regent in such
I;ir, as he may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her majesty's
affection to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than ie
coniectureth of him, the effect of which her mmajevly's letter you

X 3 ilill

327

.fail undersand, by my lord Leicefl2r's letter unto you at this
dspatch. At thecourt, 2oth July 1569.

No XXX. (Vol. 1. p. 410.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. prsbably Lord

Burleigh.

z- 9. -' EC AUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on

Ha-i. L!o. .JL fmail occasions, and that the mention of the marriage,
;-. B c betwixr the qu en my tluvereig:'s mother, and the D. of Nor-
to 43. ' folk. ha'h this while past been very frequent in both the realms,

and then I nimvf.l to be ip-iken of as a motioner, which I per-
cei;e is at the last come to her majeftv's ears. I will, for satis.
faction of her higrnelf, and the discharge of my duty towards
her re.aiefty, mrani:eft unto vou my interest, and medling in that I
rratter, frcm the very beginning, knowing whatloever is preju-
dicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king sly
fiJereign, this his realm, and me. What conferrences was be-
tw:xt the duke of Norfolk, and anv of them that were with me
x-ithin the realm of England, Iam not able to declare; but I
am no wile forgetful of any thing that passed betwixt him andt
nme, either at that time, or since. And to the end her majesty
mav underfland hown I have been dealt with, in this matter, l
am compelled to touch fume circumttances, before there was
anr mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of allthe
cnmmilioners. I 'cund very-and neutral dealing with the duke, §
2nd others her highness's commifEoners, in the beginning of the|
cau:e. as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely, andI
so fuirther. During which time. I entered into general speech,}
fricklin at our jlut defence in the natters that were objeaedI
again!t uc, by the laid queen's conmiffioners, looking certainly
for no other thing, but luminary cognition in the cause of con-i
troverflv, with a Finsl! declaration to have followed. Upon a
certain dav the lord Lithington's fecreta y rode with the duketo0
Hox-ard, w-hat purpofc thcv had I cannot fay, but that night
Lih;ington returning. and entering in conferrence with meupont
the f:lte of our action, waas advifted by him to pars to the
duke, and requtre famiiair c(.nferrence, by the which I might|
have lome fi-eling to what iitile our matters would tend. Ac-p
cording to which advice, having gotten time and place conve-
rient :nr the ga!ierv of the house where the duke was lodged,|
after rr.ewv:n of our first acquaintance made at Berwick, thet
time tifere the ai,7.e of Lcith, and fomie Ipceches pased

be-:

twix; u ; hc began to fa- to me, how he in England had fa-
xojr a:cd crecit, and I in Scotand had will and friendihip of

many,

rni', it was to be tho't there could be none more fit inftru-
rents, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt the
realmsi than v.- two. And so that discourse upon the prelent slate
of botl, and how I was entered in that aftion tending so far to
the qu :.'s diihonour, 1 was willed by him to confider how

sarir: itood in thin, what honour I had received of the queen,

ad ;v' .at inconveniences her defimation in the matters laid to her
chaige iight breed to her posterity. Her refpedt was not little
to ilic crown of England, there was but one heir. The HIamil-
!ris nlv unfriends had the next refpeet, and that I fliould esteen
th; .rte of her body would be the more affectionate to me and
nine, than any other that could attain to that crown. And so
l! llhould bemeeteft that he affirmed herdifiniflion maide in Ioch-
!idn, and we to abftraA the letters of her hand write, that ihe
f/licd not be defamed in England. My reply to that was, how
iie matter had passed in parliament, and the letters seen to ma-
r,, so that the abstraCting of the famle could not then secure
her to any purpose, and yet should we, in that doing, bring
the ignominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for us
that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of England was
not made privy to the matter as fle ought to be, to be in respect
te were purposely come in England for that end, and for the
- of the grants of our cause. The duke's answer was, he
tould take in hand to handle matters well enough at the court.
.fter this, on the occasion of certain articles, that were re-
quired to be resolved on, before we entered on the very declara-
tion of the very ground of our astion, we came up to the court;
where some new commiflioners were adjoined to the former,
mai the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parliament
house at Weftliinifter, in presence of which commiflioners of the
fald queen and- through the--- rebuking of the queen
of England's own commillioners, we uttered the whole of the ac-
t;on, and produced luch evidences, letters, and probations, as we
had, which might move the queen's majesty to think well of our
raule. Whereupon expecing her highness declaration, and feeing
no great likelihood of the lame to be uddenly given, butdailymo-
lions then made tocome to an accord with the laid queen, our mat-
lers in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, standing in hazard
and danger, we were put to the uttermost point of our wit, to
imagine whereunto the matters would tend, tho' albeit we had
iet nothing undone for justification of our causes, yet appeared
rC end, but continual motions mnade to come to tome accord
with the queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had
roother anv.-erto give themi, but that I should neither doagainft
conlcience nor honour in that matter. Notwithflanding feeing
tiLis imy plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and

X 4 that

that I was in!brnied that the duke began to mislike of me, and t(

Prob- b . fp ak of me, as that I had repor-ted of the said queen irrevere t;v
Alu.:;rrer. caling her - and murderer, I wa advised to pais to hin an,

give him gar *

d -cr s and to purge mrfelf of the things hbieed

to ne, that I ihiui; not open the sudden entry r. his evil grace
nor to have him our enemy - confidering his g;eatnei;
I: being therea itir ! \.' ifpered, and iltewed to me, that it-
departed, he iarni:,g dif.cntented and not latisfied, I migi
peradventure find fich trouble in mv wav, as my throat n;i¢it
be cut betore I cinae to Berrick. And therefore since it mi'.t
we!n enough appear to her i'arrige, I should not put hii, ;
ut::r despair, that my good v.ili could not be had therein. So
f,.- dav- betbre my departing I came to the park in Hamniton
court. where the duke and I met together, and there I decared
unto him that it was come to nv ears, how Iobme inifreport
flould be niade of me to hhn, as that I should speak irreverent.
P--,,,bly Iv and rahily of the said queen my sovereign's mother, fuchl

w ords a be:-re exprefl c. that he might-- thereby ny.
arse ion to be lb alienate frcm her, as that I could not love her,
nor be content of her preferment, howbeit he might perfiiade
himfeif of the contrary, for as lhe once was the person in the
world that I loved best, having that honour to be so near unto
her, and having received such advancement and honour by her,
I was not so ungrate or io unnatural ever to wifTl her body harm,
or to fpcak of h-r as was untruly reported of me, (howfoevert
the truth were in ihe elt) and as to the preservation of her son,
now my fJvereign. had moved me to enter into this cause, and

Prkt, b;- that her own pre.in.g was the occasion of that was uttered to
i',-:ir. z,. Ihr --- whenloever Gcd ihould move her heart to re-

pent of her bvpll behavi .ur and life, and after her known re-
pen'ance, tha ' ine 1iould be separate from that ungodly and
u-!awf-ul nmr.riagn that Ihe was entered in, and then after were
joined with such a godi, and honourable a personage, as were
a.c-ii rne Il to the true religion, and whonm we might trust, I
c.u'!d rind in my heart to love her, antd iew to her as great
pieafure, fayour, and goodw:!l, as ever I did in my life; and in
caOf, he 1h.uld be that perolnage, there was none whoml I
couid better like of, the queen - in -- of England '
being made pri.;- to the matter, and h1e allowing thereof,
which being done, I thould lab.ur in all things that I could, to
her honour and picalure, that were not prejudicial to the king
nv- sovereign's eliate, and prayed him not to think otherwise oi
i-:e, rfor mv affect.on -as rather buried and hidden within me,
awai;.nz until God lihoud diredt her to know herself, than ut-
teriy alienatcd and abltracted from her; which he seemed t
accep t in very g"od part, fa-ing, Earl of Murray thou thinks of
rue that thing, hereunto I will make none in England or Scot-

land

ian! privy, and thou haft Norfolk's wife in the hand;. So de-
paring, I came to my lodging, and bv the way, anil all night, I
,.a in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave

iVtllf in that weighty matter, fir:;. imagining whereunto this
!houki1 tend, if it were attempted without the queen's majesty of
E- lnd's knowledge and good will, this realm and I mylelf in
pr'icular having received such favour and comfort at her high-
rii's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietncfs, since
God possessed her majesty with her crown. And on ihe other
part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me, proteiling, none
rther were or should be privy to our speech, I thought I could
nro find in my heart to utter any thing that might endanger hin ;
crcvd to the uttermost with thele cogitations, and all desire of
ceep then removed, I prayed God to lend me some good relief
id outgare, to my dilcharge, and fatisfa&tion of my troubled
r;rd, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a
C;v or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with my lord
(:Leicester, in his chamber at the court, where he began to
fn!'irange with me, that in the matter I made so difficult to
:'r, !landing so precisely on conference, and how when I had
i,-n communication with the duke, come so far -- and
ere he made some discourse with me, about that which wasProhah!y
!:! betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had -- the ,i/lofd.
r::ter to my lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby dif-
r.arged at the duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame
cl.iimnlunication in every point to my lord of Leicester, who de-
itid me to shew the fame to the queen' t majesty, which I re-
f.!l to do, willing him if he tho't it might i!tport her highness'
n rihing, that he as one ---by her mijetlv, and! for many
bnetits received at her high!ness's hands is obliged to wish her
Wcll, liould make declaration of the fame to her m:ijeftly, as 1
i'.erifiand by fmoe fpeecl of her highinef to me, he did. This
.: declaration to the duke was the onlyv csufc, tihat said the
r;olence and trouble prepared for mie unexecuted, as I have di-
:eri was underfiand. The fame declaration I was obliged to
rnew since in writings of--f- ent to mv servant John
Woodl. The film whereof, I trust, he Ishewed the dike, and
i:t1:.!ing also I wrote to himfc.li, for it '^ai tho't this Ihould
rdetcn foime time, that the duke fllould not fuddein!y declare
:-;i .ur eneny, for his greatness was oft laid he;ore tne and

. 'rie;tdiltip he had of the chiefof the nohility in lIngland,
that ii might appear to the queen's ntaijly oi: England - li
At towards us, and doing nothing publi lv thlat mitht fiLem
i::'urahle for us, we had fomecaufe to fufpert thatr her hig!ncis
.tild not he contrarious to the marriage when i ilnoti!l 1 n:rm-
:'e,! to her. The iharp mef age sent hv her msj'li-¥ w: t the
rlJ Bovd, who had the like coinmilrlon froni tih- duke tending

so
_ __ __

that I was in!brmed that the duke began to mislike of me, arndt(

Probb'y fp=ak of.me, as that I had reported of the said queen irrevere lt;y
AJu.!:erer. caiing her - and murderer, I was advised to pals to hh!: and

give him gord wGCrs and to purge mfielf of the things b hekd
to me, that I ihouic not (,opn the sudden entry r.-' his evil grace,
nor to have him our enemy - confidering his g-eatneis
I: being there itih! .hifprered, and filewed to me, that if
departed, he tIanoipg dilc-intented and not latisfied, 1 nmigit
reradventure find luch trouble in mv wav, as my throat cmiit
be cut before I cime to Berrick. And there'ore since it minit
we!l enough appear to her marrilge. I should not put hihi .n
i::.er di=pair. that my good v.il! could not be had therein So
fe. dav; before my departing I came to the park in Haniptmn
court, where the duke and I met together. and there I declredi
unto him that it was come to mv ears, how some inifreportn
iliouid be made of me to hin, ar that I should speak irreverept-1
P--,ably lv a.d raJhiy of the laid queen nly sovereign's mother, fuchh

vords as before express c, that he might- thereby rnY
afeclion to be to alienate frcm her, as that Icould not lose her,
nor be content of her preferment, howbeit he might perfuaIed
h:micif of the contrarv, for as lhe once was the person in the
world that I loved bell, having that honour to be so near unto
her, and ha:-ing received such advancement and honour by her,
I \va? not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wihi her body harm,
or to speak of her as was untruly reported of me, (howsoever
the truth were in the felt) and as to the prefenration of her son,
now my fa vereign, had moved me to enter into this cause, and

pro-.el.-v that her own preiTing was the occasion of that was uttered to
; :;, -''. err -- hentoever God should move her heart to re-e

pent of her bvp:i hehavi ur and iife, and after her known re-
penrance, tha tile lliould be ieparate from that ungodly and
u.laaiuli n-mrriage that Ihew as entered in, and then after were
joined with such a godiv and honourable a personage, as were [
ancstinned to the true religion, and whonl we night trust,
crnu!d rind in my heart to love her, and fnew to her as great
pieafure, ifavour, and goodw!l, as ever I did in my life ; and in P
cafe, he should be that personage, there was none whom I
could better like of, the queen -- in --- of England
bcing made privv to the matter, and lhe allowing thereof,
which being done, I ihould labour in all things that I could, to
her honour and piealure, that were not prejudicial to the kilg
nim sovereign's estate, and prayed him not to think otherwise of
lte, for niv affection was rather buried and hidden within me,
awai;inz until God ilou:d dlrect her to know herself, than ut-
teriy alienated and abf:racted from her; which he seemed to
accept in verv -o .d. part, saving, Earl of Murray thou thinks of
rue that thing, hereunto I will make none in England or Scot- |

lar.d

land privy, and thou haft Norfolk's wife in the hands. So de-
pa-ting, 1 came to my lodging, and by the way, and all night, I

Iv, in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave
Ir cllf in that weighty matter, fir::' imagining whereunto this
hou'd tend, if it were attempted without the queen's majesty of
E-gland's knowledge and good will, this realm and I myself in
pFricular having received such favour and comfort at her high-
rs 's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietncfs, since
God possessed her majesty with her crown. And on the other
part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me, protesting, none
irher were or should be privy to our speech, I thought I could
rot find in my heart to utterany thing that might endanger him;
n sted to the uttermost with these cogitations, and all desire of
Seep then removed, I prayed God to fend me tome good relief
a.d outgate, to my discharge, and satisfaCtion of my trouhled
r.id, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a
c:i; or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with my lord
t'[ lcreer, in his chamber at the court, where he began to
n't range with me, that in the matter I made so difficult to
:i'. !landing so precisely on conference, and how when I had
i;-:n, conmmunication with the duke, come so far--- and
t.re he made fomee discourse with me, about that which wasProbah!y
!i betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had - - theliflofed.
r.tter to nmy lord of Leicelter, and thinking me thereby dif-
crarged at the duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame
comnunication in every point to my lord of Leicester, who de-
lifri me to ihew the fame to the queen'! mnajefly, which I re-
';;ai to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness'
n.r thing, that he as one -- by her majetty, and for many
benefits received at her highness's hands is obliged to wiflh her
.eil, siould make declaration of the fame to her majesty, as I
L':eriland by some speech of her highness to me, he did. This
r- declaration to the duke was the only' cause, that staid the
:;oence and trouble prepared for me unexecuted, as I have di-
;-r, ways understand. The fame declaration I was obliged to
renew since in writings of----- nt to yv fcrvant John
l'ool. The fim whereof, I trust, he lhewed the dike, and
ir:lsz!ing also I wrote to himflcf, for it wan tho't this ihould
redeem fonie time, that the duke flould not fudden!y declare
;.;. ur cnriv, for his greatness was oft laid hefore me and
· .r;'rci;e;hiip he had of the chief of the nhbility in Engl ad,

thait it might appear to the queen's imaji-ly o', England - io
c'-A towards us, and doing nothing publhilv that m:ihrt lee
::.oIrahbi for us, we had some cause to fufperct tlhar r heriglnes
i ull nort he contrarious to the marriage when i- shnuld I. nren-
?'re! to her. The sharp menage sent bv her maji, v,' Arl the
!d Bovyd, who had the like cominiilion from th d ttendin

so

1
1

Co far to the said queen's prefermenr, as it were proporing cMe
nanner of conditions fronl both, gave :s to think that her high-
nefG had been foreseen in the duke's design, and that ilte inilt
be induced to allow thereof. But howbet it was devised ib:
England, that the lord of Lethington flould come as from Ime,
and break the matter to her highnc!s, as her majeitv in a !tter
declared that fle looked for his coming, vet that devie proceed.'
ed never ofme, nor the nob'.emn at the convcntion could ro
'-ife accord to his fending, nor a.l;.v.' of the matter moioi)n,t
but altogether mi:lik it, as bringing with the flite great in-1
con\eniincies, to the furetv a!i quictnefs of this wholc ille;t
for our proceedings have dcclar v our m:'fikiing and dilallov.'anrce
ofthe purpose from the beginning,. and if we had pleased, he}
was rcady for the journey. And in like wife it was devised it
give content. that the --between the said queen and
EBorhwcll, ilhuld he luffered to praceed in this realm, as it was
desired by the said lord Bovd, by realfn we could not underlpand
what was the cueen's nmijelxrv' pieafure. and allowance in that]
behalf.-And whereas Ve mean, that her highness was noc
made privy of any such intention, thefault was not in me. The
firfl motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord of
Leiceiler, and by him imnparted to her maieflv, so far as I could
perceive, by some speech of. her highness's to me, before mv
departing. Thus I have plainiv declared how I have been dealt
withal tor this marriage, anrd hcw julf necessity moved me not
to require directlv, that which the duke appeared so---
unto. And for my threaten:n-s, to assent to the fame, Iha:-
expressEd the manner; the perlbns, that laid the matter befor
me, were of niv own conmparr. But the Duke since hath fpcken
that it w-as his writing which laved mv life at that tilne. I
conclusion I pray you persuade her Imajefsv, that flle let n
speeches nor any other thing palT-d and objected to my preju.
dice, move her majeftv to aiter her favour- towards me, or
any wavs to doubt of ms assured conifancy towards her high-
nefo; for in any thing which mal tend to her honour and lure.
tv, I will, v.hile I live, below riv'felf, and all that will do fob
me, notuwirthan.ing mv hazard or danger, as proof mhai! d;-
ciare, v.hen her nm.;ji:y fnds ti.me to emlploy me.

A I' L N D 1 .

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

AP P E N D I X

TO THE
SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 4.)
I'illiam Maitland of Ledington, to my lord ofLciccfter, March

20th, 1570, from Ledington.
sHE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, beAn Origi-

the division thereof in dangerous factions, doth press menal.

loframe my letters to your lordlhip, in other fort, than were
ihnvefull for me, if I had no other respect, but only to main-
;'n ni private credit; therefore I am driven to furnilh them
I.'ii matter, which I know not to be plauible, whereupon by
r:!conftruing my meaning, tome there mnay take occasion of
rence, thinking that I rather utter my own palfions, than go
i:ut to inform your lordship truly of the fate ; but I trust ly
iain dealing lhall bear record to the fincel it) of my meaning;
imalke the fame sensible, I will lay before yourlordlhip's eyes,
tie plat of this country; which first is divided into two falti-
n;, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign,
ile other alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall,
had unjustly deprived of her state ; the former is con!pofed of a
rond number of nobility, gentiemen, and principal burroughs
c; the realine, who fiall have, as Mir. Randolph beareth us in
and, the queen's majelty your sovereign's allowance and pro-
tettion; the other hath in it fotne most principall of the nobility,
lid therewithall, good numbers of the inferior fort, throughout
!'e whole realm, which also look assuredly that all kings do al-
!.w their quarrel and wvll aid them accordingly. W hat confe-
e'ence this division will draw a:'ter it, I leave it to vour iord-
;''p's consideration; there is fallen out another dlisiiun, acce-
rentally, by imy lord regent's death, which is like to change
he Ilate of the other two t1actions, to increase the one, and di-
inilh the other, which is grounded upon the regiment of the
rtm. Some number of noblemen aspire to the gvernminent,
?:etending right thereto bv reafin ot the qucen's demitlion of
'e croun, and her comnmiflion granted at that tnie for the re-
g'aent during theking's minorii s ; another faction doth altoge-

ther

212

tre repine aganft that divifinn, thinking it neither fit nor t
lerahie. that three or tour of the meanest fort among the ear'n
ihall prelilme to ch'llenge to themselves a rule over the whns0
realme. the next of the blood, the fnrf in rank, the gr,:atefla.
Wxav both for the antientrv of their houses, degree, a.-d forcs
he ng ne!eci.:ed ; :h; order ther think prep3!terous, that tbi
rn:-ner fort iball he placed in puhlick funtion to command, a;
tee greater iliail continue as private men to obey besides tnat
they think if the chmniihion had in the beginning heen va!ca
able, (which the nmc { part wvii! not grant) vet can it not bee
tended to the prcient, for that the conditions thereunto annexe
are ceased, and so the efle-Ct of the whole void; tile latter p
of this division hath mans' pretences, for beides the queen'sa
tion, which is wholly on that fide, a great number of thelet
have heretofore professed the king's obedience, do favour ^
fame. and will not vield to the government of the other, who
pree,-rnie-r for refptdct t!he- millike, when the queen's fadti
shaH be ;icreated, with a part of the king's, and these no! o
least fubtarnce, and vow may iudge what is like to infue; an
other incident is like to move men to enter in further difcour!fc
it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's majesty is fettin
forth some forces towards the border, which fliall enter th
realm, to countenance there, that aspire to the regiment, an
fuppref the contrary faction, and bruts are spread, that the faa|
shall be here out of hand ; these that think themselves ofequa
force with their contrary fPaion at home, or rather an over
match to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of an
other prince, rather than yield to their inferors, will, Ifear
take advie of necelirv, and evil councillors, and seek also th
rr.interance of floe toreign prince, whereby her majefti (alt
no frrther inconvenient were to he feared) must be drivent
exceli ve charges, and it would appear there were a confpirac
of '.! the elemerres at one time to set us together by the ears,

vnw when the rumour of ovur forces coming towards the orde

is spread ahrr ad. e' en at the ta.me time is arrived at Dumbarton
a gaizcon x Iilh a mtef' nger sent c-prefly from the king of France
to that part of the nohiiitv, that favours the queen, to lear
the tfate of the countr, and what support they lack or desire
either ;or furtherarce rs her afnirs, or for their own safety; al
fured'v thi. mern-fe will he .-e'l received, and suffered accord'
in's:-. ti,; ic:sht ,relent state of Scotland. Now if your lorli
f :p wo.L d als

1 novw my ,iininon, how to choice the belt,

'e cafe -d l-t'. I "i i n that alfl fatisfv your lordfbip ; Ial
r-.r·: *..:!: *F:r.: ro ita. p!a'.n!v. and y-ur lordship ll all il:!
v:i:hr I n

rr nI t; t;:r I thin- it plain dealing. when Ifi.

p,' ltter nI 11 . -r!n. a-d go. not about to disguise my inE
tentr. I Iru't lt i-:' 1 -n' ma icfr hath a desire to retain at her
dL-v.ion the re hl JofScutiand, whicli ille lath gone about to;

pu;-

,,rchale, with betnowing great charges, and the loss of some
' ler people; this desire is honourable for her highness, pro-
i;4h lor both the countrys, and of none to be dilallowed; Ipe-
i,. iv if it be (as I take it) to have the anlitv of the whole realm,

Siti is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it

.!ic- cenmmodious for her to suit the triendl;lip of a faction of
I;:i:.:d, for in so doing, in gaining the belt, ilie may lose the
r::, and the fame would bl ing all her acions with us in sus

i sn, iflhe flould go about to nourifl factions amongst us.
;ii:ch meaning I am lure never entered into her majesty's
nart; then it it be the friendflip of the whole she doth de-
sir.d, let her not, for pleasure of one part, go about to over-
lrI' the remnant, which will not be io faifable, as foine may
13 eher to understand; but rather, by way of Ireaty, let her
,about to pacify the whole state, bring the parties to an ac-
e:., reduce us all by good means to an uniformlity, so liall lhe
i*e us all occaflon to think well of her doings, that hle tend-
[,i our wealth, and provoke us universally to wilh unto her
"iefty a mofr prolperous continuance; by the contrary, if for

pleasure of a few, fle will fend forces to suppress there
oii: they mislike, and so consequently offend many; men be
:ti foaint-hearted, but they have courage to provide for their
n:,,,ifery, and not only will embrace the nmeans partly offered,
ti! .ill also procure further, at the hand of other princes.
ini tor mine own part, I do abhor, and protest I desire never
;lee forces of firangers to set foot within this land, yet I know
ate.what point neceflity may drive men into, as if mien in the
cd!e of the sea were in a flip, which suddenly Ihould be set
i:.e, the fear of burning would make them to leap into the
a. and soon after the fear of the water would drive them to

'e.e again to the fired fliip, so for avoiding present evil, men

nmany timres be inforced to have recourse to another no less
ge rous. 'rust me forces will not bring forth any good
t to her majesty's behove, it must be loine way of treaty
! serve the turn, wherein by my former letters your lordflip
:;tknow already what is my judgement; you fee how plainly
0 write, without consideration in what Dart lmy letters may
isken, vet my hope is that such as will favourably interpret

fl, liall think that I mean as well to her miajefty, and that

We, as these that will utter other language. 1 wifl the
[inualnce ofthe amity betwixt the two contrys, without other
cptt, and will not conceal from her majeftv any thing to my
k".!kge, tending to the prejudice thercof; it I llall perceave
:: ielly taking frank dealings in evil part, I liall front
*rc.tcrth forb.-arl in the minan Icafon f will not cease to
.lie your lordlhip, as I liall have occaii.on to write, and la
le nily leave of your lordlihip.

No. IH

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 9.)

A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks, July zd, I 5-.

C2a!erw. D I G HT trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you well

i-. 5. His- R,, this 'av we have received your letters of 28 the lafEmonlrh
tor ., \. .A.- ith all other letters, sent from Scotland, and mentionedinroui
p. i g9. letter;, whereunto anlifer is dcfired to he given before the tenthl

of this month; which is a very short time, the weightiness of
the n-atters, and the distance of the places confidered ; nerer.
thelefs we have, as the fhortnes could susser it, refclved to §i'
this anif.-er following, which we vwil, that yow, by warran,
hereof, ihall cause to be given in our name to the earl ofLenc:
and the reft of the noblemen conveened with him. Where i!i
bv them, in their letters, and writings alledged, that forlacko
cur resolute answer, concerning the establishing of the regimen
of the realm under their young king, great inconveniences havs
haspned, and therefore they have deferred now at theirlaft on
veinticn to determine of the famine, who fliall have the placeo
governour, until the 21ft this month, before which tLuethe
require to have our advise, in what person or persons the gover-
ment of that realm ihall be efeablihed, we accept very thankfu
the goodw il and reputation they have of us, in yielding
frankly to require and follow our advise in a matter, that touch
eth the state of their king, their selves, and realm so near
wherein as we perceive, that by our former forbearing to inter
meddle therein, they have taken some discomfort, as thoughtha

w.e would not have regard to their state and fuerty, so on th

other parr, they of their wisdoms ought to think, that it ntigh
be by the whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them
form of government, or a governour by name, for that howli
ever we liould mean well if we flould do so, yet it could not b
without feme jealoufv in the heads of the ellate, nobility, an
community of that realm, that the government thereof fhoul
be by me specially named, and ordain'd; so as finding dificult
on both parts, and vet mifliking moit that they lhould take an
ditcomfort by our forbearing to lhaw our mind therein, we har
thought in ths fort for to proceed, confidering with ourfelrC.
how now that realm had been a good 1pace of time ruled in the
name of their king, and by reaton of his base age, governed
heretofore by a very careful and honourable person, the earle o
Murray; unti;i that by a mischievous person, (an evil exanple
he was murdered, whereby great disorder and confufiono
necellitv had, and will more tollow, if deternination be r.s
made of some other fpeciall person, or persons, to take the char
of governor, or superior ruler fpeciall, for administration io

it: ?.d jultice, we cannot but very well allow the desire ofthefe
i' to have fomle fpeciall governour to be chosen; and there-
c~rebeing well alfured, that their own understanding ofall others
;belt to confider the state of that realm, and to dilcern the abi-
i:ji and qualities of every perfonl meet and capable for such a
Cire, we flall better fatisfie ourselves, whlom they by their
:oa1non consent ifall firit choose, and appoint'to that purpose,
i'en of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named, and that
;caule they fiall perceave that we have care of the person of
tier king, who by nearness of blood, and in reipeft of his so
.;ung rears, ought to be very tender and dear to us, we lhall
,t hide our opinion fionl them, but if they fliall all accord to
els:e iis grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be go-
rernor alone, or jointly with others, (whom we hear to be in
*i mean time by their comnimon content appointed lieutenant-
:neral) reason moveth us to think that none can be chosen in
ait whole realm, that shall more tefire the preservation of the
;, and be more meet to have the government for his safety,
e:ng next to him in blood of any nobleman of that realm, or
efewhiere; and yet, hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to
ill this choice, except they shall of theilfelves fully and free-
-:lov,; thereof; furthermore we would have them well aflured,
alt whatsoever reports of devifl's, are, or !hall be spread or
;ented, that awe have already yielded our tind to alter the
re of the king or goverlnment of that realm, the fame arewith-
cntcaufe or ground by us given, foras we have already adver-
ted them, that although we have yielded to hear, which in ho-
'r we could not refuse, what the queen of Scots on her part
!ll lay and offer, not only for ler own asSurance, but for the
ealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be,
l lhall be offered, we mean not to break the order o! law anl
r.ice, by advancing her cause, or prijudging her contrary, be-
irewe flall deliberately and affured!y fee, upon the hearing
:Fthe whole, some place necessary, and jull cause to do; anl
t:efore finding that realm ruled hy aking, and the fame affirmed
i:'iats of that realm, and thereof invelded by coronation and
A;her folemnities used and requisite and gener:illy lb received hb

s: whole estates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the coin-
;ants or informations of the queen against her son, to do anll
::rhereby to make conclu.~ion of governments, but as wve have
':and it, so to fiuffer the lame to continue, yea not to fufier it I>
xaltered by any nceans that we mav impeilee, as to our hon,-r
:cli belong, as by your late actions hath mani:cf'tv appeared,
*.'h bC ome j utice..tnd clearcau te, we fliall c directl induced
L:erwife to declare our opinion ; and this we wouid have theim to
a: ,to be our determination and courle that we mean to hold.

*'ereon we trull they for their king may fee lhov: plainlT lInd
',,ntLit y we Illean to proceed, n"J h!u.; lttle- calmb thes hlve

337

to doubt of us, whatsoever to the contrary they have or fll$
hear; and on the other part, v.e pray them of their wifdorns to
think h.' unhoncurable, and contrary to all human orderii
.-ere -or us. v.-hen the queen of Scotland doth so many wa.
require to hear her cause, and doth offer to be ordered byusij
the tfn:e. as well tor matters betwixt outfelves and her, as bet
twixt herecif and her Ion and his party of that realm, agaicf
nwhich oiffrs no rcafon could move us to refuse to give ear, thae
v.we ihould aforehand openly and directly, before the causes be
hc-ald and coniidered, as it were, give a judgment or fentenrc
eihher for ourfr!es or for them, whonm he maketh to beh
contraries. Finally ye ih.all admonilli them, that they doo
Iv mifconcei-ing our good meaning tcw-ard them, or by indiret
aifer'ions of their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder o
weaken their own cause, in such fort, that our good nmeanini
towards them sh2all not take tuch erTect tovards tiem as theyl
fliail desire, or themfcives have need of. All this our anfwet
ye ilaii cauf e be gien thnm, and let them know, that for thi
firtr.ei's of time, this being the end of the second of this monlhs
we neither could make any longer declaration of our mind, nor
yet write any- lveral letters, as if time might have fervedwI
would have done. 2 July, 1570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. to.)

The bilhop of Rols to Secretary Lidington from Chattfworti

rith Tune HA V E received your letters dated the 26th of May, he
1 -o. 1 at Chattifworth, the loth of January, but on the recei

thereof I had written to you at length, like as the queen id
withrny icrd Le ingfton, by the which you will be resolved o
rman% points contained in your said letter. Iwrit to you that
received vour letter and credit fromThos Cowy at London, an
fcr.t to Leicefer to know the queen of England's nind whethe
if vou Ihculd come here or not. He sent me word, that flaewl
nor wavs have you cone as one of the commiflioners, becaua

rie i et cit fended e ith you ; and therefore it appears good tha
ve cr.ne not hither, but remain where you are, to use 'cu
;.'ic,!om and d:!iience, as nav betr advance the queen's affairs
fc r I perceive your weili and safety depends thereon, in refpeC
cf the reat reid and ennimitv born againff you by your Scotspeo
r '.. nr- hegreat heirilip taken ofyour father's landis ; bothwere
iu- c

d orf-rations of their malice. Yetlam encouragedbyyou

1 n 2iaj cideberate mind. Allure vourfelf no diligence fhallbe,
oni,:c.d. tn r ocure lupports forth off all parts where it maybe
had. \\ c ll not refuse the aid neither of Papill. Jew, nrl
Gn.lr:, a 'er n;r ad:-;ce; and to thi.end, during this treaty, let
al '.h s bc vA'el prerared. And fIeing my lord Seaton is ue

firoi.

.rous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very necessary

l!,ia he so do, for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command
cithe king of Spain to give support, and I am sure that there
lie flall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it abides
onlr on the coming of some men of countenance, to procure and
receive the fame. He must needs tarry there, on the prepara-
lions thereof, during this treaty, which will be a great fur-
Ihelance to the fame here. The queen has already written to
the Duke D'Alva for this effec, advertizing of his coming;
there is certain fums of money coming for support of the Eng-
lilhmen, as I wrote to you before, from the pope. Whereupon
I would he had a general commission to deal for them, and re-
crive such fums as shall be given. The means shall be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the fums you writ for, to be difpo-
nit upon the furnishing of the cattle of Edenburgh, so being
islle honest and true man were sent to Slanders to receive it,
as l:sid is, which I would you prepared and sent. Orders shall
be taken, for the metals as you writ of. We have proponit your
erce in entring to treat with the queen of England, for retiring
ofher forces puntyoallyfor lack of aid. Your answers to the
Laglillhmen are tho't very good, but above all keep you weil
out of their hands, in that cafe, eftote prudentes ficut serpentes.
nYu may take experience with the hard dealing with me, how
re would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of
ianger, being in medio nationis prava; alway no fear, with
God's grace, fliall make me lirink from her majesty's service.
Since the queen of England has refused that you come here, it
tepears to me quod nondum eft fedata malitia amorreorum, &c.
ond therefore if Athol or Cathenes might by any means be pro-
cured to come, they were the most fit for the purpose, Rothes
were also meet, if he and I were not both of one firname; so
!he treaty would get the less credit either in Scotland or here.
ThereFore avvs, and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail
r.t Robert IVlelvil come with them, whoever comes, for so is
lfe queen's pleasure; in my last packet with James Fogo, to
lou, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the queen's
own hand writing to him, which I trust ye received. I am for-
r. ve come not for the great relief I hoped to have had by your
pretence, for you could well have handled the queen of Eng-
land, after her humour, as you were wont to do. The reft I
rf.r to your good wisdom, praying God to fend you health.
Frol Chattifworth the 1 5th of January.

No. IV.

\-
\(,1. II

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 27.)
The Declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grange and Le. '

thingron zoungare upon the 8th day of Oct. 1571.
W 7 HE RE A S you desire to know the queen's majefts

pleaiure, what nfe will do for appeasing of these con.'

troverfies, and therewith has offered yourselves to be at her
(.ormandment, touching the common tranquillity of the whole|
isle, and the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this be.-
half, that re ihould leave off the maintenance of this civil dif-
cord, and give your obedience to the kilg, whonm he will'
maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and them

king's party, to receive you into favour, upon reasonable con.-
dirions for fecnrity of life and livings.

A. so she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she hasS

pracifed with the pcpe and other princes, and also with her|
own fubjeEs in England, great and dangerous treasons againflr
the state of her own country, and also to the deftrudion of her
own person, that the shall never bear authority, nor have li-h
berty while he lives.

Ir ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you, fhel

will prefentlv aid the king's party, with men, ammunition, and_
all neceffarv things to be had against you.

WH ERt E UPO hermajefty requires your anfwerwith speed,!
without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 35.)
Articles sent by Knox to the general Assembly, Auguftsth.l

1572.

Calderw. I R ST, desiring a new ac to be made ratifying all thirgsg
MS. His- F concerning the king and his obedience that were enacted
torr. Vol.of before without any change, and that the ministers whohavel
2. 356. contraveend the former acs be corrected as accordeth.

TH .T fute be made to the Regent's grace and nobility main-ta

taining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceedeth in thi5M
treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be not prejudg'd there-m
by, in any fort, and they ftecialls of the ministers, that hase,
been robbed of their poffelTions within the kirk during the tin:ej
of the troubles, or otherwise dung and injured, may be restored.!:

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bilhoprick or otherA

benefice be given to any person, contrary to the tenor of thel
acd made in the time of the hrlt regent of good memory, and-
thev that are given conirar the said acs, or to any unqualihedl
person, may be revoked and made null b. an act of 1ccri;c

courc !,

council, and that all biliopricks so vacand may be presented,
and qualified persons nominat thereunto, within a year after the
taking thereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the
tornmiffioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of Ja-
nuar lass, and in special to complain upon the giving of bilhop-
rick of Ross to the lord Melthven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, great or finall, be given be
tmple donation of any lord regent, without consent of the pof-
ellor of the said benefices having tittle thereto, and the ad-
.i!lion of the superintendent or coinmiffioners of the province
where this benefice lyeth, or of the bishops lawfully elected ac-
cording to the laid order taken at Leith; and desire an act of
council to be made thereupon, until the next parliament,
wherein the famine may be specially inaced, with inhibition to
the lords of session to give any letters or decreets, upon such
limple gifts of benefices or pentions not being given in manner
above reherfed, and that the kirk presently affenibled declare
a!l such gifts null so far as lyeth in their power.

THAT the first form ofprefentation to benefices, which were
i the firit and second regent's time be not changed as now it is
commonly; but that this clause be contained in the presentation,
that if the persons presented make not residence, or be flandrous
orfound unworthy either in life or docrine be the judgment of
the kirk, (to which alwife he shall be subjef) or meet to be
traniported to another room at the fight of the kirk, the said
presentation and all that shall fall thereon shall be null and of
no force nor effecs; and this to have place also in the nomination
of the bishops.

TH A T an act be made in this assembly that all things done in
prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third, either be papists
or others, by giving of fews, liferents, or taks, or any other-
wile difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null with a
iolemn protestation the whole kirkdifafenteth thereto.
THAT an act be made decerning and ordaining all bishops,
idmitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give account
of their whole rents, and intromiflions therewith once in the
rear, as the kirk flall appoint, for such causes as the kirk inay
efiiv confider the fame to be molt expedient and necefTar.
A cE N T the jurifdidtion of the kirk, that the fame be deter-
ained in this assembly, because this article hath been long pofl-
poned to make fute to the regent and council for remedy against
aelTengers and excommunicate persons.
LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk,
who procure againit ministers and ministry, and for futting of
ulrice of the kirk's actions in the session.

No. Vt.
Y z

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 40.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace con.

cluded the z3d Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, by these presents, that I Henry Killi.
grew, Efq; ambassador for the queen'smajeftyofEngland,l

F' orafinuch as. at the earnest motion and solicitation being madej
to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord and pacificationl
of the public troubles and civil war within this rerlm of Scot.
l-rd agreed and concluded, and the fame favourably exter-d
touards theright hcneorable George earl of Huntly, lord Gor-
don ard EPaidzench, and the lord John Hamilton, son to the
dukt' Grace of Chaftel!arault, and commendatour of the abbhy
of Abirbrothock, for the surety of the lives, livings, honours,
and gocds of them. their kinfolks, friends, servants, and parna.
kers, now, prcperi depending on them; in treating ofthewhirch
!iid pacification, the murders of the late earl of Murray ur cle
ard the earl of Levenax grandfather, late regent to the king's
masjefv of Scotland his realm and lieges, as also an article touch.-
ing the discharge for the fracis or moveable goods, which tbhe
said p-rfcnrs have taken fra perfonis profefling the king's obedi.
ence, or for the damages done or committed by them, since the
i t h dav of lunii, 1567, and before the penult day of July lall
bv palsed, bv reason of the common cause or any thingdepend.-
ing thereupon, being thought by the king's commilaries mnatte-.
ris offuch wecht and importance, as the king's present regent
could not conveniently of himself, remit or discharge the famet
Yet in refpecR of the necessity of the present pacification, at
for the w-eil of the king, and common quietness of this realmn nd
lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of reniflion of the laii
murderers, and of the discharge of the laid fruAtis, moveable
goods, and other damages, moved bv the persons desiring th-
said remifTions and discharge to the queen's ma efty my obvereig[
as to the princess nearest both in blood and habitation to the
king of Scots. And whatsoever her majesty ihall advifeand
c-uncel touching the said remiflion and discharge, the said lorn
regent, for the weil of the king and universal quietness of the
realm of Scot!and, shall perform, observe, and fullfil the fanme,
And in likewise, the said earl Huntly, and comnnendatourot h,
Abirkrothock, beingurged to have delivered pledgesand hostage
for obfirvation of the conditions of the said accord and pacifica
tion, hath required me in place thereof in her majesty's na.e,
by virtue of mv commiflion, to promise for them that thc
:rall truly and faithfully observe and keep the said pacifcaticn
and aill articles and conditions thereof, for their parts, ant
that it would please her majesty to interpose herself, as furet1
and cau,;oner for them to that effect, to the king's maicte J

Scotlanli

343

Scrtland their sovereign and his said regent, which I havedone,
a!dproniile to do, by virtue of his majefty'sconmifiion, as by the
Losoturable and plain dealing of the said earl and loid, their
intentJn to peace well appears, the fame being inoft agreeable
to the mind of the queen's majesty my sovereign. which so long
br her nminilters hath travelled for the said pacification, and in
ite end, at her motion and solicitation, the fame is accorded,
nsowing her majefty'sdefire, that the fame may continue un-
riclate, and that the noblemen and others now returning to the
iing's obedience shall have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
h ,nr, urs and goods. Therefore in her majesty's name, and by
ritile of my commilion, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
ind comninerdator ot Abirbrothock, that by her majefly's good
reanis, the said remilfion and.difcharge shall be purcihaled and
obtained to them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and parta-
ier', now properly depen.ling upon them, (theperfons specified
the firli abftinance always excepted) as also that the liid
pacification fliall be truly observed to them, and that her ma-
ieftr fiall interpose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endea-
;iujr herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in
I!points and articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof,
I'iae to this present subscribcd with my hand, and fealed the
:ilie with mine own feal the j3th day of FeblY, An;o Domini
i1-z. And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date
hereof, and the parliament which flall be appoint:d for theic
refiitution, or at the furthest ;before the end of the said parlia-
:ent. Sic fublcribitur.
The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of

Scotland's Dowry.
T HE queen of Scotland, Dowager ofFrance, had for her 1 "6

doswry, befidesotherpoffeffions, thedukedomofTurene, Ct lib.

rhich was foiemnly contraAed and given to her by the king and Calig. B.-
tldaes of parliament; which dukedom fie poiTefled peaceably
tili I 6, and then, upon the pacification beutwixt the king and
ilorl his brother, to augment whose appenage this dutchy
sao given, to which the queen of Scotland yielded upon account
f princes who were her near relations, provided the cquivalent
enchwas promnied her lihonld be faithfully performied. So that
wear, after a great many follicitations, in liu of that dutchy,
]ie had granted her the county of Vermiau deife with the lantds
ind bailiwicks of Seuley and Vetry; tho' 'tis known that countv,
ind the other lands were not of equal value with Turene, btit
.as promised to have an addition of lands in the neiglhbourhl-c
'an equal value. Upon this letters paten' -.:, .re granted, which
v're confirmed in the courtsofparli, :nent ,::ai b:r ofaccn i;s;
[Geur of aids, chamber of the treasury. -r.d others ncceifarv

wpa, which she entered into poffcllion of;.: t couintv . . A.-
rr'ards, bya valuation of the coinrii.: Lr,.i o,' ti: cr:-

Y ; r

No. V1. (Vol. II. p. 40.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efqi upon the peace con.

cluded the z3d Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, bv there presents, that I Henry Killi.
grew, Efq; ambassador for the queen's majesty of England.

F oralinuch as. at the earnest motion and solicitation beingmade
to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord and pacification
of the public troubles and civil war within this realm of Scot-
l.-.d agreed and concluded, and the fame favourably exterded
tou aris t he rght honourable Georgeearl of Huntly, lord Gxr-
don arri Eaidzenoch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to the
dukt'E Grace or Chaftellarault, and comnmendatour of the abby
of Abirhrothock, for the furetv of the lives, livings, honourt,
and goods of them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and para.
kers. now prcperiv depending on them; in treating of the which
!iid pacification, the murders of the late earl of Murray uncle,l
and the earl of Levenax grandfather, late regent to the kings
majestv of Scotland his realm and lieges, as also an article touch.
ing the discharge for the frucris or moveable goods, which the
said persons have taken fra perfonis profefling the king's obedi-
ence. or for the damages done or committed by them, since the
i th day of lunii, i 567, and before the penult day of July lal
bv paired, by reason of the common cause or any thingdepend-
ing thereupon, being thought by the king's commilaries matte-l
ris offuch wecht and importance, as the king's present regetis
could not conveniently of himself, remit or discharge the fane.
Yet in respect of the neceflity of the present pacification, and
for the weil of the king, and common quietness of this realm and
lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of remifflon of the laidl
murderers, and of the discharge of the said fruAis, moveable
good, and other damages, moved by the persons desiring the
said remi!Tions and discharge to the queen's majesty my lovereign,
as to the princeis nearest both in blood and habitation to the
king of Scots. And whatsoever her majesty Ihall advifeand
c3urcel touching the said remiflion and discharge, the said lord
regent, for the well of the king and universal quietness of the
realm of cot!ar.d, shall perform, observe, and fullhil the fanle.
And in likewise, the said earl Huntly, and commendatouroi the
Ab:rrrothock, being urged to have delivered pledgesand hostages
for observation of the conditions of the said accord and paciica-j
tion, hath required me in place thereof in her majesty's namne,
by virtue of mv commimfion, to promise for them that thty
t'hall truly and faithfully observe and keep the said pacihicaticn,
2nd all articles and conditions thereof, for their parts, and
tiar it v.ould please her majesty to interpole herself, as fure!v
and cautloner tor them to that effeca, to the king's majicltv ;

Scotland

343

Sc.tland their sovereign and his said regent, which I have done,
ansi proniiie to do, by virtue ofhis majety's commiflion, as by the
honourable and plain dealing of the said earl and lold, their
intention to peace well appears, the fame being molt agreeable
to he mind of the queen's majesty my sovereign, which so long
by her minilters hath travelled for the said pacification, and in
the end, at her motion and solicitation, the fame is accorded,
knowing her majefty'sdefire, that the fame may continue un-
riclate, and that the noblemen and others now returning to the
iin's obedience shall have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
hbnours and goods. Therefore in her majesty's name,' and by
vi. le of my commission, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
a1d cimniendator ot Abirbrothock, that by her majesty's good
leans, the said remission and.difcharge shall be purchaled and
cbtained to them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and parta-
ikrs, now properly depen.l;ng upon thenr, (thcperfons 1fpecilied
i the firl} abftinance always excepted) as allo that the ilid
paciication fiall be truly observed to them, and that her ma-
les' fliall interpose herself as confervatrix thereol, and endea-
vur herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in
a! points and articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof,
Ihave to this present subscribed with my hand, and fealed the
a.ie with mine own feal the 13th day of Feb-y, Ai;;o Donfini
1;-2. And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date
hereof, and the parliament which shall be appointed for their
reliitution, or at the furthest before the end of the said parlia-
:nent. Sic fubfcribitur.
Ths bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of

Scotland's Dowry.
T HE queen of Scotland, Dowager ofFrance, had for her 1-56

dowry, besides other poffefions, thedukedomofTurene, Coit l ib

which was foiemnly contracted-and given to her by the king and Calig. B..
ella:es of parliament; which dukedom ille poiTeffed peaceably
ti'i I -6, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and
Monki his brother, to augment whose appenage this dutchy
war given, to which the queen of Scotland yielded upon account
ot rilnes vho were her near relations, provided the cquiva!lint
i.'lch was promi;ed her fholld be faithfully pe-,rforiled. So that
vear, after a great many lollicitations, il lieu of that dutchy,
Jie had granted her the county of Vermau:deife with the lan;ds
and bailiwicksf Seulev and Vetry ; tho' 'tis known that cnunlv,
and the other lands were not of equal value with Turene, but
was promired to have an addition of lands in the neighbourliecd
'oan equal value. Upon this letters paten'. ::,re gra!ted, which
'ere confirmed in the courts of parliament ,-::arillibr ofaccnnln;s;
ccurt of aids, chamber of the trcafury, .r.d others necclftav
,po"n which fle entered into poffllion ot: it countv, &c..

& fe
r'rw-ards, by a valuation of the com:nri;:i.. .s ' or r: ch.

Y o r

her ofaccompts, it was found, that the revenue of that count,
&c did not amount to those of Turene hv 3000 livres. Bit
irftead of making up this deficiency according to justice, some
of the privv council. viz. M. de Cheverny,theprefidents ofBellie.
vre, Nicocholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of the king, not.
wihftanding of her aforesaid loftes, did fell and alienate the lands
of Snrlis, and the duchy of Eftampes, to Madam de Monpenfier,
from whom the king received money; of which sale the coun.
cellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guarantees, which
hath hindred the aforesaid queen to have justice done her. So
that Madam de Monpenfier hath been put in poffefiion of these
ands of S&nlis. contrary to all the declaration, protestation, and
alTurances of the king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors.
S. that the Queen of Scotland is difpoffeffcd of her dowry, con-
*.'ry to all equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 44.)

A letter from the lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

:d ?C rch T wiil p!ease your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and(
rc', .- has confidered the fame. The parson of Camsey was here
E. ui.l r- at re before the receit thereof, directed fra my lord of Mar,s
t-' s Ar- and the master anent my laftwritten, which was the anfwerofi
chiv es the writing that the master sent to me, which I fend to yourr
Bund . .grace, desiring me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I
No. 19- had given mv answ-er belore the receit of your grace's letter,

tht: I behuiffit to be besvd Sant Ar.drois, at ane friends trvfit,
which I might not omir , I understand by my said cousin, that
the king's maje'ty is to write to divers of the nobility, to comer
tlchre, anent your iordfilip's trial, and that he had written beforel
his departing to my lI'rd Ionthrois. Iunderiland, likewise, he
wiil write to your grace to come there for the fame effect, whichh
I tho't gocd to mat:e your grace foreseen of the fame, prayingi
your grace for the love of God almighty, to look upon thebeft,E
and not to leep in security, but to turn you with unfeignedP
heart to God, and to confider with yourfiit, that when the king's
m.rieity was very young. God made him the instrument to diveftl
his mo.her from her authoritv, who vas natural princess, forl
oiending of hist'ivine majetflv and that there ran no vice inher,
hut that the fame is as iargely in you, except to that your grace'
cor.dcficer.ced not to the deflrution of your wife. For as tan
h-riotry and am.bition, I think your grace has as far offendedi
God, and far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God nevers
l-ft u:-p'agucd, except speedy repentance, which I pray Godj
rrart to your grace, for otherwise your grace can never havei
the love of God nor man. I prav your grace flatter not your-j
self, for if ycur grace believes that ye have the good will od
then that ate the king's good willers ye deceive yourself; for,

fure!sr

surely I fee perfecly that your own particulars are not content-
ed, lat by the reft, and that most principally for your hard
dealing. I pray your grace, heir with me that I am thus ham-
ie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very
atfection of my heart towards your grace, which has continued
lince we were acquainted. And now I fee, because the mat-
tel laands in your grace's handling with the king's majesty, for
certainly, if your grace fall forth with him now, I fee not how
re ihall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to call to God, and
i-k on the belt, and cast from your grace both your vices, to
wit, ambition and avaritio fnefs. I am riding this day to Sanat
Androis, and trust to return on Wednesday at the farthest. If
your grace will command me in any offices that are honell, that
Inmay do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise of your
grace's mind, and /hall do to my power and knowledge, and
this with my heartlie, &c. &c.

To our trusty couIin the lord Lochleven.

T RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commendations, Fron the
I we received your letter of the 3d of March, and as wce Original.
take your plainness therein in good part, as proceeding from a E. ot Mor-
Iriend and kinsman, in whose good affe&ion toward us we never ton's Ar-
doubted, so ye may not think it strange that we purge ourfelfchieves,
so far of your accusation, as in conscience we find not ourself to Bund. B.
have otffimled in. As touching our offence to God, we intend No. 31.
not to exciie it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition
surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in our private
ellate we Could, and can live as well contented, as any of our
degree in Scotland, without further aspiring. The hearing to
thc charge of the government of the realm, indeed, mon lead
us, or any other that fliall occupy that place, not limply to re-
fpet ourself, but his majesty's rowme which we supply, and
taerein not transcending the bounds of measure, as, we trust,
it Ihall not be found we have done, it ought not to be attribut-
edi to any ambition in us. For as soon as ever his majelty ihall
think iiiltfelf ready and able for his own government, none shall
morc willingly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think
nert r to Bet my face against him, whose honour, safety and pre-
lervation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never believe to
ind otherwise at his hand than favour, althoughall the unfriends
I have in the earth were about him, to persuade him to the
contrary. As we write unto you, our friendly dealing and
confidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit, as we
trust yourself confiders i but because the ambassadors of Eng-
land, my lord of Angus, the chancellor, treasurer, and Ionic
noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we pray you
heartily address yourself to be there :,s soon as you can, and as
ye Ihall find the likelihecd of all thing<, let us be advertized

Y 4 therca;

thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr Hay, whom we have
tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from Sterling
rides to Douglas. And so we commit you in the protection of
God. At Hoiyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, 1577.

FOR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies not

in us so liberallvtodeal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers,
nor never shall any sovereign and native born prince, let be any
officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them judges to
their own reward; in many causes I doubt not to find the aflift.
ance of my friends, but where my actions shall appear unhonel},
I will not crave their assistance, but let me bear my own burden.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 82,)
The coppy of the king of France his direcions sent to Scotland

with Seineur de la Motte Fenelon. Tranfated out of ti.e
French.

Ca!derw. F IRST, on their majefrts most christian part, he (hall
M. S His- F make the most honourable salutation and visiting to the
tory, Volmooft serene king of Scotland, their good brother and little son,

p. . 208. that in him is poffable.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such like

as they have written to him with their hands, and to ihow ex-
prefly the perfect friendship and singular affetion, that their
maefrrys bear to him, and to bring back the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the most fe-

rene king. to the effect that his person may be in no danger,
but that it may be most surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindred in the honet liberty that he

ought to have, and that no greater, or straiter guards be about
him than he had before.

ANoD such like, that he be not impeached in the authority,

that Ged hath given to him of king and prince sovereign above
his fubiefts, to the effect he may as freely ordain and command
in his affairs, and in the affairs of his country, with his ordinary
council, as he was used to do of before.

TH.AT his nobility, barons and commonality of his country

mav have their free liberty to resort to his serene majesty, with-
out suspicion of greater guards or more armed men about his
person than the use was, that they be not affraid and hindered
to resort; and further that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall
liberally and freely speak to the said serene king and council, re-
quiring the re-eftabliihingof that that may or hath been changed
or altered.

A N D that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and
other men of good behaviour of the towns and commonality of

the

the contry conveens, and are content with the form of govern-
nlent presently with the said serene king, to the end that if
theilr be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together,
:j that he return not without the certainty of the famine.
AXD if he may understand that there be any who have not
tied them so reverently towards the faij serene king their fove-
c;ign lord, as the duty of their obedience required, that he may
itar on this behalf of his majesty nmoft christian the said serene
ina his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the
ilnle, and exhorting them to do their duty towards his majesty,
.: time coming, in all refpets with the obedience and true sub-
icnion they ought him.
AKxD if the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceives the said fe-
;ne king to be in any manner constrained of his person, autho-
vi, liberty, and disposition of his affairs, than he used to be, and
?! convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty of a
fincedoes require, that he use all moyen lawful and honest to
D.ace him in the famine, and that he imploy as much as the
credit of his most christian majesty may do toward the nobility,
:d iubjets of that contry, and as much as may his name, with
ie name of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which
e loves and confides in as much as they were proper French-
Men.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his estates,
fhis consent, and to all the nobility and principall personages
0the contry, that his most Christian majetlie will continue on
part the most ancient alliance and confedracy, which he hath
id with the said serene king his good brother, praying his
ability and contry, with his principall fubjeas, to persevere
ithe famine, in all good understanding and friendship with
un; the which, on his part, he shall do, observing the
anine most inviolable.
IruRTNER his most christian majesty understanding that the
ene king his good brother was contented with the Duke of
nox, and his fervife, the said figneur De la Motte had charg-
itO pray his serene majesty that he might remaine betide him
his conteritment, believing that he Ihould imnre willing inter-
a the points of love and confederace, betwixt their majestys
i their contrys, because he was a good subjeA to them both
if he might not remain, without fome'alteration of the
nel'lity of his estate, that he might retire him to his own
C'e in the said contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to return
France that he might surely --and if it pleases his serene
elvty, to cause cease and ifay the impeachments, that are
de of new upon the frontiers, to the etfeft that the natural
nchmen may enter as freely into the contry, as they were
sat to do of before.

A wD

And that there may be no purpose of dil'amation, nor no

speech but honourablt of the mollf Chriltian king, in that con.
try, but such like as is spoken mnoft honourably of the serene
king of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed till a

littie before his departure, tn wit, that the queen, thekinsi
mother, .was content to receive her son in association of the
kingdom.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 96.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francii \salfingham, the 14thof Augelt,

15S4, from Berwick.

SIR,

Caderw. /A CCORDING to myformerletters, touchimgmymeet!
M. S. His-..- ing with the earl of Arran upon Wednesday last, there'
tor7, Vol.came hither tome from the earle, the jultice clerk, andfiriil
3. p.- 4.iiam Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's priit

council, to treat with me about the order of our meeting, ref
ferring v.-holly to me to appoint the hour, and the.number s
should meet withal; so as w e concluced the place to be Fou!.
den, the hour to be ten o'clock, and t.e number with ourfelvo
t.` be 13 of a fide; and the retl of our troops to ftandeadh o
them a mile from the to-wn; the one on the one. fide,' theohe
on the other fide, sic as our troops were two miles asunder;
was not many herferen, but I supplied it with footmen, ,vie
I had i oo shot on horse, but they were very near 500 horse wel
appointed: According to which appointment, we met yeftl
day, and after some congratulations, the eare tell in the l
prorefiations of his good will and rradinefs to ferve.ihe queen
rihratv, before any prince in the world, next his fovereig,
_e had donr hereiore bV his letters, and rather more; wi
tuch earnest vovws, as unless he be worse than a devil, hern:
jelly may dispose of him at her plea:aure; this being ehded,
entered with him touching thecaufe I had to deal withhim, l
so near as I couid, left-nothing unrehearsed. that I had tohar
the king or hin with any ur.nkid dealing toward' hermaieft
according to riy intliuctions, which without any delay heas
fwercd prefotil, as.e lihall perceive by the said anlwers,' le
herevith ; but I reprling unto hin, he amplified thenm vi
mranii mne circumrfarces, but to this effecEl Then I dealtWitl
hin touching the point of her mrajeiry's fatisfacion, for tieu
teringt such praftices as has been lately set on foot for thi "
quieting of her nlajefty and her estate, who thereof made :r
dry discourses, what marriages have been offered to his maecl
by fundrie princes, and by swhat means the earle has fought
c-:.' . themn, and fcr v1,-.' cauts ; the one, for that bemarrit
w-ith Spain '- Fr!-- . F.- r-uf. a. alter his religion, wvhicih"
L: -; P-: i -
.i , v;. : r..;;..: ce, o will he never fufter hsl:

k:hrs

hearken unto it, so long as he has any credit with him; he de-
nvs not but the king has been dealt withal be pracices to deal
iainlf her majesty, which he has so far denied and refused to
efier into, as they have left dealing therein, but whatsoever
the king or he knoweth therein there shall be nothing hidden
from her majesty, as her majesty fliallknow very Ihortly; surely
itleems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded
ihereunto there had been no small company of French in Scot-
land ere now to disquiet her majefy. -- This being ended,
Idealt with him earnefily for the stay of this parliament, which
now approacheth; or at the least that there may be nothing
done therein, to the prejudice of there noblemen and others
aow in England, for the forfaulting of their livings and goods.
hereupon he made a long discourse to me, first of the earl of
Angus dealing about the earl of Morton, then of his going out,
Dotwithtranding of fundrie gracious offers the king had made
iim, then of the road of Ruthven, how that prelently after
ihey had the king's majesty in their hands, they imprisoned him-
self, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out of the
realm, the king refused so to do, they told him plainly that if
he would not he should have the earl of Arran's head in a dihll;
the king asked what offence the earl had made ? and they an-
(weredit mull be so, and flhould be so; hereupon for the lase-
guard of Arran's life, the king was content to fend away the
duke, and yet Arran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life;
lalledged unto him the king's letter to the queen's maijefty, and
hisacs in council, that they had done nothing but for his fervife,
nad with his good liking and contentment, who answered nme
hedurft do no otherwise, nor could not do any thing but that
which pleated them, with such a number of other their dealings
with the king whileft he was in their hands as arc too long to
be written, and too bad if they were true; 1 said the king might
hre let the queen's majesty's ambassador have known his mnind
feretly, and her majesty would have relieved hin ; he anl:er-
ed, that the king was not ignorant that the apprehension:s in
that manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's practice, and thereby
durst not impart so much to him, and yet the king was con-
tent, and did give remiflion to as many, as would acknowledge
heir faults, and as: remillion, and such as would not, he tho't
ttto banish, to try their further loyalty, in which time they
tonfpired the king's second apprehension, and the killing of the
arle, and others, and seduced the ministers to their faction,
"nd yet not fatistied with there conspiracies and treasonable
ealings, (as he terms them) are entred into a third, being in
England under her majesty's protetion, to dishonour her nia-
iatv as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king con-
elive Come unkindness inl her majesty, for harbouring of ricr ;
*'rote to yow what the confpiracv was. the ta!;incg of tho
lai, the killing of the earle of Arran, and tume oil-l.', t!.l
'king of the caltle of Edin,'. and 1rbngi;ng '!o;!r: tac carL'-, to

cni;--,

talc t-e ch'.r.e of the king; all which (fays he) is by Drumn
nord' con.eTed, and by the provoll of Glencudden not greatly
denied, ard the conrable of the caftie thereupon flel ; the earl
brought Drumn:ond with him as far as l.angton, where he lay
to have con'fef:d the confpiracv before me. but having at hi;
i:ghting. received a blow on his leg with a horse. so as he
cou!d brirg hi.r no further, I replied that I thought verilythey
wou'd not :.rr:k any such practices, in retpect of the queen;s
maiefty abi ing within her rea!me, and if there he any flc,
practices. tlhe have proceeded *frm others, and they not "r'lie
unto then, and that if it be not apparently proved agairt: them,
trat it wii5 bz thought to he some practice to aggrL': te the
fault, ard tr ma-.ke tem the more odious to the king. H, a-.
suered ,me, :*n;t it tiau!d he proved so lufficiently, that they
jliouid no; he able with truth to deny it, for their own handsis
to be ihowed to Dart of it, and therefore concluded, that if her
irm-jef'y flnoud so pr-fs the kingfor them at this time, that would
rather hincer this matter of the amity, nor further it, and tht
,iu.ce they feckchiefly his life. he could not, in any reason, lect
to do them any good; and betides he assured me, that if he
would, he dare not, this last matter being fallen out as itis;l
and furelv if this matter had not fallen out, I would not have
doubted the restoring of the earl of Marr very fiortly, if her
rnalcftv would have employed me therein, but for the earlof
Angus, I perceive the king is pcrfuaded that both he, and the
reft of the Douglafles, ha -e conceived so mortall an hatrer
aga. in;l i

h and the earl of Arran, about the death of the earl

of .Morton, as if they were at home, to morrow next, they
would ncr leave o praciice and conlpire the death of them both,
and therefore a hard matter, to do any thing for him: finallh,
he concluded and reouired me to assure her majefry front the!
king, that there fhali nothing be hid fron her, nor any thing!
left undone that ma fatisfie her maieItv with realon, and that
the king lhail never do any thing. nor consent to have any thing;
cone in her pr-ir.die, so i.hng as he had any credit with him.
crauthrcrit- unr.er him. Having thus far proceeded, hedefiredt
t- 'c-.: . rm. hi' crr: mnmion. s-hich is under the great feal, to hinl-
i!fi onr.. .:'-.i- is as large as may be, and vet fundrie of the!
priviecounce! there with him. h.ut not one in commiflion, ror;
prefcnt. ncr nearT s.'l ths ;inme ; having spent alinoft five hoursj
in these l-i. ters; he preiaented to me the nafterof Gray. whol
delivered :o rme a letter frcm the king in his commendation,l
whom I .;rcei:e the king rme-an to fend to her majcfy, and
thererore r ,;u:-e a si .e con, ucc for his pafl'ge, which I prayv
vow prccuez, ard to fe nd it so soon as you n-av. I let him un-
c(erf:and o tre lord S.cten's negociation twith the French king.
.e i'. r.r- ncr - ;.. ;h a- S-..::n ;ws hur a knave and that it ra'

ar-'!v.?n;::i ; ,i. ll. .:;i: i.c hould he font thither. But h:.
cjn;:ZLi .on d:i. tas:'ct;ron b0i1ng of no great ir.pri"' idce. he

a ;id'ne"

ielded the sooner; and if Seaton has gone beyond his inftruc-
snn, which Arran drew himself, he wilt make Seaon finart for
ii. Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he pro-
etllcd he never heard of any such; he iavs there was a little
poor foul, with a black beard, come thither a begging, who aid
he was an enemy to Definond, to whom he gave a croun, bnt
rever heard of him lince, and for any Scots man going into
hrland, he fays there is no such matter; if therc be, there may
b 1c.nle few -afkals that he knows not of; and touching the
c:,lling of any jeluits into Scotland, he fays it is but the flan-
ccrous devise of the king's enemys, and such as would have the
world believe the king were ready to revolt in religin, who
the world fliall well fee will continue as constant tilere-in, as
what prince soever professed it most; and the earle himnfelfdos
proteit to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jeiuit in
his life, and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they
llould not do so imuch harm in Scotland, as their Ilinifters would
do, if they preach such docrine as they did in Scotland; and
icuching one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to vow, I heard from
M.r. Colvil, the earle avows conflantly that he knows not, w)r
r.ath not heard of any such man, but he would enquire at the
iulince clerk, and would inform me what he could learn of that;
thus I have made yow as short a discourse as I can of so nianv
:atters, so long discoursed upon, but these are the principal
points of all our talk, io near as I can relmember, e'tld for this
tiie I commlit yow to the Almighty. At Becrwick, tle i4th
oiAuguft, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have
mT son Robert Carrie to come to him.
Ipray yow know her majelly's plealure.
Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed to the lord

Hunfdane, let down in another form.

S to the flrait and severe persecution of all fuc!, as have

hbeen noted to have been well atf'eted to the queen's nia-

ielt, it cannot appear they were either for that caule punillued.
ri ihardly dealt with, since his majeftv of late has been so cale-
l!antl oiligent to choice out good Inltruments to ileal betwixt
her Inajefly and him, as his niajetly has done in electing of your
:rdlthip and me; besides that in all their accuititions, their good
'!land affection born to her naielty was, at no tinie, laid to
!heir charge, but capital aftions of trealbn many way tried now
be the whole three eltates, and nmole than mlanifeft to the

to l Id.
As for his ma jeftv inhibiting, by publick proclanation, such
i were baniilsed, not to repair in ltnglantd; the bruits and

whli fperings

w-hisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of their conspiracies
and treasons, which since fyn they accomplished, so fax as in
them lay, moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any
place, so near his majesty's realm, left they should have attempt.
ed these things, which fhortlv they did attempt, being farther
otf, and more distant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majesty's fugi.

tives, and not delivering them according to his promire, as your
lordihip propones, his maiefty would be most glad that so it
might fall out bv your lordihipp's traviles, that no fugitive of ei-
ther realme should be received of either, and when so /hall be,
it shall not fail on his majesty's part, albeit in very deed this
time bygone his majesty has been constrained to receipt her ma-
jeltf's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall,
since her maiefty hath receipt, in effect, the whole and greatelt
rebells and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had; as
for the agreement with his maieft's mother anent their affoci.
ation, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of your lord.
fllip's servant, to assure her majesty and your lordship, in his
majesty's name, that it is altogether false, and an untruth, nor
anv such like matter done yet.

His mrajefty has also commanded me to aflure your lordihip,

that it is also falle and untrue, that his majesty has, by any
means direct or indiret, sent any meflage to the pope, or re.
ceived any from him; or that his majesty has dealt with Spain
or any foreigners, to harm her majesty or her realm, which his
rrajeftr could have no honour to do, this good intelligence tia
king place. a; I hope it ;hall.

As concerning the contemptuousufage of her majesty's mini.

s:ers. ifnr unto his :;lajelt., his majesty used none of them so;
and if his naiettv had, sufficient cause was given by them, as!
some of their ox.n .rits do yet teftiy ; as I more particularlyv
ihewed your iordihip at Foulden at our late meeting.

No X. (Vol. II. p. 109.J

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

Madam ma bonne Seur,

C.rtt. Lih. ' tfAffeurant que vos avez eu communication d' unelettre
Cl-. B. -Vl de Gray que vofire homme Semer me livra hier fub7z.e
\ 11. Fol. noln de mon filz y recongnoiffant quasi de mot les mefmes rai
, .- tons, que le dit Gray m'efcrivit en chifre eflant dernierement
\., O-i-i- pres de vous defmontrant la fuffifance & bonneintentiondu per.
r.a' t ionage je vous prieravfeulement fuivantce que si devant jevous

a- vant inr.an:enment iniportunp.quevous me permettiezdefclair.
c:r librement & ouverrement cc point del'affociation d'entren0mo
& mon fil. & me deliier les mains pour proceder avec lui comme
je jugel ay eiray rcquis pcur son bien & le mien. Et j'entreprencz

quo0

o-n que l'on vous die & puiffe en rapporter de faire nientir ce
tcit brouillon qui perluane par aucuns de vos ininiftres a entre-
rs cette separation entre moy et mon enfant, & pour v coin-
,::.ncer je vous fupplie nm'otroyer que je puiffe parler ace jutice
coirk qui vous a este nouvellement envoye pour mander par luya
n;on filz nion intention fur cela, ce queje me promis que ne me
refullerez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demontrer en effet la bon-
ne intention que vous nl'aves affeuree avoir a l'accord & entre-
tilnde natural devoir entre c mere & I'enfant quidit en bonnes
termes efrre empcche pour vous me tenant captive en un desert
(,il e vous ne pourrez mieux definentir & faire paroitre voftre
tin e-fir a notre union que me donnant les movens d'y proceder,
i: non m'en retenir & crmpefcher coniie aucunc de vos miniltres
[,,tendent afin de laiffer toujours lieu a lieur mauvais & finiftres
!racliques entre nous. La lettre porte que I'aflociation n'eftlpas
oiDafe, auffi ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bienque nmoln ilz avoit ac-
rcDtri; & que nous en avions convenu enlemble, comme l'afte
;Ir de efa main, & ces lettres tant a tony, que en France en font
rv, avant donne cc meme temoignagede fa bouche propre a
iulieurn ambaffadeurs & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de ne
[i!'r faire publier par craint de vous fculement, demandant
;rces pour vous refifier d'avant de fe declarer si ouvertement
'Iant journellement persuade au contraire par vos mliniftres qui
., promnetoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck le faire declarer
z;re heretier. Aufurplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe
rill.elrelix quede s'opiniaftrcr en cette extreme impiete &ingra-
.!uide ver. nmoy, je ne puis penler que vous non plus qu'aucun
a!tre prince de la Chret;ente Ic voulilliez eu cela appiaudir ou
r-intenir pour luy fayre acquerir mla mnalediction ains que plutos
-,v..,endrez pour luy laire recognoitre la raison trop jufie &
::dant (tevant Dieu & les hornrnes. Helas & encores ne lur
::iloier j'en ofrer, inaysdonner avec droit ce qu'il tient par n sl-

i, Je me fuis du tout ccuiiiiife a vous, & lidelement faitec
1; xous pleft que je ne en fove pis qu'aupravant, & que le faul-
'-e des uns ne prevale defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien rc-
t:vnt mnal, & la plus grande arliliion qui me fcaurroit arriver
'rclvoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplede e mniander en
cs qu'il perfiife en cette m'efconnoiffance de !on devoir, que dc
Lur ou de moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittimre roy ou royne
Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre avec mov a
r:ela traite conmmence entre nous de quoy je vous requiers sians
s attendre de response de ce mal gouvcrne entant vous en re-
ctrrant avec autant d'affec'ion que ie fens ion cceur opprefsi
eennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenez vous de la pronieffe que m'avez
f"::r de me prendre en votri proterion me raportant du tout a
.rus, & fur ce prian; Dieu qu'il vous viueille preferverde touts
1r cnnremys & dillimulez axmvs, cornine je Ic desire de me confo-
"idcnme venger ce ceulz qui pourchalfent un tel nalheur entre
'
:re & lenfant. Jc ceffcray de vous troubler, mais non a

m' eli-

m'ennuier que je ne recoi-e quelque consolation de vous&d,
Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de tout peril
Futhbery xii Mars.

Voftre fidelement vouee fceur

& obeiffante coufine,

A la reyne d'Anglererre M A R I E Q

madame ma bonne fceur
& couine.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 109.)

A Tellament by Q Mary.

Cott. hb. N. B. The following paper was transcribed 5y the rel,
\Vefpaf. Mr. Crawford late regius professor of church hiftorr in
L. 16. the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, ac
P, 41 . cording to him, is written by Naue, Mary's fecretaryv

the relt with the queen's own hand. What is marked
" is in the queen's hand.
C Onfiderant par ma cond;tion prefente l'eftat de vie humaine,

si incertain, que perlonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt afteurer4

finnon foubs la grande et infinie misericorde de Dieu. Et mr
voulant prevalcir d'icelle contre tousles dangers et accidens, qui
me pourroient in opinement funrenir en cette captivit6, meLnej
a cause des grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenu!
jufques a present; j'advise tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou rai
Ion en jugement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de moname, en
terrement de mon corps, et disposition de nion bien, eftat,
affaires, par ce present mon teframent et ordonnance de moi
dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit. Pre

mierement, nie recongnoiffant indigne pechereffe avec plusd'o:
fences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfa&ion par toutes lesadver
fites que j'ay fouffert; dontje la Icue fa bonte. Et m'appuyas
fur la croix de mnon Sauveur et redempteur Jesus Chrifte. J
recommendemon ame a la benoifte et individue Trinite, et au
prieres de la Glorieufe Vierge Marie, etde tous lesangesfainm
et fair.ies de paradis, efperant par leur merites et interceffio:
efrree aides a obtenir de eftre faicte participante avec eulxt
fclicite eternelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net 9
entier, dcfp'uiliant des a present tout ressentiment des injure
calomnics, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me pourroier
avoir elte factes durant ma vie, par mres fubjets rebelles et all
tres ennemil; J'en retrier la vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplieleu
pardonner, de mefme atficcion, qu e e luy requiers pardon
mes faultes, et a tous ceuks et celles queje puis avoir offenfie
faites ou du par-iles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The twuo following pagrgraphi
rcitain directions concerning the place and circum/lance of her
burial. ]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conservation de
I'Eglife catholique, apoftolique et Romaine, en la quelle je
Yeulx vivre et mourir, file prince d'EfcofTe mon filz y pueft etre
reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon tres
grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin entre Ines rebelles, je le
laile feul et unique heritier de mon royaume d'Efcoffe, de droi&
queje pretende juftement en la couronne d'Angleterre et pays
cue en dependent, et generallement de tous et chacun Ines meu-
bleset immeubles qui refteronts apres ma mort, et execution de
ce present tellament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefie,
lecede, tranfporte, et fai&e don " de touts et chacuns met
' droicts, que j e pretende et puis pretendrea la couronne d'Ang-
"leterre, et aultres droifs, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en depen-
" dantz, au roy catholique, ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira,
" averques advis, confentementde fa faintete; tant pourla voyr
" aujourdhuy le feul feursappui de la religion catholique, que
" pour reconoiffance de gratuites faveurs que moy, et lesmiens
" recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma plus
"grande neceflite; et refguard aufli au droift que luy mefre
" peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays, je le fupplie qu'en
" recompence ii preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et si il
"ce pleut de celle de Guise, pour nlemoire de la race de laquelle
je fuis sortie aucofte de Mere, n'a yant de celuy de mon pere;
" que mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours

v" ou pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de l'accepter, ou
" faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.
" Je layffe mon filz a la protection du roy, de prince, et dues
" de Lorrayne et de Guise, et du Mayne, aux quelz je recom-
" mende et son eftat en Efcoffe, et mon droift en Angleterre,
" i il eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefte royne."
Je fautz don au " compt6 de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu
ar feu son pere, et commande mon filz, comme mon heretier
fucceffeur, d'oheyr en ceft en droit a mon volonte.
Je voulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe tro-
reront par moy deues, tien mis cause de doict eftre faits " a.
"Lohliven" etre promptement payee et acquittes, et tout tort et
gis repar6s per lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la con-
/ence. Oultre, &c. [Followv twvo or three paragraphs concern-

tgParticular legacys, and then is added] Fai& au manoir de
Sheleld en Angleterre le jour de -- Mil cinq cens foixant
l dix sept.
Vo II.

,

After

After a blank page follows in the queen's hand:

Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamil.

ton leuuel fe montrera le plus fidelle vers moy, et plusconltant
ent religion, au jugement de -- Ducs de Lorraine et de
Guyfe, ou ie le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auraydonnay
la charge de travter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a con.
dition de fe marrier ou allier en la dite mayfon ou par leur
" advis.

Follow near two pages of particular legacys.

" E Ie remets ma tame de Lenox au droift quelle peut pre.
tendfe a la conte d'Angous avant l'acort fait par mon com-
mandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et le comte de Mar.
ten, veu qu'il a este fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et nlo,
furla promeffe de ia fidelle affifance, si luy & moy encourions
dangler et befoin d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecre.
" tement au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu' attemt prient contrefa

vie, et pour ceft effect pris les armes, et ont porte les ban-
nieres defp!oiees, contre nous, je revoque auffi toute autredoa,
"que je luv ay fait de conte de Morton fur promeffes de les
bons services a advenir, et entends que la dire Conte foit reu-
nie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes tra-
"hifons tant en la mort de mon feu Mary, queen mon baniff¢-

ment, et pourfuit de la mien ne l'ont merit. Etdefendsa
mon filz de je jamays fervire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne
" u'il aye fle parents, la quelle je crains ne s'eftende jufques
"a luv. le connoiffant du tout affecionne aux ennemis de mon

droite en ce royaume, de quel il eft penconnaire.
" e recrmmende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz,et
"luv ccn:n'ande detenir pres de luy et s'enfervit, et jeluvlaife
"le bien du conte de Boduel son oncle, en respect qu'il ellfe
" mon farg. mon filleul, et ma eftilaiffeenlutelleparfonpere.

]e declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abbe de St. Croix

r.aen que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le ne futjaimavs
"men intention, conrnme il apret par la revocation quej'ay fa'e

deptis. et ert auffi faite de avant la afge de xxv. ans, ceque
"iaimois deliberer si ii ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de
dc-avre aulx eftats je veulx donc que Orkenay foit reune a Ia
" curcr.ne cornmle une de plus neceffaires pour mon filz, et
"fa.n~ la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.
"Les fi!let de Miorra ne parvient acceffi heriter, ains revienti
"a conre a ia Couronne, si il luv pleft luv donner fa cu|
" f:l: en marriafge, et il nome l'en filenne ligne."

No. XII,

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 19.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scotts.
pLEASEyour majesty, I received your letter of the date the April-

2th of Novr. and in like manner has seen some part of the Harl. Lib.

contcnts of one other of the fame date, direced to MNIonfr. de 37. B. 9.
lM.vifir, ambassador for his majeity the most Chrillian king,fo. 126.
b'i.i which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one
youl iighnefs deftrcs to know the true cause ot my banishment,
ali oiters unto me all favour if I lhall be innocent of the lgi-
nous fads committed in the person of your husband of good me-
mirv, so by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare
unto me, if your hulband's murder could be laidjuftly against me,
lhat you could not follicit in my cause, neither yet forany person
that was participant of that execrable fad, but would seek the
revenge thereof, when you flould have any means to do it;
yrnr majesty's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is most fa-
r;::'able, and your desire to know the truth of the lame is moit
equitable; and therefore that I ihould with all my finplicity,
fitcerity and truth answer thereunto is molt realbnable, to the
nid that your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence
liall sufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be
culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of the evil dif-
pofl' minds of the most part of your nobility against your said
hujaand, and not revealing of it, which Ia am asured was fuffi-
ciently known to himself, and to all that had judgment never so
iittle in that realm; which also I was confirained to underfrand,
as lie, that was specially employed betwixt the earl Morton, and
a good number of your nobility, that they inig1;t with all humi-
lity intercede at your majetty's hand for his relief, in luch mat-
ter as are more specially contained in the declaration following,
which I am constrained for my own juftitication, by this letter
to call to your majelly's remembrance. Notwithstanding that
I am assured to my grief, the reading thercof will not tinally
ortfetd your princely mind. It may please your majesty to re-
iieniber, that in the vear of God 566, the said earl of Morton,
v.ith divers other nobility and gent. were declared rebels toyour
najefy, and banifihed your realmn for insolent murder committed
in yruir inajiety's own chamber, which they alledged was done
it cninimand of your husband, who notwithltanding affirmed
thiat ie was compelled by them to subscribe the warrant given
for that effect, ht'vwioever the truth of that matter remains
a!mongst thel ; it appertains not to me at this time to be curi-
ti;; tiue it is that I was one of that number, that heavily of-
fended against your ilajeftv, and passed in France the time of
our l'anithment. at the delsre of the reft, to humbly pray your
brother the most Christian king, to interceed that our offences

Z 2 might

might be pardoned, and your majesty's clemency extended to.
wards us, albeit divers of no fr(all reputation, in that realm, wus
of the opinion, that the laid fat merited neither to be requisite
for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the careful mind of
his majesty towards the quietness of that realm, that the dealing
in that cause was committed toMonfr. de Movifir, who was di.
rec'ed at that time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the hap-
py birth of your Con, whom Almighty God of his goodness may
long preserve in happy estate and perpetual felicity ; the careful
travel of the said de Movifir was so effectual, and your majelty's
mind so inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter,
I.was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Mur.
ray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Ledington, in the
name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Lindsay,
and remanent complefiis, that they might make offer in the names
of the said ear!. of any matter that might satisfy your majesty'
wrath, and procure your clemency to be extended in their fa-
vours; at my coming to them, after 1 had opened the effect of
my nleffage, they declared that the marriage betwixt you and
your husband had been the occasion already of great evil in that
r-alm, and if your hutband ihould be suffered to follow the ap-
petite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of dealing
in:ght produce with time worse effecs; for helping of such in.
convenience that might fall out by that kind of dealing, they
had thought it convenient to join themselves in league and
band with frme other noblemen, resolved to obey your majefy
as their natural sovereign. and have nothing to do with your
husband's command whatsoever, if the said earl would for him-
felfenter into that band and confederacy with them, they could
be content to humbly request and travel by all means with your
rmiaefty for his pardon, but before they could any farther pro-
reed, thevdefired to know the laid earl's mind herein; when I
had answered. that he nor his friends, at my departure, could
not know that any such like matter would be proponit, and
therefore v as not infiruEted what to answer therein, they de-
fired that I lhould return fufficientlv instructed in this matter to
Sterling. before the baptism of our son, whom God might pre-
I;rve; this message was faithfully delivered by me at Newcaflle
;n England, where the laid earl then remained, in presence of
his friends and company, where they all condescended to have
vo farther dealings with your husband, and to enter into the
ftid band \X ith this deliberation I returned to Sterling, where
at the request of the most Christian king and the queen's majefrl
of England b; their anibalTadorsprefent, your majeffy's gracious
pardon was granted unto them all, under condition always that
they should remain banished forth of the realm, the space ot
two years and farther during your majedtv's pleasure, which li-
mitarion was after mitigated at the humble request of your own
nobility, so that iimmediately after the laid carl of Morton re-

paired

paired into Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl Bodvell
and secretary Ledington came to him; what speech paifed there
smongft them, as God shall be my judge, I knew nothing at
that tinie, but at their departure I was requested by the said
earl Morton to accompany the earl Bodvel and secretary to
Edenburgh, and to return with such answer as they should ob-
tain of your najefty, which being given to me by the said per-
lons, as God /hall be my judge, was no other than these words,
, Schaw to the earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech
"of that matter appointed unto him;" when I crafit that the
nfrwer might be made more sensible, secretary Ledington said,
that the earl would sufficiently understand it, albeit few or none
2t that time understand what paffedamongft them. It is known
to all men, als veill be railling letters past betwixt the said earl
and Ledington when they become in divers facions, as also ape
back sett furtht by the ministers wherein they affirm that the
e.rl of Morton has confessed to them, before his death, that
the earl Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling
away off the king your husband, to the which proporfiton the
haid earl of Morton affirms that he could give no answer unto
ftcl time he might know your majesty's mind therein, which he
never received. As to the abominable murder, it is known too
bh the depositions of many persons that were executed to the
death for the committing thereof, that the fame was executed
hv them, and at the commano of such of the nobility, as had
lusbcrivit band for that effect; by this unpleasant declaration,
ic mr. a part thereof known to yourself, and the remainder may
be undckriod by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined in
torture, and that are extant in the custody of the ordinaryjudges
ia Scotland, my innocency so far as may concern any fact does
ippear sufficiently to your majesty. As for my dealing afore-
"iid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but as what would
iccufe the vessel that preserves the vine from harm, for the in-
temperancv of t:'ch as immoderately use the fame. As for the
special caule of my baniflment, I think the fame has proceeded
upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the earl
cf. vorton of so much mattcras they alledge himfclfto have con-
felWed before he died, a'nd would not be induced, for loss of
reputation, to perform any part thereof. If this be the occasion
of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punifihment I fliou!d
deserve, I remit me to your majesty's better judgment, who
'ell knows how careful ever ilk gentleman fiould be of his
5ame, reputation, and honour, and how far ever ilk man should
abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would have
been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his
tin, notwithitanding all the injuries I was constrained to receive
t his hand all the rime of his government, and for no other
i'efe, but for shewing of particular friendship to particular

Z 3 friends

I X.

friends in the time of t'he lati cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorrv
I be now to accuse hiln in anv matter being dead. and more fir-
rr that be- g on I.i. he fi:ch kind of dealing obtained that
name of grate. A'v.avc for rnyown part I have been bnn!iih-
ed mv native con0trv ti-le three vears and four months, iivin
in anxietv of mind. my ho!l guds in Scotland, which were not
finall. internittit and eiircnit upon, and has continually since
the time I -was relieved out of nm lalt troubles at the defireof
Monfr. de Moviir. attended to know vour majefti's pleC.fre,
and to awasit upn ' wat fervic. it hliould please your majefsv for
to command. Upon the Sth of April inrt. your good friend fecre-
taryv Walingha:ne ha? declared unto me, that her highness tho't
it expedient that I hlould retire mvfllf where I pleated, I de-
clared unto him I had no means wherebv I might perform that
desire, until such time as I ihould receive it from vo ir majeln.
Neither knew I where it wou!d pieafe your highnef; to direct
me, until flth time as I Ih'mi!d have received further inf'rma-
tion from you. LUpnn thi; occasion, and p.rrtiy by permiflion. I
have taken the hardreif to write this present letter, vwherebv
vourmaieliv mav underltand anv part of my troubles pait, anc
ilrait prel.nt. A; to mv intention future, I will never deny
that I am fuliv resolved to lpend the reft of my days in your ma-
jeftv'; service, and the kin vyour son's, wheresoever I ihall be
d recaed by vour majefrv, a!d for the better performing thereof,
if so ihali be her majeftv-' Fieafure, to recommend the trval of
my innocerncv and exarrinati(on of the verity of the preceding
narration, to the king your son, with request that I may be
pardoned for such offences as concerned your majesty's service,
and var common to all men the time of his les aige and perdonit
to all, except to me, I ihould be the hearer thereof myself, and
he direcaed in whatfoeser service it flnuld please your majelty
for to commnand. lMoft humble I beseech your majesty to con-
rider heres, and to be f1 gracious as to give order, that I may
have mean, to fere your maieft'y according to the sincerity of
my meanir-. r;, r so expeceing vour majefly's answer, after the
kissing 'our hand wi-;h all hunliliry, I take liave from London.

No. XliI. (Vol. II. p. 138.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Douglas his am-

baffador in England, Otother 586.

Cot. L:h. ESEPRVE up yourfelfna langer in theearneftdealingfor
Calig. C ';. . ro_ m other, for ye have done it too long; and think not
A- ()' gi- rit any your travyllis can do g-ode if her lyse be takin, forthen
nil i r;.e adeu with my deali -g with thaime that are the special inltru-
king'S mentis thairot: And theirfore. gifye looke for the contineuane
hand. of niv favour towartis you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this

cace.

cace, hut reade my letter wrettin to Williame Keith, and con-
frm vourfelf quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in this rc-
c'!iilt let me reap the fruifti of youre great credit there, ather
row or never. Fairwell. October 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in England, probably

from secretary Maitland. Nov. 27, 1586.

Y your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no A copy in
plealant fubjedc) his majefiy conceives well of your earnest- the collect.

n.l' and fidelity in your negotiations, as also of Mr. Archibald'sof fir A.
activity and diligence, whom you so greatly praise and recom- Dick. Vol.
mend. I wilt the issue correspond to his majesty's opinion, your A. fol.
care and travell, and his great diligence as you write. His ma-219
jicv takes this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in honour and
orherwife. His highnesses actions and behaviour utter plainly
not only how far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of
the sequel of that process, and of what moment he efreens it.
There is an ambaflade shortly to be diretly, wherein will be
employed an earl and two counsellors, .on whose answer will de-
pend thecontinuance or dissolution of the amity and good intel-
i:,encc between the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if
farther extremity be used, and his majesty's suit and request dil-
Cdined, his highness will think himself dilionoured and con-
acinned far betides his expectation and deserts. Ye may per-
ceire his majefly's disposition by his letter to you, which you
lall imipart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal according thereto.
I need not to recommend to you care, concerning your matter's
Itsrice both in weill and in honour. As you and your colleague
llu!l behave yourfelfin this behalf, so for my own part, will I
interpret your affection to your master. I am glad of that I
h.'r of yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr.
Archibald, whose friends here make great account of his pro-
eltied devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes to the
Ling's niajefy her son. Farther I am constrained to remit to
next occasion, having scarce time to scribble there few lines
xh;ich of themselves mav bear witness of my haste.) Wifiing
r 'u a prosperous issue of your negotiation, I commit you, &c.
H'aNrudhoufe, Novr. 27th, 1586.

'Tn E people, and all eilates here are so far moved by the ri-

;'rous proceedings against the queen, that his imajefty, and all
t at have credit are importuned, and may not go abroad for ex-
r:amations againit them, and imprecations againit the queen of
England.

Z4

No. XIV.

No. X7V. (Vol. . p. 141.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

i6 OQt. P LEASE your majeft, I received your letter of the date
1586. the zSth of September, the 5th of Ocober, which was
From thethe fame day that I directed Wn. MVurray towards your high.
Original nels; by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates,
in the col-your majeftv may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as
lct. of frmv travel might reach unto, anent the performing of the two
A. Dick. chief points contained the said letter before the receipt thereof,
Vo!. B. which by thcfe prefenis I mull repeat for answering the faidis.
aoi 324. As to the firit, so far as may concern the interceeding for the

queen your majeftv's mother her life, I have divers times and in
every audience travelled with this queen in that matter, fpeci.
ai!y to know what her full determination mufft be in that point,
and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this
proceeding againit her by order ofjuftice was no less againlt
her mind than against their will that loved her best: As towards
her iifc she cou!d give no afifwer thereunto, untill such time as
the law hath declared whether she was innocent or guilty.
Herewithall it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it
was a number of the affociants that earnestly pressed her that
the law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so long
as ihe was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never this
realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this state in affu-
rance, and in the end they used this protestation that if ihe
would not in this matter follow their advice, that they should
remain without all b!ame whatsoever should fall out; where-
upon lhe had granted them liberty to proceed, left such as had
made the renueft. might hereafter have charged herself with
inconvenience if any should happen.

AND by mvfelf Iknow this her speech to be true, because

both papist and protestant has behaved them, as it hath been
her pleasure to declare, but upon divers respect., the one to
avoid suspicion that otherwise was conceived against them, the
other upon zeal, and care that they will be known to have for
preservation of their sovereign's life and fhate in this perrilous
time, upon consideration whereof, I have been constrained to
enter into some dealing with both. wherewith I made her ma-
jeftv acquainted; the proteftanis, and such as in other matters
will b-' known to bear no fnsall favour unto your majetfy's ser-
vice, hath prayed that they may be excused from any dealing
in the contrary of that, which hb their oath they have avowed,
and by their speech to their lovereign requefled for, and that
before my coming in This country; if they flould now otherwise
do, it would produce no better effea but to make them fubiect
to the accufatien of their fovercign, when it Should pleaie her

to

lodo it, of their inconflancy, in giving councell wherely they
might incur the danger of ill counfellrs. and be consequent
worthvof puniihment. Such of the papists as I did deal with,
went immediately, and told her majesty what I had spoken to
them, who albeit she understood the matter of before, Sent for
rie and declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to
them, willing me for the weil of my maifter's service to abflain
from dealing with such, as were not yet sufficiently moved to
think of ny master as fle did. I craved leave of her majesty,
that I might inform them of your niajefty's late behaviour tO-
wards her, and the slate of this realm, whereunto with rome
diculty she gave her content. At my late departure from
court, which was upon the 5th of this inltant, and the day as-
ler tiat the lords of this grand jury had taken their leaves of her
rniefty to go northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure
t.pronlife to have further speech in this matter at the returning
0fthe said lords, and to give full answer according to ycur ma-
iehy's contentment to the remainder matters, that I had proponit
in, ane of your majesty. As to the 2d part concerning the as-
xiation, and desire that the proniife made to the master of
Gray concerning your majesty's title may be fulfilled; it ap-
pars by the said letter, that the very point, whereupon the
cudfion that may bring your majesty's title in dr.ult hath not
iben rightly at the writing of the said letter considered, which
I ake to have proceeded for lack of reading of the a& of parlia-
.ent, wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to
:re laid master, and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise
sgainl your said title, except that an opinion flould he con-
ceired by there lords of this parliament that are so vehement at
rls time against the queen your majesty's mother, that your
Calelty is, or may be proved hereafter aftenting to her pro-
eedings, and rome that loveyour majesty's service were of that
Priion that too earnest request might move a ground, where-
·0on suspicions might grow in men so ill affeced in that matter,
hiclh I tho't might be helped by obtaining of a declaration in
:arliament of your majesty's innocence at this time, and by
cafon that good nature and public honesty would constrain you
intercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with
'es, without any further, some suspicion that might move ill
Ac'edn men to doubt. In my former letters 1 humbly craved
'i: *;r majefly that some learned men in the !I ws, might ,e
-c:.d to advise with the words of the association, and the nil-
:.ainn contained in the act of parliament, and withall to ad-
tewshat suspicious effeEts your majefly's requef might work
hefe cholerick nen at this time, and how their nmilds ligi t
beslt moved to receive reaf n; and upon all tlete c; nfiicra-
'ns ihev might have sorned the words of a declaRa'or of y'ir
tify's innocence to be obtained in thi4 panliamlci;, :Ind 2[oi-

ing

inz thereof, the very words of a proteflation for the fame es.
fct that mh;t hell 1 -rve for your majesty's service, and so-; i
better in, frmatin n. Albeit this wav was my firrole opinior, I
f'nna! i- c-r.ented to follow an- directic:l it iall please vsul
rnMsePr to 1:e; I have already opened the fubilance hereoit I
the queen cG this reamn, who seems nct to be offended here.
wi!n, and ha'n granted liberty to deal therein ;-,ith such of tha
pari:nrrerr as .may remain in any dcubt of mnd. This heir.
the li:m or mn proceedings in this matter. hefi.es the remainder,
cont;ti':ed in otier letters of several dates, I am constraincd ti
lay the h'.'he open before your nmaiefv, and to hun!hiy pDr;
rtar fui in, rniatri- n may be fert unto me what fiulther tci.)
herein. in t.is n:iddle timne, 1whii- I shall receive more allDn
direclon I ir.;i t roceed and be doing according to tich (dirc:iJ
on a< I rv.-e P'readv recewved. And so, molt gracious sovereign,
v.'i!rn: unteo v'ur maief-v all happy success in your affair, Ii
hunmb.r take my leave fr-m London, 16th of Ocr. this I;S6
ltYour :maje:tt's mo'. hulmble fuhject and obedt servant.

A rnemorial from his majeftv by the Master of Gray.

12 lan. T w'ill piafte vour majesty, I have tho't meeter to set dowl
_2 ]P--

, - .'.

i ;86. An I all thing- as they occur, and all advertisements as they came
Original to mv ear,, ther jointly in a letter.
in his own I came to \?'re the 24th of Decr and sent to WVm. Keith}
hand in anid Mr. Archibald Doug!as to advertize the queen of it, Ikl
the co!- as the did attheir audience She promiSed the queen vc.uy
Icfi. of Gr rmajeL.v's mother' life should he spared till we were heard. The
A. Dick. 2-th. thev came to \are to me, the which day Sir Robt. came
Vol. A. to \are, where they rihewed us how far they had already gon{
foL. 2. in their neg tiarion, but ' r that the difcourle of it is let dowt

in our gencr letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will tellr'
unto your nt.!citv that \Vm. Keith hath used himself rightho
nefily and iuftly till our coming, reipecting all circunimtanct
and chiefly his cnlleague his deiling, which indeed is not better
than your mai fly knows already.

THF E qith day of Decr. we came to London, where we weri

no vavs frii..div received. nor after the honeit fort it had pleae
your rr..ie:y uie her a.mbEfadors, never nan sent to welcome
or conrev ;s. The fame day we underltood of Mr. de Bel
i-vre his lea.e 'aking, and for that the cullom permitted not "w
fynt our excutfs hv .ir. Ge -ge Young.

Tn r. i ft id! o' Iv r. \x, m. Keith and his colleague accord
ing to the Ct!,-i l; l nr to crave cur audience. We receive

abe an:;v c. rn-.r.eJ i:n tle zener.i letter, and could not ha
ani'wr t.' th.; th c da., :s '-at swa done thaRt ay your nla;t'

.... Gth cav, wa~~~~ donebi

Is it in the general, yet we was not out of expetation at that
:,':e aih it we received hard answers.
TH 8th day we spake with the earl of Leicester, where cur
r,,,rrcnce was, as is set down in the general. I remarked th;:..

:.: h that day said plainly the detaining of the queen of Sc,.t-
.! priloier was for that fle pretended a fuccefiion to this

J: ludge then by this, what is tho't of your Imajefit as

r:-;il hear a little after.
TnL oth day we spake with the French ambha lador, whom
e i;:d very plain in making to us a wife discourse of all his
:-.:eeiinas, and Mr. de gclilevre we thanked him in your ma-
-.:i; nnnie and opened such things as we had to treat with this
cetn , iave the last point, as more largely tet down by our ge-

bI is tho't here, and tome friends of your majelRv's advised
-.:. Itt Bellievre his negotiation was not etefrtual, and that

:': .li.int was not privy to it, as indeed I think iq true, for
l:i: llievre his parting, there is a talk of this Chafteauneuf
:: Ilrvants taken with his whole papers and pacquets. which he
v-: lending in France, for that they charge him with a confpi-
·:c of late against the queen here her life. It is alledged his
-:ant has confesSed the matter, but whom I fiall trust I know
-:; but till I fee proof I /hall account him an hnnef: marn, for
-:.:d so he appears, and one (without doubt) who hath been
;:v instant in this matter. I fliew him that the queen and earl
t'Leicefter had desired to speak with me in private, and craved
: opinion; he gave it freely that he tho't it meeteft; I flhew
'.n the reason why I communicate that to him, for that 1 had
-;-!'n ueat)ed by some of her majefly's friends in France to
:edon evil offices in her service, that he should he my wit-
:; that my earnest dealing in this flould he a fifii cieln tefti-
t.y that all was lyes, and that this knave Naue who nrw had

i.raved her, had in that done evil offices; he d-fired mie, fee-
i:he saw only with other folks eves, that I fhiluld no ways
:-site it to her, for the like The had done to hirn:liF by Naue
:., erfuafic n. I answered he should be my witnelf in th:lt.
TnE g 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which we
i': tle oth day; at the firfl, (he said a thing long looked for
i u!! he welcome when it comes, I would now lee your mia-

ofpcrs. I anl;.wered, no man makes offers hit for ionme

-r; wec would. and like vwur inajefr;, si-s know the cause
e extant tor which ve otler, and likewifc that it lie ex.ant
i.our majeffy has heard us. I think it be extant yet, but I

olnot proiife for an hour, but you thhnk to flift in hat fI;rt.
.ilt .ered we mind not to ihift, hIut to off:r frmil our fovel eign
lt'hings that with realon may be; and in special., we offered
: let down in our general, all was rifufied and tho't nothn,:.
called on the three that were in the hou!e, the earl of' ].i-

c:i.. r,

cclter, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very cefpite.
ifliy repeared a!l o'r offers in prefOnce of them all. I opene
the last part and laid, Madam for what refpet is it that men
dea] agai.iet your person or estate for her caule ? She answered
becau!e they think ihe shall succeed to me, and for that ile ,.
2 papist; appearingiv laid I both the cauies may be removed
:he said ihe would be glad to underfand it. If Madam, faidl,
all that she has of right of fucceilion were in the king our fh'.
reign's person, were not all hope of papists removed? She an.
fwered I hope so. Then Madam I think the queen his mother
lhatl wiliingly dem't all her rights in his person. She answered
ihe hath no right, for ihe is declared unable. Then I said, ii
flie have no right, appearing!' the hope ceases already, so iat
i: is not to he ectred that any man attempt for her. The quen
answ:ered, bu; the papists ailo.- not our declaration; then le
it fal, fays I, in *he king's person by her alfignation. Theear;
of Leicetter answered, She is a prisoner, how can ihe demita
I answered the demillion is to her son, by the advice of all he
friends she has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, thatany
attempt conttit the queen here away, who shall party with her
to prove the demiltion or aflignation to be ir.effetual her son be.
ing opposite partr and having all the princes her friends for him,
having bonded for the efficacy of it with his majesty of before!
The queen made as she could not comprehend any meaning, and
fir Robe opened the matter again, (he yet made as tho' ihe un-
deCrlood not. So the earlof Lcecefler answered that our mean-
irg was, that the king should be put in his mother's place. Is
it fr , the queen answered, then I put nmvfelf in a worse ca
t'an of before; by God's passion, that were to cut my own
throat, and for a dutchv, or an earldom to yourself, you 0
such as you would cause some of your desperate knaves kill me.
No, by God, he f'hal! never be in that place. I answered hg
craves nothing of your majesty but only of his mother. The
earl of Leicester answ.ered that were to make him party to the
oueen mvmiflrefs. I laid, he will be far more party, if he be
in her place thro' her death. She would ftav no longer, bu
said she would not have a worse in his mother's place. An
f-rd, tell your lkng what good I have oine for him in holdin:
*-e crn- r. on his heal fiorce he was born, and that I mind tl
keep the league thar now stands between us, and if he breakil
fiall be a d.uble fault, and with this minded to have bid
den us a farewel: but we efcheuit And I spake cravingob
her that [-er life may he spared for I 5 days ; ihe refused. Si
Robt. craved for only eight days, lie 1aid not for an hour l
and so geid her av.-av. Your majelly fees we have delivered
we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for she and her couni
cel has laid a determi:: tion that they mind to follow forth, an"
I fee it comes rather of heir council than herself, which I ll;

tho

Le v.orie ; for without doubt, fir, it shall cut off all friendship
Ie had here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned well
to vour majesty, yet remembring themselves, that they have
nedlcd with your mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope
treat good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further
,our majesty may perceive by this last discourse of that I pro-
cnit, if they had meaned well to your majelty, they had ultd
iiotherwife than they have done, for reason has bound them.
ot ldare not write all. I mind something to speak in this
ca:ser, because we look fliurly our letters lhall be troucit by
:e wkay.
FoR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their de-
rnrmination, altho' the queen again and the earl of I.eicefter
asdefired to speak with me in particular; I mind not to speak,
or lhall not but assuredly filall let all men fee that I in parti-
.alr was no ways tyed to England, but for the refpec of your

faicfvs service. So albeit, at this time, I could not effectuate

::it Idefired, yet my upright dealing in it flall be manifetled
t the world. We are, God willing, then to crave audience,

wire we mind to use sharply our inftrutions, which hithcrio

Ie have used very calmly, for we can, for your hlnour's cause,
i.sno less for your majefly, than the French aumbaffador has
,I for his malter.
So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in your
i-rice, and not the effet, for had it been double by any I
ght have here had credit, but being I came only for that cause
iil not my credit shall serve here to any further purpose. I
Ia God preserve your majesty and fend you a true and sincere
endfhip. From London this 1 th of Jan. i 586.
I U D E R S T A N D the queen is to fend one of her own to your
aiefly.
,the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and secretary to his

majesty, from the master of Gray.

Y lord, I fend you tlhee lines with. this inclosed to his l2tI Jan.
niajefty, whereby your lordfllip Iliall understand how I 5q6. a,

tiers goes here. And before all things I pray your lordflip Origial
se his majesty to refpeAt my diligence, and not the effecd in in the co!-
;negotiation, for I swear if it had been for the crown nfl ct. ot fir
biand to mryfelf I could do no more, and let not unfiienlis A Dirk.
s advantage of me, for the world fliall fee that I loved Eng- Vol. A.
ffor his niajefty's service onlv. I look flortly to find yourfol. 1-9.
;lip friend as ve made proiili-, and by God 1 fliall be to vou if
:an. Win. Keith and Idefiled, if mnatters had gone well, to

run a coui fe that your lordflip might have here been in
it and others disappointed, but now I will do for you as
a:nlelf; which is tocare for no credit here, for in coflcie:ce

they

they mean not honestly to the king our sovereign, and if they
mav, he v. ill go the get his mother is gone or shortly to g0
therefore my lord without all kind of scruple I pray you toad.
viie him the beii is not this way. They fay here, that it ha
been fail hbv one who heard it from you, that ye deftred not tI
ki-. arc Enrgland o agree. becaufeit would rack the noblemeia
.ndc gnae an example of. it by king James the fourt, I anler:i
in v;.ur namne that I was assured you never had spoken it. .ir
Archiba.ic is the iDpea:er of it, who I asSure your lordllhiD hI
be-n a pcil'.n in this matter. for they lean very mickle toh
opinion. He cares not, he savs, for at length the king will b0
fain to deal this -way, either by fair means or necessity, so thai
v.v-en he cdais this course he is alrured to be welcome; t0fe1
d-,v.-n ali that is pail of the like purposes, it would conltuit
nore paper than I have here, so I deter it to meeting. TherI
is a ncw. confpiracv aliedged againif the queen to have beenin.
ci ndd, t'r the French ambassador rcfident three of his men tal
kvn, hu- I think in the end it lhall prove nothing. 'Mr. Staf
ford, v ho is anbsairador for this queen in France, is touthe
v..; it. hi, brother is taken here, always it has done this harn
in our r.egu.,i'lon, that all this council would not move thi'
queen to tmeddile with the queen of Scotland's blood, till this i
vct;: on \v.a found forth. I remit all other things to the in
cl f-d. W\e minded to have lent to his majesty a discourse
,h ich we have let down of all our proceedings since our hither
co!;ing, hut we are surely advertized that the bearer is to
tru:lrnt by- the way for our pacquets, so that we defer it ri
our o.-n cnming; this I have putin a pri-vy part betide the pac
quet. V\e hall I think take leave on Fryday the 13th daj
v. here we mind exactly to follow the rigour of our inftrucliod
for it ca-not fiand with the king's honour that we fay les the
the French ambaiTador, which was, Ie roy mon maiitre ne pew
mairs fair que fe refentir. So that about the 24th I think
:;,ai;, God wiiiing. be at home, except that fomie fay co't
v.' ich we iock not for. The aueen and the earl of Leicee

;.- de;ired to lfeak with me. I rcfuted save in prelence of a
c' 'caues, hb re-aIon I lee a determination which particularcrt
c!' ca-.not help. and I crave no credit but for that cause. Ita'
p!'eal- -our l.rdilhip retire the inclold from his majesty andkee
ir. S, a-:er my service commended to yourself and bedfellorw,
c- .nmiit vu to God. From London the I zth of jan. 1586. '

I.Ss. An To the king's majeft-, from fir Robert Melvill.

h' ov.n T T nrr'.- poee -our maiefv, since the directionofourforoi
ha'.d. in le!ter, v.e had audience, and her mtajeifv appeared to ta
·'--- c- :'^ oc!:r Cvi.ririi;re in god part in. pretence of her council; albeitl

C -'.' A o.f::.:C v.':oui' tak- pf'ce with them, having taken retolution
LD.:: \ V. proced'

A s~~~~~~i ~Sl. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~P

rroceed withextremity, not the lefsit pleased her majeftlrtode-

t. I, to flay for two daiys on taking our leave, until hie had

iadfiei upon our propositions; since which time, her majesty is
bc, nlc more hard by lome letters (as we are informed) has come
from Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majesty
rakes not this mlattcr to heart, as we know the contrary in es-
fcci, and had of before removed the like opinion out of her
!iairlty's mind, which by sinister information was credited, their
,cperts has hindered our comlnlillion, and abuled this queen,
fearing in like manner we flall be tfayed until answer come from
Scotland by such person as they have intelligence of. And al-
,;: that it will be well enough known to all men how heavily
nur maieltv takes there proceedings to heart, the truth is, that
i.te has:e by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like
t hinder our negotiation. As also Allynour Stewart is to be
dretted in their party, by our know:ledge, who has awantyt
rore of his credit, than I believe he may perform, and we wi!led
hJl to defiff from this dealing, laying it does harm, and he is
not meet for that purpole, remitting to ,our majesty's good di-
rection to take order herein as we flall be anfwierable to your
:ajelly not to omit any point we have in charge, as the truth
ithe master of Grhaye has behaved hinfelf very rightly and
ifcrectly in this charge, and evil tayne with he di\ers in their
alties who were of before his friends. VWe have hcen behald-
i'g to the nienlfrals who has born us best companv, but has
rot been troubled with others. W ylzeme Kethe hath left no-
i ing undone tlat he had in charge. As for malter Archibald
t has promiled at all times to do his dewoyr, wherein he ihall
r l true report made to your majeflv, craving pardon of vour
:.i rlty that I have been so tedious, after I have killed your lma-
l'is hand I humbly take my leave Prasing God to grant
':,ui inajefly many good davs and happy, in whose piotection I
niiiilit your Inajelly ; at London, the zoth of Jan. 1586.

S r R,

A LB I IT Master George has not been in commiiflion, he
rou inlerior in his service to any of us, as well by his good ad-
. a(nd diligent care he takes for the advancement ot your
.licct, wherein we have not been a little furthered.
To the king's majesty, from the master of Gray and fir Robert

i Melvill.

21ft Jamr.

L EA S E it your majeivy in the last audience v:e had, since 586. Ar
, ir lai t advertizement, by \Vm. liMurra, we find hltr Inas-Oriiilnal in

:'r at the resuming our osiers fonrt hing nitrigatcel, and inclined the col-
:icunlidir more deeply of thein, because v.t;c t our leave, atledt. of fir

ourA. Dick.

Vol. A.
fol. 180.

our reasoning, certain of the council, namely my lord orLei.
cefter, fir Christopher Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my hrd
Hawart being present in the chamber, gave little share of any
great contentment to have her from her former resolution, now
caflin in perplexity what she should do, always we left her in
that state, and since have daily pressed conferrence with the
whole council, which to this hour we have not yet obtained
This dav we have sent down to crave our leave. The greatef
hinder which our negotiation has found hitherto is a persuasion
they have here that either your majesty deals fuperficiallyin this
nmatter, or that with time ye may be moved to digest it, which
when with great difficulty we had expugnit, we find anew that
certain letters written to them of late from Scotland has found
some place of credit with them in our contrare. So that refolr-
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special message, they
have made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try your highne's
meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty to like of their pro-
ceedings. where from no terror we can fay out unto him is able
to divert him, he has given out that he has credit with your;
majesty, and that he doubts not to help this matter, at your
highness's hand. If he come there that errand, we think your
majeft y will not oversee the great disgrace that his attempts shall
give us here, if he be not tane orderwith before that he be iurt-
ther heard, and if so be that any other be directed (as our in-
telligence gives us there shall) our humble suit is to your majelty,
that it may please your highness to hear of us what we find
here, and at what point we leave this matter with her majefy,
before that they find accidence, the causes whereof remitting to
our private letters. We commit your majesty for the present
to God's eternal protection. From London this ziftof Jan.
586.

ADDITIONAL!

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

A D D IT I O N A L

A PP E N DI X.

I ,ad o opportunmty of feing several of the following papers,

till thoJe /heets of the hi/oty, to which they relate, were print.
ed off. For this reason no refe-ences are made to them there;
but I have supplied that defefl by marking the particular pas-
fages in the hi/fory which theyferwe to illuf/rate.

No. XXXI. (Vol. I. p. 361. line 1 .)

Account of the sentence of divorce between the earl of Both-
well and Lady Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript
belonging to Mr. David Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.
U POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt hon.

Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward
Henryson dodor in the laws, two of the senators of

iie college ofjuftice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alexander
mine advocattis, commiffers of Ednr; compeered Mr. Henry
Kinrof0e, procurator for Jean Gourdoune countes of Bothwell,
t.nilitute be her for purfewing of ane proces of divorcement,
ntendit by her contra James earle Bothwell her husband for
;ccltry, committec be him with Bessie Craufurde, the pursuers
r.ant for the time; and ficklyke, for the said earle, compear-
I Mr. Edmond Hay, who efter he had pursued and craved
:: purfewar's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had jult caus
:Ipurfew the said action, and obtained it, denyd the libell, and
'e said Mr. Harrie took the morne, the last day of Apryle, to
:-ve the fame pro prima. The quhilk day, having produced
'ne uwitneffes, he took the next day, being the i of May, to
:s arther diligence. Upon the quhilk i of May, he pro-

i.ced some moe wirneffes, and renounced farther proba-
:ne. After quhilk, he deftred a term to be afligned to pro-
::unce sentence. To whom the said commissars alligned Sat-
'rday next, the 3 of May, to pronounce sentence therein, fe-
:d.im alligata et probata, quhilk accordingly was given that
: in favour of the purfewar.
AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be the
'F n' othwell contra his lady, for to have their marriage de-
::.d null, as being contracted againIt the canons, without a
:"nation, and he and his lady being vithindegreesdefendand.
\' rII. A a vizftrdis

37'

viz;erdis a kin, and that -wyfe for cxpedingof this proces, tller
was a commi:,uone grantit to the archbi:hop of St. Androis tc
cojoce and determine it, and Rot. bishop of Dunkeld, Willian
billop of Dunblare, MIr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glalgo,
and par!o-. of Ezelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creightoun, and Mr
George Cook chancellor of Dunkeld. and to Mr. Johne Man.
deritcun chanon in Dunbar and prcbendar of Peltoune, or any
ane of them. This commiflione is datit 27 Aprile 1567, s-i;
prelented ro two of the Iaids commissioners, viz. Mr. And!.
Cra.-'urd and M.r John M.anderftoune on Satterday 3 May, by
M.r. Thnim.s Hephurne par!_n of Auldhamitocks, procurator
for the erle ot Bothweil, who accepted the delegatioune, and
ga've oui their citation by precept, directed, Decano Chriiia.
r.;tates e 1IH.ting:one, nec non vicano fi:u curato eccle. par.
rochie de Crcichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri cappellano debit
requifii.s, ser summoning at the said eries instance, both of the
Jadr'. perf.rally if ihTe could be had, or otherways at the pa-
rolche kei k of Creichroune the time of Ier ice, or at herdwdi.
ling plact bcu;ic t itneffes, primo, fecundo, tertio, et perem-
toie, u't:c. tanien ccntextu protupiice edico. And likewas
to be \.'ir.-nTes in the laid matter, Alex. bishop of Galloway
who d:d marrv the said erie and his ladv, in lalereud-houf
kirk, in Feh 1565, fir John Bannatyne of Auchnoule juftic
clrk,. Mr. Robert Creichtoun of Elliot the queen's advocate,
\Mr. D. ', Chalmers provoll of Creichtoune and chancellor of
Ko's, -I;cac'! -- abhhot of Mtlirofs, and to compear betore
the i2:d idr.c- or anv one of them in St. Gcils iirk in Ednr.on
>'".son dv the of \lay, he thamlflves, or their procurators.
Upcn ir.e !a d 5 day, Mr. John Manderftoun, one of the
iu-e dieg-; or oiv being present compeared the fame procura-
t.-rs fzi3 boih irhi parries that were in the former proces, Mr.

Twn Ec;:::r:1 v (

1 articulatlie ) and some

r-or; :r. cf :he v. ;nclfes summoned produced, and received for proring
the rr . ,a!-3t e !a:- e. The laid prrcurat,.r renounced fcrder probat,
thet.cn . i- u-e, .d r'cigc atfigncd the ipt, the 6th of May, ad plib
g:m : ica-,',''.n. ?p!:..,c.-!... nci ipe depositiones iplorum teltium. Tihe

cu:!-. v. ;:} pubiicatas depositiones pradiCtas, Mr. Hen.
K:nro!cT . pr-curater tnr the lady instanter objecit cbjecicnes
lu.:s grr-ntrac,. conn.ia pro duct, infuper renunciavit u'ierl
o'r; de"--rii ; prci, ,I conclufa de confeniu procuratorum hin.
irc ccau:?, ji:- r.x rdictus ftatuit cratiinum diem pro ternir.a,
ad pro n."c..:-'.: i i:-2i ifnecntiam definituram, ex deductis co-
r;,i -r. :.- : s:l;i:i caufa rt procecTh. Conform hereunto, on
V. -tdrc. - 'h -~th ot May. the said judge gave out his !1'
fte-c . o'-

'ur of the Cr!e, declaring the marriage to be, andrt

h.-vc bee: nu;.: rc:i: 'he beginning, in relpect of their clon;n-

g- -: i:i b w.,. 'i-ch h.. .Jercd their lawful marriage witho'-:

2'- -
-',i; .'' i, ainci. ot b-oir.

No. XXNSl.'

No. XXXII. (Vol. 1. p. 384. line 5.)

Queen Mary to queen Elizabeth.

MA D A M,
L LT H OU G H the neceflity of my cause (which makethCott. Lib.
A me to be importune to you) do make you to judge that Cal. i. A

loin out of the way; yet such as have not my palfion, nor thecopy, and
irlects whereof you are persuaded, will think that I do as rmyprobably
cr.il doth require. Madam, I have not accused you, neithera tranfla-
:.lrdis, nor in thought, to have used yourfelfevil towards me.tion.
i.Ad I believe, that you have no want of good understanding, to
ieep vou from perfwafion against your natural good inclination.
Burtin the mean time I can't chufe (having my fenres) but per-
.ire very evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hi-
tler I thought that I had sufficiently discoursed unto you the
ii'comillodities, which this delay bringeth unto me. And efpe-
sal!v that they think in this next month of August, to holda
ri.ianlent against me and all my servants. And in the mean
[ae, I am stayed here, and yet will you, that I fliould put my-
'i;ifflrther into your country, (without feeing you) and remove
ne further from mine; and there do me this diflonour, at the
rauelt of my rebels, as to fend coinmiflioners to hear them
:.;infl me, as you would do to a mere subjet, and not hear me
i mouth. Now, madam, I have promlifed you to come to
.u, and having there made my umoan and complaint of thele
'bel{s, and, they coning thither, not as poffefbors, but as sub-
:"s, to answer, I would have besought you to bear Inyjufti-
:cation of that which they have falsely set furth against me,
-: if I could not purge mnyfelf thereof, you might then dif-
iarc your hands of my causes, and let me go for such as lai.
tit to do as you fay, if I were culpable I would be better ad-
;id; but being not so, I can't accept this diflonour at their
[3ad, that being in poffeliion they will come and accuse mi
-:;ore your conmiflioners, whereofl can't like : \nd feeing you
1k it to be against your honour and confignage to do other-
..e, I hefcech you that you will not be mine enemy, untill you
' 1-e how I can discharge myself every way. And to susser
r:; a go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain me;

a': thle least to go i.ito Scotland, with assurance that if there
.:::e any strangers thither, I will bind niyfelf tor their return
r:!l::t any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do thus,
3 Ir el that Iwill not impute it to falfhood, if I receive ftran-
;- n min country, without making you anyotherdifcliarge for

D3o with my body as you will, the honour or blame fildl be
-s. For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants
:::. .:coured 'rho' vau wou'd not so) by firangers, than to.

A a 2 susser

faster them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in time
to come, particular commodity. There be many things to
move me to fear that I shall have to do, in this country, with
others, than with you. But forasmuch as nothing hath follow.
ed upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may
happ. I have asleef to abide my fortune, as to seek it, and

endure 3

not find it. Further, it pleased you to give licence to myfub.
jects to go and come. This hath been refifed by my lord!
Scroop and Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, be.
cause I would not depart hence to your charge, untill I had an.t
fwer of this letter, tho' I shewed them that you required my
anfv.er, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

TH E one is to let you briefly understand, I am come to you

to make my moan to you, the which being heard, I would deI
clare unto you mine innocency, and then require your aid, and
for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to
God, that I am not heard in my just quarrel, and to appeal t
other princes to have refpe& thereunto, as my cafe requirethb
and to you, madam, first of all when you shall have examisne
vour conscience before him, and have him for witness.
And the other, which is to come further into your country, an
not to come to your presence, I will esteem that as no favour
hut will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing forced
In the mean time, I beseech you, to return to me my lord Her
:res, for I can't be without him, having none of my counsel
here, and als o

to susser me, if it please you, without further

ddavy, to depart hence whithersoever it be out of this country
i am sure you will not deny me this simple request for your hi
nour's fake, feeing it doth not please you to use your natura
goodnesG towards me orterwife, and feeing that of mine owt
accord, I am come hither, let me depart again, with yourt
And if God permit my causes to succeed well, I shall be bound
to you for it ; and happening otherwise, yet I can't blame yo0
As for my lord Fleming, feeing that upon my credit you hav
suffercd him to go home to his house, I warrant you he ha|
pals no further, but shall return when it shall please you.
that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. Bo

Perhas f(-om Dumbarton I answer not, when my L. Fleeming shall b
f.- in the Tower. For they which are within it, will not sorbea

to receive succour, if l don't assure them of yours; no, th
you would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge,
h;.ve rr. rerpeAl to my servants and to my estate, than to
i.fe. Good filler be of another mind, win the heart, and
li. be yours, and at your commandment. I thought to fat
i-' 3- V;.-,;h:iyr, if I mnight have seen you. Alas ! do not as i
firpent, that foppeth his hearing, for I am no enchanter, bt
y-;r '-:er, and natural cousin. If Czfar had no. difdamedtO

heg

hear or read the complaint of an advertiser, he had not to died;
,,hy should princes ears be flopped feeing that they are painted
flong? Meaning that they should hear all and be well ad-
ifed, before they answer. I am not of the nature of the bafi-
j;l:, and less of the chamelion, to turn you to my likeness, and
tho' I flould be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you are
iuffciently armed with conitancy and with justice, which I re-
quire of God, who give you grace to use it well with long and
:ppy life. From Carlile, the 5th of July, 1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 385. line 344)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop, and fir F.

Knollis, September 3d, 1568.

'

Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordlhips, I am infor- Cott. Lib.
. mit by James Borthwick, lately come from the queen's Cal. C.

ejefty your foverane, that it is fchawin to her highness, I fhuld An Origi-
Ilve ridden in Crawfurdmure, fen my lass cuming into this nal in his
:nlm, upon the earl of Murray's dependants. And that I fuld own hand.
bare caufit, or been of counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden in
l-g!and, to flay or fpulzie her majesty's fubje'ts.
My lords, I thought it right needful because your lordships
c, be your foverane, commanded to attend upon the queen's
siefly my mistresS, so having daily access in thir matters, to
tcdare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your lordflhip's
.i!l, for God's cause, certificate the queen your foverane the
iane.

As God lives, I have neither contented, nor any wife hr.d
kHwledge of ony Scottifman's ryding in England, to do the
:;'Ets thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene the siege of Leith;
.- as I understand it fllall be fund true, that gif ony sic open
i'rt be done, it is by the queen my sovereign's disobedients, and
:at I have not ridden nor hurt no Scottifhman, nor command-
0 any hurt to be done to them, fen my coming from the
cJeen's majesty of England, it is well kend, for that never ane
.'.!complain of me.
I HAVE done more good t6 Crawfurdmure nor ever the
rol of Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them any
arm than he will. Except the queen's majesty your fove-
'gn, command sic false reports to be tryit, quereof this is alto-
:dder inventit leafing, her grace fall be trublit, and tyne the
.arts of true men here, quhom of sic report fall be made,
'at baith would serve hir, and may, better than they unworthy

iars. ·MY lords, I understand the queen's majefly your fovcreign
not contented of this bruit, that there should ony Frenchman
:5e in this realm, with the duke of Chattlerault Truth it

A a 3 is.

is, I am no manner of w-iv the counfall of their cuming, nor
has no sic cerTainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's repo!t
from the queen's majefrv vour sovereign. And gif I might as
well sav it, a, it is true indeed, her gracefelf is all the vwvitt
and the cour.lall that will never let her take order with my
mrai:'recs cause. For that our sovereign havand her najety:s
pr mile, be writing, of luff. friendilip, and afliftance gif need
had so requirit, enterit that realm, upon the 16 day of Mar,
fen that time the queen's majetiv has commanded me diverse
times todeciare ihe would accept her caule, and do for her, and
to put her in peaceable polTefTion of this realme, and when I
required of 'her maielfv. in my maillrefs name, that her high-
ness wold either do tur her, (as her special trull was she wold)
according to her former promises, or otherwile gif her coun.
fal .old not cnnfent. (as I ihow her grace I sand diverse repug.
nant) then that hle would permit har to pass in France, or to
some other prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk
was agains all reason) that she would permit her to return in her
awin countrie. in sic fempil manner as the came out of it, and
said to her majeily ane of thir, of her honour, would not be
refufit, fecand that (he was comed in her realm upon her writ-
ings and promises of friendihip. And ficklike, I said to her
highness, gif my maiftrefs had the like promise of her nobilihy
and estates, as ihe had of herself, I (hould have reprovit theml
highly, gifthav had not condefendit to one of thir three, andi
so I sav, and so I write, that in the varid it fiall be maift repre-.
bendable. gif this promise taketh not other good effeAt, nor ve
it coes. Notwi-thlanding, I get gud answer of thir promiles'
of f.rie-d. i;p inde to my sovereign, and to put her grace in thi;'
her a-.-n countrie peaceably. -e have fund the contrary work-i
ing by Mr. Middlemore, directi from h-r highness to (fay the
ar-my that cruifidown our houses And alfua, in the preceding
of th.; late pretended parliament, promised twenty days before
the time to mvfeif to have caused it been difchargit. And etj
contrary to this promise, have they made their pretendit manner1
of forfauiture of :i men of guid reputation, bishops, abbo;is,
and barronies, obedient fubjccts to our sovereign, only for he
cause.

TH E Y have also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause was tafke

upon hand be the queen's majeflv of that realm, an hundred
thcLufand pounds Scots worth of her awin true futjects gier, uni
der the color of their law, groundit upon their falie, trcafonable,
lo :'.'in, authority.

TiiE murders, the onprefilons, the burnings, the rasviling

of women. the dellruciion of policy, both ecclefiatical and
tenporal, in this mean time, as in my former vwlitings I said it
xv.s !amentable to onv christian man to hear of except God gil
grace, the profeTlion of the ev-inile of Jesus Chrilt profeliit
be your prince, counfaii and reaiie, be marir nlvndit, nor tli

auli

ilid inamlty that has stand betwixt the realins, many of mny

intrvrmen will doubt in this article, and their proceedings put-
: ir fclfin fanct Thomas belief.
'Now, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that realm, upon
[chais pronife and honour my maiftrefs came there, as I have
;i, u-ill leave all the French writings, and French phrases of
I,-rin-, quhilks amongis them is over melkle on baith the
;: u-rit, and plainly, according to the auld true custom of
inlisd and Scotland, quherein be a word promift truth was ob-
.;rd, promise, in the name of the eternal God, and upon the
1,h honour of that nobill and princely blude of the k'rgs 'of
iniard, quhereof she is defcendit, and presently wears the
:.cnl, that ile will put mv maiftrefs in her awvin countrv, and
usui. her as queen thereof in her authority and ftrcngth to he
Acvit, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day withinl
::. montis. at the farthel:, as we underlland this to be cur
'.;il fia will we, or the mail part of us ahi, toiicw upon it,
rving the Frenchmen, and their evil French ph;lrals; t',gidder.
AAd thercibre, and for the true perpetual fiRicndihip of that
.almn, will condition, and for our part, vwith the g:ace of A!-
:;"hty God, keep sic heads and conditions of agrecnent, as
.ie and wife men can condetcend upon, for the s-.eill of this
hiiil iand. As I have been partlings declaring to the queen
sa'r 1overeign, quhilk I flew to your lordfliips feleis both in
;:digion. in the puniflment of the earl Bothwile, for the queen's
ir[ hulband's fiaughtcr, and for a mutual band oi amity perpe-
;i'!v to remain amangis us.
DounTI.Ess, my lords, without that, we mny lfind sic titn-
;:d friendiul working, as may gif us occasion baith to for-
.::te Middlemore and this late pretendit parliament, we wiil
-:n the leaf, leaving our lovereign agains our will to reft where
' ei, under the pronmife of friendhiip. As I have bait'n said,
/-: wiil ever affirm, made be your f)vereign, quhiik was only
;au;l of her graces coming in that realine, and seek the help
*[.lilyen of French, or Spaniill, till expulfe this treasonable
[ilt sale; pretendit autholity, quhill means to r,:ign ahove us.
M[Y lords, I dicre yourlordlhips confider, that it is he, that
:;t desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland to conti-
'u, and of a poor man best cause has, that writs thi;.
.MIY 1rother, the laird of S:riiing, fchaws me, that In your
.:!i:;rts c.mimuning w-ith him, it appearit to him, ymvr mind
t'. 'c ;ii ;.d lutfcr the earl of Murray to wo:rk, aitho it were
.:'s reason to us, and conmpain thereof to the queen's majefy,
I, lier lighinefs wald fee it reformit. My lords. her majefy
*ill be over meikle troubiit to reform the /wr'nges we have
uitainit already. For I am sure, gif reason snd jufiice may have
.ace, our maiftrefs, and we her lubjejts, al avC iceived express
:'"ng, far above two lundred thousand polinds tterling. in thc

u' of this unhappy government, feeilng the reformiation of la

A a 4 g ,.-at

.)77

great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie, and the ungodly
law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle praais'd, I think, no.w.
ther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordships would
fua mean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye
will give your sovereign sic advertisement thereof as your good
wisdoms ihall find in this cause meet. It will be true and
friendful workingforus, indeed, and nowther French phrases,
nor boasting, and finding little other effec, that will cause us to
hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written, and I
desire your lordlhips plain answer, for in truth and plainnei
langeft continues gud friendihip, quhilk in this matter I pray
God may lang continue, and have your lordships in his keep-
ing. Off Dumfreis, the 3d day of September 1568.

Your lordihips at my power

to command leitully

H E R R IS

Queen Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

i- Aug. T A D A M E ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres,
16S3. JV d'une mefme date; l'une, ou vous faites mention del'ex.
Cott. Lib cule de Mnonfr. de Murra pour tenir son pretendu parlement,
Cal. 1. Anqui me femble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerancequeje
Oriir.al. m'efltois perluadee n'avoir par voftre promeffe, quant a n'ofer

donner commission de venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de
nombre de nobleiTe alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois
ou quatre d'avantage, qui eufleutaufli bien dit leur opinion horsi
de parlement. qui n'a este tenu tant pour cette effec, mais pourj
fair ce qu' expreffement nous avions requis eltre empefches, quit
eft la forfalture de mes subjects pour m'avoir eftes fidelles, cee
que je m'affurois, jufques a hier, avoir eu en promeffe de vous,
par ia lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrupe Maiftre Knoleis vousinduire
a ire contre eulx, voire. a les enfayre refentir; toutefois jevois
que ie lay mal pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre|
lettre qu'il me montrerent, et leur parole, je l'ayfidivulguement.
alTuray cue pour vengeance que j'en defiraffe, si non mettrel
dflnerence enire leur taux deportemens, et les miens sinceres.
Dans voftre le;treaufTi datee du omne d'Aouft, vous mettie ces!
mots. " I think your adverse party, upon my sundry formerl
' advices, will hold no parliament, at all; and if they do, iti
" hall be only in form of an assembly, to accord whom to fend
"into this realm, and in what fort ; for otherwise, if theyfhall
" proceed in manner of a parliament, with any act of judgment
"againfr any person, I ihall not, in any wife, allow thereof;.

and if they iha!l be so overseen, then you may think the fame
to be of no other moment, than the former procedures: and
" b such their ral-h manner of proceeding, they flall most pre-
" judice themselves; and be assured to condemn them, in their

doings." Surquoy,j'ay contremande mes ferviteurs, les faiffant

retire:,

retirer, fouffrant felon voitre commandement d'etre faufiement
oimmiiis traitres, par ceulx, qui Ic font de vray; et encore
d'etre provoques par efcarmons dies, et par princes de me, gens
et lettres, et au contraire vous etes informee que mes tubleEls
ont evahis les voitres, Madame qui a fait ce rapport n'cte pas
honone de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont esRes mes
rebelles depuis le commencement; enquires vous, s'iis n'efnient
aDonfris aveques eulx, j'avois otfri refpondre de fa 'rontiere,
ce qui me fut refuse ce qui m'endevroit afies dcfcharil er, nean-
mnins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelite, et de leur

. alfit,

s'il vous me fayte donner le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier,
je connnanderay mes fubjecAs les pour fuivre, ou si vous voules
0ue ce foit les voftres, les miens leur avderont; je vous prie m''e;l
mander voftre volonte, au refte mnes fubjeEts fidelles fcront re-
fponlables a tout ce que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les
aolires, ni les rebelles, defpuis que me confeillates les fairc re-
tirer. Quant aux Francois, j'efcrivis que i'on m'en fit nulle
pouruite, car j'efperois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois be-
ioign,-je ne f:eu si le dict aura en mes lettres naii, je vous
iure devant Dieu que je ne fcay chose du monde de leur venue,
cue ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot du
nonde, et ne le puis croire pour ceft occasion, et si ils si font,
c'elt fans mon fceu ni confentement. Pourquov je vous lupplie
ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je fuis prest de tenir tout ce
quej'ay offert a Mester Knoleis, et vous assure que voftre ani-
te, qu'il vous pleff m'offiir, sera rescue avant toutes les choses
du monde, quant France fervit la pour prefler leur retour a
ceite condition, que prenies nies affaires en mein, en foecu, et
bonnc ami, comme ma France eft en vous ; mais une chose feule
me rende confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre oreille, la-
quelle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toures mes actions vous
lont defgulfees, et falfement raportees, par quoi il m'ct iimp)
iible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait
pour deftruire voftre bonne volontc de moy ; parquov! jedefire
rois bien avoir ce bien vous faire entendre ma sincere et h ':n
tlfetion, laquelle je ne puis si hien dcfcrire, que Iles encrml;
tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne foeur, gagncs mov; e:nsc
a)y querir, n'entr6e- en jealoufie pour faulx raports de ccll'
mne defre que votre bonne grace ; je me rcmiettrav filr 'i
Knoleis a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte, et 'upr

'

rsir bai-6e les mains, je prieray Dieu vols donner en ,
jpge et lheteul'e vie. De loton, ou je vous promn
nelpere partir, qu'asequcs vof!re bonne grace, qucy!c
eriteurs menntent. Ce 26 d'Aouft.

No XV. (Vol. II. p. 67. line 2z.)

Letter of Wa!fingham'sto Randolph, Feb. 3. 15o0-1.

SI R,

Co:t. Lb;. HA V E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your
CaJig.C.6. i l-tter of the 25th of the last directed unto his lordship, con-

taininga report ot your negotiation with the kingand his coun-
cil, in your second audience, wherewith having made her ma-
jefty acquainted, ihe seemed fonlewhat to mi/like, that you
jhould so long defer to deal for the enlargemenrt of Empedocles.
But I made answer in your behalf, that I thought you were di-
rected by the advice of the laid Empedocles'friends, in the fol-
litin, ofthar cause, who knew what time was fittest for you
to rake to deJl therein, with most effect, and best success, with
which anf-.er, her majeftydid in the end reft very well latisfied,
touching that point.

Yo uR putting of us in hope that D'Aubigny might easily be

won at her majesty's devotion, was at first interpreted to have
been ironie fpcke by you. But since it feemeth you infit upon
it, I could with vou were otherwise perfwaded of the man, or
at lealt kept that opinion to yourself, for confidering the end and
purpose of his coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sus-
ficiently proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and
reception into that government, to overthrow religion, and to
procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed
copy, which you may use to good purpose there, llall partly
give you rome light; there is no man here can be perfwaded
that he willchange his purpose, for so small advantage, as he
is like!y to find by it, and therefore you shall do well to for-
bear to harp any more upon that tfring, as I have already writ-
ten to you. The prince of Orange fending, I fear will not be
in time that it may do any good; for besides that there peo-
pie are in themlveies flow in their resolutions, their own affairs
are. at present, so great, their state so confused, and the prince's
authority so small, that he cannot so toon take order in it; and
vet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or careless in
the matter, hav ng, more than three weeks past, sent one about
it. from whom nevertheless I do yet hear nothing. The letters,
you desire lihouid be written thither by the French ministers, I
have g;ven order to Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt
not, will carefu;y perform it, so that, I hope, I shall have them
ta fend you bv the next. And so I commit you to God. At
V hitehall h thehird of February 580.

Your verv loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
i'-r;s !rtr i' n crigial, aidz in falne parts of it Qrvtte in cyfters

s.ctldr* i-x:.- if- vr:.o . r $lln.J. .y Em.peJirles is ucrdqc-2

V Iu.'ari':be ,.ng ;

3.ors-, jD',aubgig is .,SartfC
: - S o -'--. Fb

3 Feb. 1580.

Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time

to be better manilefted, being now thought meet to be in
convenient fort used, and laid against D'Aubigny, to prove
him abusing the king, the nobility, and that ltate.

IRST, it hath been informed, by credible means, that Cot. Lib.
D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with la Naue the Calig.C.6.

ling'q mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, and of his er- An Origi-
rand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and nal.
eilcem it an evil president for princes, that subjects might have
power to deprive their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother,
Eihbo was not minded, by any mean. to defeat him, either of the
present government of that realm, or yet of the poffeili'n of
thecrown and inheritance thereof, but rather to asSure the fame
to him; and that for the accompliflhment of that assurance, the
king flould have been advised and drawn to have governed,
for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubignv to rule as
governor of the prince, by commission frotm the queen his nmo-
ther, untill the king's enemies were filppreffcd; after which
tine, D'Aubigny should have power given to efiabliil and re-
ign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's voluntary con-
ftnt, whereby all such, as had before been in action againif the
queen or her authority, might be brought to Ifand in the king's
mercv. And for that the king mightlive iln mn re surety, D'Au-
biiny flhould be declared both secnd person in fucceltion of that
crw an, and also lieutenant-genieal of Scotland, and that D'Au-
higny, before his departure out of Fiance, received comniillion
from the king's mother to the effects remeibred, or near the
lime. That in this behalf he had conference wuith the bifhbp
o'Glafgow, and Ross, and with fir James Baford, with which
pertfons, and with the duke of Guise, he had and hath frequent
inelligence, and by fir James Baford he wa.; advised to confer
v.ith the lord John Hamilton before his repair into Sc,tland,
l'hereunto he agreed, and yet af'terw.Iiads he sent one John Ha-
,;ilton, to the said lord John, to excuse him in this part, allcdg-
ag, that he did forbear to come to hiii, left thereby he lhl ild
narr or hinder greater effects to be executed by him in Scotland.

Tn X - before his coming into that realm, the nobility and
sti'turv were well quieted and united in good concord, with
gret love betwixt the king and nobility, and amongf' the no-
biefre, but he hath both drawn the king agpint fiundry of the
chiefelt of his nobility, that have been molt ready, and have ex-
:-nded their blood and pofielTions to preserve religion, and dc-
lind the king's person, his government and estate, and aif hath
:'en occalions of great suspicions and offence to be engen-

deres,

dered bet:.-ixt the king and his nobility, and especially with such
as have been in action againfl the king's mother, and her au.
thori'v, who bh foircand means ofthe faidcommirnionandprac.
-ice, hl u!ld have been brought into moil dangerous condition;
and who zlf miv find themfrlves in no fmnall perril, whiles he
pc. Tcres the king's ear, abufeth his presence, and holdeth such
of the princ pal keys and ports of his realme, as he presently
':njoveth

TH A T he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great

benefitr done t^ him and his realm, by the queen's majesty of
L-g:a-d, but allo to require the fame with sundry signs of

-reat unthankfut!nefs, and wounding therewith the honour of
her majeisv, and thereby hath adventured to lhake the happy
mitv long time continued betwixt those princes.
AN D whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle let-
r a-nd good offers, to have passed, and been done betwixt
t- m : In which respect, the king and council having refolred

'-rite to her najelly, for her highness' better fatisfaftion in

:'- 'ae negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick,
;...: given order to the king's secretary to frame that letter: He
-. ndinnto breik the bond of amity in funder, willed the fecre-
:ry to be sure that nothing iliould be inserted in that letter,
whereb- the king 11suld crave any thing at her hands, seeking
therhvy to cut off all loving cour:ifcs betwixt them, as by the
declsr.:ion of the laid fecretars- may be better learned, and
thereupon further approved.

TH - T under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's

prctectio,? A!exranrcer King presumed with that boldness to
make hi; !ewd haransgue, and bv his means hath hitherto efcap-
ed chatlifement and cnrredfion. due for his offence.

THi A.T ir Tames Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the

King'S father, hath been called into the realm by Lennox, with-
out the priv;r of the king. And whereas the said fir James
f.und in a ge- veivet desk. Ia:e the earl of Bothwcll's, and saw,
and had in his hands the principal hand of the conspirators in
that tmurder, ard can best declare and witness who were au-
thor- and executcrr of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to
fJpDrels the tru-j. and to accuse such as he himself knoweth
to be innocen; ; and as bv order of law, will be so found, if they
mav hav:-c de tr;I-, which, contrary to all justice, is by Len-
nrx means cer.n d.

TI'ii is i " r-aresg onoinlf D'Aubi;ny, mentioned in tie fore-

gfite l:etr -7; la/;,,fFeim ,; hbt ,vy Bafcrd they mean fir anmes
BaleGfor.

No. XVI.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. too. line 17.)
The ScottiSf queen's offers upon the effeEt of her liberty pro-

pounded by her secretary Naw, November 1584.

HE queen my mistress being once well assured of your C.,-,' L:.
majesty's amity, . i

. WILL declare openly that she will (as it is sincerely her . 1;

meaning) straitly to join unto your majesty, and to the fame to
rield and bear the chief honour and refpeft, before all other
kings and princes in Christendom.

2. SHE will swear, and protest solemnly, a fincereforgetrul!-
Reis of all wrongs which lfie may pretend to have been done n -
to her in this realm, and E ill never, in any fort or manner wha;-
soever, shew offence for the fame.

3. SHE will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own r--
ticular name, as also for her heirs and others descending of her
for ever, your majesty for just, true, and lawful queen of ' g-
land.

4. AND consequently, will renounce, as well for herrc. i.
for her said heirs, all rights and pretences which fhie rnay cr:'
to the crown of England, during your majesty's life, ani n -. .r
prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all ads and shews, by her he.rto---r
made, of pretence to this said crown to the prejudice ors 'v,.r
.najefty, as may be the taking of the arms and stile of qu..:,r't
England, by the commandment of king Francis her late '.-,i
ind husband.
6. SH E will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may b:
expounded to turn in her favour, and for her behoof, touching
i;,e deprivation of your majesty, and will declare that she will
rever help and serve herfelt' with it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, duringyour majeily's life, hy open
trce or otherways, any publick declaration of her right in the
iacceffion of this realm, so as secret afflrance be given unto
rer, or at the least publick promise, that no deciding thereof
hiall be made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son,
.uring your majesty's life, nor after your decease, untill such
':!me as they have been heard thereupon, in publick, free, and
;nertal assembly of the parliament of the said realm.
8. SHE will not practice, directly or indirectly, with any of
"our majesty's subjects, neither within nor out of your realm,
'.y thing tending to war, civil or foreign, againit your majesty
ark your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for civil and
po!itick government.

9. Sn it will uot maintain or support any of your fubjeas de-
ialcd rebels, anld convifted of treason against you.

tO. SHE

o1 SHE v.ill enter into the association, which was flejed

her at V inzfield for the surety of your majesty's life, to as thern
he mended cr right cxplicated fonie clauses, which I will shew
to your najefiy, when I iall' have the copy thereof, as I have
be:ore lime required.

it. SH- v. ii not treat wi;h foreign kings andprinces, forany

var or Ircubh!- ar-::;t th; i ate, ar.d v.iil renounce, from this
tilr:e, ?c-ntrFr!:-s made or ta be Imade in her favour for that
refp c.

z. F r H E r O RE. this realm being assailed by any ci\il

or firr ign v r, jhe v.-i l tlke part vwith your n!a;lfty, and aflitl
you in our feerce with all her forces and mesns, depending
of Iereifi ant vw ih all her friends of Christendom.

13 A:-D to that efft , for the mutual defence and mainte-

r:.rce ct v uLr najcftv and the two realns of this isle, flie will
enicr;'ii, v-,r n!ajicfly in a lague defensive, as flall be more
partiiular' ad iCcd, and -ill pcrfuade as much as in her, the
ii.n, her f.n to do the like.

T'H l I-a,:e; with ali partc abroad remaining firm, and efpe-

ciallv th- ancient league betecen France and Scotland, in that
vwhch ]ila! ntc be agsinft thi, pr fcnt.

14. Sni . w ill enter into a !eague nffenfive, having good as-

furance. or f. crt declaration and acknowledgment of her right
in the fi;cc1 iin of this crown, and promile, that happening
snr) breach hcit ixt France and this realm, (which fle praveth
Goc rever to happen) the jult value of her dowry iliall be placed
for her in iands of the revenuc of the crown.

I;. ForF. Miirarce of her promises and covenants, fhedoth

off'r to albie herfeif in this realm for a certain time, (better
hcftage c-.n ;:le not give than her own perlon) w hich, so as she
be kept n :- t' libert here before propounded, is not in cafe to
e'cap- fecet:iv cut of this contr-v, in the sickly Itate the is in,
and with t-e good order which our majehy can take therein.

16. AX D ;n cafe your :ijieil! do agree to her full and whole

ce:;-erance, tr. cthc herself at her wiil out of this realm, the
fid quee-rn ,1 -'.; .lie v.ill giv c fu.Tcient hofrage for iuch time
as v. iii be ac: I-d.

17 TI fl.e ablde ;n this real;i, flie will promise not to depart

cut o- it, -.. i{ut , -,iur licence, !-o .a i, be proinifed unto her
t-t t her -._:e. .n inch ilb-rr:it n.s .ial be accorded unto her,
flia.: not b ;rn r fort n!tercd, u.-tiil after tryall to have at-
tc.',pred a^i. -t .'ir
o or other troulle of your eflate.

i?. IF .- iinto Scotland. tlie will proniile to alter nothing

thc-r. in ti e r-!j;on - hich is now. used there, ihe being f!ilTered
t i. hae f.--e ct.-rciie of hers, fir her and her hou!tlold, as it

t. a-r r

r r-eu-n cut of France; and lunrthr, topull out everl

r>-a cf .-:::w d'.L;.in b; tw e

?n the

ucs tht noneofthe fib-

iu, c:- -

S i;ard tltal! he f.-'ed for hi- conl,-nce, nor constrain-

ed -:c. : ) tJ the ' :, ice o; thl conI rar y r >'.i
r i. tu

IQ. Silt

1q SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences done

against her in Scotland, and things shall remain there as they are
;t this present, for that respect, saving that which hath been
done against her honour, which hle meaneth to have revoked
and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation
between the nobility of the country, and to cause to be appoint-
ed about the king her son, and in his council, such as ihall be
t; for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the country,
and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majesty, in favour
of the Scots lords banished and refuged hither, upon their due
fubiniflion to their princes, and your majesty's promise to assist
nthe aid queen and king of Scotland against them, if they happen
io tall into their former faults.

22. SH E will proceed to the marriage of the king her son,
With the advice and good council of your majeffy.

23. As she will pass nothing without the king her son, so
ioth she desire that he intervene conjointly with her in this trea-
:., for the greater and perfecter aflurance thereof; for otherwise
vny thing can hardly be established to be found and continue.
24. IH E said Scotch queen trufteth, that the French king
her good brother, according to the good affection which he hath
slreas shewed her, and hath been afreih testified unto me by
'.lonir de Mannilfiere for this Iaid treaty, will very willingly in-
icrrene, and will aflill her for the surety of her promises.

25. AND so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, follow-
i:g the will of the laid King, will hind themselves thereunto.

26. For other kings and princes of Christendom, flie will
iray to obtain the like of them, if for greater solemnity and ap-
probation of the treaty it be found to be necesSary.

27. SH F. doth desire a speedy answer, and final conclusion of
Le premilFes, to the end to meet in time with all inconveni-
mcies.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to ftrengthcn the said
!teaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, flie defretll
:htt demonstration be made of tome releafement of her cap-
'Iity.
Objecions against the Scottilf queen, under fccretary Walfing-

hame's hand, November i584.
T H E queen of Scots is amrbitionu, and flandeth ill asse:t-

ed to her maj'-iy, and therefore it cannot bebut that her
;:.r'y- hould bring peril unto her nrajrtTy.

1 HAT

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papilts, and

e:her ill affected fubiCc'ts, and greatly advance the opinion had
ofher title a- fuccc:-s.

TH ... - rs lo. as iie shall be continued in her majesty's pof.

fdTicr. 1ll'- mav lrve as it were a gage of her majesty's surety,
for tha: :-.r friends, for fear of the danger she may be thrown
inio, :n cafe any thing illculd be done in her favour, dare not
attempt any thing in the offence of her majesty.
November } What course were fit to be taken with the queen

1584. 3 of Scots, cither to be enlarged or not.

C-t I 'b. 'j HE course to be taken with the (aid queen may be con-
Cal. S. T fidered of in three degrees; either,

i. To continue her under custody in that state she now is.
z To restrain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. OR to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. To U c H 1 X G the first, to continue her under custody under

that slate ]ihe now is; it is to be confidered, that the princes
t'nat tivour that queen, upon the complaint file maketh of hard
tu.ge, are greatly moved with commiseration towards her, and
pr-.mite to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which pur-
po.e, her minifrers follicit them daily.

A ' D to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquaint-

eth them with her offers made to her majesty, which appeared
to he no !es profitable than reasonable for her majesty, so as
the re-ufsl and rejecting giveth her friends and favourers cauL
to thi'nk her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the
better ground and reason, attempt somewhat for the setting of
her at liberty.

IT i; aflo likel- that the said queen, upon this refusal, find-

ing her cafe defperare, will continue her pracice under hand,
bc:h at hclne and abread, not only for her delivery, but to
attlar. o the ?rclent poiTeflion of this crown upon her pretended
t.tle, as lhe hath hitherto done, asappeareth, and is mo ima-
r. !.' by letters and plctr in'ercepted, and chiefly by that late

t2i!-r:e:on of Scotlann, v. :iich hath proceeded altogether by her

direct'on, v. hereb;- . 5.p is laid open for the malice of all her
r:..aj:'s enemies.. o as it appeareth that this manner of keep-
i- E her. , ith such number of peribns as the now hath, and with
!l'Irrw' to v.ri:e and receive letters, (being duly confidered) is
crnr.-fi-e t to the prrce<, the said queen's friends ; rather charge-
ab;-, thar. prc: -.t:c to :hr maiefrv; and subjeR to all such
prac'ice~ a-; I?'.v p -: her iaie-fy's person or state, without any
prc'vilin t o her tr.iefit's ia;ety, and therefore no way to be
liked oC.

z To t- c n: '-. iLe second. :o restrain her in a mo-e straighter
degr- cf the :l:1--, i;.e hath hitherto c.njO-ed.

!r

Ir may, at first fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop
the course of the dangerous practices fofLered heretofore by
ler: For, true it is, that this remedy might prove very profita-
b'e, if the realn of Scotland stood in that fortdevoted to her ma-
ielrv, as few years pars it did ; and if the king of that realm
'Were not likely, as well for the release of his mother, as for the
advancement of both their pretended title, to attempt some-
rhat against this realm and her majelty, wherein he should nei-
Iher lack foreign afliftance, nor a party here within this realm:
But the king and that realm standing affected as they do, this
restraint, instead of remedying, is like to breed there inconve-
riencies following:

FIP.ST. It will increase the offence both in him, and in the
reit of the princes her friends that mifliked of her restraint.

St.coNDLY, It will give them just cause to take some way
of redress.

L. T L Y, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke fore de-
ferate ill disposed person, all hope of her liberty removed, to
Itenlpt somewhat against her majesty's own person, (a matter
above all others to he weighed) which inconveniency being
aulv confidered, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in
iftraighter degree, is likely to prove a remedy fubjeEt to very
lard events.

TH E latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the said queen
at liberty, miniftreth some cause of doubt, touching the man-
ierof the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be performed,
whether to be continued here within the realm, or to be retlor-
d into her own country.
BuT first, this proposition, before the particularities be
weighed, is to be confidered in generality.
FOR it is very hard for a well affected subject, that tendereth
iermajeftv's surety, and weighetheither the nature of theScot-
!ih queen, being inclined to ambition and revenge, or her for-
mer actions, what practices flie hath set on foot most dangerous
: her majesty and this reall, to allow of her liberty, being
nt made acquainted with such causes, as tnie hath wrought,
:make it less perilous than it hath been, nor with such cau-
ons as may, in some fort, be devised to prevent both her am-
:ition and malice; and therefore to make this apparent,
IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mo-
'er, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame
:ee he doth: Such as do affect her, both at homeandabroad,
'lasset him; (and he is the more dangerous for that he is
C:married, which may greatly advance his fortune, and that
'is a man, whereby he may enter into action in his own per-
!n) where she is rcftralned, he is at liberty; his own realm is
a' altogether at his devotion, and the party affected to this
:rn abased ; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her li-
VOL. II. B b berty

bertv nor restraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards
her majesty, unless by such promises as may be made by way of
treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from the king her
son be provided for.

BUT in this behalf it may be objeated, that so long as the

mother remains in her majesty's hands, the king will attempt
nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objecion it may be answered, first, That they hope

that her majeftv, being a prince of justice, and inclined to
mercy, will not punilh the mother for the son's offence, unless
The ihall be found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily, That
men will not be over-hafty, confidering in what predicament
the king standeth touching his expectation of this crown, to ad-.
vise any thing that in time future mav be dangerous to the giser'
of such council as mav reach to his mother's peril.

AND latilv, the taking away of his mother, he be'ng str.ong

in the field through both foreign assistance, and a party hbcre
within the realm, will appear so weak a remedy, (which may,
rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed witih
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard meafurei
should be offeredunto her) as they will suppose for the reafoli
above specified, that no such extremity will be used.

IT may also be objected, that the setting of her at liberty

will greatly encourage the papists both at home and abroad 'i
but herein, if the provision be duly confidered, that maybe!
made by parliament both here and there, they fiall rather find:
cause of discomfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that wa

in the mother appearing most manifefily to be seen in the fol
accompanied with more danger, with due consideration had ailo
of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the
dangers, that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt ofi
there will be good cause of hope found, that the fame will ra.
ther breed benefit than perils.

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty shall be performt

ed ; if it shall be thought meet flhe shall be continued within the
realm with some limitation, especially in that place where ihe
now refideth, the country round about being so infected in reli-
gion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much in-
ereafe the corruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides
she should have commodity, with much more ease, and speed,
to entertain pratices within this realm, than by being in her
own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotlandor

France, then ihall her majeftv lose the gages of her safety, thet
shall the be at hand to give advice in furtherance of such prac-
tices, as have been laid for to flir trouble in this realm, where-
in The hath been a principal party.

FoR the first, it is answered before, that the respect of any
perils that may betal unto her, will in no fort refilain her Con
For the other, if it be confidered what harm her advice will
work unto herself, in refpeft of the violation of the treaty, and
the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be
tihught, that fie will then be well advised, before she attempt
ar' luch matter, which now fin may do without perill. Befidce
such princes, as have interposed their faith and promise for her,
cinnot with honour aflift her, wherein the French King will
rJr be found very forward, who, in inoft friendly fort, hath
hliv rejected all such requests, propounded either by her, or
tr Ion's ministers, that might any way offend her majety.
And to to conclude, feeing the cause of her grief ihall be taken
avwav; the French king gratified, who is a mediator for her,

',i will mislike, that, by any Spanilli pra&ice, flhe should be

C:aw;n to violate her faith; that the refl of the princes fliall
hn'e no jutt cause of offence, but rather to think honourably of
her inajelty conidering the Scottili queen's carriage towards
her, which hath deserved no way any such favour; the noble-
men of Scotland shall be restored, who will be a good flay of
such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm, efpe-
crally having so good a ground of warrant as the parliament to
tand unto ; the charges and perills which her practices might
have bred to this realm fihall be avoided; and lastly, the hopc
of the papists (hall be taken away, by such good provisions, as
ihboth the realms may be made, whereby the perils that might
fall into her majesty's own person, (a matter of all others to be
weighed) (hall be avoided, when by the change that miay- grow
hr any such wicked and ungodly practice, they ihall fee their
cale no way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce her majeftv to proceed in the treaty under

Secretary Walsingham's hand.

HAT such plots as have of late years been devifedCott. LTb
(tending to the railing of trouble within this realm) have Calig. C.

grown from the Scots queen's minilters and favourers, not with-8
cut her allowance and seeking: Or,
THAT the meansufed by the said niniifters, to induce prince;
'! give ear to the said plots, is principally grounded upon folile
coimiferation had of her reitraint.

TH AT the flay, why the said plots have not been put in ex-
erution, hath proceeded, for that the laid princes have, for
the noRf part, been entertained with home and domestic trou-
bles.

Tn AT it is greatly to be doubted, that n.ow their realms be-
g:. to be quiet, that somewhat w ill be attemipted in her tavour;
'* the said princes.

B b z

1 NHT

TH. r it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be at-

tempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the
peril! of her majesty.

THAT for the preferration thereof, it shall be convenient

for her majesty to proceed to the finilhing of the treaty, not
long fithence begun between her and the said queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 126. line i.)

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SI R,

O-igint. T DID forbear, according to your direction signified in your:
Ca C. 9. l letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed to the execu-

tion of the contents of Mr. \Vaades letters unto you, for the
diperfing of this lady's unnecessary servants, and for the seasing
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my fimpie
opinion, (although in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters
of the 7th of this instant, which I doubt not are with you be-
fore this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5th,
which came not unto my hands until the 8th in the evening,
by reafan as did appear by indorfement, that they had been
mniiiaen, and were lent back to Windsor, after they were en--
tered into the way towards me, I confidered, that being accom-
panied only with my own servants, it might be thought that
they would be intreated to fay as I would command them, and
therefore I thought good, for my better discharge in thele mo-
ney matters, to crave the assistance of Mr. Richard Bagott, who
repairing unto me the next morning, we had access to this
cueen, whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old man-;
rer with a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide oft
her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her hands,
unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her former prac-i
t'fr;, doubting leftl Ile would perift therein by corrupting un-
derhand some bad members of this state, I was exprefly com-
manded to take her money into my hands, and to reft answer-
able for it, when it shall be required; adrifing hertodeliverthe:
said money unto me iith quietness. After many denials, many.
cxclamations, and many bitter words against you, (I fay nothing
of her railing againit myself) with flat affirmation that her ma-.
jeftv might have her body, but her heart lbe should never have,
refusing to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my servants,
and lent for barrs to break open the door, whereupon she yield-
ed and causing the door to be opened, I found there in the cos-:
ners mentioned in Mr. \\aade's remembrance, five rolls of can-
vass, containing five thousand French crowns, and two leather
bags, whereof the one had, in gold, one hundred and four

poundr

pounds two shillings, and the other had three pounds in silver,
which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that fle had no
nore money in this house, and that fle was indebted to her
l;rvants for their wages. Mr. Waades note making mention Curie can
of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he was tell you
:nilre;koned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and the truth
oanhs ofdiverfe persons, as also by probable conjectures; so as of this
in truth we found only two rolls, every of which containeth one matter.
thoutind crowns, which was this queen's guifte to Curie's wife
; her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a ca-
b;ner, a chain worth by estimation one hundred pounds, and in
. itlcy, in one bag nine hundred pounds, in a second bag two
hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen Shillings. All the
;rc!id parcells of money are bestowed in bags, and fealed by
Ml. Richard Bagoit, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's mo-

wi', which I reserve in my hands, for the use of this houfhold,

atd nmay) be repayed at London. where her majesty fliall appoint
out of the money, received lately by one of my servants, out of
lteExchequer. I feared left the people might have dispersed
taii moiney in all this time, or have hidden the fame in Come fe-
c't corners, for doubt whereof, I had caused all this queen's
Ia::;;il, from the h;ghelt to the lowefl, to be guarded in the fe-
>eral places where I found them, so as yff I had not found the
:oney, with quietness, I had been forced to have searched first
iltheir lodgings, and then their own persons. I thank God
with all my heart, as for a singular blessing, that that falleth
cut to well, fearing left a contrary success mnight have moved
fonme hard conceits in her majesty.

TOUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I
bve done so much, as may suffice to satisfy her majesty for the
time, wherein I could not take any absolute course, until I
heard again from you, partly because her majelty, by Mr.
l\ade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return such
is hall be discharged to their several dwellings and countries,
'herein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to deliver your opi-
ion ; partly, for that as yet, I have received no answer from
;ou, of your resolution, upon the view of the Scottish family
:Mnt unto you, what persons you will appoint to be difinift; on-
i this I have done, I have bestowed all such, as are mentioned
! this hill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame
!a.r suffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink shall This lady
.r brcught unto them by my servants. It may please you, to hath good
:i''rtife me by your next lutter;, in what fort, and for what Ltore of
curie, I shall make their paWports, as also, if they shall fay money at
at they are unpaid of their wages, what I shall do therein. present in
i! is said that they have been accustomed to be paid of their the
'raes at Chriftimas, for the whole year. Her majesty's charge French

B b 3 will Ambaffa-

dor's
hands.

will be fomewbar d:i-inijhed by the departure of this peopie
and mv charge hv this cccafion, will be the more easy. But
the perfors, al! save Baflian, are such fillv and simple fouls, as
there was no great cause to fear their practices, and upon this
ground. I was of cp:n:on, in my former letters, that all this
difinilTed train should have followed their mirfrefs, until the
next remove, and there to have been discharged upon the fud-
den, for doubt that the laid remove might be delayed, yf he
did fear, or expect any hard measure.

OTH E R shall excuse their foolilh pity as they may; hut for

rmy part, I renunce mv part of the jays of heaven, yf in any
thing that I have said, written, or done, I have had any other
refpec' than the furtherance of her majeftvs lervice; and so I
Iha!! most earnestly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for
the not feafir.g of the monev by Mrr. Manners, the other com-
mrn.ilners and myfe!f. I triit Mr. W aade hath answered, in
a!! humble duties. for the whole company, that no one of us
did so much as think that cur commifion reaching only to the
papers. we might be bold to touch the money, so as there was
no Ipeech of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I was
no c .mmilTioner in this search, but had my hands full at Tyx-
ha'. discreet servants are not hartily to deal in great matters,
u-:h-cut warrant, and efpecialiy where the cause is such as the
dCav of i- carr:eth no danger.

YO u R advertisement of that happy remove hath been greatly

ccmrortable unto me. I will not sav, in respect of mvfelf, be-
caul'e m- private interefl hath no measure of comparison with
her majefrvs safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God
grant a happy and speedy yffue to there good and godly coun-
ft! ; and so I commit vou to his merciful protection. From
Chartley the Ioth of September 1586.

No. XVIII. (Vol. II. p. 147. line 32.)
Cer' of a letter from the earls of Shrev.fburv and Kent, &c.

tiuc>-i- :hcir prcceed:rgs with regard to the death of the
Scortsh queen, to her majesty's council.

T may please your honbie good lord'hips to be advertised,
thar, on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Robert Beale

came t-i the house of the earl of Kent in the county of-
to whom your lordfrhip' letter and meflage was delivered, and
her majeftv's cmimmiffion ihewn ; whereupon I the earl forth-
wih feni precepts for the flaying of such hues and cries as
had troub!ed the country, requiring the officers to make flay
of all such persons, as should bring any such warrants without
names, as before had been done, and to bring them to the next
juf:ice of peace, to the intent that upon their examination,

the

he occasion and causes of such seditious bruites might be bolt-
edour and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl
ns Kent flhould on the Monday following, come to Lylford to
\lr. Limes, to be the nearer and readier to confer with my lord
, Shrewsbury. Sunday at night, I Robert Beale came to So-
theringay, where after the communicating the commiflion, &c.
nto ti fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that
A,-A. Pawlet was but late recovered and not able to repair to
:he earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix miles of; it
.2~ thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale
:'ould go unto him, which we did on - morning; and
[oether with the delivery of her majesty's commiflion, and
:ur lordflhip's letter, imparted unto him what both the earl of
Kent and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying his
!irdlhip hither the day following, to confer with me the said
tarl, concerning the fame ; which his lordship promised. And
.or the better colouring of the matter, I the said earl of Shrew-
hurv lent to Mr. Beale, a justice of peace of the county of
Huntington next adjoining, to whom I communicated that war.
ant, which Robert Beale had under your lordship's hands, for
the htaying of the hues and cries, requiring him to give notice
thereof to the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the
!ltices of peace of Huntingdonshire, and to cause the pursuers
snd bringers of such warrants to be stayed, and brought to the
-xt justice of peace; and to bring us word to Fotheringay caf-
!e on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he
i!:uld in the mean time underfland of the authors of such bruites.
\ n'hch like order I also fir Amias Pawlet had taken on Monday
..,rning in this town, and other places adjoining. The fame
night, the sheriss of the county of Northampton upon the re-
ceir of your lordflip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were
ent to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's intention
ad :neeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other letters were
at';l sent with their lordships assents to fir Edward Montague,
i; Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to be here on
i'elnefday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which
i'.:e it was thought meet that the execution flhould be. So upon
luefttay, we the earls came hither, where the sheriss met us;
and upon conference between us it was resolved, that the care
;cr the fending for the surgeons, and other necessary provision
hl.uld be committed unto him against the time. And we forth.
sith repaired unto her, and first in the presence of herself and
her folks, to the intent that they might fee and report here-
a'ter that she was not otherwise proceeded with than according
to law, and the form of the statute made in the 27th year of
her majesty's reign, it was thought convenient that her majecfy's
conimillion flould be read unto her, and afterwards hle was

B b4 by

by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself againfl the er.x -
morning. She .:-as ailo put in remembrance of her fault, the
honourable manner of proceeding with her, and the neceflf i
that was imposed upon her imajeity to proceed to execution, for t
that otherwise it was found that they could not both stand to-
gether; and however, fithence the lord Euckhurft's his being
here new conspiracys were attempted, and To would be fill;
wherefore lince she had now a good while since vwarninz, b
the said lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare her-
ftil to die, we doubted not but that flie was, before this, fc-
tied, and therefore would accept this mefnage in good part.
And to the efiectc that no clriftian duty might be said to be
omr.itted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the lalva-
tion both of her b.dv and foul in the world to come, we offered
unto her that if it uouli please her to confer with the bilhop
aid dean of Peterborough, lhe¢ might; which dean, we had,
for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of
rhat p!ace. Hereto she replied, cro!ing herself in the name of g
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Gholl, laying that flme was
readv to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her anceilors '
had professed, from which flie would not be remaved. And
albeit we used many persuasions to the contrary, yet we pre-
vaiecd nothing; and therefore, when /he demanded the admit-
tance of her priest, we utterly denied that unto her. Here- i
upon, f'ie demanded to underfiand what answer we had touch-
ing her former petition to her maieftv, concerning her papers of
accoun:s, and the b lrowing of her body. To the tirft we had ,
none ocher anfcer to make, but that we thought if they were
not fetnr before, t-.e finie might be in lMr. ,"aade's custody
who wras now in France. and leeir.g her papers could not anv-
wilc leaf .re her mrieliv. wc' doubted no' but that the lanme
vwo!id be dc'iv-tcd unto lich as ihe l,,,uld appoint. FGr,
for our :ew . prt, v.e und :ubicdh- tho:ught that her majeLty
wou!l no: rmake ani pr.fit o- her things, and theretore (in our
opinions) ihe might fe; down what ihe would have done,
a-d thr fiam e liculd be impirted unto her majesty, of whom

th ie a',d p

otherCi nmght expect all courtesy. Touching her

b d;, we knew not her maieity's p -afure, and therefore could
r-'.her 1': v 'hat her petition should be deny'd, or granted. For
the arr-ctice of Bbhington, 'he utteriv denied it, and would have
inft rred it, th.: hcr death was for her religion; whereunto it
wvs ftfroo-ns bhu us replied, that for many years she was not t
toucnh-d for re!iion, nor flaould hare been nowv, but that this
procceding agairt. her was for treason, in that lte was culpa-
ble of ctha h-rrible confl)oracy for dcftroving her majeity's per-
fr,n; wh.lh ine a-gin denied, adding further, that albeit Ihe
for h-rfelffnrg-ive them that were the procurers of her death,
vr: :Tae coub-ed no: but that God would take vengeance there-
of And bcing charged with the decofinions ofNauc and Curie

to

' a -
^ ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

5

to prove it against her, she replied, that she accused none, but
that hereafter when flie fliall be dead, and they remain alive,
it Ihall be seen how indifferently flie had been dealt with, and
what measure had been used unto her; and asked whether
it had been heard before this, that servants had been praftifed
to accuse their mistress, and hereupon also required what was
b:c nie of them, and where they remained.

I["ON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the
c :.!.: iron, that the charge of her was in the disposition of us
r;ic ea'-. *we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue Drurie to
iee;:'e, : "r that night- the charge, which they had before, and
r0 cau,; the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and
that her !':. should be put up, and take order that on!y four
c, the;n should be at the execution, remaining aloof of and
guardcd with certain persons, so as they should not come near
I:;to h.;, which were Melvil her steward, the physician, fur-
,son, and apothecary.

\V E D NE SD A Y morning, after that we the earls were repaired
r:,) the caflle, and tie fleriff had prepared all things in the hall
fr the execution, he was commanded to go into her chamble,
and to bring her down to the place where were present, we
wicr!l hie-, signed this letter, Mr. Henry 'iallot, efq; fir Fd-
w-ard Montague, knt. his son and h-it apparent, and William
lonatague, his brother, fir Richard Knichtly, Mr. Thomas
Brudcnel, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robe-rt and John Wingefield, Mr.
F reft, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbo-
rough and others.

AT the flairfold, she pawsed to speak to Melvil in our hear-
ing, which was to this effcct, " Mclvil, as thou haft been an
ineft servant to me, so I pray thee continue to my son, and
ouommend me unto him. I have not impugned his religion, nor
ihe religion of others, but with him well. And as I forgive all
:hat have offended me in Scotland, so I would that he flould
;iin; and beseech God, that he would fend him his holy
n:it, and illuminate him." Melvil's answer was, that he would
hdo, and at that instant he would beseech God to aftil him
[:ith his ipilit. Then The demanded to speak with her priest,
ahich was denied unto her, the rather for that ihe came with a
[%er}irious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to
'i'e her womten to help her, and upon her earnet request, and
Iri-g that when other gentlewomen were executed, she had read
.'chronicles that they had women allowed unto them, it v:'a
imrnmitted that file (inuld have two named by hcrfllf. which
a'ere Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After she came to the scaffold,
'ft, in presence of them all her majeflie's commiflion was open-
· read; and afterwards Mr. Dean of Peterborough, according
:ca dir ctiun, swhich he had received the night before from us
:;eearls, wou'd have made a godly admonition to her to repent

and

aid dve wr-il n the fear of God and charity to the world. Rut
at the frfi cn'-", ihe utterly refused it, faying that the wvas
would that i; - ihou!d aifoi and beleech God, that he catho-
lique, and that it were a folly to move her, being so resolutely
minded, and that our prayers would little avail her. Where.
upon, to the intent it might appear that we, and the whole al-
femibly, had a christian desire to have her die well, a godlr
prav-r. cnrceiv'd by Mr. Dean, was read and pronounced by
us ai; "That it would please Almighty God to fend her his
hcly fJiri: and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pardon
all her offences, and of his mercy to receive her into his heaven.
iy andever'.aring kingdom, and finally to bless her majesty, and
confound all her enemies;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to re-
pair up Jhortly, can ihew your lordships a copy.

THIS done, ihe pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this

effclt; " To beseech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that
oe trusted to receive her salvation in his blood, and of his grace
to be received into his kingdom, besought God to forgive her
enemies, as? he forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this
land, to bless the queen's maieftie, that file might serve him.
Likewise to be merciful to her son. to have compafiion of his
church, and aitho' he was not worthy to be heard, yet (he had
a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray
unto her iaviour to receive her.' After this (turning towards
her servants) fiiedeilred them to prav for her, that her Saviour,
would receive her Then. upon petition made by the execu-
tioners, Ihe pardoned them; and said, (he was glad that the
end of all her sorrows was so near. Then she mifliked the
whinning and weeping of her women, faying, that they rather
ought to thank God for her resolution, and killing them, willed
them to depart from the scaffold. and farewell. And so refo-
lutely kneel'd down, and having a kercheff banded about her
eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded.:
Her servants were incontinently removed, and order taken that
none Should approach unto her corps, but that it should be em-
balmed by the surgeon appointed. And further her crosse, ap-
parell, and other things are retained here, and not yielded unto
the executioner for inconveniences that might follow, but he is
remitted to be rewarded by such as sent him hither.

TH Is hath been the manner of our dealings in this service,.

whereof we have thought good to advertise your lord/hips as
particularly as we could, for the time, and further have thoughti
good to finifv unto your lordships hefEdes. that for the avoiding
of all fir.i'er and flandernus reports that mav be raised to the
contrary, wehav, caused a note th-recof to be conceiv'd to the
lame effect in wvrt;ng. which we the f id lords have subscribed,
with the handu of such other thcre the knights and gentlemen
above named rnt were prefert at the action. And fihefeech-
ing Ahnightv God long to bless her majesty with a inot profpe-

rouc
396

rous reign, and to confound all his, and her enemies, we take
our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the 8th of February
l;86, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.

N. B. This. as well as feveril other papers in this Appendix,

is taken from a collection made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drum-
soy, hitforiographer to Q Anne, now in the library ofthe fa-
culty of Advcates. M\r Crawfurd's transcriber has omitted
to mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be found.

No. XIX. (Vol. II. p. 152. line 17).

The objecions against Mr. Davison, in the cause of the late
Scnrtifni queen, must concern things done either, i. Before
her trial at Fotheringay. 2. During that session. 3. After
the fame.

F. EFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged Cott. L.ib.
to have had any hand at all in the cause of the said Calig.C. .

cueen, or done any thing whatsoever, concerning the fame di-
iedly, or indireCly.

2. DURI Nc that feflion, he remained at court, where the
on!v interest he had therein, was as her majelfy's secretary, to
receive the letters from the commissioners, impart them to her
highness, and return them her answers.

. A FT E R the return thence, of the said commillioners, it

.: well known to all her council,

i. THAT he never was at any) deliberation or meeting what-
."eer, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause of the
iaid queen, till the fending down of her majelty's warrant unto
ae conmiifioners, by the lords and others of her council.
2. THiAT he was no party in signing the fsetence pasecd
zgainth her.

3. THa T he never penned either the proclamation puhlilling
:he fame, the warrantaftcr her death, nor any other letter, or
:h;i' whatsoever concerning the fame. And,

T'11 A T the only thing, which can be specially and truiy im-
ri:') to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto her ma-
:' to ht finned. She fending a great counsellor unto him,
Ihih her pleafilre to that end, and carrying it to the great feal
if Fngland, by her own special direction and commnindmllnt,

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is ecMicnt,
T. THAT the letter, being penned by the hl-d treasurer,

'as delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with hfe : in.!l' ly's own
;rity, to be ready for to sign, when fie flo',i p.- e
pleased to

(i: for it.

2. THAT

2. TH AT being in his hands, he retained it at the leal five or

fix weeks unprefented. nor once offering to carry it up, till .h:

.sent a great counsellor unto him for the fame, and was iharply
reproved therefore by a great peer, in her majelty's own pretence.

3 THAT having signed it, she gave him an express com-

mandment to carry it to the feal, and being fealed to fend it im-
mediately away unto the commifioners, according unto the direc-
tion. Herself appointing the hall of Fotheringav for the place E
of execution. mifilcing the court-yard, in divers refpefls. alnd
in conclusion absolutely sorbad hin to trouble her any further,
or let her hear any more hereof till it was done. She for her
part, having (as lhe said) performed all that, in law or realon,
could be required of her

4. WH IC diireCions notwithstanding, he kept the warrant

seal'd all that night, and the greatest part of the next day in
his hands, brought it back with him to the court, acquainted
her majefly withal, and finding her majesty resolved to proceed
therein, according to her f-rmer directions, and yet desirous to
carry the matter so, as she might throw the burden from herself,
he absolutely resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treafurer'scham-

ber, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his
presence restored the fame into the hands of the said lord trea-
furer. of whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till himself and the reft of the council sent it away.

WHIcR, in fubifance and truth, is all the part and interest

the said Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pre-
tended to the contrary.

To t c HI x G the fending down thereof unto the commiflion-

ers. that it was the general aEt of her majesty's council (as is
before mentionec) and not any private at of his, may appear by,

T. TH E sI owvn confession. z. Their own letters sent down

therewith to the commilTioners. 3. The testimonies of the
lords and others to whom they weredirefted As also 4. of Mr.
Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her majel-
rv's first commiiTion for their calling to the ftar-chamber for the
fame, and private appearance and submission after ward initead
thereof, before the lord chancellor Broomley. 6 The con-
fefflon of Mr. Attornev-ceneral, in open court confirmed. 7. By
the sentence itfeif upon record. 8. Betides a common ac of
council. containing an anfwver to be verbally delivered to the
Scottith asnbafador then remaining here, avowing and justify-
ing the fame.

Now where Come suppose him to have given some extraordi-1

nary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evidently ap-:
pear by,

I. Hls

i. His former absolute refusal to fgn the band of affociati-

on, being earnestly pressed thereunto by her majesty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commi(fion-
er, in the examination of Babington and his accomplices, and
ivoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to stay the commiflioners from pro-
nouncing of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it till
they should return to her majesty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hand fix weeks unprefent-
ed, without once offering to carry it up, till her majerfy sent
expreny for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was fealed unto the
colnmifiioners, as he was specially commanded, staying it all
that night, and the greatest part of the next day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of the
lord treasurer, of whom he had before received the fame.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison
did nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of
the place he then held in her majeffy's service.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the hack is this title,
TH E innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late Scot-
tih queen.

No. XX. (Vol. II. p. 235. line 2a.)

Letter from ®, Sir Robert Cecil, to His Majefy King James.
Nr OS T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your From the

. affectionates have been such, as hath inforced silence in Original

hin, who is faithfully devoted to your person, and in due time Bibl. Sac.
of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the mainte-Jur. Edin.
nance of the just regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of na- A. I. 34.
lure, and of nations, is inveffed in your royal person. Fall not No. 4.
then, most noble and renowned prince, from him, whose pro-
vidence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
instrument of his glory, and the good of his people. Some fe-
trets, I find have been revealed to your prejudice, which muff
proceed from rome ambitious violent spirited person near your
majesty in council and favour; no man in particular will I ac-
rase, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom,
ifr your service, I have held correspondence; otherwise, I had,
'ig lince, been disabled from performance of those duties, that
the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth ; being only known to
thi worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of
Cnriftendom for his fidelity to your perton and state, and to Mr.
Dalid Fowlis your most loyal servant, my firfi and faithful cor-
:tpondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom I have found in

all

all things that concern you, most secret and assured. It may,
therefore, please your majesty, at the humble motion of E,
which jargon I desire to be the indorfement of your commands
unto me, that bv some token of your favour, he may understand d
in what terms you regard his fie'ity, secrecy, and service. My
pallionate affection to your person, (not as you are a king, but g
as you are a good king, and have just title, after my sovereign,
to be a great king) doth tranlport me to presumption. Condenm
not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love, altho'
mixed with defefts in judgment.

. 1, TH E R E F OR E, firt beseech your majesty, that for the

good of those, whom God, by divine Providence, hath deftlned
to vour charge. that you will be pleased to have an extraordi.
nary care of all praclicers, or practices, againf your peron;
for it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either
out of ambition, faction, or fear, there are many thatdefire
to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the sovereignty
and state might be fwaved by partiality of subalternate persons,
rather than bv true rule of power and justice. Preserve your
person. and fear not the pratices of man upon the point of
vour right, which will be preserved and maintained against all
aifaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protefiont
of your person. and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of
Heaven. who bless and preserve you and all yours, in all rega
happiness to his glory.

2. N E XT to the preservation of your person, is the conferra-|

tion and secret keeping of vour councells, which, as I have
said, are often betrayed and dicfovered, either out of pretend.
ed zeal in religion, turbulent fation, or base conception, the
which your majesty is to regard with all circumfpeaion, asa
matter most dangerous to your person and state, and the only
means to ruin and deitroy all those, that stand faithfully devoted
to your majesty's service. Some particulars, and perfonsof thi
nature, I make no doubt have been discovered by the endea-
Yours of this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your ma-
jery may be further informed.

3. THE 3d point considerable is that your majesty, byall/

means potlible, secure yourfellf o the good affection of the{
French king and States, by the negotiation of some faithful fle
cret confident; the French naturally diftating the union of the
British Ifiands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt note
but you have many allies and friends, but by reason of their,
remo'te state, thev do not so much import this affair, whicl
must be guided hb a quick and sudden motion.

4. \X HE X God, by whose providence, the period of alla

persons and times is determined, Ihall call to his kingdom of!
glor: her majesty, (although I do affnredly hope that there will
not b any question in competition, yet for that I hold it not fit

ting

ting to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a na-
ture,) I do humbly beseech your majesty to design a secret,
faithiul, and experienced confident servant of yours, being of
an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here refi-
dent, whose negotiation, it were convenient your majesty flould
fortifie, with such secret trust and powers, as there may not
need 14 days respite, to post for authority, in a cause, that
cannot endure o hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend least
good to your eftablilhment, will not in publickoppung your title,
but out of their cunning ambition, will seek to gain time, by al-
ledging their pretence of common good to the state, in propound-
ing of good conditions for difburthening the common weale, of
divers hard laws, heavy impositions, corruptions, oppressions,
&c. which is a main point to lead the popular, who are much
dilgulted with many particulars of this nature. It were there-
fore convenient, that these motives, out of your majesty's pro-
vidence, should be prevented, by your free offer in there points
following, viz.

I. THAT your majefly would be pleated to abolish purvaiors
2nd purvaiance, being a matter infinitely offensive to the common
people, and the whole kingdom, and not profitable to the prince.

2. THATr your majesty would be pleated to dissolve the
curt of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient fa-
milies of this realm, by base matches, and evil education of their
children, by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally
repined againif by the subjed, in regard of their uncertainty.
being many times altered from their true meaning by variety of
interpretation.

4. TH AT your majesty will be pleased to admit free outport
ofthe native commodities of this kingdom, now often reitrained
Is subalternate persons for private profit, being most prejudi-
tial to the commerce of all merchants, and a plain destruction
to the true induifry and manufa&ure of all kingdoms, and
igainft the profit of the crown.

THESE, being by your maiefty's confidents in the point of
lime propounded, will assuredly confirm unto your rmajelfie the
hearts and affections of the whole kingdom. and ahiflirely pre-
vent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out
ofpretext of common good, would feck to patroni'e themselves
in popular opinion and power, and thereby to derogate from
your majesty's bounty and free favour, by princely merit of
rour moderation, judgment, and juttice.
YOUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the fuhje&t, will no
ray impeach the profits ot the crown, but advance them. The
difproportionable gain of some chequer officers, with the hare
mod mercenary profits of the iiie unnecrffarv clerks and atten-
nrts, will only susser some detriment but infinite will be the

good

good unto the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majesty
the universal love and affection of the people, and establish your
renown in the highest esteem to all posterity.

TH E Lord preserve your majeflie, and make you triumphant

over all your enemies.

MY care over his person, wfhofe letters pass in this pacquet,

and will die before he leave to be yours, ihall be no less then of
mine own life, and in like esteem will I hold all your faithful
confidents, notwithstanding I will hold my self reserved from
being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted assec.
tions unto your majesty, only this extraordinary worthy man,
whose associate I am in his misfortune, doth know my heart,
and we both will pray for you, and if we live you shall find us
together.

I BES EC H your majesty burn this letter, and the others;
for altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

0.
A CRITICAL

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

[ 403

A

C R I T I C A L
CRITICAL
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuine-

ness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to
which the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary

to Bothwell, have given rife ; far less to appear as an adversary
to any particular author, who hath treated of them. To re-
peat, and to expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to
there points, which have flowed from inattention, from preju-
dice, from partiality, from malevolence, and from dishonesty,
would be no less irksome to myself, than unacceptable to morfl
o my readers. All I propose, is to affiit others in forming some
judgment concerning the fads in dispute, by stating the proofs
produced on each fide, with as much brevity as the cafe will
idmit, and with the fame attention and impartiality, which I
have endeavoured to exercise in examining other controverted
points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the king's murder, two different sys-
tems have been formed. The one supposes Bothwell to have
contrived and executed this crime. .The other imputes it to
the earls of Murray, Morton, and their party.
TH E decision of many controverted fads in history, is a mat-
ter rather of curiosity than of use. They stand detached; and
whatever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the
Iry remains untouched. But the fad under dispute in this
place is a fundamental and essential one, and according to the
opinion which an Historian adopts with regard to it, he mutl
nary and dispose the whole of his subsequent narration. An
tilorical system may be tried in two different ways, whether it
he consistent with probability, and whether it be supported by
proper evidence.
VOL. II. Cc THiOS

THosE who charge the King's murder upon Bothwellargue

in the following manner; and though their reasonings have
been mentioned already in different places of the narrative, it is |
necessary to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fly
they, was a sudden and youthful passion. The beauty of his |
person was his chief merit. His capricious temper soon raised in
the OQeen a difguit, which broke out on diffeient occasions,
His engaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted this dil.
guftinto an indignation, which she was at no pains to conceal.
This breach was perhaps, in its own nature, irreparable; the
King certainly wanted that art and condescension which alone
could have repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and
fettled hatred effaced all remains of affecion. Bothwell ob.
served this, and was prompted by ambition, and perhaps by
love, to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal both to the
Queen, and to himself. He had served Mary at different times
with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself into her favour,
by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her heart.
In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it was necc-
fary to get rid of the King. Mary had rejected the proposal
made to her for obtaining a divorce. The King was equally
hated by the partizans of the House of Hamilton, a considerable
party in the kingdom; by Murray, one of the most powerful
and popular persons in his country; by Morton and his aflo-
ciates, whom he had deceived; and whom Bothwell had bound
to his interest by a recent favour. Among the people Darnlr
was fallen under extreme contempt. He expected, for all thete
reasons, that the murder of the king would pass without any
enquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own address and good
fortune, he trusted for the accomplishment of the reft of his
wishes. What Bothwell expeced really came to pass. Mary,
if not privy herself to the design, connived at an acion which
rid her of a man whom /he had such good reason to detest. A
few months after, nhe married the person who was both sus-
peeled and accused of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party

reason in this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of bound-
less ambition. Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he
had early formed a design of usurping the Crown. On the
Queen's return into Scotland, he insinuated himself into her ft-
vour, and engrossed the whole power into his own hands. He
set himself againfi every proposal of marriage which was made 1
to her, left his own chance of succeeding to the Crown shou!d
be defrroved. He hated Darnly, and was no less hated by him
In order to be revenged on him, he entered into a sudden
friendship with Bothwell. his ancient and mortal enemy. He
encouraged him to perpetrate the crime, by giving him hcpe

oC

of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a design to
throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of being accelfory
to the murder, and under that pretext to destroy Bothwell, to
depose and imprison her, and to seize the sceptre which he had
wrested out of her hands.

THE former of there systems has an air of probability, is con-

fillent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, rome
alfertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and
effects appear, of which no fuflicient cause is produced. Mur-
ray, on the Queen's return into Scotland, served her with great
fijelity, and by his prudent administration rendered her To po-
pular, and so powerful, as enabled her with ease to quafl a
formidable insurrection raised by himself in the year 1565.
What motive could induce Murray to murder a Prince without
capacity, without followers, without influence over the nobles,
whom the Queen, by her neglect, had reduced to the lowest
slate of contempt, and who, after a long disgrace, had regained
(according to the most favourable supposition) the precarious
possession of her favour only a few days before his death ? It is dif-
ficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from theking's life.
It is no easy matter to guess what he could gain by his death.
If we suppose that the Queen had no previous attachment to
Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical than a scheme to
persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was still alive, and
who was not only fufpefted, but accused, of murdering her for-
mer husband. But that such a fchemie Ihould really succeed is still
more extraordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to com-
mit the crime, or had himself been accessory to the commission
of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the persecutions which he suffered,
without ever le:orting upon him the accusation, or revealing
the whole scene of iniquity? An ancient and deadly feud had
subsisted between Murray and Bothwell; the Queen with diffi-
culty had brought them to fomne terms of agreemnent. But it is
probable that Murray would choose an enemy, to whom he had
been so lately reconciled, for his confident in the commilfion of
such an atrocious crime ? Or, on the other hand, would it ever
enter into the imagination of a wife man, first to raise his rival
to supreme power, in hopes thatafterwards he should find lonme
opportunity of depriving him of that power? The most adven-
turous politician never hazarded such a dangerous experiment.
The most credulous folly never trusted such an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong these general reasonings may be, we

must decide according to the particular evidence produced. This
we now proceed to examine.

Cc 2

THAT

Ta T Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears,

I. From the concurringteftimony of all the cotemporary bifto-
rians. 2. From the confefTion of those persons who suffered for
aliifting at the commillion of the crime, and who enter into a
minute detail of all its circumilances. Anders . . . 165.
3. From the acknowledgment of Mary's own commissioners,
-who allow Bothwell to have been one of those who were guilty
of this crime. Good. v.. . 213. 4. From the express testimony
of Leilev Bishop of Ross to the fame effect with the former.
Def. of Q Mary's Hon. And. 2. 76. Id. v.. .

3.
p . 5. Mor-

ton, at his death, declared that Bothwell had solicited him, at
different times, to concur in the conspiracy formed against the
life of the King, and that he was informed by Archibald Dou-
glas, one of the conspirators, that Bothwell was present at the
murder. Crawf. Mlem. App. 4. The letter from Douglas to
the Queen, publithed in the Appendix to vol. II. No. 12. con-
firms .Mortons teftimonv. 6. Lord Herreis promises, in his
own naune, and in the name of the nobles who adhered to the
Q<een, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell as the
murdereof the King. Append. vol. I. No. 23.

TH E most direct charge ever brought against Murray is in

these words of Bishop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addrefling him-
self to the Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herreis said to
"your face openly, even at your own table, a few days after
"the murder was committed ? Did he not charge you with the
" foreknowledge of the fame murder ? Did not he nulla circui-
t tiiee ufus. flatly and plainly burden you, that riding in Fife,
"and coming with one of your most assured and trusty servants

the fame day whereon rou departed from Edinburgh, said
" to him, among other talk, This night ere morning Lord

Darnl- fihall lose his life " Defence or Q I Mary, Anders. v.

2. -q But the alertion of a man so heated with faction as
Lefiev., unlief it were supported by proper evidence, is of little
-weighi. The servant to whom Murray is said to have spoken
these words, is not named; nor the manner in which this fe-
cret converlation was brought to light mentioned. Lord Her-
reis was one of the most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is
remairkable that in all his negotiation at the court of England,
he never once repeated this accusation of Murray. In answer-
i;g the challeng. given him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a
fair opportunity of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the mur-
cdr; but though he openly accuses of that crime some of those
who adhered to him. he industriously avoids any insinuation
againfi Murray himself. Keith, Pref. XII. Mary, herself, in
a conversation -i:h Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and
:Maitiand or being privv to the murder, but does not mention
Murray. And. 4. 55. When the Bilhop of Ross and lord Her-

reis

reis themselves appeared before the English council, January I ,
;69, they declared themselves ready, in obedience to the
Q en's command, to accuse Murray and his associates of being
accefliry to the murder, but " they being also required, whe-

ther they .*r any of them, as of themselves, would accuse the
" fid Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them

guilty thereof;" they answered, " that they took God to
" witrcfs that none of them did ever know any thing of the

conspiracy of that murder, or were in council and foreknow-
iedge thereof; neither who were devisers, inventors, and
"executors of the fame, till it was publicly discovered long

thereafter by some oi the aflaflins who suffered death on that
account." Good. v. 2. 308. These words are taken out of

a register kept by Ross and Herreis themselves, and teem to be
a direct confutation of the bilhop's assertion. The billhop him-'
felfrepeats the fame thing in ffill ifronger terms. And. 3. 31.

THE earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Proteflation touching

thle murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given
an account, vol. I. 316. add, " So after these premifTes, the
"murder of the King following, we judge in our consciences,
"and hold for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and
" ecretary Lethington were authors, inventors, counsellors
"and causers of the fame murder, in what manner, or by
" whatfomever persons the fame was executed." Anders. v. 4.
iSS. But, i. This is nothing more than the private opinion
or personal affirmation of these two noblemen. 2. The con-
clufion which they make has no connection with the premisses on
which they found it. Because Murray proposed to obtain for
the queen a divorce from her husband with her own content, it
does not follow that therefore he committed the murder without
her knowledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll were at that time the
leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and animated with all
the rage of faction. 4. Both of them were Murray's personal
enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment which his fa-
mily and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll was
desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
on no good terms, Knox 328. and by whom lie had no children.
Crawf. Peer. I9. She was Mvurrsy's sifter, and by his interest
he hadobftrucaed thatd si n. Keith 55 . These circumstances
would go far towards invalidating a positive teftitmony; they
more than counterbalance an indeterminate lufpicion. 5. It is
altogether uncertain whether Huntly and Argvil ever fubfcrib-
cd this protestation. A copy of such a protestation as the Qteen
thought would be of advantage to her cause, w.as tranfiiitted
to them by her. Anders. v. 4. 86. The I oteftaion itself
publilhed by Anderson is taken from an unfulfcribed copy with

C c 3 blanks

blanks for the date and place of fibfcribing. On the back of
this copy is pasted a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer

of the Ear! of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Hunt!y

"and Argy!i.-' Anders 194, j95. But it can scarce be efterne
ed a replv to the ahr.ve-mentioned protestation. Murray's an-
fwer bears date at London, Tanuarv 19, 1 68. The Queen's
letter, in which ihe inclcfed the copy of the protestation, bears
date at Bowton, Jan. 5. 1 68. Now it is scarce to be sup-
posed that the cc pv could be sent into Scotland, be subscribed
by the two Earls, and be seen and anfwvered by Murray within
so fiort a time. Murray's reply seems intended only to prevent
the impression which the vague and uncertain accusations of
his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil had got the ori-
ginal of the Queen's letter into his custody. Anders. vol. 4. 186.
This naturally leads us to conjecture that the letter itself, toge-
ther with the inclosed protestation, were intercepted before they
came to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjecaure alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protef-
tation was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. i. fol.
280, and is an original subscribed by Mary, though not writ-
ten with her own hand, because ihe feldomn chose to write in the
Englih language. The protestation is in the fame Volume,
fol. 282, and is manifeftiy written hv the fame person who wrote
t-e Queen's letter. This is a clear proof that both were inter-
cepted. So that much has been founded on a paper not sub-
fcribed by the two Earls, and probably never seen by them.
Besides, this method which the Queen took of fending a copy
to the two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare with
regard to a conference held in their own presence, appears
somewhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and
not so liable to any misinterpretation, to have desired them to
write the moo :xact account, which the) could recollet of
what had palled in t!he conversation at Craigmillar.

THE Queen's conimifioners at the Conferences in England

accused Murrav and his associates of having murdered the
King. Good. 2. 2Si. But thele accusations are nothing more
than loose and general affirmations, without descending to such
particulqr circumstances, as either ascertain their truth, or dif-
cover their falsehood. The fame accusation is repeated by the
nobles affenibled at Dumbarton Sept. 1568. Good. 2. 359.
And the fame ohbervation may be made concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account

for Murray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was
done on purpose, that he might have a pretence of disturbing
:he Queen's adminiltration, and thereby rendering ineffectual

her

her general Revocation of Crown lands, which would have de-
prived him and his associates of the best part of their estates.
Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73. But whoever confiders the
limited powers of a Scottilh Monarch, will fee that such a re-
vocation could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
King of Scotland began his reign with such a revocation; and
as o'ten as it was renewed, the power of the nobles rendered it
ineffectual. The best vindication of Murray and his party from
this accusation, is that which they presented to the Queen of
England, and which hath never hitherto been published.

Ans/wers to the objecions and alledgance of the sueen, alledging Paper Of-

the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of Morton. Marr, fice.
Glencairn, Hume, Ruthven, &c. to have been moved to ar-
mlour, for that they abhorred and might no abide her revocation
of the alienation made of her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it

appears God has bereft, the alledgance of all wit and good re-
membrance, for thir reasons following.

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occasion to
grudge thereat, in respect the Queen made him privy to the
fame, and took resolution with him for the execution thereof,
letting his Lordship know she would assuredly in the famine ex-
cept all things flhe had given to him, and ratefy them in the next
parliament, as Ihe did indeed; and for that cause wished my
Lord to leave behind him Master John Wood, to attend upon
the fame, to whom she declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it should be provided, yea of free will did pro-
mise and offer before ever he demanded, as it came to pass with-
out any let or impediment, for all was ratified by her command,
and hand write, at the Parliament, but any difficulty.

IT E M as to my Lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever
I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ON LY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property

quilk alfua was gladly and liberally coi.firmed to him, in the said
parliament preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of
niifcontent of that revocation, far less to have put their lives
and heritage to so open and manifest ane danger as they did for
tic ane frivole cause.

Cc4

GYT ever any did make evill countenance, and show any

rrilcontenenent of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argvll
in freciall. quha fpak largely in the time of Parliament thti;r-
anents to the queen herself. and did complain of the mani eft
corruption of ane act of Parliament past upon her Majefy's re-
turn, and fa did lett any revocation at that time; but the ar-
mor for revenge of the King's deid was not till twa months as-
ter, att quhat time there was no occasion given thereof, nor
never a man had mind thereof.

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been pro- .

duced againf; the Earls of Mhurray and Bcthtwell;; we shall nrxt
proceed to enquire whether the Queen helrfel was accefforv to
the murder of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known. ti.n

ftrcng fufpicinns arose, among feme of her fubjeis, th \ Marv
had given her consent to the commission of that crime. And 2.
156. We are informed, by her own ambass.ador in France, e
Archbiihop of Glasgow, that the fentinents of fore'ers.

e '

this head, were -.o !ess unfavourable to her. Kci:h. i':e; ix.
Many of her nobles loudly accused her of that crime, arda
gr-at part of the nation, by supporting them, seem to have al-
lowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of fuclh a nature, that they

scarce admit of a positive or dire& proof. Deeds of darkness
can feld'm be brought perfect!v to light. Where persons are
accused not of being Principals, but only of being Accessories to
a crime; not of having committed it themselves, but only of
giving c.r.fent to the commiflnin of it by others; the proof be-
comes lli mrore difficult; and unless when fomc accomplice be-
trays the secret, a proof by circumstances, or presumptive evi-
dence, is aJl that can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such
evidence is sometimes held to be sufficient for condemning cri-
rninals. T- e degree of conviction which such evidence carries
a!ing with i', is often not inferior to that which arises from
positive teftirmcnv; and a concurring series of circumstances
fa:fises the underfianding no less than the express declaration
of witnesses.

EvIDEN'CE of both these kinds has been produced against

Mary. We shall first confider that which is founded upon cir-
cumlila-ces alone.

SoMzs of these suspicious circumstances preceded the King's

death; others were subsequent to it. With regard to the for-
mer, we may observe that the Queen's violent love of Darnly
was soon converted into an aversion to him no less violent ; and
that his own ill conduct, and excesses of every kind were such
that/if they did not juflify, at least they account for this sudden
change of her difpolition towards him. The rife and progress
of this domestic rupture, I have traced with great care in the
history, and to the proofs of it which may be found in papers

published

published by other authors, I have added thole contained in
App. No. XVI. and XVII. The Earls of Murray, Morton,
Bothwell, Argyll, and Huntly confidered the fcheine of pro-
curing for the Queen a divorce from her husband, as one ot the
molt flattering proposals they could make her, and employed it
as the most powerful inducement to prevail on her to conlent to
a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
ticv knew her to be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 188.
Du Croc the French ambassador, who was an eve-witnefs of
v.sat he describes, not only represents her difgult at Darnly to
Fe extreme, but declares that there could be no hopes of a re-
c nci!ement between them. " The Queen is in the hands of December
tphlficians, and I do assure you is not at all well; and do be- 12, 1566.

rice the principal part of her dif-afe to conlift in deep grief and
sorrow ; nor does it seem poflible to make her forget the fame.
Still the repeats there words, I could wvifi to be dead. You
know very well that the injury she has received is exceeding
great, and her majelty will never forget it.---To speak my
mind freely to you, Ido not expect, upon several accounts, any
good underltanding between them [i. e. the King and Queen]
unlers God effetually put to his hand.---His bad dept"rtment Dec. 23.
is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expeaed from him
for several reasons, which I might tell you was I present with
you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn. but I will
fta, that matters cannot fubifif long as they are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad consequences." Keith, Pref. vii.
Had Henry died a natural death, at this juncture, it mull have
been confidered as a very fortunate event to the Queen, and as
a seasonable deliverance from a husband who had become alto-
gether odious to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few
weeks afterwards, and as nothing had happened to render the
Queen's aversion to him lets violent, the opinion of thole who
confder Mary as the author of an event, which was n:anifcftly
so agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to some of our readers
to be neither unnatural nor over refined. It' we add to tl.is,
that has been observed in the hillory, that in proportion to tile
Increase of Mary's hatred of her husband, Bothweil made pro-
grefs in her favour; and that he became the object not on!v of
her confidence but of her attachment, that opinion acquires
new strength. It is easy to observe many advantages which
might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from the king's
death; but exccpiing them, no person, and no party in the
kingdom could derive the least benefit from that event. Bot'l-
well, accordingly, murdered theKing, and it was, in that age,
thought no violent imputation on Marv's charaCertr to f ppofe
inat /he had consented to the deed.

THE steps which the Qneen took after her hufland's death

add strength to that supposition. i. Melvil, who was in Edin-
burgh, at the time of the king's death, asserts that " every body !
suspected the Earl of Bozhwell and those who durst speak free- i
ly to others, said plainly that it was He." p. 155. . Mary
having issued a proclamation, on the 12th of February, offerinc
a reward to any perfin who ihould discover those who had
murdered her husband; And. !. 36. a paper in answer to this
was affixed to the gates of the Tolbooth, February i6, in which
Bothwell was named as the chief person guilty of that crime. ,
and the queen herself was accused of having given her confenit
to it. And. z. 156. j. Soon after, February o2, the Earl
of Lenox, the King's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring her,
byevery motive, to prosecute the murderers with the utmoil
rigour. He plainly declared his own suspicions of Bothwell,
and pointed out a method of proceeding against him, and for |
discovering the other authors of the crime, no less obvious than |
equitable. He advied her to seize, and to commit to sure cuf-
rody Bothwell himself, and those who were already named as
his accomplices; to call an assembly of the nobles; to issue a
proclamation, inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear; andif,t
on that encouragement, no person appeared to accuse them, to
hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them without farther
trial. And. i. 4o. 4 Archbishop Beatoun, her anbaffador
in France, in a letter to Mary, March 9th, employs arguments;
of the utmost ueight to persuade her to prosecute the murder-
ers with the greatest feveriy. " I can conclude nathing, (fayst
he) by quhat zour Majesty writes to me zourfelf, that fen it has
plefit God to conserve zcw to take a rigorous vengeance thereof,
that rather than it be not actually taine, it appears to me better
in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I ak your Majeftir
pardon that I writ a far, for I can heir nathing to zour preju-
i"e dife, but I man confltaindly writ the famin, that all may come

to zour klnawledge; for the better remede may be put thereto
Heir it is needfulj that ze forth flaw now rather than ever o
before, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and constance that
God has grantit zow, ke oiuhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome
this molt heavy envie and difplefir of the committing thereon'
and conrferve that reputation in all godliness, ze have conquift
of lang, quhich can appear na wayis maire clearlie, than that-
L':h.:.-birzow do sick jutlice that the haill world may declare zowr inno-

cence, and give tefrinrny forever of thair traifon that has corn.

: mitted bhut fear of God or nan) to cruel and ungodlie a mur-
r.acb ther. quhairof there is la mick!e il! sooken, that I am conftrainlt

to ask zow mercy, that r.e:her can I or will I make the rehea
fal thereo, wvhich s'wr odious. But alas! Madame, allove
Europe :h; cay t .ere i, na purpnfe in head fa frequent as
z-ur Majeltfe, and of the prrent slate of zour realm, quhilki
in the molt part interprit it sinister!, '. Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Eli

zabeth,

zbeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the
isme thing in strong terms. 6. The circumstances of the cafe
i:;lf, no less than these solicitations and remonstrances, called
',,: the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had
ice'i ni rrlcred in a cruel manner, almost in her own pretence.
Her Ilbjects were filled with the utmost horror at that crine.
E ;:'well, one of her principal favourites, had been publickly
:c.' .si is the author of it. Reflecions, extremely diflonour-
a:!e ro herself, had been thrown out. If indignation, and the
irc : justice, did not prompt her to pursue the murderers with
a!orr, decency, at lea.t, and concern for vindicating her own
;irCter, thould have induced her to avoid any appearance of
;e!ilrtefs or want of zeal.

BUT inllead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all her
tinns, the utmost partiality towards Bothwell. I. On the
Itth of February, five days after the murder, fle bellowed on
tin the ;-. vcrfion of the superiority of the town of Leith, which
:: the rear 1 65 flie had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh.
This grant was of much importance, as it gave hint not only
he command of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great
;icendant over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely
&firous of keeping possession of it,. z. Bothwell being ex-
irmiely desirous to obtain the command of the castle of Edin-

burgh,

' Copy from the original in the Charter-bolfe of the city of Edin-
burgh of nn .4Fgnation to the reversion of thejitpetriority of Leith
. 2queen M/lary to the Earl of Bothwell.
Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis homini-
:!s fuis ad quos presentes liter2 pervenerint falutem. Sciatis,
nod nos ad memoriam reducentes multiplex bonuln veruin ct
:cle fervitium, non tantum quondam noftra chariltime matri
llari Regint regni noftri pro tempore in noftra minoritate
"-cum et inmpenfum, vcrum etiam nobifiuet ipfis, tam intra
:.rtes Gal!ia quam intra hoc nostrum regnumi, ad cxtcntionc'm
.:ai honorih et aucnritatis in punitione turun, man!efatorltlln,
: tranfgrefforum intla idem, per nostrum confiilmni cr.nfnsgui-
iiuml ct confiliariunl Jacobuam comitem Bothuile, diilmiun
ialis, Creighton et Liddifdale, magnum adiiiiralluiii regni
:;ri, comnliltionen ct orerationeni adhunce fieciimn habontuin,
:.r quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno pcr:cu;io pol-i;;
i: etiam, in performatione et extentione noit-ii diti tl \.I 'i,
iam hrreditatem, supra fiuinman viginti llillium nlercr!111
!ujusnoflri regni, alienavit ac lafit. Et nos cogitantcs qt ,J,
norfra principali honore et devoria, diceuni noftrutn c;infi;i;:i
tonfanguineum & conciliarium cunm quodain accldcntc et gi ti-

ine recompenfare et gratificare incunlbit qun nos coililn'ie
:;concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis aunbiii c:::.iburs aft. -

turts

burgh, the Queen, in order to prevail on the earl of Mar to
surrender the government of it, offered to commit the young
prince to his custody. Mar consented; and she instantly ap
pointed Borhwell governor of the castle. And. 1. Pref 64.
Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the murder, previous to
Eothweil's trial, seems to have been conducted with the utrnofi
remifnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly against this. And. 2.24.
Nor was it without reason that he did so, as is evident from a
circumflance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson, one of the
King's servants, who was in the house when his master was
murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbish. Being
examined on the Monday after the King's death, " This depo.
nar fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the
Queenis fervandis the keyis of her fhalmir. Quhilk the Laird
of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair, here is ane ground.
Efter quhilk words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na sarti;er
in the inquisition." And. 4. p. 2. 167. Had there been ary
intention to search into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance
of so much importance merited the molt careful enquiry. 4.
Notwithftandi.:g Lenox's repeated solicitations, notwitliftand-
ing the reasonableness of his demands, and the neceflity of com-
plying with them, in order to encourage any accuser to appear
againlt Bothwell, the not only refused to commit him to cuf-
tody, or even to remove him from her presence and councils;

And.

turis temporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum
in omnibus caufis feu eventibus: In recompenfationem quorum
przmifforum, ac pro diverfis aliis noilrls rationalibus caufis et
confiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dictum Jaco-
bum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos hmredes mafculos quofcun-
que noftras leg:timos, &c. affignatos in et ad literas reverfionis
factas, &c. per Symonem Preston de eodem militem, prepofitum,
balivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri burgi de Edin.
burgh. pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefforibus, &c. nobis, noltrifque
EBredibus, fuccelToribus, et afignatis pro redemptione, &c
fuperioritatis totius ville de Leith, &c. impignoratae per no!
diclis przpofito, &c. sub reverfione alienata continentis fummarr
decem millium mercarum monete praefriptx numerandam el
calcnlandam in parochiali ecclesia de Edinbrugh, super premo
r. :ione quadriginta dierum, ut moris eft, veluti in difis re
vertinnis literis, &c. de data 8vo Oc-ob. I 565, &c. (The refl i
form. and contains a clause ofabfolute warrandice.) IN cuJUt
P. EI TESTIO N N M praefentibus magnum figillum noftrur
.pponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh, decimo ouinto die menfi
Februarii, anno Domrini millefimo quingentefimo fexagefimn
fcsto, et regni noftri vicefimo quinto.

The great feal entire

Ard. 1. 42, 48. but by the grants which we have mentioned,
sld by other circumstances, discovered an increase of attach-
snt to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to a
Isb!ic trial; but she permitted him to fit as a member in that
seeting of the Privy Council, which directed his own trial;
i.d Clie trial itself was carried on with such unnecessary preci-
:.ancy, and with so many other suspicious circunmftances, as
nider his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
c his innocence. These circumstances have all been mention-
,at length, Vol. I. p. 328, &c. and therefore are not repeat-
e in this place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a

Aibic proof of her regard for Bothwell, byappoiiting him to
rrv. the sceptre before her at the meeting of Parliament.
eiih, 378. 7. In that parliament, she granted him a ratifica-
tcn of all the vast poffeflions and honours, which she had con-
i.red upon him, in which was contained an ample enumeration
(:I1 the services he had performed. And. I. 1 7. 8. Though
elM il, who foresaw that her attachment to Bothwell would at
e-gth induce her to marry him, warned her of the infamy and
;:ger which would attend that action, (he not only disregarded
'. salutary admonition, but discovered what had passed be-
':en them to Bothwell, which expoied Melvil to his indigna-
:.on. Melv. 56. 9. Bothwell seized Mary as (he returned
.:!n Stirling, April 24. If he had done this without her know-
ige and content, such an insult could not have failed to have
*-ed her with the rnoft violent indignation. But according to
;:e account of an old M. S. " The friendly love was so highly
;:traóted between this great princess, and her enormous ful-
.:t, that there was no end thereof (for it vwas conftarltly es-
eimed by all men that either of them loved other carnally)
that flie suffered patiently to be led where the lover lil, and
.:the way neither made obstacle, impediment, clamour or re-
:ance, as in such accidents use to be, or that (he might have
ore by her princely authority, being accompanied with the
;h!e Earl of Huntly, and secretary Maitland of Lethington."
teith, 383. Melvil, who was present, confirms this account,
;ald tells us that the officer, by whom he was seized, informed
::nthat nothing was done without the queen's content. Melv.
158. to. On the 12th of May, a few days before her mar-
'ge, Mary declared that /he was then at full liberty, and that
t1ugh Bothwell had offended her by seizing her perfan, she
'rs so much satisfied with his dutiful behaviour since that time,
ad so indebted to him for past services, that she not only for--
ave that offence, but resolved to promote him to higher ho-
'urs. And. I. 187. 1 . Even after the confederate nobles
hd driven Bothwell from the Queen's presence, and though
ile aw that he was confidered as the murderer of her former
iuftand by so great a part of her fubjefs, her affection did not
[he least abate, and lihe continued to express the most unal-

terabie

terahle attachment to him. " I can perceive ((ays Sir NI
Throgmorton) that the rigour with which the Qu. en i; k-,
prcceedeth by order from these men, because that th- '.;
will not, by any means, be induced to lend herauthority iprok
fecute the murder; nor will not content by any per!uafiol tI
abandon the Lord Bothwell for her husband, but avoweth cont
ftantlv that file will live and die with him; and faith, that if if
were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom&
or the Lnrd Bothweil. she would leave her kingdom and dignirt
to go a simple damsel with him, and that she will never consent
that he ihail fare worse, or have moreharm than herself. Apl
p. 4z. See also p. 44. From this long enumeration ofcircui
lances, we may, without violence, draw the following cona
clufion. Had M.Lary rea:lv been accessory to the murder of he'
husband ; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime with herconfenta
or at her command; and had she intended to stifle the evidence
againit him, and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, she could
scarce have taken any other steps than those she took, nor could
her conducl have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

TH E pofriive evidence produced againif Mary may be claTeA
under two heads.

i. THE depositions of tome persons who were employed ii'

cammitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, whio
in the writings of that age is called French Paris. This perio -
who was Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was'
twice examined, and the original of one of his depositions, and
a copy of the other, are still extant. It is pretended that both
t'nee are notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable for
fi:rplicitv and nai-ete which it is almost impollible to imitates
thcy abound with a number of minute facts and particularitiesi
which the most dextrous forger could not have easily assembled3
and connected together with any appearance of probability
and they are filled with circumltances, which can scarce be lup
po!ed to have entered the imagination of any man, but one do
Pa:s's profefion and character. But, at the fame time, it niui
be acknowledged that his depositions contain some improbabe
circut!'flances. He seems to have been a foolish talkative teV
ow-; the fear of death; the violence of torture; and the defti
of pleating those in whole power he was, tempted him, pep

t?.?, to feign aome circumctances, and to exaggerate others. i

T., sav that tome circumstances in an affidavitare improbablo

or -a11. is verv different from faying that the whole is forge.
I lulpect the former to be the cafe here; but I fee no appea
ace of the latter. Be that as it will, some of the molt materi
!ch; in Paris's affidavits reft upon his tingle testimony ; and si
that re.-fn, I have not in the history, nor fliall I in this plac!
liv anyv irets upon thern. I

2. TaH

I
i

2. THE letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell.
These have been frequently published. The accident, by which
the Queen's enemies got them into their poffeflion, is related
Vol. 1. 354. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is
dubhous or contefled, it may be ascertained either by external
dr internal evidence. Both these have been produced in the
present cafe.

I. ExTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters.
Murray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon

their word and honour, that the letters were written with the
Queen's own hand, with which they were well acquainted.
Good. 2, 64, 92. 2. The letters were publicly produced in
the parliament of Scotland, December 1567, Good. 2 360;
and were so far confidered as genuine, that they are mentioned,
in the aft againrt Mary, as one chiefargumllent of her guilt.
Good. z. 66. 3. They were shewn privately to the Duke of
Norfolk, the Earl of Suflcx, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Eli7abeth's
conimiflioners at York. In the account which they give of
this matter to their miftreCs, they seem to confider the letters
as genuine, and express no suspicion of any forgery; they par-
i:cularly observe, " that the matter contained in them is luch
that it could hardly be invented and devised by any other than
herself; for that they discourse of some things, which were
unknown to any other than to herself and Bothwell ; and as it is
hard to counterfeit so many, so the matter of them, and the
manner how these men came by them is fitch, as it feemeth
that God, in whose fight murder and bloodshed of the innocent
i abominable, would not permit the fame to be hid or conceal-
ed." Good. 2. 42. They seem to have made such an i1n-
preflion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter to
Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has these words, " If the
matter shall be thought as deteftableand manifest to you, as for
ought we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. z. 154.
4. After the conferences at York and Westminster were finifli-
ed, Elizabeth resolved to call together the Earls who were then
it court, and to lay before them the whole proceedings against
theScottifh Queen, particularly that " the letters and writings
exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen of Scots letters and
writings, should also be shewed, and conference [i. e. compa-
tifon] thereof made in their fight, with the letters of the said
Qleen's being extant, and heretofore written with her own
hand, and sent to the Queen's Majesty; whereby may be
searched and examined what difference is betwixt theam." Good.
2 252. They assembled, accordingly, at Hampton Court,
December 14 and 15, 1568; and the originals of the letter;
flppofed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
lcre then also presently produced and perused; an b.:i:g

, read,

W'ere duly conferred and compared, for the manner of '.:ritln;,
mid ftahion of orthography, with lundry other letters long ficce

l:ere-

heretofor- written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the
QOeen's lMajefiy.- In collation whereof no difference was
round.' Good. 2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologeti.
cal ietrer for her conduct to the Countess of Lenox, July o,
i :-.n , she transmitted it to her hulband then in Scotland;
and h= returned to the Counters the following answer: Se.
ing vcu have remittit to me to answer the Queen the King's
mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay but that I do not
marve i to fee hir writ the best she can for hirfelf, to feame to
pLrge hir of that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly per.
fuaait of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knaw.
ledge, but by her handwrit, the confefionis of men gone tothe

death,

i Mary's letter has never been published and ought to have

a place here, where evidence on all fides is fairly produced.
" Mladam, if the wrang and false reportis of rebellis, enemies
weiil knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trusted
of me by zoure advice, had not so far fturred you againis my
innocencv, (and I must fay againis all kyndnefs, that zow have
not onelie as it were condempnit me wrangfullie. bot so hated
me, as tome wordis and open deideis hes teftifeit to all the
warlde, a manvfeft mifiking in zow againis zowr awn blude)
I would not have omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow
excusing me of those untrew reporties made of me. But hoping
wiih Godis grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to
zo-, as I trufi it is already to the maift pairt of all indifferent
perfonis, I thocht it best not to trouble zow for a tyme till that
such a matter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the tran-
sporting zoure littil son, and my only child in this countrey. To
the quhilg albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be glaid to hare
zoure advvfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I
have horn him, and God knawis with quhat danger to him and
me bith ; and of zow he is defcendit. So I meane not to for-
zet my dewtie to zow, in fchewing herein any unkyndnefs to
2ow, hcw unkvndlie that ever ze have dealt with me, bot will
love zoaw as mv awnt, and refpeft zow as my nmoder in law.
And gif ve p!es to knaw farther of my mynd in that and all
uther thing:s betwixt us, my ambassador the Bilhop of Ross fall
be reaR.- to confer with zovw. And so after my hairtlie com-
menda;ionis, remitting me to my faide ambassador, and zour
better c-:.dcratioun, I commit zow to the protectioun of Al-
mvghtv God. quhom I pray to preserve zow and my brother
Charles. a"d caus zov.- to knaw my pairt better nor ze do.
From Chatiiiorch this x of July 1570.

To niv L2die Lennox Your natural gude Nice

mv t-ooder in law. and lovynge dochter.

death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme
that is hable to put a mattir lb notorious in oblivioun, to inak
b!ack quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is la
v.-cill knawin. The maifi indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of
the equitie ofzoure and my cause, and of the just occafioun of
our mifliking. Her rich dewtie to zow and me, being the par-
teis interest, were hir trcw confeflioun and unfeyned repentance
of that lamentable fast, odious for hir to be reportit, and for-
rowtiull for us to think of. God is just, and will not in the end
he abused; but as he has manifested the trewth, so will he pu-
neife the iniquity. Lennox's Orig. Regiji. of Letters. In their
public papers, the Queen's enemies may be iufpeded of advanc-
ing what would be inof: subservient to their cause; not what
Was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their own inward
conviction. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lenox had
no occasion to diflemlble; and it is plain, that he not only thought
the queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to
BLthwell.

11. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of
the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we may oblcrve, I. That
awhenevcr a paper is forged with a particular intention, the ea-
gernefs of the forger to eftahlifh the point in view, his folici-
tude to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appear-
ance of uncertainty, always prompt him to use expreflions the
molt explicit and full to his purpole. The passages foifed into
ancient authors by Heretics in different ages ; the legendary mi-
racles of the Romilh faints; the suppositious deeds in their own
favour produced by monasterics; the false charters of homage
mentioned Vol. I. p. 1 . are so many proofs of this assertion.
No imaxim seems to be more certain than this, that a forger is
often apt to prove too much, but feldonm falls into the error of
proving too little. The point which the Queen's enemies had
to crfabliih, was" that as the Earl of Boithwell was chief exe-
cutor of the horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c.
so wns flie of the foreknowledge, counlel, device, persuader,
anil commander of the said murder to be done.' Good. 2. 20'.
But of this there are only imperfeE hints, obscure intima-
:3ons, and dark expreflions in the letters, which however con-
.cncing evidence they might furnilli i l found in real letters,
bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity of evidence
W1hich forgeries comlrnonly contain. All the advocates for Mia-
ry, innocence in her own age, contend that there is nothing in
i:.e letters wllich can serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefley,
B'ackwood, Turner, &c. abound with passages to this pur-
?;e; nor are the sentiments of those in the present age differ-
rt -' Yet still it might have been expe&ed (lays lier latest
.efender) that some one or other of the points or articles of the
-ccualtion ffiould be miade out clearly by the proof. But no-

\o . II. D t thiag

thing of that is tobe seen in the present cafe. There is nothing
in the letter that could plainly shew the writer to have been in
the foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any murder, far less
to have persuaded or commanded it ; and as little is there about
maintaining orjuftifving any murders." Good. I. 76. How
ill advised were Mary's adversaries to contraa so much guilt,
and to practise so many artifices in order to forge letters, which
are so ill contrived for efrablifling the conclusion they had in
view ; Had they been so base as to have recourse to forgery, is
it not natural to think that they would have produced some-
thing more explicit and decisive ? 2. As it is almost inpoflible
to in ent a long narration confifing of many circumstances, and
to connect it in such a manner with real fadts, that no mark of
fraud 'hall appear; for this reason skilful forgers avoid any long
detail of circumstances, especially of foreign and superfluous
ones, well knowing that the more there are multiplied the more
are the chances of detection increased. Now Mary's letters, es-
peciailv the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circumstances,
extremelv natural in a real correspondence, but altogether foreign
to the purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have been extreme follv to have inserted if they had been alto.
gether imag;narv, and without foundation. 3. The truth and
reality of several circumstances in the letters, and these too of
no very public nature, are confirmed by undoubted collateral
tvidence. Lett. I. Good. 2. p. i. The Queen is said to have
met one of Lenox's gentlemen, and to have some conversation
with him. Thomas Crawford, who was the person, appeared
before Elizabeth's commissioners, and confirmed, upon oath,
the truth of this circumstance. He likewise declared, that
duri;ng the Queen's ftav at Glasgow, the king repeated to him,
everv night, whatever had paited, through the day, between
her Ma jetly and him, and that the account given of there con-
verfations in the sirs letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 2. 245. According to
the lame letter there was much discourse between the Kingand
Queen concerning lMnto, Hiegait, and Waicar. Good. 2. 8,
lo, 1 . \What this might be, was altogether unknown, till
ietter of Mary's preserved in the Scottish college at Paris, and
published, Keith, Pref. vii. dilcovered it to be an affair of so
much importance as merited all the attention the paid to it at
that time. It appears by a letter from the French ambassador,
that .Mary was subjec to a violent pain in her fide. Keith,
ibid. This circumstance is mentioned, Lett. i. p. 30. in a
manner to natural as can scarce belong to any but a genuine
procuceion. 4. If we Ihall still think it probable to suppose that
ol many real circumstances were artfully introduced into the
letter, by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
their p-oduction; it will scarce be poTlible to hold the fame
orinmon concerning the following particular. Before the Queen

began

began her firif letter to Bothwell, fie, as is usual among those
r ho write long letters containing a variety of fubjets, made
trtes or memorandums of the particulars file wiflhed to remember;
hut as fie fat up writing during a great part of the night, and
after her attendants were asleep, her paper failed her, and lhe
c.ntinued her letter upon the fame sheer, on which flie had for-
rlerly made her memorandums. This flie herself takes notice
of, and makes an apology for it: " It is late; I desire never to
cease from writing unto you, yet now after the kifling of your
hands, I will end myletter. Excuse my evil writing, and read
it twice over. Excuse that thing that is fcriblir, for I had na
paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial." Good.
2. 28. These memorandums still appear in the middle of the
letter; and what we have said seems naturally to account for
the manner how they might find their way into a real letter. It
ii scarce to be supposed, hobw ever, that any forger would think
of placing memorandums in the middle of a letter, where, at
frtl fight, they make so absurd and so unnatural an appearance.
But it any shall still carry their refinement so far, as to suppose
that the forgers were so artful as to throw in this circumfiance,
in order to preserve the appearance of genuineness, they muff
st leafr allow that the Queen's enemies, who employed these
forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and meaning of
these flort notes and memorandums but we find them miftak-
ing them so far as to imagine that they were the credit of the
leaser, i. e. points concerning which the Queen had given him
verbal instructions. Good. 2. 152. This they cannot possibly
be; for the Queen herfelfwrites with so much exaCtness con-
cerning the different points in the memorandums, that there
weas no need of giving any credit or inlTrucions to the bearer
concerning them. The memorandums are indeed the contents
of the letter. 5. Mary, mentioning her conversations with the
King about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait. &c. fays, " The
morne, [i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to him upon that point ;"
and then adds, " As to the reft of Willie Hiegit's, he conteffit
it; but it was the morne [i. e. the morning] after my cumming
nr he did it." Good. 2. 9. This addition, which could not
iase been made till after the conversation happened, seems ei-
ther to have been inserted by the Queen into the body of the
le:tzr, or, perhaps, flie having written it on the margin, it was
taken thence into the text. If we suppose the letter to be a
real one, and written at different times, as it plainly bears, this
eircumllftance appears to be very natural; but no reason could
have induced a forger to have ventured upon such an anachro-
ifirn, for which there was no neceflity. An adtdition, perfeEtly
'milar to this. made to a genuine paper, may be found. Good.
2. 28.

nd z

BE-,

Bo'r, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates

for her innocence have contended that there letters were forged
by her enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to jus
tity their o'.n rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice of
the arguments which were produced, in her own age, in sip-
port of this opinion; the observations which we have already
ma,;e. contain a full reply to them. An author, who has en.
(uired into the affairs of that period vu.th great indufiry, anti
v.-ho lias acquired much kn1,wledge of them, has lately puhlitlied
(^, he affirnm) a dienonltration of the forgery of MIarv's letters.
1 !si dt-munioration he frund* upon evidence both internal ar.d
c::cern:l With regard to the foriier he chfcrvcs. that the
French copy of the Queen's letters is plainly a translation of
Buchanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a tranlation
of the .Sottilh cop ; and bv consequence, the alTrrtion of the
Quecn"' enemies, that Ihe wrote them originally in Fren,:h, is
riogeeior gr,,unclets. and the whole Letters are grois torgeries.
H a¢ccounts for this strange fucceffinn of tranilations, hy sup-
p, ln l.h:.t iwhen the forgerv was projeced, no person could be
f-.und capable of writing originally in the French language let-
trrS which would pals for the Queen's; for'that reason they
. ere -rt compeod in Scottiih; but unluckil the French in-
tcrrrc-r., it would seem, did not understand that language;
; .d it:hereore uchanan translated them into Latin, and from
hs L.ain theyv v,;ere rendered into French. Good. I. 79, 8o.

IT i; scarce necelrarv to observe that no proof whatever is

produced of any of thefc suppositions. The manners of the
Scots, in that age, when almr;ft every man of rank spent a part
r. hnc youth in France, and the intercourse hetween the two
ra;,;.n . as great, render it altogether improbable that so many
cclle pcatedi operations should be nectffalr, in order to procure

':e.' ietters to be written in the French ianguage.
i': - w ithout insisting farther on this. we lma obfervc that

-' ;,1i author's rrcmifes may he granted, and vet his conclu-
ft n il ri not fol '., un!c:s he likev. ii prove that the French
i-lttcr. a we nov. hbae them, are a true cop; of those which
. ere pr.duced bs Mlurras and his par'v in the Scotti1ll parlia-
.-. .rt. and at York and Ve.ltn in:;cr. But this he has not at-

mptei ; and if we a:tend to the hi:-rv- of th. Ie tteis, such
:* ::e:iipt, it is ob;itus. mult have been ur.fucccfdul. The

r. v' . re first puhlihed at the end of Buchanan's detcdion.

Irc ..' - edition of this treatise wass in Latin, in v.which language
' r-_e o the Qieen's letters were lul,o:ned to it; this Latin
.trion a< primned A D. 15-1 . Sn after . Scnot;ilh tranflai-
r. of it was publ :lcd, and at the end of it .erle printed, iike-
v.'!.c :r Scottlh. the three !et'er, which ha.d tilorlcr!v appeared
:: L.;.n, and r :, - :i-.er }etters in bSc, ttiJ, v. ilch
! .'rc not in

tle

hle Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of the
D. icetin, and offeven of the letters; this bears to have been
printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltemn, I 72. TFle name
of he place, as well as of the printer, is allowed by all parties
to he a 1marnfeft ilrpnclurc. Our author, firom olhfrving the
dav of the month, on which the printing is said to have been
fniilied, has asserted that this edition was printed at London;
but ro flrefs can he laid upon a date found in a book, where
e re other circunifance with regard to the printing is allowed
In he faire Blackwood, who (next to Lefley) waq the belt in-
;.rilcd of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that the
Fn nch edition of the Detection was published in France: " 11
fBuchaann ] a depuis adijouft a cefte declamation un petit libel-
Icdu prctendu mariage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la facon de
f,n proces, et la tout envoye aux freres a la Rochelle, leciiucls
I-.vant (Iqu'il pouvoit fervir a la cauli, l'ont traduit en Francois,
et ic'l:v fut iiipriiiiee a Edinbourg, c'eft a (lire a la Rochclle,
p- T'homnas Waltern, noin apoftc et fait a plaifrl. Marrsvre de
Malri'. Jecb. 2. 256." The author of the Innocencr re ,/ Mtie
goes flirtler, and names the French translator of the Detection.
llt iccluy premierement compose (coinrme il fenmble) par George
Iluchanan Efcolroys, et depuis traduit en langue Francoise oar
lin Hugonot, Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camnuz, soy difant
geitillh' )c, et un de plus remarquez feditieux de France. Jelt.
I 42z. 4 4-3" The concurring tetlimiony of two cotenporarv
auiliors, whoferefidence in France afforded them sufficient nmeans
Da' iinlration, Imul outweigh a flight conjecture. This French
irnflator does not pretend to publilll the original French let-
is as written by the Queen herlelf: he cxprefly declares that

t. iranflated them from the l.atin. Good. i. o10. Had our

a:tllr attended to all there circunfliances, he might have saved
hil:ll'lf the labourof lo many criticifins to prove that the pre-
i'nt Fr-ench copy of the letters is a translation from the .atin.
Tlie Irench editor himself acknowledges it, and so far as I
iioow no person ever denied it.
\\ t mayobferve that the French translator was so ignorant,
[ to affirm that IMary had written these letters, partly in
I'.:nch, partly in Scotrilh." Good. i. 103. Had this tralnfa-
inlli been publified at London by Cecil, or had it been made hy
r'i dirc tion, so grots an error would not have been admitted
I;tu it. This error, however, was owing to an odd circum-
,lance. In theScottilh translation of the DeteEtion two or three
ftntences of the original French were prefixed to each letter,
.. 'icli breaking off with an &c. the Scottish translation of ihe

il'ole followed. This method of printing tranflalinns was not
incr,iniion in that age. The French editor obfcrving this, fio-
1ililv concluded that the letters had been written partl in
Frrnch, partly in Scottill.

Dd 3

1]i

T. wie cirefullv confider ihel: ftw French sentences of each

letter which tili remain, and apply to them that species of cri-
ticiln, by which our author has exnamined the whole, a clear
proof wil! arie, that there was a French copy not translated
from the Lairn, but wh;ch was itfilf the original from which
bt.h the Latin and Scottiil have been translated. This minute
c;itici'm mu:l necelfarily be disagreeable to many readers; but
luci';y a few sentences only are :o be examined, which will
render it extremely i'hort.

IN the firi letter, the French f.ntence prefixed to it ends

with th fe words, y fan:l/it bn. It is piain this expreflion, veu
C .e q:e -,t un crrt/s fan caer, is by no means a translation of cur,
flar.e prinde ef/7m asque crrpus fine corde. The whole fen-
tence has a spirit and elegance in the French, which neither
the Latin ncr Scottilh have retained. buJIqes a la dinie is not a
trandatirn of ts:s prantii tempore; the Scottili translation,
qsuhih derncer-tine, expreires the sense of the French more pro-
perl.; fcr ancien:ly q;hbi.e signified until as well as during. ye
.;y ;-.s tenu grand propas is not jullly rendered neque contulerimn
Irnrl,:.'m cu qur fuam; the phrase used in the French copy, is
one peculiar to that language, and gives a more probable ac-
count of her behaviour than the other. Yugeant b'en qu'il nj
j;aiJ.t kor, is not a translation of ut qui judicarent id non eie ex

'si. The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with ap-

,treni-. it is evident that both the Litin and Scottiilf tranfla-
tions hsve omitted altogether these words, et toutefois je nepuis
apprendre. The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with
, re/r;-:r. y'a'eHi.' ='ii^/s tard la haut is plainly no translation
of dtiuu-; .': rasrnta lm ; the sense of the French is better ex-
preffc bh. the Scc:ti 'h haZ e Uvalkit later there-up. Again,
Fur .r*(.i r ,L.flre a.ssai, ' ii verv different from nd exc;ufndunm
r.':ira. n-gotit. The five remlaining letters never appeared in
Latin; nor is there any proof of their being ever translated into
that larguage. Four of them, however, are publilhed in
French. This intirelv overturns our author's hypothesis con-
ccrnin g ;he necefitv of a translation into Latin.

!: the Scottrih edition of the Detection the whole sonnet is

pr'nted in French as well as in Scottilh. It is not poflible to be-
i,;ve that this Scottiilh copy could be the original from which
the French was translated. The French confills of verses which
have both mcafure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are
far frcm being inelegant. The Scottili consists of an equal
number of !ines, but without mealure or rhvne. Now noman
cciUd ever think of a thing lb absurd and impracticable, as to
r;cuirz one to translate a certain given number of lines in prol:
:n:o an equal nu:::ber ofverfes, where both mieafureand rhyme

-ere to be ob;.;ried. The Scottiil, on thecontrarv, appears
t' b:. rr.ir.- :;. irarliaLion of the French; the phraies, the

idicnis,

idioms, and many of the words are French, and not Scottill.
Bfitles, the Scottish translator has, in several instances, milta-
ken the sense of the French, and in many more expresses the
sense imperfectly. Had the sonnet been forged, this could not
have happened. The diretors of the fraud would have under-
llood their own work. I shall satisfy myself with one example,
in which there is a proof of both my assertions. Stanza viii.
ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the sirs line is not a Scottish but a French phrale;
the two other lines do not express the sense of the French, and
the last is absolute nonsense.

TFI E eighth letter was never translated into French. It con-
tains much refined mysticism about devices, a folly of that age,
of which Mary was very fond, as appears from feverrl other
circumstances, particularly from a letter concerning impresas
by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged
her letters, they were certainly employed very idly when they
produced this.

FROM these observations it seems to be evident that there
was a French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and
Scottillh were only translations. Nothing now remains of this
copy hut those few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottills
translation. The Frencheditor laid hold of these sentences, and
tacked his owntranflation to them, which, so far as it is his
work, is a servile and a very wretched translation of Buchanan's
Latin; whereas in those introductory sentences, we have disco-
sered strong marks of their being originals, and certain proofs
that they are not translated from the Latin.

Ir is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottish

tanflations with these sentences, that the Scottish translator has
,lore perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than
tIe Latin. And as it appears that the letters were very early
!,anflated into Scottilh, Good. . 76; it is probable that Bu-
chanan made his translation not from the French hut from this
''ot'illh copy. Were it necessary, several critical proofs of
,Ilis might be produced. One that has been already mentioned
;emns decisive. Diutius illic mirata fun bears not the lealt re-
lllblance to j'nye veill/ plus tard lz haut; but if, inflead of

D d 4 1 tzvllkit

425

I t':alit [i e. wa'chr.ed] lz:er :heie-up, we suppose that Bu.
chanan read I-n.at, &c. this miflake, into which he might so
ea-flv have alier, accounts fcr the error in his translation.

THzSE criicif.n . howevs-er minute, appear to be well

founded. But whatever opinion nmas be formed concerninv
them. the other argunients with regard to the internal evidence
remain in full frce.

THE external proof of the forgerv of the Queen's letters,

which our author has produced, i. extremelv Ipacious, but not
more solid than that which we have already examined. Ac-
cording to Murray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to
Gialgo.,- Jairuarv 21, 1 j67 ; ih arrived there on the 23d,
left that place on the 2-th; flhe, together with the King, reach-
ed Linlithgow on the 2Sth, staved il that town only one night,
and returned to Edinburgh befJre the end of the month. But
according to our author, the Queen did not leave Edinburgh
tni Friday January 24th ; as ilhe flayed a night at Callendar,
flie could not reach Giafgow- fonrer than the evening of Satur-
day the 25th, and she returned to Linlithgow on Tuesday the
28-h. B- conlequence, the frfit letter which supposes the
Queen to have been atlealt four dass in Glasgow, as well as the
second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Saturday morning,
whereas the did not arrive there till the evening, nmut be for-
gerieT. That the Queen did not fe; out from Edinburgh sooner
than the 24th of January, i, evident (as he contends) from the
public records, w:.hich contain a Precept of confirmation of a life-
rent by Ja!mes Bo-d to Margaret Chaliers granted by the
Queen on the 24th of January at Edinburgh; and likewise a
le:ter of the Qaeen's dated at Edinburgh on the fanme day, ap-
pointing Jamres Inglis tavlor to the Prince her ibn. That the
King and Queen had returned to Linlithgow on the zSth, ap-
pears frani a deed in v. hich thev appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper
of their palace there, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good.
I. 1 1

TH is has been represented to be not only a convincing, but

a legal procf cf the forgerv of theetters lid to be v.ritten by
M!ar; hut hew far it falls ihort of this, will appear from the
following confsdrations.

I. IT is evident from a declaration or confefion made by the

Ei:hop of Rols, that before the conifrences at York, which
V-ere rpened in the beginning of October 1568, Mary had, by
an arti5ce of ial:!and's, got into her hands a copy of those let-
ters which her fubjccts accuscd her of having written to Both-
we!'. Brown's trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31, 36. It is
h;gh!t probable that the Bilhop of Ross had seen the letters be-
fore he wrote the defence of Queer. Mary's honour, in the year

c570. They were pubiflled to ail the world together with

Bucha;an's

Buchanan's Detefcion, A. D. 15-t. Now if they had con-
tained any error so gross, and so obvious, at that time, to dif-
covcrv, as the supposing the Qieen to have pased fcveral days
a; Glalgow, while Ihe was really at Edinburgh; had thev con-
tained a letter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning, tho' ihe did
not arrive there till the evening ; is it poflible that tlhe he-relf,
who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advocates
awho appeared for her in that age, lhould not have puhlifhed
and exposed this contradiEtion, and, by so doing, have blasted,
at once, the credit of such an impofttre? In difquifiions which
are naturally abfirufe and intricate, the ingenuity of the latelt
author may discover many things, which have escaped the at-
tention, or baffled the sagacity of those who have formerly
considered the fame fubjeEt. But when a matter of tact lay so
obvious to view, this circumfrance of its being unobfcrved by
the Queen herself, or by any of her adherents, is almost a de-
monltration that there is some miRfake or fallacy in our author's
argumnents. And so far are any either of our historians, or of
Mary's defenders, fiom calling in queflion the common account
concerning the time of the Queen's letting out to Glafgov and
her returning fiom it, that there is not the least appearance of
any difference among them with regard to this point. But
farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which our au-
thor refts the proof of his aftertions, concerning the Queen's
motions, are not the originals subscribed by the Queen, but
copies only, or translations of copies of those originals. It is
not necessary, nor would it be very easy to render this inrelligi-
b!e to persons unacquainted with the forms of law in Scotland;
but every Scotfinan conversant in bufinefls will underfland .-le,
wihen 1 lay that the precept of confirmation of the lite-rcnt to
Bovd is only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which swas fealed
with the Privy Seal, on a warrant from the fignet-office, pro-
coeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh the 24th
of January; and that the deed in favour of James Inglis is the
copy of a letter, Sealed with the Privv Seal, proceeding on a
liinature which bore date at Edinburgh lanuary 24. Fromt
ail this we may argue with tome degree of reason, that a prnof
founded on papers, which are so many reemoves diltant iroml
the oriinals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

;. AT that time all public papers were iffied in the iniine

both of the King and Queen; by law, the King's fublcription
ewas no less requisite to any paper than the Queen's ; and thtre-
fore tnlefs the original signatures be produced in order to al-
certain the particular day when each of thern signed, or ti,
prove that it was signed only by one of them, th- legal pFl'o

arising

arising from these papers would be, that both the King and
Queen signed them at Edinburgh, on the z4th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued by the

sovereign, in that age, seem to have been in a great measure ar-
bitrarv, and affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of con-
sequence, there dates were seldom accurate, are often falle,
and can never be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent,
and was found to be so pernicious, that an ant of parliament,
A.D. i 59:, declared the affixing a false date to a signature to
be High Treafcn.

5. TH E R E f11il remain, in the public records, a great num-

ber of papers, which prove the necefitv of this law, as well as
the weakness and faiiacv of our author's arguments. And
though it be no eafv matter, at the ditlance of two centuries, to
prove an' particular date to be falle, yet furprizing infiances of
this kind ihail be produced. Nothing is more certain from his-
torv than that the King was at Glasgow 24th January i56 ;
and yet the record of signatures from i 565 to I 58z, Fol. 16th,
contains the copy of a signature to Archibald Edmonfton said
to have been subscribed by our Sovereigns, i. e. the King and
Queen at Edinburgh. January 24th 1 567; so that if we were
to tru't implicitly the dates in the records of that age, or to holdl
our author's argument to be good, it would prove that not on-
ly the Queen, but rhe King too, was at Edinburgh on the 24th
of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the bishop of Ross, that

on the 25th of October 566, M7Iary lay at the point of death;
Keith, App. i 4; and vet a deed is to be found in the publick
records, which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day.
Privy-feal, Lib. 35. fol. 89. Oucb:erlony'.

BOTH WELL seized the Queen as she returned from Stirling,

April 24th 56-, and (according to her own account) carried
her to Dunbar with all diligence. And. i. 95. But our au-
:hor, relying on the dates of some papers which he found in
the records, supposes that Bothwell allowed her to (topat Edin-
burgh, and to tran'mac business there. Nothing can be more
improbable than this fuppofitlon. We may therefore rank the

* N. B. In the former editions, another instance of the fame

nature with those which go before and follow was mentioned;
but that, as has since been discovered, was founded on a mif-
tike of the perfan em!ploved to search the records, and is there-
fore om",ecd :n :his ed:iion. The reasoning, hov.ever, in the
D:n1ertation :'a. fjil'.! in full force, not;vithflanding this
_=.z.{iEs .

date

date of the deed to lrright, Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and
which is mentioned by our author, Vol. i. 124. among the in-
stances of the false dates of papers which were issued in the or-
dinary course of business in that age. Our author has mistaken
the date of the other paper to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April
I4th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's history, it is,

that she remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell car-
ried her thither, till she returned to Edinburgh along with hiill
in the beginning of May. Our author himself allows that ihe
resided twelve days there, Vol. . 367. Now though there are
deeds in the records which bear that they were finned by the
Queen at Dunbar during that tine, yet there are others which
bear that they were signed at Edinburgh, e. g. there is one at
Edinburgh, April z7th, Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There
are others said to be signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31.
Chart. No. 524, 526. Ib. lib. 32. No. 154, 157 There are
some signed at Dunbar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh April
3oth, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunbar May ift.
Id, ibid. No. 158. These different charters luppofe the Queen
to have made so many unknown, improbable, and inconGltent
journeys, that they afford the clearelt demonfiration that the
dates in there records ought not to be depended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the charter

said to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be
a Sunday, which was not, at that time, a day of business in
Scotland, as appears from the books of federunt, then kept by
the Lords of fefion.

FROM this lhort review of our author's proof of the forgery

of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are
far from amounting to demonstration.

A NOTHER argument against the genuineness of there letter.

is founded on the ltile and composition, which are laid to be al-
together unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real produc-
tions. It is plain, both from the great accuracy of corpo-
lition in most of Mary's letters, and even fi-om her solicitude
to w rite them in a fair hand, that flie valued herself on those
accompliflmnents, and was desirous of being eftecmed an ele-
gant writer. But when flic wrote at any -inc in a hurry, then
mlany marks of inaccuracy appear. A r,:markble instance of
this may be found in a p;ip:r pL',ifihd, Good. 2. 301. Ma-
ry's letters to Bothwelil were written in the utinoft hurry; and
yet under all the diladvantages ot a trra.lhiio they are not dc-
Ilitute either of spirit or cf energy. The i . -ner in which file
expresses her love to Bhthwell h:;t' be.-:, .;.'.lounced indecent
nd even flocking. Buti I'r"'-' . i:l, i; her to warm ex-
r,.ll;,is of her reiariJ, tho!z rc:...'! '::. .':'d d !ic?.l-y, which

now

now appear in a! the commerce between the sexes, were, in
that age, but lirte k-own, even among persons of the lighef
rark Among l -rd R.vfticn' papers there is a series of letters,
fr"m Marv to the Duke of \rfolk, copied from the Harleian
Libr-r;. P. -. .

B. fci. S, in which MIary declares her

Icvc to that nohleman in language, which would now be rec-
koned extren-me ir.de!ic-te.

TH E onners and rome of Marv's letters to Bothwell were

written before the miurder of her husband; tome of them after
that event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which
are ri:or to the death of her hufDand abound with the fondest
erxretffons of her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that
tLeir familiaritr had been extremely criminal. X'e find in
them, too, some dark exprefTions, which her enemies employed
to prove that the v-as no stranger to the schemes which were
forming arainfi her hu'band's li'e. Of this kind are the fol-
Ib-aing palTaize, " Alace! I nevir diffavit ony body; hot Ire-
mit nme altogidder to zour wiil Send me advertisement quiat
I fra do, and cuharfs.ever thing come thereof, I fall obey zow.
Adrife too wi'lh 7.urfelf. gifze can find out ony mair secret in-
vT'ntiun by medicine, for he fuid tak medecine and the bath
at Craigm;llar." Good. 2 22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris
fiild not be !a meikle Draifit and eftemit, as the trew and faith-
ft'! travellis quhiik I fuitene for to merite hir place. For ob-
taining of the quhiik. aganis mv natural, I betrayis thame that
rr,av imrefche me. God forgive me," &c. ibid. 27. " I have
walkit later thair-up, then I wald have done, gifit had not been
to draw something cut of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw
zow, quhilk i; th. faire-f commodity that can be offerit to ex-
cuoe zour afrairi.' Ib;d. 32. From the letters posterior to the
death of her hu!t2nid, isi eid lent that the scheme of Bothwell's
fei;ipg MIarr bv force. and carrying her along with him, was
contrived in concert with herlelf, and w-ith her approbation.

HAVI \G

TH . T etters of so 7nmch importance as those of Mvlarv's to

lBotiw-ril ,ihou'd h--e been intirelv loit, appears to many aito-
e'-her un-.cccunrahle. After being produced in England be-

i,,re f!izabeth'; cninlimTioners, they were delivered back by

t':m ;to the Erl c.f Murray. Good. 2. 235. He seems to
have kept them in his pcffefion during his life. After hisdeath,
:hee si:! int. ;Le hands of Lenox his successor, who restored
them to the Er: ntif.rtnn. Good. 2. 91. Though it be not
nceteiTariivc cn.t-ct v.ith any of the quefifons which gave oc-
ca2fi.n to 'hi Dilrertat;n, it ritas perhaps iatisfy the curiosity
of f-nce of ny readers to i;obr:n them, that after a very dili-

gent

HAVING thus stated the proof on both fides; having exa-
mined at so great length the different fyfleems vith regard to the
facts in controversy; it may be expected that I lhould now

pronounce

gent fcarch, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's
-tters to Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries
in Great Britain. The only certain intelligence concerning
them, since the time of their being delivered to Morton, was
communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; abaffaldor

froin Quieen Elizabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir
Francis Walsingham, secretary of State, froni the original re-
gifter-book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from 5rh of Augult 1 58z,
to 28th September 1583, in the poifellion of Christopher lHun-
ter, M. D. of Durham.

1582, 8th November, frcm Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been born in hand, That the coffer where-

in were the originals of letters between the Scottilh Queen and
the earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it relied,
ret I have learned certainly by the Prior o' Plufcardyne's means,
that both the coffer and also the writings are come, and now
remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will he hard-
i intreated to make delivery to her Majesty according to her
.lajeity's desire.

TH ts time past I have expended in searching where the cos-

ser and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
should have found great difficulty; now I will eflay Gowrie,
and of my success you liall be Ihortly advertised.

I 2th of November I 582, from Edinburgh.

BECA USE I had both learned, that the casket and letters ImeIT-
tioned in my last, before there were come to the poffeflion of the
Earl of Gowrie, and alob found that no niean might prevail to
Wjin the fame out of his hands without his own content and p-
:)'y; in which behalf I had employed fit instruments, that ne-
rtrthelefs profited nothing; therefore I attempted to etfay hin:-
!elti letting him know that the afiid casket and letters flicui
have been brought to her Majelfv bh the offer and good ilean.
rs good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Ima-
'ty betore they came into his hands and cutody, and knowing
that he did bear the like affection, and wax ready to pleaifre
}ier Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this that had beel tl:-;i
far tendered to her vMajeftv, and s hic it tiercbv ihould be well
accepted, and with prilccliv thank, adiu gratuity be lequited to

1-;:s

pronounce sentence. In my opinion, there are only two con-
c!uifins. w.hich can be drawn from the sacs which have been
enumerated.

ONE,

h.s comfort and contentment; I moved him that they might be
a present to be sent to her Majesty from him, and that I might
cause the fame to be conveyed to her Majesty, adding here-
unto such words and arguments as might both stir up a hope
of liberality, and also best effec the purpose. At the first
-e 2was loth to agree that they were in his poffeflion; but I
let him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that
they were delivered to him by Sanders Jardin; whereupon
he pressed to know who did so inform me, enquiring whe-
ther the Ions of the Earl of Morton had done it or no. I
did not otherways in plain terms deny or answer thereunto,
bur that he might think that he had told me, as the prior is
ready to avouch, and well pleased that I shall give him to be
the author thereof; after he had said [though] all these letters
were in his keeping (which he would neither grant nor deny)
-et he might not deliver them to any person without the con-
sents and privities, as well of the king, that had interest there-
in, as also of the reft of the noblemen enterprisers of the action
againfr the King's mother, and that would have them kept as an
evidence to warrant and make good that aaion. And albeit I
replied, that their action in that part touching the assignation of
the crown to the King by his mother, had received such efta-
b ishment, confirmation, and strength, by aCts of parliament
and other publick authority and instruments, as neither should
:;:ht cafe be surfered to come in debate or question, nor such
scrolls and papers ought to be shewed for the strengthening
thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered to the
hands of her Iajefty, to whom they were destined before they
sei! n his keeping; yet he would not be removed or satisfied;
c..ncluding, after much reasonings, that the Earl of Morton,
nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durRf at
a--.: time make delivery; and because it was the first time that
I had moved him therein, and that he would gladly both answer
her Majefy's good expectation in him, and also perform his
cutv due to his sovereign and associates in the action aforesaid;

'crr-fnre he would seek out the said casket and letters, at his
return to his house, which he thought flould be within a short
t:ie ; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and con-
fidcration had of the cause, he would give further answer.

his refoluiion I have received as to the thing; and for the
present I could not better, leaving him to give her Majefvy such

testimony

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-
couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her husband, and
presuming on her attachment to himself, struck the blow with-

out

testimony of his good will towards her, by his frank dealing
herein, as fle may have cause to confirm her highnesses good
opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to
greater goodness towards him. I fliall frill labour him both by
ryfelf and also by all other means ; but I greatly diffruft the de-
fired success herein.

24th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

FoR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the
hands of the Earle of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnest-
ly therein, letting him know the purpose of the Scottilh Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or de-
faced, and that the means which [he will make in this behalf
ihall be so great and effecual, as these writings cannot be fafc-
Iv kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that hath
the custody thereof, neither shall he that is once known to
have them be suffered to hold them in his hands. Herewith I
hare at large opened the perils likely to fall to that action, and
the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now
openly known to have the possession of these writings, and I
have lettin him fee what surety it ihall bring to the laid cause
and all the parties therein, and to himself, that these writings
may be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping
of her Majesty, that will have them ready whensoever an use
hall be for them, and by her Highnesses countenance defend
them and the parties from such wrongfull objeEtions as Iliall be
laid againf them, offering'at length to him, that if he be not
fully satisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the affocitce
flall not like of the delivery of them to her majesty in this good
manner, and for the interell rehearsed, that I illall readily, up-
on meeting and conference with them, procure their agfent in
this part; (a matter more easy to offer than to perform) and
lalfly, moving him that (for the secrecy and benefit of the cause,
and that her Majesty's good opinion towards himself may be
irmly fettled and confirmed by his acceptable forwardness lhere-
in) he would, without needless scruple, frankly commit these
writings to her Majesty's good cuftodv for the good uses received.
After long debate he resolved, and said, that he would un'eign-
edli fliew and do to her Majesty ail the pleasure that he might
without offence to the King his Sovereign, and prciudice to
the afiociates in the action, and therlcfore he would lirft make
'arcll and view tile said letters, and herein take adv ice. whalt he

mlight

out having concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, instead of teltifying
much indignai:on at the deed, or dilcovering any resentment
againift Bjtha eil, who was accused of having committed it,

continued

might d., and how far he might satisfy and content her Ma-
jelty'; 3.nmifing thereon to give more resolute answer; and he
concluced fla:lv, that after he had found and seen the writings,
that he might not make deliverv of them without the privity
of the King. Albeit I stood long with him against his refolu.
tion in this print. to acquaint the King with this matter before
the letters were in the hands of her Majeity, letting him fee
that his doings there should admit great danger to the cause;
yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he .nean-
eth to put cs er the matter from himself to the King, upon fight
whereof I thall travel erfecaually to obtain the King's content,
that the letters may be conm:litted to her Majesty's keep-
ing, thinking it more ealv to prevail herein with the King,
in the preS;:n love and affection that he beareth to her Highnef,
than to w.n and thing at the hands of the associates in the action,
whereof toine principal of them now come and remain at the
devotiin of the King's mother; in this I shall ftiil call on Gow-
rie rto l-arch out the coffer, according to his promise; and as
I i-n:'! fnd him minded to do therein, so fliall I do my best and
whole endeavour to eifecd the success to her Majesty's belt con-
tentment.

2d December 582, from Edinburgh,

BE CA

. v E I saw good opportunity offered to renew the mat-

ter to the Earl or Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the cos-
ser in h s hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where-
upon he tld me, that the Duke of Lenox had fought earnetfly
to h;ve had those letters, and that the King did know where
thycv aer;, !o as they could not be delivered to her Majelty
w;h i t the King's privity and consent, and he pretended to be
:i!! :l'i i::i to pleasure her .laijef',i in the fame, so far as he
:=v , ;..n ;is J!Liur to the King and to the relt of the aflociates
in h't ;'on; but I greatly diltruft to effec this to her Ma-
ie:v'" ri- altire, wherein, nev.rthele:,, I lhall do my uttermo0t
enD'c; .r i

.

V H T H E R Tames V!. v.-n put the Earl of Gowrie todeath.

A. D. i 5;4 and tiized ali his efleds, took care to destroy his
rnnther's letters, tfr who.'e honour he was at that time ex-
tr::v ze,)ou ; whether the - have perisiled by some unknown

:: ,; or whc- er theyv rv not fti!i remain unobserved

aicre :;he arch iyes of some of cur great families, it i iimpelii-
'!ec to -eeS:llinc.

rued to load him with marks of her regard, conducted his tr;al
in -uch a manner as rendered it impoflible to discover his guilt,
and soon after, in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of
prudence, voluntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which
every consideration fliould have induced her to detest. By this
verdid, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the
murder of her husband, or even of having previously given her
content to his death; but she is not acquitted of having ditco-
vered her approbation of the deed, by her behaviour towards
him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and his adhe-
rents laboured to establish, " That as James, fumtyme Erle of
Bothewile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unwor-
thy murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry
of gude memory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis
lauchfull husband; fa was fie of the foreknowledge, counfall,
devise, perfwadar and commandar of the said murder to be
done." Good. 2. 207.

WHI c H of these conclusions is most agreeable to the evi-

dence, that has been produced, I leave my readers to deter-
mine.

INDEX.

Ee
Vor.. II.

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Numerical Letters refer to the Vo-

lume, and the Figures to the Pages.

A.
A DAMSO N, archbishop of St. Andrews, i: excommuni-

cared by the vfnod of Fife, II. 116. He excommuni-

cated his opponents, i 17. is restored by the general affemnbly
upon conditions, ibid. His mean submission to the general

assembly .-

- -3
Albanry, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles against his

brother K. lames III. I. 48. is made prisoner but escapes to
France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of England,
ibid. procures afiiftance to invade Scotland on mean condi-
tions, 49 returns to Scotland, and is restored to favour, ibid.
cabals again, but is forced to fly to France - 50

- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James V.

I. 31, 53. after several unfuccefiful struggles with the nobi-
litv, he is forced to retire to France, ibid.
A!er.cn, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuses the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him - II. 58
Allen, cardinal, published a book proving the lawfulness of kill-

ing excommunicated princes -II. o05
A!-.a, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q. Mary, II. z5,

28, 3-. is recalled from his government of the Nether-
lands -- 4
Arnaziadors, their office - - I. 73
Andre.ws St. the archbishop of, remarkably cured of a dange-

rous distemper, I. 1 3. the motives of his opposition to the
Q. Regent, 31. his great influence on the bench of Bishops
and weight in Parliament, 136. governed the church with
great moderation, 137. persecutes the reformers, 138. per-
forms great service to the congregation against the French,
184. is imprisoned for celebrating Mats, 248. ruins Q Ma-
ryv' affairs by his imprudent condut, 372, & seq. is taken
prisoner in Dumbarton castle, and hanged - II. 16

- - the cattle of, demolished by the French - I. 96
-- the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q Regent

and the reformers, I. i4S. is provoked to leave the court,

150.

15o. is one of the chief promoters of the reformation, i63
some account and a character of him, ibid. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, 164. presumption of his inno-
cence of the designs charged on him, ibid. is sent by the con-
vention to invite the Queen to Scotland, 208. is received by
her with confidence and affeftion, 209. restrains the turbu-
lent spirit of the people againif popery, 220. is sent to re-
fRrain the licentious practices of the borderers, 225. executes
his commifion with vigour and prudence, 226. a conspiracy
againit him discovered, 233. is created Earl of Mar, 235.
becomes obnoxious to the Earl of Huntly, ibid. fee Mar and
Murray.
Angus, Earl of, was the only man who asserted the indepen-'

dency of his country, I. 9, to. assumes the Regency during
the minority of K. James V. 53. is unable to gain his assec-
tions, 53. is attainted and flies into England - 54

obtains leave to return into Scotland, II. 78. furren-

ders himself to K. James VI. 86. he with several others seize
the castle of Stirling to oppose Arran, 90. they are forced to
fly into England on the approach of the King with an army,
ibid. he is attainted and his estate forfeited, 97. is concerned
in a plot in favour of Spain, 177. is seized and committed
prisoner to the castle of Edinburgh, 178. escapes and flies to
the mountains, ibid. offers to submit to a trial, 81 . fen-
tence is pronounced againit him, 183. he refuges to sub-
mit - - -- ibid.
/njou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eli-
zabeth -- - - II. 23

Anne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI. II. 169.

her arrival in Scotland and coronation, 172. heads a party
that opposes the chancellor - - 18z
Archbifhiops, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters revived in Scotland

during the King's minority, II. 34. this gives great offence to
many of the clergy, ibid. an act of affemnbly againit there of-
sices, 72. Bishops made subje&t to prefbyteries and assemblies,
117. a great stroke given to their authority, 157. None of
them present at the Queen's coronation - 172
rgyl, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to
the Dauphin of France, I. 136. uses his interest with the
reformers to make a treaty with the Queen Regent, 148.
leaves her court in resentment of her treachery, 50. refuges
to accede to a treaty with MlVurray the Regent, 422. is soon
after forced to submit, 423. ats as lieutenant to the Q(een
after the Regent's murder, II. 7. is prevailed on to join
the King's party, 19. quarrels with Atholc, 48. confe-
derates with him against Morton, the Regent, for their
mutual defence, ibid. they remonitrate againit him to the

E e z King,

King, 5o, thev raise forces against him, 55. negotiates a
treaty with him by the mediation of Q Elizabeth, ibid. is
promnoted to the office of chancellor, 57. the King's autho.
rity delegated to him and Lord Sorbes against the popifls
Lord&, 186. his forces are defeated in an engagement with
them - - ibid.

.r:-'/cracy, predominant in Scotland I. 195
Armada, Spanish, preparations for it, II. 160. it is defeated, r65
A.rra, Earl, is appointed Regentduring the minority of Q.Ma-

ry. I. 82. his character, ibid. 83. consents to the fchlmes
of England which dilgults the public, ibid. becomes fufpici
ous of the Earl of Lenox, 8;. is forced to renounce the
friendlhip with England and declare for France, 86. and to
perl'cute the reformer., ibid. publickly abjures the doErine
of the reformers, 8-. is contemned by one half and little
trusted be the other part of the nation, 88. heads the parti-
zans of France and defenders of popery, ibid. attempts in
vain to seize the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 94. is forced
to nmake a truce with the conspirators, 95. his eldest son is
condirionally excluded all right of fuccdeilon, 97. his mean
coneeiion to the court of France, 105. gets the title of Cha-
telherault, ibid. is undermined by the Q. Dowager, 1 10, ill.
propohals and arguments for his resignation, 12. he consents
to it, ibid. retracts by the influence of the archbishop of St.
Andrevws, 114. is at last prevailed on and gets advantageous
ternis, ibid. See Chatelerault.

A4rra-., Eldeci son of the Duke of Chatelherault, joins in anaf-

fociatiun with the reformers, I. 162, narrowly escapes in-
tended ruin at the court of France, 163. is full of resentment
agoinit the French on that account, ibid. the congregation
solicit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, 202. his great imprudence
with regard to Q. Mary, 227. discovers a conspiracy against
the Queen's favourites, 233. loses his reason, II. 57, isim-
prlfoned by Morton -- --
--- late capt. Stewart, gets that title and estate, II. 68. is

appointed to conduct Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ibid. tertures several of his servants cruelly, ibid. his infa-
imous marriage with the coutefs of March, 7o. his variance
mith Lenox, -1. is frustrated in an attempt to rescue the
King at Ruthven, 77. is confined prisoner to the castle of
S:iri;!g, ibid. regains his liberty and the King's regard, S4.
reiurec his power and arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthven con-
fpirators declared guilty of high treason, 86. is detefledas
a2ithr of a persecution againit the clergy, 9 . is gained over
to 4Queci Elizabeth's interest, 95, 96. gets several forfeited
eftatrs, -. his corruption and inollence, 102. ismade chan-
celior and has unlimited power, o03. his venalitv is imitated
by his wife, ibid. his monllrous tyranny and oppreflion, o14.

his

his power undermined by Wotton the English envoy, I 3.
is confined in the caitle of St. Andrews but soon recovers
favour, 114. his interest finks much, 115. is stripped of
his honours and spoils, and reduced to his original flation 116

Alticles, Lords of, their origin and burinefs, I. 68, 70. by

whom chosen, 70. the subsequent variations and political use
made of this institution - 71, 72
/runiel, Earl of, is appointed a commifloner to the conference

at Westminster I. 395 & fcq,
.417bl, ambassador from Q Elizabeth to Scotland, II. 162. his

great promises to King James, ibid. his promises are soon
forgot, i65. he is aflained and withdraws privately firum
Scotland - ibid.
APflafnation, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted

for, I. 297, 299, several instances of it in France, 299, 300.
a flop put to it there and in Scotland, ibid. several great men
approved of it, 301. prevailed greatly afterwards II. 173
dfembly of the church of Scotland, the first but feeble and ir-

regular, I. 208. another assembly, their demands fron the
convention, 227, two other assemblies in vain solicit an aug-
mnentation of their revenues, 242. they address Q. Mary in
high firains of complaints, 281. an affenbly proceeds at Glaf-
gow notwithstanding the King's interdiction, II. 72. two as-
femblies yield many of the privileges of the church to the
King, 201. declare it lawful for Ministers to fit in Parlia-
ment, 203, 204. See Clergy.
Atociation, formed in defence of Q_ Elizabeth against Q: Mary

11. 99

Aihole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl c

Argyll, II. 47. joins with him in opposing Morton the Re-
gent, ibid. dies soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 57,
fil'picions of his being poisoned - ibid.
.4urigne, Lord de, second son of the Earl of Lenox, arrives in

Scotland from France, II. 60 becomes soon a great favoi-
rite of K. James, ibid. high titles and posts bestowed on him,
ibid. notes against him, appendix 381. See Lenox.
Af't-ian family, their origin and power I. 74

B.

B AtB IN TO 3, Anthony, some account of him, II. 120.
D the rife of his cionlfiracy against QI Elizabeth, ibid. the
names and scheme of operations of his associates, 121. they
are betrayed, seized and executed - - 22

BaSon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the coinmiflioners to the

conference at Westminster - - - I. 396

Baliol, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, I. 8. is pre-
ferred by Edw. I. Io. soon forced by him to resign ibid.

E e 3 Ballard,

Ba'lard, a trafficking priest, solicits an invasion of England

from Spain, II. 20, joins in a conspiracy to murder Q Eli-
zabeth, z12, is discov-ered and taken into custody, 1zz, and
executed - ibid.
Barons, the;r jurifdicion very extensive, I. I8, the difference

between the greater and lesser whence, 66, three hundred of
them remonstrate against the conduct of the Q. Dowager,
I 26, the lesser admitted by their representatives into Parlia-
ment, II. 158, petition of the lesser Barons to Parlia-
ment, app. 169. See A.Tbles.
Baq/licon Dorcn, a book publilhed by K. JamesVI. strengthens

his interest in England II. 206
Bezatoun, cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify the

nobles, I. 7, his pretensions to the regency on the death
of that prince, So, forges a testament of the late King, ibid.
his views how disappointed, ibid. his charaaer, 83, opposes
the Earl of Arran Regent, ibid. excites most of the nation
against the Englilh, 85, seizes the young Queen and her
mother. ibid. cajoles the earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the
Regent to renounce England and declare for France, 86, and
to persecute the reformers, 87, engrosses the chiefdirection
of affairs, 88. his double dealing with the Earl of Lenox re-
sented, ibid. is murdered, 93, his death fatal to the Catho-
lics, 94, a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid. scandalous re-
ports concerning him - 122
Bdfoard. Earl of, comes as Ambassador from Q Elizabeth to

witness the baptism of James VI. I. 316, his instructions,
ibid. 31-, his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appendix 290, 292,

298

Bellendon, Sir Lewis, justice clerk, K. James's resident at Lon-

doa, II. 112. joins in promoting Q: Elizabeth's interelt in
Scotland, ibid. is lent vith her Envoy into that country

ibid.
Black, Mr. David, minilter at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

seditious expressions in the pulpit, II. r93, 194, 196, being
supported by the clergy, he declines the civil jurisdiction,
ibid. is condemned by the privy council, 195, is sentenced
by the King to reside beyond Spey - - 198
Blackader, captain, and three others executed for the murder of

Darnlv -- - 354

B.ethius, Hector, his history of Scotland, some account of, I. 4
Bolron Ca fle. Q. Mary confined a prisoner there I. 384
Bonot, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney, I. 125
B.or-rers, an attempt to restrain ther licentious practices, J. 225,

Q. Mary ivits them, 308, a scuffle there in which the Eng-
liih warden, &c. are made prisoners - II. 46
3.rt:A.wvck, Lord, aflifts the Queen Regent in defending Leith

I 1. 1-7
Bothrvcl,

B!tf'well, Earl of, intercepts a fum of money from England to

the congregation, I. 176, favours the Queen Regent, but
resides at his own house, 178, his refentmentagainft the pri,,r
of St. Andrews, 236, is by him, when Earl of Murray and
Regent, summoned to a public trial, 268. prevents it by
leaving the kingdom, ibid. a sentence of Outlawry againif
him prevented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return,
276, escapes with her after the murder of Rizio, 296, some
account of his former behaviour, 303, commences a favou-
rite of the Queen, ibid. 303, she reconciles him to several
Lords, with whom he was at variance, 304, he increases
in favour with her, 305, circumstances concurring in this,
306, he is wounded in attempting to seize one of the bor-
derers, 309, the Queen's extraordinary regard for him on
this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents he obtain. a pardon
for Morton and his associates, 320, proposes the restoration
of the popish ecclefiaffical jurifdition, 321, his views in this,
ibid. is fufpefed to be the author of Dar.ly's murder, 328,
is charged with it by Lenox, 330, but still favoured by the
Queen, ibid. appointed governor of Edinburgh Caffle, ibid.
his trial is hurried on, ibid. remarkable partiality in his fa-
vour, 331, Lenox accuses him openly, 332, comes to his
trial with a great retinue, 333, is acquitted by a jury, 334,
the trial universally censured, 335, challenges any that would
accuse him, ibid. several afts of Parliament passed in his fa-
vour, 336, he procures an aa in favour of the reformation,
337, prevails on several of the nobles to recommcnd him as a
husband to the Queen, 338, 339, seizes the Queen on a
journey from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar, 341, his
view in this, 342, obtains a pardon under the great feal,
ibid. procures a divorce from his wife, 343, carries the
Queen to the castle of Edinburgh, ibid. is created Duke of
Orkney, ibid. and married to the Queen, ibid. is not allow-
ed the title of King, 344, he watches the Queen very closely,
345, endeavours to get the Prince into his custody, ibid. is
alarmed with an association of the nobles against the Queen
and him, 346, carries the Queen to the castle of Borthwick,
ibid. raises forces against the confederate Lords, 348, he
marches against them, 349. proposes a single combat, 350,
this how prevented, ibid. takes hislaft farewell of the Qeen,
and is forced to fly, 351, fends for a casket of letters from Q.
Mary to him, 355, they are intercepted by the Earl of Mor-
ton, ibid. his miserable fate, 364, 365, refleEtion on his
conduCt, ibid. copy of his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon,
appendix - - 371
- late Francis Stewart, created Earl of Bothwell, 1I.
;66, is imprisoned for consulting witches, 174, escapes and

E e 4 attempts

attempts to break into the King's presence, ibid. retires to
the north, ibid. be and his adherents are attainted, i-6,
fails in an attempt to seize the King. ibid. is taken underpro-
tection of Q. Elizabeth, who solicits for him, 178, seizes the
King's person , 7, lSo. forces him to dismiss the chancellor
and his other favourites, ibid. and to grant him a remiflion,
ibid. his bold and insolent behaviour afterwards, i 8, is en-
couraged by the Englilti ambassador, 183, makes another at-
tempt to come at the King, 185, is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the north. of England, ibid. is abandoned by Queen
Elizabeth. and forced to fly into Spain and Italy, i88, re-
mains in indigent obscurity, and is never after reconciled to
the King - - - ibid.
Botb,-ell, Adam, bifltop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of

marriage of Q_ Mary to the Earl of Bothwell I. 344

Bothb-,ellbaugh. See Hamilton.
BsPulogne, wrested by the French out of the hands of the Eng-

lih . I. 03, they consent to restore it and its dependencies to
the French --- 105
Bo-es, Envoy from Queen Elizabeth, accuses Lenox ofdifturb-

ing the peace, II. 63, is refused an audience, ibid. is sent to
encourage the conspirators at Ruthven, 78, to enquire about
K. James's correspondence with the pope - 207
Boydl, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James Ill.

frustrated --- -- I. 31
--- is prevailed on to join the King's party against Q. Mla-

rv, II. 20, joins the Ruthven conspirators - ,6
Brienne, Count de, comes as ambaflador from France to wit-

ness the haptifin of K. James VI. - I. 316
Bruce. Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, I. 8, his

grandftn aiTerrs his right and vindicates the honour of his
country, 10, he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles

39

- a priest, employed by the King of Spain to fcduce the
Scots nobles - - - II. 166
- Mr. Robert, a presbyterian minister, performs the ce-
remony of the coronation of K. James's Queen II. 1;2

Edward. abbot of Kinlels, acquits himself with ad-
dress and reputation as ambassador at the court of England

II. 204, 205

--- Mr. Robert, a mirniier, his resolution in refuting to
publiih the King's account of Gourie's conspiracy, II. 225
is deprived and baniihed on that account - ibid.
Buc-rnan, George, his history of Scotland, some account of,

I. 4, remarks on his dialogue de jure Regni, i ct, alone
accuses Q. Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio,
29z, approved of a)liafinarion, 301, his partiality in over-
looking an aCt of Par!ianment in favour of the reformation,

337j

337, attends the Regent into England when called on to
accuse Q. Mary, 286, was one of the preceptors of K.
lames VI. II. 48, commended for his great genius, 256, 257

Burleigh, fee Cecil.
Bu-rroughs, when first represented in Parliament - I 197

C.

A IS, John, a declaration of his in name of Q( Elizabeth
to the Lords of Grainge and Lethington, app. - 340

Caithness, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Bothwell for the mur-

der of Darnly - - I. 335

Calvin, the patron and reftorer,of prelbyterian church govern-

ment - - - - 206
Camden, some mistakes of his - . 319, 339
Canongate, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there II. 8
Cardan, some account of him, I. 113, his remarkable cure of

the bilhop of St. Andrews - ibid.

Carey, Sir George, sent anibaf'ador from Q: Elizabeth to en-

courage the conspirators at Ruthven - 11. 76

-- Robert, sent by Q. Elizabeth to tooth K. James after the

death of his mother, II. 52, is not p :ritted to enter Scot-
land, ibid. was the first that brought K. Janes intelligence
of the death of Q. Elizabeth - - 243, 244

Cnjket of letters from Q: Mary to Bothw-ell seized by the Earl

of Morton, I. 355, her enemies avail themselves much of
them - ii.

CJflls, Earl of, joins the King's party II. 20
Cajilenau, the French ambassador, is employed to procure the

consent of his court to her marriage with Darnly, 1. 262, he
endeavours to make up the diffcrences between the Queen
and him, 305, his interceflion in behalf of Queen Mary

II. to7, o08
Catharine of Medicis, aflumes the government after the death

of Francis II, her son, I. 204, her harlh treatment of Q
MIary, ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 2, i
bends her whole endeavours to destroy the Protellants, 11.
23, her artful conduct with that view - ib'l.

Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, I 92z, 212, is empiny-

ed to negtiate a pc:ice with France, ibid. over-reaches the
French aimbafiador in the treaty of Edinburgh. ibid. is tp-
pointed a colmilniioncr to the conference at Wctlininfler, r9t,
ient by QEllizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, II. i , hins
an interview with her which excites Q El.!izabeth's jealoulv,
43, is treated harlhly by Q_ Elizabeth btr contenting to Q.
Mary's death 152

-- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party againit
LEsex, II. 229, his charastcr, ibid. ;i.. great alliduity, ibid.

enters

enters into a private correspondence with K. James, 234, a
letter from him to his Maielty, app. - 399
Cc-i.acy of the popish clergy, a chief engine of their policy

I. 120, 141
Chkr.es V. Emperor, his great power, I. 73, and unlimited

ambition, -5, is checked by Francis I. - ibid.

K-ing of France- makes a league with Q_ Elizabeth,II. 28
C'ntelberault, Duke of, that title conferredon the Earl of Arran,

Regent of Scotland, I. o14, his right of fucceflion to the
crown of Scotland maintained, 132, enters a protestation to
save his right, 134, joins in association with the reformers,
161, is looked on as the head of the congregation, 162, joins
them in endeavouring to expel the French army, ibid. 163,
his pufiiianillitv, 1 .5, becomes obnoxious to Q Mary, 227,
his jealous-- of the prior of St. Andrews, 233, deprived of
his French pension, 251, is alarmed at the Earl of Lenox's
return to Scotland, 257, an accommodation brought about
bv the Qpeen's influence, 258, adheres to Murray in oppo-
sing the Queen's marriage, 278, is pardoned on his humble
application, but forced to reside in France, 280, his parti-
zans grumble at Murray's being advanced to the Regency,
367, returns from France and heads the Queens adherents,
403, is made her lieutenant-general, ibid. his resolution
wavering. the Regent commits him prisoner to the cafle of
Fdinburgh. 404, is set at liberty by Kirkaldy and joins the
Qleen's party, II. 5. is proclaimed traitor by Lenox the new
Regent, 9, is reconciled to Morton the Regent, 40, articles
of a treatv between them, ibid. his death - 46
Cl,-rcl of Scotland, revolutions in it after the union of the

crowns, II 250. 21, fee afsembi, clergy.

C'.urch Lands annexed to the crown by Parliament II 157
Ciars, the inlfiturion and nature of - I. 23
C.-r-y, popifli, their great riches and power, I. 56, 117, were

made use of by K. Iames V. to filpprefs the nobles, 57, 58,
made a conliderab!e body in Parliament, 118, their great in-
fluence over the laitv, 119, they engrossed learning, 120,
and held many of the chief employments, ibid. their power
ercreafed by Ce!ihacy, ibid. they seized the estates of the in-
terate 121, and tried all matrimonial and tettamentary
causes, ibid. become obnoxious to the laity, 122, their
great ccrri-ptio., whence, ibid these of Scotland particular-
lv d:filrc! :e. 123, their weak defence of their tenets, ibid.
try in vain to impose false miracles, ibid. their irlpolitic con-
duc' to the reformers 139
---- reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of the

church, I. 2.3, 209, 2r , cause all relits of popery to be
oefiroved, iid. a new regulation concerning their revenues,
227, 231, they are no gai3ers by it, ibid. their stipends

what

what in those days, ibid. are offended at the moderation of
their leaders, 249, occasion a tumult among the people,
ibid. more complaints of their poverty, 258, 321, are jea-
lous of Q, Mary, ibid. the small allowance appointed to iup-
port them all, 321, their application for payment of their
itipends of little effect, 367, fresh complaints of the defici-
ency of their funds for their maintenance, 414, 415, arc put
off with fair words and proniifes, 414, archbishops, &c. in-
troduced among them by Morton, II. 34, 35, their grie-
vances under his administration, 45, they approve of the
Ruthven conspirators, 78, by favouring them they provoke
the King, 87, revere laws made against them, go, 91, they
of Edinburgh fly into England, ibid. as do several others
that were molf eminent, ibid. more vigorous measures against
them, 97, they obtain no address on the restoration ot the
exiled Lords, 1 16, represent their grievances to Parliament,
155, a maintenance provided for them by Parliament, 157,
they prevail to get Prelbyterian government eftablifled by
law, -75, their zeal againit the Popilll Lords, 181, their
rafli pruceedings, 19o, 191, they erecA a flanding Council of
the Church, 192, vindicate one of their number who declin-
ed the civil jurifdition, 194, 195, their standing Council or-
dered to leave Edinburgh, ibid. this occasions a violent Lu-
mult there, 196. 198, they use theirutmoft efforts to spirit
the people, 199, are deserted and fly to England, zoo, their
power greatly reduced, ibid. are prevailed on to give up
many of their privileges, 201, 202, are restored to a feat
in Parliament, 203, this violently opposed by many of them,
205, but carried in their general Assembly, ibid. those en-
titled to this privilege are laid under many regulations and
reftriaions, z0o, they are brought under great subjection,
21 , the revolutions among them since the Union of the
crowns 250, 251
Clinton, Lord, appointed a commiflioner at the conference at

Westminster I. 396

Cockburn of Ormifton, receives a supply of money from the

Englilh to the congregation, I. 186, is intercepted and rob-
bed of it - - - ibid.

Coin in Scotland, some account of - I. 171. II. 45
Comwnifizr;es appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Court, J. 248, they are deprived of all authority - 321

ConfeJon of faith by the Reformers, consented to by Parlia-

ment - - - I. ,)
Ctngregation, the Protestants diftinguiflled by that name, 1.

144, their leaders enter into an aflbciarion, 145, are involv-
ed in difficulties, 174, apply to Q. Elizabeth for afliltance,
/75, money sent them by her intercepted, t66, make a ralls
and desperate attempt on Leith and are repulsed, 177, are

no

no less unfortunate in a tecond fkirmiih, ibid. are quite dif-
pirited and retreat to Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body
of the nobles, 1-R, their army dwindles away, 179, are ani-
mated by Knox, ibid. thev apply again to Q Elizabeth, r79,
their parties harass the French, 184, are atifted hv a fleet
from England, ibid. conclude a treaty at Berwick with the
D. of Norfolk, 185, the design and substance of this treaty,
186, negotiate a peace with France, 192, articles of the
treaty, 193, they reap many advantages from it, 195, fee
Reformation.
CG.enant. National, framed in defence of the King and Go-

vernnent, II. 163, the nature and reafonablenels of it, 164,
the progress of it since ibid.

C-urte/y of Scotland, what - - I. 132
Cris, a rrinirer, boldly testifies against Q Mary's marriage

with Bothwei! - - - . 344
Cranfcri,. Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes Dumbarton Castle,

11. 14. the difficulties of that enterprize - 15
--- Earl ot, one of the heads of the Spanish faction, 11.

16r, 165. offers his service to the K. of Spain, ibid. joins in
rebellion againIt the King, 168, is forced to submit to him,
ibid. and imprisoned a short time - - 169
Cricbton, Regent dunng the minority of K. James II. his bar-

barous policy - - I. 44, 4

- a jesuit, a plot against Q. Elizabeth discovered by his
means - - - 11. 98
Crinna,'s, a remarkable instance of the difficulty of bringing

them to jultice - - - I. 17
Crrc, du, the French Ambassador, refuses to countenance Q.

Marv's marriage with Bothwell, I. 344, attempts in vain a
reconcil ation between the Queen and the confederate Lords,
-49. mediates a truce between the King's and Queen's party
in Scetland - II. 29
Crown matrimonial of Scotland granted by Parliament to the

Diuphin of France, I. 13z, deputies appointed to carry it,
but are prevented - 136
Cuningarnm, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwell in name of

the Earl of Lenox, I. 334, demands a delay, which is re-
fused - - ibid.
Cur-i, one of Q Marv's secretaries, is seized and carried pri-

soner to London, II. 12z, 126, is produced an evidence
againfs her - 133

D.

,R 'Lr, Henry, Lord, proposed as a husband to Q

.Mary I. 2a;, his right of succession confidered, ibid.
256, is permitted to Visit the court of Scotland, 260, arrives

there

there and quickly gains the Queen's heart, 26z, his characer,
163, disgusts several of the nobles, particularly Murray, ibid.
cultivates a familiarity with David Rizio, 264, is despised on
that account, 265, grows intolerably insolent and haughty,
270, schemes to afnallinate Murray, 272, a plot to seize and
fend him to England prevented by the Queen, ibid. evi-
dences of this, 273, 275, his marriage with the Queencele-
brated, 275, is honoured with the title of King of Scotland,
ibid. is implacable with refpea to the exiled nobles, 284,
loses the Queen's affecion by his untoward behaviour, 289,
demands the Crown matrimonial, ibid. becomes suspicious of
Rizio's ill offices with the Queen, 289, his resolution to be
avenged of him encouraged by the nobles, 290, articles
agreed on between them for that purpose, 292, heads the
conspirators who perpetrate the murder, 294, confines the
Queen after it is committed, ibid. prohibits the meeting of
the Parliament, ibid. makes his escape with the Queen, 295,
296, her hatred to him increases, 30o, is neglected by her
and treated with little refpec by the nobles, 305, resolves to
leave Scotland, 307, his wayward and capricious behaviour,
ibid. he writes the reason of his conducE to the Queen, 308,
his (trange behaviour at the baptifin of the Prince, 317, a
false reason alledged for this confuted, 319, retires to his fa-
ther at Glasgow, 320, falls tick there, 322, conjecures con-
cerning his distemper, ibid. is neglected by the Queen, 323,
fle afterwards visits and expresses affection for him, 324, he
is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 326, is lodged
in a separate house, ibid. he is murdered there, 327, his
character, ibid. a proclamation iflued for discovering the
murderers, 328, a remiss enquiry made into it, 329, 335,
Capt. Blackader, and three others executed on that ac-
count, 367, the confeflion of Morton the Regent at his death
concerning the murder, II. 69, paper of objections of the
Court of England against his marriage with Q. Mary, App.
a dissertation concerning his murder, at the end of vol. II.

David I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the church 1 1

- II. troubles during his minority - I. 28

Davison, sent into Scotland by Q. Elizabeth, as a spy on the

French Ambafador, II. 81, is lent to gain Arran's interest
to Q Elizabeth, 96, this he soon accompliflies, ibid. brings
the warrant for Q. Mary's death at Q Elizabeth's desire,
142, 143, is charged by her with difobesing her orders, 152,
is imprisoned, tried and fined, and loses all favour, ibid. ob-
jections againrt hii in the caulf of the late Scottifli Queen.
App. 397
Drfe, Monsieur, is sent with a fupp'y of forces to afitl th.

French againtt the Englilhl in Scotland, 1. lo3, his luccels
there ibid.

Di/fipine, in the C';urch, the first book of, composed, I. 208,

why objected againfl in a convention of the States, ibid. an-
other attempt in favour of Church discipline frustrated, II. 7z
DougLzs. the power and property of that family, I. 29, they

a'pire to independency, 44, Will. Earl of, murdered by K.
James II. 45, his son endeavours to relent it, ibid. is forced
to fly into England, - - ibid.
*-- iilliam, Q Mary committed a prisoner to his castle

of Lochlevin -- - 354
---- George, brother to the above, aflifts the Queen in

making her escape - 368

Archibald, one of Darnlv'smurderers, II. 119. under-

goes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitted, ibid. is
lAnt Ambassador to England, ibid. letter from him to the
Q. of Scots, 357, app. to the King 36I
Drury, Sir VWm. enters Scotland with an army to support the

Q.ueen's party, II. 7, they join him and drive off the
Queen's, ibid. he procures a truce between the King's and
Q leen's parties, 29, comes with forces to afift Morton in
besieging the cafile of Edinburgh, 41, which is forced to
surrender -- ibid.
- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q. Mary's keepers

II. tol
DuIl', Lord Robert, recommended by Q_ Elizabeth as a hus-

band to Q Maary, I. 252, why a favourite of Q_ Elizabeth's,
ibid. is high!y promoted by her, 253. hisfituation extremely
delicate, 254, becomes fuipicious of Cecil - ibid.
DmAartjn Castle, furprized and taken in the King's name by

the Regent - II. 5, i6
Dur., a minifler of Edinburgh, banished from his charge by

K lames, for his free invectives againf the courtiers, II. 74,
a'ter being restored he is driven from it a second time for ap-
proving the Raid of Ruthven - 87

E.

DI.\BURGf, is taken and burnt bv the English, I. 90,
a grear frav there between the French and Scots, 107, is

s-i7ed by the Reformers, 154, its inhabitants are terribly
alarmed by the French, i77, a treaty there with the French
and Engl'ii, 193, a loan demanded of it by Q_ Mary, 281,

i:-hch i. gran:ed for the fuperioritv of Leith, ibid. the treaty
of, insisted on bv Q: Elizabeth, 319, is poffelfed by the
QOeen's partv, II. 5, and fortiied by them, 18, the City
and Caflle hold out againit the King's forces, 2-, is reduced
to great straits bv :amine, zS, is relieved bv a truce, ibid.
tie cirt:ens tak:. up arms to promote the King's marriage,
17o, Ih.e; rile again and in.uit the King and his minitrers

on

on the murder of the Earl of Murray, 175, aflift the King
against Huntly, 185, a violent tumult there on account of
the clergy, 196, 198, they are severely punifiled for it by
the King, 201, their ministers return to their charges, 203,
divided into parifles and number of ministers increased, ibid.
they decline publishing the account of Gowrie's conspiracy,
225, all, except one who is baniflied, are persuaded by the
King to do it - - 226
Edtard I. of England, destroyed the public archives of Scot-

land, I. 4, is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, 7, his
art to acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid. his wars with
the Scots under R. Bruce o, 39
Eglington, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the King's party

II. 20

Elizabeth, her peaceable accefflon to the Crown of England,

I. 136, supports the congregation in Scotland, 175, is spar-
ing in her supplies, 176, resolves to support them on a fe-
cond application, 180, her good conduct in matters of im-
portance, 181, motives that determined her to aflift them,
ibid. 182, her deliberate and resolute conduct, 185, fends a
firong fleet to their afliftance, ibid. concludes a treaty with
them, ibid. 186, her right to the crown of England, alterted
by Francis and Mary in France, 194, obtains advantageous
terms for the Scots, 195, is solicited by the Parliament of
Scotland to marry the Earl of Arran, 202, this flie declines,
203, the feeds of her discontent with Queen Mary, 211,
212, her jealousy of the fuccellion, ibid. 216, herexceffive
vanity and jealousy of Mary's beauty, 217, her diflimulation
to her, ibid. refuses her a safe conduct, ibid. fends to con-
gratulate her arrival in Scotland, 222, refuses a confeflion
made by Queen Mary, 223, her jealousy of her right be-
trayed her into mean actions, ibid. her resemblance to Henry
VII. 224. a personal interview with Q. Mary proposed, 242,
ihe artfully declines it, ibid. her views in regard to Q. Ma-
ry's marriage, 245, 246, assumes a disagreeable authority,
ibid. names one for a hufbmnd to Q Mary, 252, the diffe-
rent qualifications of her ministers and favourites, ibtd. dif-
fembles with Q. Mary about her marriage, 255, and likewise
with regard to Lord Darnly, ibid. affronts Queen Mary, by
her insinuation concerning Lenox, 257, is perplexed about
the marriage of the Scottilh Queen, 260, permits Darn!) to
visit the Court of Scotland, ibid. assets to declare against
Q: Mary's marriage to him, 265, her reasons for this con-
duct, 266, her great diflimulation in that affair, 271, her
harfi and deceitful behaviour to Murray and his aflociates
who had fled to her, 279, is struck at hearing of the birth
of James VI. 304, contents to fland godmother to hilm, 305,
the Parliament address her to fettle the succession, 311, this
greatly embarrasses her, ibid. flue sooths and gains her Par-

liamlept,

liarent, 313, endeavours to acconnmcdate her differences
with Marv, 319, writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's
murderers, 333, interposes in her behalf when a prisoner,
3;6, her anbaifador is refused access to Queen Mary, ibid.
ihe offers alTiftance to the other nobles, 357, her deliberati-
ons concerning the dilpofal of Q. Mary on her arrival in Eng-
and, 3-5, 376, resolves to detain her there, 377, her mo-
lives to this conduct, ibid. 378, fends her letters of condo-
lInce and gives orders to watch her condue, ibid. lhe glad-
lI- accrp' the office of umpire between her and her fubjets,
3-9, 380, rcceives a very prelling letter from Q. Mary, 382,
}-.r precauiions against her, 383, appoints conlmiflioners to
l:ear Q Marv and her accusers, 387, her important fituati-
on on that occasion, ibid. her views in this affair, 388, 389,
receives the Regent's demands, 302, removes the Conference
to WVeftminter, 393, her mean artifices to get the evidences
of Q. Mary's guilt from the Regent, 399, treats her with
greater rigour, ibid. writes a harsh letter to Q. Mary, ibid.
ihe dililnines the Regent without approving or condemning
hIim, 41o, but secretly supports his party, ibid. makes pro-
po!2a! to the Regent in her favour, 404, Norfolk's projefl
cornzeaed from her, 406, 408, discovers and defeats a re-
lhe!in in Qi Mary's favour, 412, 413, resolves to deliver
her up to :he Regent, 41 5, her great concern at his death,
II. 3, continues to encourage facAions in Scotland, 4, her
political conduct with regard to Lenox, 7, 8, is excommu-
ricated and deprived of her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 8, 9,
f;pports the King's party in Scotland, and names Lenox to
be Regent, ibid. proposes a treaty of accommodation be-
tw een

e Mary and herfubjects, lo, procures a cessation

,f hoffilities, 9, fends proposals to Queen Mary, ibid. her
artfices in the conduct of this affair, 12, appoints commiffi-
oners to frame a treaty, 13, finds a pretence to render their
meeting fruitless, 14, a marriage proposed between her and
the D. of Anjou, 22, 23, declares openly against the Queen's
partv. 6. concludes a treaty with France, 28, her motives
for neaotiasing a peace between the two parties in Scotland,
:.- j3S. ; jealous of Cecil's interview with Q, Mary, 43,
rero;:iates a treaty between M'orton and his adversaries, 56,
her anAer to K. James's demand of a pofefTion of an estate
in England. ibid. a marriage between her and the D. of
A!r-c'jn proposed, 58, interposes in behalf of Morton, 63,
her ineafures in order to save him, 6,, countenances the con-
ftnrators at Ruthien, -8, is alarmed at a conspiracy against
her, 93, 94, the designs of Q. Marv's adherents against her,
c;, endeavcurs to recover her interest in Scotland and gains
Arran to her intereit, 96, ariuses Q. Mary with a fruitlels
r..s;otin:.n. 8. a new confpiracv against her, 99. an aflo-
c.Alzicn f.rrmed for her defenc-, ibid. her suspicions of Queen

Mary,

Mary, too, her life endangered by a conspiracy, lo5, this
how discovered and prevented, ibid. occasions an extraordi-
nary statute for her preservation, o16, is in a dangerous situ-
ation from the progress of the holy league, I o, endeavours
to form a confederacy of the ProtefRant Princes, ibid. and to
proceed with rigour againit Q. Mary, ibid. i i , advances
her interest in Scotland, and proposes a league with it, 1I2,
fettles a pension upon K. James, 113, concludes a treaty
with Scotland, I 18, account of Babington's conspiracy against
her, 122, 123, herdiflimulation after Q. Mary's convistion,
135, 136, her answer to King James's intercefiion for her,
138, her farther dillimulation and anxiety, 140, signs the
warrant for her execution, 14z, her speech to Davison on
that occasion, ibid. affefts to lament Q. Mary's death, 150,
several marks of her artifice in that affair, ibid. 15 i, she en-
deavours to sooth K. James, 153, provocations given by her
to Spain, 161, prepares to meet its resentment, ibid. 162,
endeavours to iecure Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K.
James's marriage, 169, solicits him to treat conspirators
against him with rigour, 178, evades the decision of K.
James's right of fuccelfion to the Crown of England, 207, is
disgusted at several of his proceedings, 209, discovers his
correspondence with the Pope, ibid. fresh grounds of her
suspicion, 229, her conduct with regard to the Earl of Es-
sex, 230, 233, her irresolution concerning his death, 233,
and great concern after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from
K. James with regard, and increases his subsidy, 134, her
last illness, 237, conjectures concerning the causes of her
melancholy, 239, herdeath, 240, and character. ibid. 241,
242, declared the K. of Scots her successor, ibid. some of
her letters, app. 272, 292, 300, 301, 305, 315, 316, 320,

336. Elphinjfon, secretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a cor-
refpondence with the Pope, II. 208, is tried and found guilty
of high treason, 209, and pardoned on the Queen's inter-
ceifion - - - ibid.

England, the Englifl seize and detain K. James I. of Scotland

long a prisoner, I. 29, the nobles there humbled, 32, had
early two houses of Parliament, 67, 68, they invade Scot-
land, go, their depredations there, 91, 92, a peace between
England, France, and Scotland, 93, invade Scotland again,
98, gain a great victory, 98, 99, it proves of little advantage
to them, lot, they force the Scots into a closer union with
France, 0oz, conclude a peace, 1o5, an Englilh fleet ar-
rives in Scotland to aflift the congregation, 184, a peace
concluded between them, 185, they enter Scotland and
besiege the French in Leith, 186, are several times re-
pulsed, 188, causes of their bad success, ibid. 189, articles

Vo. 11. Fs of

of a treaty of peace, 192, they quit Scotland, 195, reflefi-
ons on the riZht of fuccelion to their Crown, 214, I25, the
Parliament favours Q. Mary's right of succession, 217, a
league between England and France, II. 28. between Eng-
land and Scotland, 118, the national covenant adopted In
England - - i63

Fniails with what view introduced -. i
E:.gjpa! government in the Church, some account of, 1. 206,

an attempt to revive it, II. 34, 35, it is abolished by the
Atiemblv, 73, iurifdi&ion abolished, 173, fee Archbi/hops.
E, rt, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spaniflh faction, I. 162,

his offers of service to the K. of Spain, 166, appears in re-
be.!!io. 168. is forced to submit to the King, ibid. impri-
soned T.or a ihort time, 169. joins in another conspiracy, i/7,
is summoned by the King to urrender, ibid. offers to fubmnit
to a trial, IS1, sentence pronounced against him - 183
Er/tire of Dun, is employed bv the Queen-Regent to deceive

the Protestants, I. 50o his resentment of this usage ibid.

- Lord go;erncr of Edinburgh Castle, ats a neutral part
between the Queen-Regent and the Congregation, I. 178,
receives the Queen-Regent into the Castle, 187, is created
Earl of Mar, 239, fee Mar.

- A!exander, has the chief dire&ions of the education of

K amnes VI. II. ,I. admits tome of the nobles to make
complaints to him againit Morton the Regent, 50, is turned
out of Stirling Cattle by his nephew the Earl of Mar 53
Fe-:.al, the French Envoy, endeavours to obftruA a treaty be-

tw.een England and Scotland II. 118
F.cfx, Earl of, set up by the Engli;n Papists as a candidate for

the Crown, II. 187, heads a party in England, 229, his
character, ibid. is greatly distinguished by the Queen, 23o,
favour; the K. of Scots, ibid. obtains the offices of Lord
Lieutenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is un-
successful in that exDpdition, ibid. receives a harlh letter from
the Qieren, ibid. returns to England and is confined, 231,
= tried -nd censured, ibid. endeavours to spirit up King
James, ibid. hi~; iaril and frantic conduct, 232, is again
taken into cuftodv, 253, his death, ibid. his son and afloci-
ates are restored to their honours after the acceflion of King
Jame; - - - 234
E.r ce, the state of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

I. -
ExV:.?mil;,:a:in, a terrible engine of the Popiih Clergy I. 121

F.
.LTOY . n- Engliihman, fixes the Pope's excommuni-

tcation of Q. El:yabeth, on the gates of the Bilhop of

I..c5Lona x -e._ - - II. 9

Fno/,:.,

rlnen, M. de la Motte, sent by the French King to interpose

for King James when confined by the Ruthven conspirators,
II 80, is forced to return without success - ibid.
freal government, its origin and ariflocratical genius, I. 12,

13, causes which limited the power of feudal monarchs, 14,
feudal vaflals liable to few taxes, 15, a remarkable inflance
of the feebleness of feudal government, i 7, the most perfect
idea of the feudal system, how attained, 36, 37, state of it
in England, 65, 66, and in Scotland - 67% 68
rife, a populous and powerful county much devoted to the con-

gregation, I. 183, is destroyed and plundered by the French,
ibid. the fynod of, excommunicates the archbifiop of St.
Andrews for contumacy, II. i 16, they excommunicate the
popifl Lords - i8

Sorbes, Lord, with the Earl ofArgyl, is sent against the popish

Lords, II. 185, are defeated by them - I86
AFrdun, John de, his history of Scotland when wrote I. 4
Fotfler, Sir John, warden of the Englilh border, a scuffle be-

tween him and the Scots - II. 113, 14
Fotheringay Castle, Q. Mary's imprisonment, trial and death

there II. 126, I47

France, the consequences of the subversion of the feudal go-

vernment there, I. 72, a body of French arrive in Scotland
to support the Catholics, 96, they reduce the castle of St.
Andrews, ibid. another party of them arrive there, 103,
their tranfaations there, ibid. o16, conclude a peace with
England, 105, their politic conduct, ibid. 103, they leave
Scotland, ibid. their artifices in a treaty of marriage between
the Dauphin and the Q: of Scots, 131, 132, endeavours to
expel the French army out of Scotland : 58, another party
of them arrive there and fortify Leith, 165, they exasperate
the people by their insolence, ibid. they are sent againfl the
congregation, 183, they deitroy and plunder Fife, and are
much harassed by parties of the congregation, 184, are
greatly alarmed by the arrival of the English fleet, ibid. they
return to Leith greatly harassed and exhausted, 185, are be-
fieged there by the Englilh and the congregation, 188, they
gain several advantages, ibid. 189, their motives for con-
cluding a peace, 191, negotiations for that purpose, 19z,
articles of the treaty, 193, 195, they leave Scotland, 209,
the French advise Q. Mary to moderate measures, 210,
their proposals by an ambassador rejected, ibid. they agree to
Queen Mary's marriage with Lord Darnly, 263, the licen-
tioufnefs of their morals - - 325
France, King of, a copy of his directions lent to Scotland, app.

346

Francis I. gives a check to the ambitious projeEt of Charles V.
L -4, 75, his fidelity to the Scots, 92, his death 96

F f . Francis

Francis II. comes to the crown of France, I. 160, his cha-

raaer, ibid. 203, is guided by the Duke of Guise and car.
dinal of Lorrain, ibid. 161, he treats the Protestants with
great rigour, 191, his death - 203

G.

IFFOR D S, DoCtor and Gilbert, their notion concern- .
ing the lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated E

Princes, II. 120. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his
associates, 1 22, employed to carry on a foreign correfpon-
dence with Q. Mary - 123
Clamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft I. 58

- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to Mor- i
ton to firrender the Regency, II. 50, is killed in a rencoun-
ter at Stirling 53
-- the tutor of, joins the confpiratars of Ruthven, II. 76,

his bold speech to King James, 77, he with the other con-
fpirators seize the castle of Stirling and ereCt their ifandard,
89, he is attainted and his estate forfeited 97
GlaJgow, bilhop of, a note of his concerning the Queen of Scot-

land's dowry, app. 343 |

Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators II. 75, 76
Glznlirat, the battle of II. i86
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the streets of Edinburgh between |

him and Lord Ogilvy, I. 136, begfig confined for it, he
makes his escape, ibid. when ordered by the Queen to fur- ;
render himSfelt he takes up arms against her, 236, 237, 238, e
is defeated, and together with his brother made prisoners, i
24o, he is beheaded and his brother pardoned - ibid.
Gcrdon, Lord, set at liberty 276

Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's interest in the
north, II. 2,, his character and good conduct as a soldier,

29
Gotvr.e, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at Ruth-

ven, II. 76, is visited and pardoned by the King after his
elcape, 83, becomes fufpeced and is ordered for France, 89,
delavs his voyage, and is taken into custody, ibid. he is tried
and executed - 90
Ga-.rice, John and Alexander, sons of the above, their charac-

ter and corfpiracy, II. 211, the surprising circumifances of
that remarkable tranfation, 212, several different conjec-
tures concerning it, 216, 225, their dead bodies brought
into Par!iament and condemned, 226, their estates and ho-
nours forfeited, and name abolished for ever. ibid. different
accounts of this affair publifled, but not fatilfactory, 227,
228. Ife RuthbJen.

Grahamn

Graham, Sir David of Fintry, accused of a conspiracy with the

popish Lords in favour of Spain, II. 177, 178, is convicted
and beheaded - ibid.
Gray, master of, some account of him, II. 1ox, he becomes a

favourite of King James VI. ibid. is gained to Q. Eliza-
beth's interest, 1oz, betrays Q Mary, ibid. persuades K.
James to write a harfl and undutiful letter to her, lo8,
joins with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's intereit in Scot-
land, 112, his treachery when sent to intercede for Q. Ma-
ry, 141, his baseness discovered, he is disgraced, 154, his
vain attempt against secretary Maitland, ibid. ats in Italy
as a spy from the court of England, 207, a memorial of his
for his Majesty, app. 364, 367, to the secretary of state 369

Guise, Duke of, his violent counsels with!regard to the Scots,

I. 16i, is murdered at the.fiege of Orleans - 245.
- his intrigues against Q. Elizabeth, II. 95, 96, is a prin-

cipal promoter of the holy league, 1lo, 160, drives the
French King out of his capital - ibid.

H.
H ADD I ATG TO UN, seized and fortified by the Englill,

I. 102, is relieved by the French - 103.

Hamilton, the rife of that family, I. 30, arbitrary proceedings
of Morton the Regentagainft it, II. 57, fee Chatelherault.

of Bothrelhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-

fide, I. 383, is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent by the intercefiion
of Knox, ibid. an account of his murdering Murray, 416,
417, makes his escape, 417, is received in triumph at Ha-
milton - - - II. 3
aniilton, Mr. Patrick, the first who suffered in Scotland for
the Protestant religion . 137
fHartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an English army, I. 90,

burns Edinburgh and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somerset,
and protector of England, 98, fee Somerset.

Ilatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by whith

he prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial II. 129
Henry II. of France, fends forces to assist the Scots, I. 96, a

marriage proposed between his son the Dauphin and the
young Queen of Scots, 102, 103, excites the Scots to in-
vade England, 127, his infamous imposition on Queen Mary
in the treaty of marriage, 139, persuades his son and Queen
Mary to assume the titles of King and Queen of England,
141, his death - 59

----- III. degenerates greatly on his accession to the Crown

of France, II. 1o8, enters into a private negotiation with Q.
Elizabeth, 14i, interposes feebly in behalf of Q. Mary 134

F f 3 Henry

Francis II. comes to the crown of France, I. 160, his cha-

raaer, ibid. 203, is guided by the Duke of Guise and car-
dinal of Lorrain, ibid. 161, he treats the Protestants with
great rigour, 191, his death -- 203

G.

IFFOR D S, Docfor and Gilbert, their notion concern-
ing the lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated

Princes, II. 2o. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his
associates, 122, employed to carry on a foreign correfpon-
dence with Q: Mary - 12
Clamis, Ladv, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft I. 58

Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to Mor-

ton to fiirrender the Regency, II. 50, is killed in a rencoun-
ter at Stirling - 53
- - the tutor of, joins the confpiratars of Ruthver, II. 76,

his bold speech to King James, 77, he with the other con-
fpirators seize the castle of Stirling and erect their standard,
89, he is attainted and his estate forfeited - 97
GlaJgvsw, bilhop of, a note of his concerning the Queen of Scot-

land's dowry, app. 341

GLncairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators II. 75, 76
Glenli-at, the battle of II. 186
Gsrdin, Sir John, a scuffle in the streets of Edinburgh between

him and Lord Ogilvy, I. 136, being confined for it, he
makes his escape, ibid. when ordered by the Queen to fur-
render himlelf he takes up arms against her, 236, 237, 238,
is defeated, and together with his brother made prisoners,
240, he is beheaded and his brother pardoned - ibid.
Gordon, Lord, set at liberty 276

Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's interest in the
north, II. z7, his character and good conduct as a soldier,

29
GCt'rie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at Ruth-

ven, II. -6, is visited and pardoned by the King after his
elcape, 83, becomes suspected and is ordered for France, 89,
delavs his voyage, and is taken into custody, ibid. he is tried
and executed - 90
Gs-jrie, John and Alexander, sons of the above, their charac-

ter and confpiracv, II. 21 1, the surprising circumstances of
that remarkable transaction , 212, several different conjec-
tures concerning it, 2i6, 22z, their dead bodies brought
into Parliament and condemned, 226, their estates and ho-
nours forfeited, and name abolished for ever, ibid. different
accounts of this atair published, but not fatisfacdory, 227,
228. lce Ruti.'en.

Gral'a

Grtaam, Sir David of Fintry, accused of a conspiracy with the

popish Lords in favour of Spain, II. 177, 178, is convicted
and beheaded - ibid.
Gray, master of, some account of him, II. sol, he becomes a

favourite of King James VI. ibid. is gained to Q Eliza-
beth's interest, ioz, betrays Q: Mary, ibid. persuades K.
James to write a harsh and undutiful letter to her, oS8,
joins with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest in Scot-
land, 112, his treachery when sent to intercede for Q. Ma-
ry, 141, his baseness discovered, he is disgraced, 154, his
vain attempt againfl secretary Maitland, ibid. acts in Italy
as a spy from the court of England, 207, a memorial of his
for his Majesty, app. 364, 367, to the secretary of fate 369

Guise, Duke of, his violent counsels with!regard to the Scots,

I. 161, is murdered at the siege of Orleans - 245.

- his intrigues against Q. Elizabeth, II. 95, 96, is a prin-

cipal promoter of the holy league, llo, 160, drives the
French King out of his capital ibid.

H.

ADD I ATNG O UN, seized and fortified by the Englilh,
I. ioz, is relieved by the French - 103

Hamilton, the rife of that family, I. 30, arbitrary proceedings

of Morton the Regentagainft it, II. 57, fee Chatelherault.

*- of Bothrelhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-

fide, I. 383, is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent by the interceflion
of Knox, ibid. an account of his murdering Murray, 416,
417, makes his escape, 417, is received in triumph at Ha-
milton - - -II. 3

.t-amilton, Mr. Patrick, the firit who suffered in Scotland for

the Protelfant religion I. 137
Hartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an English army, I. 90,

burns Edinburgh and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somerset,
and protecor of England, 98, fee Somerset.
latton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which
he prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial II. 1 29
Henry II. of France, fends forces to assist the Scots, I. 96, a

marriage proposed between his son the Dauphin and the
young Queen of Scots, loz, 103, excites the Scots to in-
vade England, 127, his infamous imposition on Queen Mary
in the treaty of marriage, 139, persuades his son and Queen
Mary to assume the titles of King and Queen of England,
141, his death - . 59

-- III. degenerates greatly on his acceflion to the Crown

of France, II. 108, enters into a private negotiation with Q.
Elizabeth, 141, interposes feebly in behalf of Q. Mary 134

F f 3 Henry

Hfnry VIII. of England, by his fyflem of reformation becomes

formidable both to Papists and Proteflants, I. 58, proposes
an interview with K. fames V. 59, is dirappointed by him
and declares war against Scotland, 60, invades it but is forced
to retreat. 61, his importance as to the balance of power in
Europe, 75, his influence in Scotland how obtained, 77, his
schemes with regard to it on the death of James V. 82, were
ill-conducted by himself and odious to the Scots, 83, at-
tempts to gain the Regency by great promises, 86, invades
Scotland, go, this being ill-conduEced turns to no account,
ibid. receives and rewards the Earl of Lenox, 91, encou-
rages the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 95, his death and
character, ibid. 96, his inconsistent conduEt, 140, excluded
the Scots line by his testament -319
Herris, Lord, joins Charelherault in opposing the Regent, 1. 402,

comes to a treaty with him, 403, he and the duke are com-
mitted prisoners to the castle of Edinburgh, 404, intimates
the King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, II. 50,
account of his behaviour in Parliament, app. 319. a letter
from him to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis - app. 375
Hickford. secretary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by

discovering his intrigues with Queen Mary II. 25, 26
Highlands and Js.es, an attempt to civilize them by K. James

VI .

II 26, regulation for that purpose, 237, three towns

endued with the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to be
built there - - ibid.
Hodgson, a priest at Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of kil-

ling heretical excommunicated Princes - II. 120
Home, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a secret embafly to

the Pope - - II. 209

Ho'waZrd, fee .Vrf.lk.
Hrunjdane, Lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with Ar-

ran - - - II. 96

Huntl/, Earl, tho' a catholic. joins the reformers in opposing the

French army, I. 1 5, afifts them only with fair promises,
177, his furtherconcurrence with them, 189, some account
of that family, 234, his enmity against the young Queen's
mainifers, ibid. his resentment inflamed by an accident, 236,
appears in open rebeHion against the Queen, 238, his plot
againfl her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks out into bpen
rebellion, 239, is trodden to death in a battle, 240, his fa-
rniy prosecuted with the utmost rigour, 241, several anec-
do:es and conjectures concerning his plot, ibid. 242, is at-
tainted by Parliament, 248, the attainder repealed and the
family restored to the estate and honours - 336
=- his attachment to Bothwell, 332, 338, refuses to submit

to the Regent, 403, is forced to do it, 4c4, a.ts as lieutenant

to

to the Queen after the Regent's murder, II. 7, is proclaim-
ed a traitor by Lenox the new Regent, 9, receives some
money and promises of afliftance from Spain, to, agrees to a
treaty with Morton the Regent, 137, is one of the heads of
the Spaniflt facion, t62, engages to the Prince of Parma to
serve the King of Spain. 166, is imprisoned for a short time,
169, ereAs a standard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to sub-
mit to the King, 168, is again imprisoned, ibid. is soon set
at liberty, ibid. receives a commiflion from the King, 173,
his barbarous murder of the Earl of Murray, 174, is funm-
moned to surrender to justice, 178, flies to the mountains,
179, offers to fubnmit to a trial, 182, sentence pronounced
against him, ibid. refuses to submit, 183, makes another
desperate attempt, but is forced to fly - 18

I.

J MES I. was detained long a prisoner in England, 1. 29.
J troubles in Scotland, during that time, ibid. was much im-
proved by an Englifl education, 40, his policy on his return
to Scotland, 41, his character, 42, suppresses the power of
the nobles, ibid. they being exasperated conspire againrt and
murder him - 43, 44

- - II. troubles in Scotland during his minority, I. 30. his

attempts against the nobles, 44, 45, murders the Earl of
Douglas, 45, procures several good laws to be passcd, 46,
reduces the power of the nobles, ibid. 47, his death ibid.

-- IIII, the state of Scotland during his minority, 1. 31,

his impolitic conduct, 47, 48, kills one of his brothers, and
is invaded by another, 48, 49, is greatly insulted by his no-
bles, 5o, his despicable minions, ibid. was the firfR that ap-
pointed a flanding guard to his person, ibid. the nobles are
provoked to take arms against him, 51, is killed in a battle
against them, ibid. 52, his charater - ibid.
----I IV. his character, I. 53, is killed in a battle against

the Englifil at Flouden - 53
-- V. his minority long and turbulent, I. 31, tranfacti-

ons during that time, 53, 54, assumes the government while
very young, 54, his character, 55, his scheme for hum-
bling the nobles, 56, 58, 59, is diverted from it by the
clergy, 60, 61, takes arms for the defence of his kingdom,
61, his nobles refuting to follow him, throws him into a deep
melancholy, 62, 63, which is increased by a surprising de-
feat of his forces, 64, his death, ibid. reflecions on his con.
dut, ibid. he refused an alliance with Charles V. Em-
peror 77

F f 4 Jares

James ¥I. his birth, I. 304, his baptism, 317, the care of

him committed to the Earl of Mar, 330, is by him preserved
from fa!iing into the hands of Bothwell, 345, is crowned,
260, the robnes oppressed by Morton the Regent, turn their
eves to him for redress, II. 48. his education and difpofiti.
ons, 49, he becomes suspicious of the Regent's power, ibid.
discovers early a great attachment to favourites, 59, adopts
two of different dispositions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with
great solemnity, 6r, is by his favourites engaged in unpopu-
lar measures. 74, 75, is seized by a party of nobles at Ruth.
ven, 76, and forced to receive complaints against his favou-
rites, ibid. dissembles with them and banishes Lenox, 78, is
brought to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 80, his concern at
Lenox's death, and regard for his memory, ibid. receives the
French ambassador with great refpet, 8i, makes his escape
from the conspirators, 82, resolves to treat them with moce-
ration, 83, visits Gowrie and grants him a pardon, 84, re-
news his fondness for Arran, ibid. is by him persuaded to
violent measures againfl the conspirators, ibid. his answer to
a haughty letter from Q Elizabeth on their behalf, 85, is by
her interposition rendered more violent againit them, 86, is
provoked by the clergy, 87, his steps to humble them, 90,
his profusion to Arran, 97, fends a new favourite to England
againit the banished Lords, lot, devolves the whole regal
authority on Arran, 103, writes an undutiful letter to his mo-
ther, 108, is threatened to be disinherited by her, 0o9, re-
ceies a pension from Q: Elizabeth, 113, is reconciled to the
exiled Lords, 1 15, becomes popular by concluding a treaty
with England, i18, his scandalous behaviour with regard to
Archd. Douglas. 119, his endeavours to save his mother's
life after her condemnation, 137, 138, is greatly incensed at
her death, 153, arguments used by the English ministers to
pacify him, 154, is forced to ftifie his resentment, ibid. at-
tempts to unite the nob!es, i 6, 157, is courted both by
Spain and England, 161, 16z, resolves vigorously to adhere
to the latter, 16z, takes several steps with that view, 163,
his still in the popish controversy, ibid. wrote a commentary
on the revelations, ibid. his maxims with regard to popery,
167, his exceflive lenity to conspirators againfr him, 168, re-
solves to marry the Princess of Denmark, 169, arts used to
prevent it, ibid. the marriage is consummated in Norway,
170, paifes several months in Denmark, ibid. reflecions on
his condut there, ibid. his arrival in Scotland with the Queen,
172, indulges the Presbyterians, 173, the ill consequences
of his lenity, 174, his zeal against witchcraft, ibid. is soli-
cited by Q Elizabeth to treat the conspirators against him
with rigour, 176, 177, is fqfpeAed of conniving with them,

179,

179, is furprized and seized byBothwell, 180, and forced to
comply with his terms, ibid. his lenity to Bothwell abused,
181, is suspecting of favouring the popish Lords, ibid. is in
new danger from them, 185, delegates his authority to Argyl
and Sorbes against them, 186, goes in person against them,
ibid. waftes their lands and garrisons their castles, ibid. his
right of the fucceflion to the crown of England opposed by
the papists, 187, his lenity to them incenses the clergy and
people, 192, is much provoked by the obstinacy of the cler-
gy, 193, gives orders against them, 196, is much in-
fulted and in great danger at Edinburgh, 197, 199, leaves
Edinburgh and proceeds with severity against the citizens,
ibid. acquires absolute dominion in ecclesiastical affairs, 202,
strengthens his in parliament by restoring the feats of the
ecclesiastics, 204, 205, endeavours with success to gain a
party in England, 205, 206, increases his reputation bypub-
liflhing his Bafilicon Doron, 206, is accused by Q. Elizabeth
of correfpondingwith the Pope, 208, this he denies and how
accounted for, 209, other reports concerning this, ibid. is at
great pains to gain the Roman Catholics, zjo, his regulati-
ons with regard to the church, 21 , the mysterious affair of
Gowry's conspiracy, 229, his cautious behaviour in regard to
the Earl of Elex, 231, fends ambassadors to save him, 233,
they arrive too late, ibid. he restores his son and associates
to their honours after his accession, 234, continues his in-
trigues in England, ibid. his interest greatly strengthened
there, 236, endeavours to civilize the highlands and isles,
237, is proclaimed King in England after the death of Q.
Elizabeth, 242, 243, is proclaimed likcwife in Scotland and
prepares for his journey to England, 244, enters London and
takes possession of the throne, ibid. his character how diffe-
rent from that of Q, Elizabeth, 244, a letter from him to
Mr. Archd. Douglas, app . - - 360
Inverness Castle, refuses to surrender to Q. Mary, I. 238, it is

forced, and the governor punifled - ibid.
Italy, the liberty of, how preserved - I. 73

K.

EI T H, Sir William, sent to intercede for Q. Mary when
under sentence, II. 138, letter to him from secretary

Maitland, app. 360

Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q Mary

executed -- II. 144
Ker of Ferniherft, ravages England on the murder of Murray

the Regent, II. 3, 4, his design, 6, has a scuffle with the
English --- - 13

Ker,

Ker, George, brother to L. Newbottle, isdifcovered, when ready

to fail to promote a plot in Spain, II. 177, his scheme
opened, 180, escapes out of prilon - - ibid.

Killigrew, Henry, his declaration on the peace, 40, app. 342
Kings, feudal, the most limited of all Princes, I. 12. general

causes of this, 14. their revenues were hut small, ibid. 1;,
had no flanding armies, ibid. and jurifdidion limited, r6,
means used to extend the royal authority, 33, their jurifdic-
tion enlarged, 35, the extraordinary influence of the Scottifli
Kings in Parliament, 64, the reason of this ibid. 68, 69
K.r'aldy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q. Dowager, I. t28, his attainder reversed in Par-
liament, 248, offers to fight Bothwell in tingle combat, 350,
his interview with Q Mary, in name of the confederate
Lords, ibid. relcues .Maitland from confinement, 41 l, la-
bours to support the King's authority and restore harmony
after the murder of the Regent, II. 4, accedes to the Queen's
party, ibid. 5, provides for a siege by increasing his garrison
and fortifying Edinburgh, 17, proclaims Lenox's authority
unlawful and usurped, 18, attempts in vain to prevent a
meeting of the Parliament, ibid. forms a scheme for fur-
priing the King's party, 20, is at first successful but after-
wards defeated, 21, comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regent, 32. a treaty with Morton, breaks it off, 38,
fires upon Edinburgh from the castle, 39, is befieged.by the
Regent afifted by English forces, 4i, is forced by a mutiny
of the garrison to capitulate, ibid. surrenders to Drury the
English general, ibid. is by order of Q. Elizabeth delivered
up to the Regent, 42, he and his brother are executed 43
Knolys, Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of con-

dolance to Q Mlary on her arrival in England, I. 378, some
of his letters, app. 321, 324

Knox, John, a famous reformer, his character, I. lo8,pafter

.being some time abroad he is recalled by the persecuted Pro-
tefiants, 146, inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
against the papists, ibid. his notion concerning the govern-
ment of women whence, 15z, 153. his residence fixed in
Edinburgh, 156, complains of the lukewarmness of the re-
formers, 168, his opinion to the convention of reformers
that it is lawful to refit and deprive tyrannical Princes, 170,
animates and revives the desponding congregation, 179, t8o,
complains of the neglect of the reformers in providing main-
tenance for their preachers, 200, recommends the Geneva
model of the church government, zo6, proposes fuperinten-
dants in the church, 207, composes the first book of difci-
pline, 208, renounces friendthip with the Earl of Murray
for his moderation, 230, is tried for encouraging a mutiny

among

among the people and acquitted, 250, popish judges concur
in this decision, ibid. 25 ,, is publckly accused by Maitland
of preaching seditious doctrine concerning resistance, 259,
characters of the two disputants, ibid. approved of several
instances ofaffaffination, 300, 301, agrees to some regulati-
ons concerning the eleation of Bishops, II. 34, his death and
character, 35, his eulogium by Morton the Regent, 36, ar-
ticles sent by hin to the general affimbly, app. - 340

L.
L AATGSIDE, the battle of - I. 372

Laureau, cardinal, is sent as Nuncio from the Pope with

a present to .Q Mary of Scotland, 1. 313, is ftoppedat Pa-
ris - - 314
League, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics so called, 11.

l o, was universally agreed to by them all over Europe

ibid.

Learning, the revival of, promotes the reformation I. 116
LeiceJter, Earl of, appointed a commiflioner to the conference at

Welfminfler - I. 396
Leith, burnt by the Englifl, I. go, fortified bv the French,

164, hefieged by the English, 186, Q. Mary lands there
from France, 218, the Superiority of it granted by her to
Edinburgh, 281, is seized and fortified by Morton and the
Regent - - - II. 18

Lenox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, I. 85, is much

courted by cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions to the
fucceflion how founded, 88, resents Beatoun's deceitfulncfs
to him, 89, heads the reformers and the advocates for the
English alliance, ibid. furprizes the Regent and cardinal, go,
is outwitted by the cardinal; ibid. continues alone in the in-
terest of England, 91, is forced to fly to that court, where
he is rewarded, ibid. is married to a niece of King Henry's,
by which he became father to a race of Kings, ibid. 92, his
claim to the fucceflion, 255, is imprisoned for a secret cor-
refpondence with Q. Mary, 256, is invited secretly by her to
return to Scotland, ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received
with great familiarity by her, 257, his forfeiture is repealed,
and he is restored to his eltate and honours by the Parliament,
253, his lady sent prisoner to the tower of London, 267, and
treated with rigour, 271, he insists on the prosecution of his
son Darnly's murderers, 330, charges Bothwell with it, ibid.
the prosecution is hurried, 33 , he craves a delay which is
refused, 332, he is left alone in it, ibid. solicits Q. Eliza-
beth's interest to obtain a delay, 333, insists on it by proxy
at the trial, but is over-ruled, 334, beingapprehenfive of
danger he flies towards England, 335, his countess accufis

Q: Mary

Q_ Miary of the murder to Q. Elizabeth, 380, he appears
at the conference at V,'eftmipfter and accuses Q. Mary of the
murder upon oa:h, 397, returns to Scotland protected by an
Englilh army, II. 5, is elected Regenr, 9, o1, his progress
againIt the Queen's party, ibid. appoints commiflioners to
trame a treaty with those of the Queen, i , furprizes Dum-
barton cafle, 14, joins the earl of Morton at Leith, 18,
holds a parliament in the Canongate, ibid. another at Stir-
ling, 20, he is furprized and killed there ibid. 21
Lernx, late Aubign. his charaEter, II. 60, joins with the

King's other new favcurite to undermine Morton, 61, re-
reunces popery, 62, Q: Eliyabeth demands him to be re-
moved from the privv council, 63, is accused by her ambaf-
fador, 66, Arran tries in vain to supplant him, 70, is com-
manded by K. James at the requcft of the nobles to leave the
kingdom, 77, puts off his departure on various pretences,
79, So, returns unwillingly to France where he soon dies,
ibid. his memory vindicated and much regarded by the King,
ibid. died a Protestant - - ibid.

- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north after dif-

perfing the pepilih Lords - II. 187
Le/lie, Norman, murders cardinal Beatoun, I 93, he and his

associates keep polTeffion of the castle of St. Andrews, 94,
makes a truce with the Regent, 95, are encouraged by
Henrv V II. - ibid.
- biihop of Rnof. ie sent by the catholics in Scotland to en-

gage Q. Mlary in their interest, I. 209, his proposals to her
rejected, ibid. 210, his negotiations in England in favour
of Q Mlary, 11. 23, 24, is confined long in the tower and
afterwards is banitled England - - 26
Lir:..ai, Lord, carries the proposals from the confederates to

Qt -Mar, that she should resign the government, I. 359,
'iins the Ruthven conspirators - II. 76
L'hAlezin castle, Q, Mary committed a prisoner there, 1. 354.

her escape fr.m thence - - 368

- Lord, letters to and from him, appendix - 344, 345
LoCan of Reftairig, an alledged accomplice in Gowrie's confpi-

racv, II. 21-, 21 S, i tried, and his estate forfeited long
a'er his cealh - - - 219, 220
L:.'s. cont-cerate, associate zainft Biothwell and Q_ Mary, I.

145. ra.se fnrce- against them, 347, publish the motives of
their cor.z-uc, ib'c. preval on the Queen to surrender to
tn:m. ;- . alume the title of Lords of the secret council
and the rF-(v: aut;h'r.;v - 354
--- popfi:li. conlpire Paginft K. James II. 166, are treated

h h'.m v'. trh eat letv. 168, form a newA con!piracv, 17-.
the Ki"- Dpr.c,:-s ga inli them, 178, more of his lenity to
hemi. i"2, :-':;l daier; from thrn, 185, they receive

:.::*:'.. ;:. S:., i-i. zeal of the cic:-g against theni, 186,

are

are declared guilty of treason and their estates forfeited, ibid.
defeat the King's army, 186, are dispersed on the King's ap-
proach, 187, go abroad and give security to keep the peace,
ibid. return to Scotland, and petition for leave to reside in
their own houses, 191, this granted by a convention of es-
tates, ibid. recant their errors and are absolved from excom-
munication, o22, relapse, and are again reconciled to the
church of Rome, 203, are restored to their ellates and ho-
nours - - - ibid.
Lotrain, cardinal, gets some of the best benefices in Scotland,

I. 13,

Princes of, their ambitious views, I. 140, instigate the

Dauphin and Q. Mary to take the titles of King and Queen
of England, 141, relolve to invade England, 142, and to
check the reformation in Scotland, ibid. the cardinal's great
influence over the young King, 160, 161, drives the Queen
Regent of Scotland to violent mealures, 166, 167, their vio-
lences occasion a conspiracy against themi, 191, 192, are
forced to w:ithdraw their troops trom Scotland, ibid. they in-
fult the Scottifl ambassador, 202, have great power over the
young Sing and Queen, 203, are forced to contract their
views on the death of the King - - 204
Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the reformation, I.

116, the rapid progress of his doctrine - 117

M.
M A.JrO R, John, his history of Scotland, some account

of -- ~ I. 4

Maitland of Lethington, secretary to Mirv Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the congregation, 1. 178, his cha-
raaer, ibid. is sent by them anbafiador to Q Elizabeth, o80,
fends them assurances of ler protection, 182, is sent by Q.
Mary to the court of England, 223, makes a concellion to
Q. Elizabeth, ibid. accompanies Q. Mary in a progress to
the north, 237, he is employed by Q. Mar) to desire a perfo-
nal interview with Q Elizabeth, 242, publickly accuses
Knox of preaching seditious doctrine concerning resistance,
259, intimates to Qi Elizabeth the intention of Q. Mary t,?
marry Darnly, i65, prudently conceals her rfeintnlent fron
Q: Elizabeth, 267, proposes moderate measures with regard
to Q. Mary when imprisoned, 257, attends the Regent when
called on to accuse her in England, 386, he dilapproves of
this ineafure, ibid. his intrigue with the duke of Norfolk,
390, 391, is imprisoned by the Regent, 403, is relieved by
Kirkaliy and secured in the caRft, ibid. 41 , proposes a
coalition of the two parties after the murder of the Regent,
II. 4, accedes to the Queen's party, 6, is deprived of lis
office of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 9, i: attainted in

a par-

a parliament of the King's party, i8, agrees with Mar, 32.
his views in refusing a reconciliation with Morton the Re-
gent, 38, rejefts overtures of a treaty with him, ibid. is be-
fieged by him in the castle of Edinburgh, 39, is forced to
capi'ulate and surrenders to the Englifi general, 41, to avoid
the Regent's refenentnt he dispatches himself, 43, several of
his letters, app. - - II. 333, 358
- Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, II. 1, 2, con-
curs with others in promoting Qa Elizabeth's interests there,
ibid. attempts againfl him by capt. James Stewart, late Ar-
ran, 155, they prove abortive, and he is advanced to be
chancellor, ibid. an attempt to remove him from that office,
frustrated, i68, his death, 188, a copy of verses in honour
of him wrote by the King - - 189
Aar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrews,

I. 23;, accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north,
237, he and his aTfociates narrowly escape assassination, 238,
he is created Eall of Murray, 239. See Murray.

the title is conferred on L. Erskine, ibid. the person

of the voung prince put into his hands, 330, his resolution in
preserving him from Bothwell, 345, is chosen Regent, II. 22,
labcurs to bring about a general peace, 32, is thwarted
by Morton and his associates, ibid. dies of melancholy, 33,
his charater, ibid. his merit and integrity was acknowledged
by both parties - - ibid.
-- the younger Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns

cut his uncle from the castle of Stirling, II. 53, joinsthe
Ruthven conspirators, 76, he with the others seize Stirling
caftie, and ereEt their fiandard, 89, is attainted and his
cftate forfeited, 97, is pardoned and restored to estate and
honours - - - 115, 116

March, counters of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of

Arran - - - iII. 70, 71
Marv of Guise, Q- Dow-ager of Scotland, takes a considerable

fihare in the government, I. o12, is much addicted to the
French intcreft, ibid. projects a marriage of her daughter
,o the Dauphin of France, ibid. 103, becomes instrumental
in promoting the reformation, 1og, aspires to the office of
Regent, i o1, promotes disaffection to the present one and
favours the reformers, x I, visits the court of France, ibid.
returns to Scotland to take pofSeflion of the Regency, 113.
after orme opposition she obtains it, 114, confers several
cffices of truftupon strangers, 129, proposes to lay a tax up-
cn land, ibid. is forced to drop it, 126, tries in vain to ex-
cite a ar v.th England, 127, the nobles vigorously oppose
the mealures, 128, treats the reformers with great refpe&.
29. obtains a concession from the Parliament in favour of
the Dauphir., 13, her artful management of the reformers,
ibid. i 3, beieows the vacant benefices on foreigners, I 6,

fhr

the alters her condu&t to the reformers, 139, remonstrates
against the violent measures of the Princes of Lorrain, 143,
is persuaded by them to persecute the reformers, 144, her
rash answer to their remonstrance, ibid. summons their
preachers to appear before her, 145, breaks a promise Ihe
had made them, ibid. marches with an army against them,
147, concludes a treaty with them, 148, this fle again
breaks, 149, her severity at Perth, ibid. her schemes disco-
vered, ibid. the goes to attack them, 15n, has again re-
course to negotiation, 151, ille is flartled at their demands
and gets time to answer them, 152, violates another treaty,
153, loses Perth, and forced to abandon Stirling and Edin-
burgh, she retires with precipitation to Dunbar, 154,
marches to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, 56, gains
time by her artifice, 157, makes another treaty with them,
ibid. her artifices to undermine the prior of St. Andrews,
163, the absurdity of her scheme, 164, gets a reinforce-
ment of French troops who fortify Leith, ibid. she disregards
a remonstrance of the reformers, i66, is influenced by French
counsellors and persuaded to violent measures, ibid. 167,
retires to Leith on the approach of the reformers army, 168,
her prudent and artful conduct there, t 69, her haughty and
imperious answer to a frefli remonstrance from them, ibid. is
by a convention of them deprived of her office of Regent,
170, the foundation of this sentence, ibid. 172, foments
differences among them, 174, is deserted by her principal fe-
cretary, 178, fends French troops against the reformers,
1 3, retires into the castle of Edinburgh on the approach of
the Englifhi 187, her death and character, 190, repented
of her violent measures, ibid. listened to the instructions of
a reformed preacher - - 19

Mary, Queen of England, her persecuting reign, I. i5, her

death - - 1 36
- Queen of Scots, born, I. 79, a proposal to marry her to
Edward VI. 82, fle is demanded by Henry VIII. 84, her
marriage to the Daupbin of France proposed, 102, a treaty
for that purpose concluded, 104, flie is sent to be educated
in France, ibid. the fatal consequence of this, ibid. is ir-
posed on by the artifices of the French in the treaty of mar-
riage, 131, her marriage celebrated with great pomp, 132,
they take the title of King and Queen of England, 141, Ihe
makes conceflions to the congregation, 193, declares Q: Eli-
zabeth's right to the crown of England, ibid. she acquires an
entire ascendant over her husband, 203, she is overwhelmed
with great affliction on his death and retires to Rheims, zo4,
The is invited by the convention to return to Scotland, 208,
an emissary from the catholics in Scotland proposes violent
meafilres to her, 209, fie is .; tcrn:ined to moderation by

the

the French and the prior of St. Andrews, ibid. is prevailed
on to prepare for her return' to Scotland, r2, the origin of
the discord between her and Q, Elizabeth, ibid. 212, her
pretensions to the crown of England, ibid. is envied on ac-
count of her beauty, 216, demands a safe conduct from Q.
Elizabeth, which is refused, ibid. leaves France with great re-
luctance, 217, lands at Leith, 218, is much affecaed by the
change of her situation, ibid. several disadvantages attending
her accelfion, 219, some circumstances to her advantage,
220, her accomplishments of body and mind, ibid. the ser-
vants of her chapel insulted, ibid. procures the free exercise
of her religion, 221, issues a proclamation in favour of the
Protefrants, ibid. 222, employs them only in the adminiftra-
tion, ibid. attempts to gain Q. Elizabeth's favour, 223,
makes a concession to her, ibid. which is rejected, ibid. file
makes her public entry into Edinburgh, 224, an insult offer-
ed to her religion on that occasion, ibid, discourages the at-
tempts of the papists to gain her favour, 226, her aversion
to the famil! of Hamilton, ibid. makes a progress into the
north. 237, her ministers narrowly escape affalTination, 238,
is refused access to the castle of Inverness, ibid. when in the
utmost coniternation is relieved by the Monros and other clans,
ibid. her forces defeat Huntly's rebellion, 240, she desires
an interview with Q. Elizabeth, 242, negotiations concern-
ing her marriage, 243, is Solicited by different Princes, 244,
2 4, her deliberations concerning it, ibid. is forced to bear
the authoritative behaviour of Q_ Elizabeth, 246, to please
hers ubjects detrmninesagainft a foreignalliance, 247, deter-
mines not to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, 248, further ne-
goriations for her marriage, 251, discovers the views of
Catherine ofM.edicis, ibid. 252, Lord Robert Dudley recom-
mended to her as a husband by Q. Elizabeth, ibid. file is
highiv offended at this, 252, dissembles with Q. Elizabeth,
ibid. 2;4, entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Darnlv,
:,;. hie recails Lenos, 256, is affronted at a letter of Q,
Eli7abeth's, ibid. her indifference as to the reformed, and
zeal for the catholic religion, 258, is taken with Darnlyat
frrt sigh:, 261, is greatlv moved at Q, Elizabeth's insulting
cr-ftinefs ibid. 262, negotiates with the court of Rome for
a i'rpeni-ton to arry Darn!v, ibid. and the content of the
court of France, 262, imposes on Randolph, but applies to
O Ezi7zberh for cnnient to her marriage, 265, 266, which
fhiealfcs to refuse, ibid in refentmrenr fie proposes to fend
an angrv r.cifage to Elizabeth, w hich Maitland prevents,
z6-, juflif.-s her conduct to the Englill ambassador, ibid.
ende..vou-s to get Murray's consent, 269, courts the pope';
pruoec:lcn, and receives a fublidy fro:n him, ibid, her great

addrels

address in gaining the consent of her fubjets., 271, prevents
a plot againfl Darnly, 272, funllonls her vallals to take arms
against Murray, 274, and him to appear before her, ibid.
her marriage with Darnly celebrated, 275, Ilhe confers the
title of King of Scots upon him, ibid. this tPep censured,
ibid. her resentment against the maleconlents, 276, flie
marches against them, 277, rejects the interceFlion of Q.
Elizabeth, in their behalf, ibid. continues her march againfi
the rebels, 278, her conduc and courage on that occasion,
ibid. drives them out of Scotland, 279, her further resent-
mentagainft them, 281, has recourse to several devices to
raise money, ibid. her prosperity promotes her religion, 282,
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 283, deter-
mines to treat them with lenity, 285, is diverted from this
by her religion and French influence, ibid. 286, this the
source of her after misfortunes, 287. intention to reflore po-
pery, ibid. is disgusted with Darnly's insolent behaviour, 288,
her familiarity with Rizio offends the King, 289, vindicated
from any criminal correspondence with Rizio, 291, uses her
utmost endeavours to prevent his murder, 29., file is con-
fined by the conspirators, ibid. flie gains the King, and e!-
capes from them, 295, is reconciled to the exiled nobles,
296, her hatred to Darnly encreafes, 301, 3(2, and favour
for Bothwell commences, ibid. extinguiihes fonle doimeffic
feuds among the nobles, 304, is delivered of her son James
VI. in the Castle of Edinburgh, ibid. invites several foreign
princes to his baptifin, 305, continues to treat Darnly with
neglect, ibid. her attachment to Bothwell encreafes, ibid.
prevents Darnly's intended flight, 308, visits the borders,
ibid. an inflance of her regard for Bothwell on that occasion,
309, how she rivalled Q Elizabeth, 310, her right of fuc-
cellion favoured by the Englifl parliament, ibid. fle endea-
xours to avail herself of that opportunity, 311, 312, flie
takes an extraordinary Itep in favour of popery, 313, re-
ceives a present from the pope, but flops his nuncio at Paris,
314, endeavours to procure a better fibfiftence for the re-
formed clergy, ibid. her averfGon to the King excelive, ibid.
becomes melancholy, ibid. fie declines a divorce fiom hin,
315, goes to Stirling to celebrate her son's baptifin, 316, is
greatly offended at the king's behaviour on that occasion, 3 1 7,
restores the popiflh ecclefiallical jurifdi&tion, 321, herneglect
of the King during his sickness, 323, the breach between
them becomes irreparable, ibid. 324, Ilie visits him at Gla-f
gow, ibid. the motives of her diflimulation on that occasion,
ibid. 325, prevails on him to come to Edinburgh, 326, her
suspicious behaviour to him there, ibid. 327, Tifues a pro-
clamation for discovering his murderers, 328, is Pfuppoled to
have been accefforv to it, ibid is charged with it abroad as

VOL. II. G g v'.vc

well as at home, 329, goes to visit her son at Stirling, 341,
is met on her return by Bothwell, who seizes and carries her
to Dunbar, ibid. this supposed with her consent, 342, is
conducted to Edinburgh, 343, and married to Bothwell, 344,
fends an apology to the Courts of France and England, ibid.
her conduct causes a general indignation against her abroad,
346, is alarned at a combination of the nobles against her,
34-, the publiihes a manifesto to vindicate her conduc, ibid.
is conducted to the castle of Borthwick, ibid. marches with
Bothweli's forces against the confederate Lords, 349, an at.
tempt of an accommodation proves vain, ibid. is forced to
furre.der to the confederates, 351, is insulted by the fol-
diers and mob, ibid. is carried to Edinburgh, where many
abuses are otiered her, ibid. 354, lent a prilbner to Lochle-
vin Cafile. .4, Q·. Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 356,
the Er!gii'h ambassador is refuiled access to her, ibid.
various proposals among the confederates concerning her, 35-,
they oblige her to resign the Government, 358, 359, diffe-
rent realonings on this measure, 360, 363, is much moved
with the freedom of the Earl of Murray, 363, her party
among the nobles becomes dispirited, 365, her resignation
of the Crown accepted by the Parliament, and her imprison-
oment declared lawful, 366, her letters to Bothwell read,
and the declared accelTory to the King's murder, ibid. es-
capes from Lochlevin, 368, arrives at Hamilton, ibid. is at-
tended by many nobles and a numerous army, 369, an affo-
ciation signed in her defence, ibid. her imprudence in ha-
zarding a battle. 3-2, her army defeated by the confederates,
ibid her precipitate flight into Galloway, 373, raflly de-
termines to retire to England, ibid. goes thither against the
advice of her attendants, 3-5, arrives at Carlisle, ibid.
l rites to Q: Elizabeth, imploring her good oftfces, ibid.
receives letters of cendolance from her, and demands ad-
inittance into her presence, 378, this refused and why, ibid
3-9, ofers to fibmit her cause to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. is
much deceived in her expectation from this. 381, and of-
fended on dilcovering the artifices of Q Elizabeth, 382.
earnrefiv solicits to be admitted into her presence, ibid. the
i5 ca:rted to Bolton Caltle, 383, chagrined at finding herself
a priloner. ibid. agrees to an enquirv into her conduct, 384,
herc::;;:muiation with regard to religion, ibid. conmnifiioners
appo::. ed to appear in her name, 387, her chief view in
this ar-air, 388, contents to moving the conference to Weft-
min!ter, ,93, the is carried to Tuthbury in Staffordillire,
39,. i mnuch offended at the regard shewn the Regent, and
recalls her conlf;n to the conference, 395, the accusation
againtc her produced by the Regent, 396, is accused likewise
bv the Earl of Lenox, 39', her commitlioners refuse to an-
...r, a-.d emand a personal interview, .39S, they protest

againfrt

against future proceedings, ibid. a fufpiciols circutntance
against her, ibid. 399, her connmiflioners withdraw from the
meeting, 399, her resolute answer to a harsh proposal of Q.
Elizabeth, 400, avoids any farther progress in the inquiry,
ibid. is enraged at the proceedings, and proposes desperate
measures, 401, spreads chimerical conjecures with that
view, ibid. 402, proposes a divorce from Bothwell, 404, is
influenced by the D. of Norfolk's lchemes, ibid. exchanges
many letters and love tokens with him, 406, consents to pro-
pofals from the English nobles, 407, their views in this
tranfaAion, 407, 408, a rebellion by her adherents against
Q. Elizabeth, 412, is removed to Coventry, 414, Q- Eliza-
beth thinks of delivering her up to the Regent, 415, this
projed how disappointed, ibid. 416, acceflion of several to
her party after the murder of the Regent, II. 5, they en-
deavour to foment a war with England, 6, her authority
proclaimed at Linlithgow, 7, her parties defeated by the
new Regent, to, ii, Ihe anlwers proposals by Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. attempts in vain to get foreign afliftance, ibid.
appoints commiflioners to frame a treaty for her liberation,
13, this proving fiuitlefs, she is more ftricly confined, 14,
the invalidity of her resignation declared in a Parliament held
by her adherents, 18, act of parliament in England to curb
her and her party, 22, fle looks for protection from the
King of Spain, 23, is denied the privilege of an ambalfador
at the court of England, 26, is more close confined and
watched, ibid. proceedings against her in England, 29, her
interest negleced by the French, 30, is hurt by the naflacre
at Paris, 31, her adherents divided into two fadions, 37, 38,
one of them joins with Morton the Regent, 39, review of
the characters of her adherents and opponents, 42, her for-
lorn situation, ibid. is carried to Buxton Wells, 43, loses fe-
veral of her friends by death, 45, fends a letter and presents
to her son, 58, her messenger why difmiflTed without feeing
him, ibid. her uneasiness at his confinement by the Ruthven
conspirators, 8o,-- complains to Q( Elizabeth of her hard
usage, ibid. and begs her interceltion for the King her son,
ibid. Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour, 93,-97, a
fruitless negotiation with Q, Elizabeth, 98, is alarmed at an
aflociation in defence of Q, Elizabeth, 99, is committed to
more revere keepers, too, betrayed by Lord Gray the Scots
ambaflador, 102, a statute for the preservation of Q. Eliza-
beth proves fatal to her, io5, is more rigorously treated, 107,
her complaints to 0 Eiiz.bcth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
French ambaffadji s interest, removed to Tuthbury, 1oS,
is undutifully treated by the King her son, ibid. her pai-
onate complaint to the French ambafl:ador on that occasion,
ibid. 109, threatens to difinhelit him, ibid. several disco-
veries alledged ngainlt her, 1 23, 124, tlhe is guarded with

C g 2 unnlual

unufral vigilance, 125, her domestics, papers, &c. are feiz-
ed. ibid. she is conveyed to Fotheringay Castle, 126, deli-
berations crncerning the method of proceeding againif her,
ibid. is suspicious of poison or private murder, 127, vindi-
cates herfelfto the D. of Guile, ibid. the commissioners for
tn-ing her arrive at Fotheringay Castle, ibid. her spirited
speech when refuting to plead, ibid. 128, is at length pre-
vailed on. 129, she protefis against the authority of the
ccurt. 130. the accusation against her, 131, her defence,
ibid. her sentence, 133, irregularities in her trial, ibid. the
sentence is confinned bv parliament, 134, who demand the
execution of it, ibid. 135, France interposes feebly in her
behalf, 136, 13-, the sentence againti her published, 139,
She is treated with the utmost rigour, ibid. herlat request to
Q. Eiizabeth, 14o, refuses the aflifance of a Protestant
Biihop or Dean, ibid. artifices used to inflame the people
againit her, 142, her behaviour at her death, 144, senti-
ments of historians concerning her, 147, her character, 148,
her person described, 149, 1 5o, buried, first at Peterbo-
roggh and afterwards at Weftminfter-Abbey, 150, letters
from her, app. 373, 378, her will, app. 354, objetions
against her by Walsingham, app. 385, what course to be
taken with her, ibid. a dissertation on the genuineness of her
letters to Bjthwell End of Vol. II.
Max.,eell, Lord, arrives from Spain and prepares forces to join

them, II. 162, his followers dispersed, he is taken prisoner,

-N- - - ibid.
Mel-,jil is sent by the French King to obierve the motions of

the Queen-Regent and her adversaries, 1. 160, lent to make
Lup a difference between Elizabeth and Mary, 257, brings
about an appearance of friendihip between them, ibid. is
lent to inform Q. Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI.
304, puts a letter into the Queen's hand against her mar-
riage with Bothwell, 340, is forced to fly from court, 341,
advises K. lames to moderate measures upon his escape from
the Ruihven conspirators - I. 83
---- ;Ir Andrew, a clergyman, his character, II. 45, zea-

louflv opp'.fes episcopacy, ibid. declines the civil jurifdicion
in eccleiiaftical matters, 88, is forced to fly into England to
avoid Dprfecution - ibid.
--- S:r Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q. Eli-

zabeth for Q. Mary when under sentence, II. 140, executes
his commission with fidelity and zeal, 141, a memorial of
his to the King, app. - 368
---- Master of the houfhold to Q, Mar', takes his laftfare-

wellof ier, II. 145, her parting speech to him - ibid.

Milidmty, Sir Wm. lent by Q_ Elizabeth with proposals to Q-
Mary - II. ii.

Monluc,

Aonluc, Bishop of Valence, employed by the French to con-
clude a peace with England and Scotland, I. 192, terms
agreed to by him - - - 193, 195

iMIontgomery appointed Archhifhop of Glasgow, JI. 75, is re-

fused and excommunicated by the general Assembly for his
immoral life - - - ibid.
lMontmorency, Constable of France, endeavours to prevent

the Dauphin's marriage with Q. Mary, I. 129, 130, his pru-
dentadvice to Henry II. 160, makes a slender appearance in
favour of Q. Mary - II. 30

Mirlton, Earl of, his irresolute condut as to the Reformation,

I. 177, accompanies QO Mary in a progress to the North,
237, instigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, 291, takes
the direction of that enterprize, 293, is admitted into the
Qu.een's presence, who promises him a pardon, 295, is forced
to fly into England, 296, obtains his pardon on Bothwell's
intercession, 319, 320, seizes a calket with letters from Q.
Mary to Bothwell, 355, he is, by QL Elizabeth's interpofi-
tion, in favour with the King's party after the murder of the
Regent, II. 5. appointed one of the commissioners to treat
with the Queen's party, 13, his demands frustrate the meet-
ing, ibid. is entirely influenced by the Court of England, 19,
commands the King's forces at Leith, 27, has several fkir-
mifhes with the Queen's forces, ibid. closely besieges Edin-
burgh, and commits great cruelties, ibid. a fufpelfion procured
by the English and French ambassadors, 28, a coalition of
parties prevented by him, 32, 33, he ischofen Regent, ibid.
his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Northumberland,
34, obtains the temporalities of the Archhifloprick of St.
Andrew's, ibid. labours to procure a peace between the
two parties, 37, attempts in vain to gain Maitland and Kir-
kaldy, 38, makes a treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly,
39, gets poffeflion of the Castle of Edinburgh, 41, his fe-
verity to Kirkaldv and his brother, 43, his adminifnration
becomes odious, 44, his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. 45, connives at the disputes of the Clergy,
46, he irritates the nobles, ibid. Argyl and Athol reftfie
to answer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt againll
Lord Claude Hamilton, 48, discovers the designs of the no-
bles against him, and prnprnfes to resign his office, 50, his
resignation accepted by the King gives universal joy, 5 1, oh-
tains an approbation of his conduct and a pardon in ample
form, 52, continues to watch the motions of his advelrfariei,
ibid. is forced to surrender the Castle of Edinburgh, ibid. re-
fumes his authority, 53, gains the Castle of Stirling and a
feat in the Privy Council, 54, procures a meeting of the
Parliament at Stirling, ibid. 55, his security ratified in it,
ibid. forces are raided for and againit him, ibid. he is recon-
ciled to his adversaries by the interceflion of Q. Elizabeth,

Gg3 56,

56, is fu 'peted o- foul play at an entertainment in his own
hotfe. 57, hi; i'egal proceedings against the family of Ha-
milton, ibid. 8S, the Kine' new favourites undermine him,
61, he endeavours to prevent them, 62, Q. Elizabeth inter-
poses in his favour, 63, is charged with being accessary to
the la:e K ng's death. ;bid. he is confined in diferent prisons,
64, discourages an attempt to rescue him, ibid. all his friends
are turned out of office. 6-, he is tried and condemned, 63,
his resolute caln behaviour and confe'Tion before and at his
death. 69. 70, hi? body is treated with ignominy, ibid.
Al{rray, Earl of, lare prior of St. Andrew's, goes with a hand-

ful of men agairft Hunflv, I. 239, by his great skill and
courage he gains a complete vicory, 240, his grant is con-
firmed by Parliament, 248. cabals againit him by Lenox and
DarnIv, 263. h s averfon to Darnly and other court favou-
rites, 268, calls Bothwell to stand a trial, ibid. his reafonj
for opposing Darnly's marriage with the Queen, 269, he and
his alTociates are made the dupes of Q. Elizabeth's policy,
271, concerts to seize Darnlv and carry him to England,
272, this prevented by the Queen, ibid. avoids afiaffination
intended him by Darnly. ihid. evidences of these plots, 273,
274, the Queen's vassals are called toarmsagainll him, 22.
he is summoned to appear before her, 2-5, is again funi-
mo-ied and outlawed on his non-appearance, 276, is forced
to flv with his associates into Argylfhire, 277, they are in-
terceded for bv Q. Elizabeth, ibid. are pursued by the
Queen, and otliged to flv into England, 279, they meet with
unexpected ill treatment front Q Elizabeth, ibid. 280,
courts Rizyo to intercede with the Queen for him, 284, ma-
ny of his friends ioiiclt for him, ibid the Queen's favour how
intercepted, 285, a Parliamtent is called to attaint them, 287,
this how prevented, 288. he and his affociares arrive at
Edinburgh, 295, are graciouily received by the King and
Queen. ibid. are alarmie. at the Queen's escape, but soon
reconciled to her, 296, he is appointed Regent during the
minority of King James VI. 363, his harll behaviour in a
visit to the Queen, ibid. the success of his wile adminiltra-
tion, 365, procures many of the Queen's party to join him,
ibid. gets the places of strength into his hands, 366, his of-
fice of Regent confirmed by Parliament, 367, his lvcre and
haught.v behaviour disgusts several, 368, his adherents in
great consternation at the Queen's eicape from Lochlevin,
369, hi- prudent conduct on that occalion, 37o, defeats the
Queen's army at Langfide, 372, he improves this vicory,
383, his lenity to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament,
j34. is called upon by QL E!izabeth to vindicate his conduct,
386, he arrives at York, 388, his views in this affair, ibid.
:onmplaints of the Queen's commillioners against him, 389,

he

he behaves with great reserve on this occasion, ihid. 390,
this part of his conduct accounted for, 39o, 392, intrigues
with the Duke of Norfolk, ibid, his demands fiom the Eng-
lilh commilaioners, 391, 392, aniwers the complaints of the
Queen's commillioners without touching on the murder, 392,
393, agrees to have the conference noved to \Vefliinfter,
393, is affecionately received by Q. Elizabeth, which of-
fends Q Mary, 395, is prevailed on by Elizabeth to accuse
Mary of the murder, 396, produces his evidences, 399, is
difiniffed by Q; Elizabeth without approving or condemning
his conduc, 401, his party is secretly supported by her, ibid.
returns to Scotland, and by his vigorous conduct breaks the
Queen's party, 403, he receives proposals both fromi Q.
Elizabeth and Q. Mary, 404, he disappoints Norfolk, 41,o
an account of his murder, 416, 417, his characer, 417,
418, his death much lamented by Q. Elizabeth and the King's
party, II. 3, much anarchy the consequence of it, 4, part
of a letter of his, app. 328, his heir murdcred by the Earl
of Huntly -- - II. 17.

N.
N AiiL, secretary to Q. Mary, is sent by her with a letter

and presents to her son, II. 58, why diimilfed without

feeing him, ibid. is sent with offers of humble resignation to
Q. Elizabeth, ioo, is seized and sent prisoner to London,
1 27, is produced as an evidence against her - 133
Neqvil discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q. Eliza-

beth - - II. 1)5, i06
Aobles, theirextenfive powker, I. S1, 19, become turbulent and

formidable, 20, their power greater in Scotland than in any
other kingdom, 21, the causes of this, 21, 27, their power
of long duration, 31, it becomes intolerable to the Princes,
32, they are humbled in France and England, ibid. but con-
tinue rigorous in Scotland, 33, discords amlong them encou-
raged, ibid. their jurifdielion circumscribed, 35. are greatly
mortified by King James V. 55, 58, are disappointed in a
&cheme to fliew their resentment, 61, refute to attend the
King into England, ibid. they seize the revenues of the
church, 200, refuse to part with them to the reformed cler-
gy, 201, 208, 209, dilfentions amlrng them, 232, a con-
vention of them approve the Queen's nlarriage to Darnly,
270, several of them recommeni d Bothwell as a husband to
her, 338, a strange combination of them on this occalion,
339, a body of them alfociate againlt her and Bothwcll, 347,
their dii-erent views in this, ibid. a pal ty ol them tavoutrs
the Queen, 355, they ar Illmtch ldifpirited by the good con-
duct of Murray, 365, 366, they are much pro\oked by
Morton the Regent, II. 47, think of redrefi ftrom the King,

Gg4 47,

47, 43 in'ufe suspicion of the Regent's power into him, 49,
a meeting of them called by him, 50, a party of them con-
spire againlt the King's favourites, 75, they seize his person
and drive them off, 76, their neglect of, and ingratitude to
the clergy. 116, the King attempts to reconcile their feuds
and unite them, 56. See Lord,.
.hrfck, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner to hear a cause

between Queen Mary and his accusers, 1. 387, forms a
scheme of mounting the throne of Scotland, 390, intrigues
with the Regent and Maitland with that view, ibid. 391, he
represents the demands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 392,
his farther negotiations with respect to Q, Mary, 405, 406,
endearours to conceal his designs from Q, Elizabeth, 406,
is imposed on by the artifice of the Regent, 406, 407, gets
the consent of many of the Engliih nobles, 407, his project
approved at foreign courts. 408, is discovered and defeated
by Q Elizabeth, 410, flies to Norfolk, 411, he surrenders
on a second summons, and is sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid.
is set at liberty, and continues his intrigues with Q Mary,
II. 4, is betrayed by his secretary, 25, is seized with his
dependants, and accused by them, 26, is executed ibid.
A.rttunrerlr:nd, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q.

vIary, I. 412, his fchemne defeated, 4 1, he isfeized by the
Regent, 414, is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
and put to death at York II. 33
.Vo:tingham, CountefT of, tome account of the tranfaEtion con-

cerning the Earl of Essex's ring - II. 239

0.

C 'TA4 IAF .S, their institution and extensive powers,II.
t 89, they undermine the King's ministers, ibid. become

odious, and a combination is formed against them, ibid. be-
ing split into factions, and envied by the courtiers, they re-
sign their commission - - 203
Oil'vie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John Gordon in the fireets

of Edinburgh - - - . 236

OhIpoant, Malaer of, joins the Ruthven conspirators II. 76
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scotland, II. 67, his in-

tiructions, ibid. is assassinated - - 110
D'Oyfil, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endea-

vours to promote a war with England. I. 128, his design fru-
ffrated, ibid. the number of troops under his command, 150,
instigates the Queen Regent to violent measures against the
Reformers, ibid. is sent by Q. Mary to demand a fate conduct
from Q. Elizabetn, during her voyage to Scotland 216

P. PAISLErY

P.

AISLEr, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, I. 85, creates a
suspicion of the Earl of Lenox in the Earl of Arran, Re-

gent, ibid. is made Archbishop of St. Andrew's - 96

Paris, the massacre of, 29, 30, rejoicings of the Popish party

on account of it, 3 1, the consternation and horror of the Pro-
teftants - - ibid.

Parliament, the nature of their original constitution, 1. 65, 67,

particularly that of Scotland, 67, 79, 196, a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 196, a difficulty started and
answered, 197, their proceedings with regard to religion,
198, condemn the Popiih and approve the Reformed Doc-
trines, 199, several other regulations of the lame tendency,
2oo, their validity called in question, 201, exceed their pow-
ers, 20o, their proceedings laid before the King and Queen,
ibid. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, 336, pals an act in
favour of the Reformation, ibid. 337, confirm the proceed-
ings of the confederates, 366, parliaments held both by the
King's and Queen's parties, II. 18, 19, another of the Queen's
adherents, 19, attaint upwards of 2oo of their opponents, 20,
a parliament at Stirling by the King's party, 19, furprized by
the Queen's adherents, 20, another at Stirling, 54, 55, one at
Edinburgh, 61, and on the King's being of age, 157, ibid.
several new laws made there, 158, 159, the lesser Barons ad-
mitted into parliament, ibid.
Parry, Doctor, undertakes to murder Q. Elizabeth, II. o15,

is encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. is executed, ibid.
Parsons, a Jesuit, publifles a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain's right offucceffion to the Crown of England, II. 188
Pa]fqunaJes and Pitures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly's murder,

I. 328, 336, a law made against them - ibid.

Patten, William, his account of the Scottish ancient military

discipline - - I. 1oo

Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Queen Mary's keepers,

II. lo1, his rigid severity to her, 107, discovers her foreign
correspondence, 123, his rude treatment of her, 139, refules
to be concerned in privately aflaffinating her, 143, a letter
froin him - - app. 390

Petlle, , Bishop of Amliens, is appointed to support the popilh

interest in Scotland, I. 166, drives the Qulen Regent to vio-
lent measures againfl the Protestants - - 167
Perth, an insurrection of the Reformers there againfi the Papills,

I. 146, its inhabitants are severely treated by the Queen Re-
gent, 149, a French garrison placed there, ibid. is besiegcd

and

and taken bv the protefsants, 153, a great tumult there on
account of Gewrie's confpiracv - II. 21
Pi.ip 11. of Spin, married to Mary Queen of England, I. 114,

reinforces his army with her troops, 1 z7, hi great power, 1I.
i to. joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to invade and
conquer England, 161, his preparations for it dilatory, 165,
his design fruftrared, ibid. meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 166, intrigues with some Scots Lords with
that view. ibid. remits money to them -- 18

Pinke. the battle of - - I. 98
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q. Elizabeth todeprive her of

her kingd-m. and aboilves her fubjecs - II. 8
PAl,r one of Babington's conspirators against Q Elizabeth, II.

12z, discovers the plot - - 122
Poltrat, the frantic zealot, aflaflinates the Duke of Guise at the

sieg- of Orleans - I. 24,

Ptnt, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

protets againtn laws opprellive to the Church - II. 91
PApery, where molt flouriihing, I. i 17, what kind prevailed in

Scotland, ibid. 118, was partlv grafted on Heathenifin, 154,
is much hurt by the congregation, 19', their doctrines con-
denned by pariiament, ibid. the jurisdiction of their courts
abollnhed, r99, their worship prohibited, ibid. attempt in
vain to gain Queen MIary's favour, 226, the great influence
of Poperv 286, 287
Pr-zer, the balance of, the great consequence of preserving it,

II. 72
PreItr:'rera church government etabilihed in Scotland, I. 205,

is confirmed bh King Janmes VI. - I1. 175

Pr:te!ian!s, in France, vioiently perlecuted, I. i62, are mode-

rate on Q. Mary's arrival from France, 221, are employed by
her in the adminifration, 222, a scheme for fupprelling them
a'l over Eurnpe, 2S6, a league formed for that purpose, II.
I 1, fee ReJtrmatisn.

R.

AMS. 4'. a favourite of K. James III. narrowly escapes
the f'te of his alTociates, I. 49. is appointed Captain ofthe

K:-z suazrd, and created Earl of Bothwell, 50, fee Bolhzvell.
Ran.J-'a. S:eur de, emp!lved bv the French to negotiate a peace

with England and Scotland, I. 192, ternms agreed on by hinm,

194, 195
R.n..,' 'A, .-, ;to encourage thecongregation, I. 175, (leeapp.

2z-.) c.-n-.- tul te. Q Mary's arrival in Scotland, 202, urges
r-- r.:-cat;cn o; ;he treat'' of Edinburgh, 22z, is impoled
r':: b' Q_ Mar;- n :he as?.ir of her marriage ;-ith Darnly,

. (s-:.-: i-:;o Scolarnd on the mnurder oT Xiulray, II. 4, in-

terpoles

terpofes for Morton, 66, 67, flies from Scotland in the night,
68, is sent again there, and concludes a treaty with England,
121, several of his letters, app. z6j, 270, 275, 287, 294,
297, 298

Ratcli, fee Suffex.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, I. 107, account of its first

preachers. o18, is much influenced by England, ibid. two
remarkable inltruments of promoting it, 0og, it makes great
progress, 1 14, causes contributing to promote it, 1 1 5, its ad-
vantages over popery, 124, is favoured by the Queen Re-
gent, 129, an instance of regard for it in Scotland, 130, the
whole party not chargeable with Cardinal Beatoun's murder,
137, a priest burnt for embracing it, 138, the reformers vio-
lently persecuted by the Archbiflhop of St. Andrew's, ibid.
are protedted by the Q( Regent, ibid. apply in vain to the
popish clergy, 139, a persecution against them pushed on by
the French interelt, 144, the preachers funmoned before the
Regent, ibid. they are deceived and declared out-laws by her,
146, a riotous infurreftion of them at Perth against the pa-
pifts, ibid. prepare to defend themselves against the Queen,
147, conclude a treaty with her lwhich flie presently breaks,
149, they take arms againRf the Queen, 150, infill on re-
drefling civil as well as religious grievances, 1 5 , the influence
of the reformation on liberty, ibid. they besiege and take
Perth, 153, they seize Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
great violence on churches and nionafteries, 154, their con-
dua how accounted for, ibid. an instance of their modera-
tion, 155, fix their residence at Edinburgh, 156, the Queen
prepares to attack them, ibid. make another treaty with her,
157, are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but allowed the
exercise of their religion, ibid. demand the expulsion of the
French army, 158, are aware of their danger from France,
161, their party strengthened, ibid. remonstrate against the
French fortifying Leith, 166, take arms in their own de-
fence, 167, remonstrate again to the Regent, 169, are high-
ly incensed at her imperious answer, ibid. 170, by advice of a
convention deprive the Queen Dowager of the office of
Regent, 170, the foundations of this conduct, ibid. 17 , the
growth of it encouraged by parliament, 366. See Congre-
gation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdition of - I. 18
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belonging - ibid.
Revenge, encouraged both by custom and law - I. 34
Revenues of the church, proceedings of parliament concerning

them I. 200

Ridol/pi, an agent for the Pope at London negoi'.t- for Q.
Mary, II. 23, his arguments with the Duk- of Norfoll:,

24, 25
Ri is,

Rizi, David, some account of him and his rife, I. 264, 265,

Darnly's conneCtion with him, ibid. his good offices courted
bY Murray, 2 8, his great interest and familiarity with the
Q::een, z8c. incurs the hatred of Darnlv, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, 290, several concurring causes of
this, ibid. 391, a combination formed to murder him, ibid.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace - 394
Rnmans invade Britain, I. 2, give the earliest accounts of the

.Scots - ib!d.
R5ss, bilhop of, ze-loufly promotes Q. Mary's interest at Lon-

don, II. 25, 26, is confined to the Tower and threatened
with capital punishment, ibid. is set at liberty and banilhed
the kingdom, ibid. some letters of his app. 121, 338
Rutnay, a foreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Scotland,

I. 125
R:tbvern, Lord, the murder of Rizio propoSed to him by Darn-

ly, I. 219, heads the conspirators againit him, 294, his part
in thar tranCe.;in, ibid. is admitted into the Queen's presence
who promises him a pardon, 295, did not repent of it at his
death -- 301

- created Earl of Gowrie, he and his associates seize the
K;ng, and remonstrate against his favourites, 11. 76, 77,
drire them from h:m, ibid. their conduct approved in an as-
femblv of the states, -8, the King escapes from them, 83,
by Arran's influence vi lent m:easures are determined against
them. 84, Q E:iizaheth intercedes in their behalf, ibid. 85,
are declared gu;'tv of high trefon, 86, take refuge in foreign
countrle. ib;d are har!hls- treated by Q Eli7zabeth, ioz,
rec'nciiiat!on with her brought about, 113, 114, return to
Scotland and are reconciled to the King, 11 5, their modera-
tion on being retlored to their estates and honours, 116,
their neglect of their friends the clergy - ibid.

- that nnme abolifhedby parliament, 1T. 226. See Gmsvrie.
P:t-rl'en rmn, what -- - 77

S.

4 ADLER. Sir Ralph, appointed a commissioner to hear the
cause between Q Mary and her accusers - 1. 387
Sandiar..:o of Caider, lord St. John, sent to lay the proceeding

of the c'ngrega.ional parliament before the King and Queen
in Frnce,. I. 2'2, is coldly received and difmirfed without a
ratincati.n "- n hem - 203
a,-.i: ae, a Span,:h officer, his desperate resolution to kill Q_ Eli-
za-erh - - -. I2z
-'ar:nd, its a-cient hiftorv fahulni., I. i, the origin of the
S-;";. z. t-he;r hiltrr wvhv remarkably obscure, , fomne ac-
court o, ;he w riters of it, 4, is div;ded into four periods,

5S

5, a review of the third era, 6, some account of the con-
troverfy concerning its independency, ibid.-lo, this the
cause of great anintofities and much bloodflied, i, the state
of Scotland when Bruce began his reign, t2, it begins to
have an influence on the fate ofdiftant nations, 76, 77, in-
fluence as to the balance of power, 77, slate of Scotland at
the birth of Q. Mary, 79, is invaded by the English, and fe-
veral places burnt and plundered, go, much alienated from
the English, ibid. 92, a peace concluded between England,
France and Scotland, ibid. computation of damages done by
the Englilh in Scotland, 92, 93, a new breach with England,
97, is invaded by an English army, 98, the Scots are de-
feated with great slaughter, 99, loo, their manner of fight-
ing at that time, 1oo, lot, a marriage agreed of their young
Queen and the Dauphin of France, 104, they soon repent
this ftep, o6, a fray at Edinburgh occasions their utter aver-
sion to the French, 107, this inflamed by another incident,
125, they decline a war with England, 127, fend repre-
fentatives to witness Q Mary's marriage, 130, their care as
to the marriage articles, ibid. 131, they refuse consent to
the demands of the French, 132, four of their deputies sus-
peated to be poisoned, 133, which much increases the aver-
sion, 135, grant the crown matrimonial to the Dauphin, ibid.
they apply to the Englifli for afliflance against the French,
175, 179, an Engliiil fleet arrives for that purpose, 1 84, con-
clude a peace with England and receive an Englifl army,
185, i86, all parties agree in resenting the French, 189, a
treaty between England, France and Scotland, 192, 193, both
English and French armies leave Scotland, 195, they rejoice
much at the death of the young King of France, 205, fend
to invite the Queen to Scotland, 208, 209, reject proposals of
an ambassador from France, 210, ifate of Scotland on Q:
Mary's return from France, 218, the great zeal of the na-
tion againit popery, 221, the Scots brought into contempt by
Q. Mary's conduct, 251, in a miserable condition after the
murder of Murray the Regent, II. 18, state of factions at
that time in it, ibid. 19, a league concluded between Scot-
land and England, 18, a view of the revolutions of Scotland
since the acceflion of James VI. 255, 256,. of the policy of
the state, 245, and of the church, 250, of the genius and
tafe as to learning - - 252, 256
Scott, of Buccleugh, enters and ravages England after the mur-

der of Murray the Regent, II. 3, 4, the design of this 6
Scroop, Lord, sent to condole with, and watch Q. Mary on her

arrival in England - I. 378
Serlion, Lords and Court of, by whom firfl appointed, I. 36, tie

President and one half of their number ot the Clergy 120

ISLE [)r

Seton, Lord, assists the Queen Regent in defending Leith 177
Sbrezfjbury, Earl of, the charge of Q. Mary's person committed

to him, I. 394, why removed from that office, lot, is ap-
pointed to fee the sentence against her executed, 143, letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Ap.
pendix 39z
Si;nr. cir, Biihop of Ross, a zealous Papist, concurs as president

of the feilion in acquitting Knox of a charge of treason,

I. 250
S:merjet, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army, I. 9i,

is reduced to a very critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great (laughter, 99, this victory why of little advantage,
Iot, cabals against him, at the Court of England, force him
to return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 105
Spain, great warlike preparations there, II. 16r. See Armada.

the Infanta of, let up as candidate for the Crown of Eng-
land -- - 188
Stari, ambassador is ordered to leave England, for intriguing

in favour of Q. Mary - - II. 26
Spr.t, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, II. 217,

219, is executed - - ibid.
Stewirtr, James, prior of St. Andrew's, is appointed to carry

the Crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I. 136.
See St. Andre-w's.

Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, II. 60.

See .4utigne.
--- Capt. James, his charater, II. 60, becomes a favou-

rite of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder of
the late King, 64, is created Earl of Arran. See Arran.

Col. Vv'illian, commander of the King's guard, con-

tributec to his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, 1I. 83,
seizes the Earl of Gowrie - - 89
-- FFrancis, created Earl of Bothwell, II. 166, joins in a

treasonable correspondence with the Popith lords, 167. See
BPth-.:cl.

all of that name combine in opposing the Chancellor,

180
S::r!irg s-ized be the Reformers, I. 153, a parliament there

by the King's party', II. zo, is furprized by the Queen's ad-
herents, and a great Irav ensues - - 23

Strczzi, Leon, ccn-mands a bodv of French sent into Scot-

land. 1 96, reduces and demolishes the Castle of St. An-
clev.'s, ibid. See France.

S-rccrJl:n, a remarkable statute concerning it I. 97
Suiir.::enl..::s pr( .'-d in the Church of Scotland, I. 207,

their bulinels - - - ibid.
S$ii:.-, Lar! of, one of the comn.iiiorers to hear the cause

between

between Q Mary and her accusers, I. 387, aflembles a
powerful army on the borders, II. 7, he and Scroop enter,
and ravage Scotland -- - 7

T.

AX upon land, firfl proposed in Scotland I. 126
rThrogmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador extraordinary

from Q. Elizabeth, to oppose Q. Mary's marriage with
Darnly, . 267, his intercellion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 284, 285, his enmity to Cecil, ibid. is sent to ne-
gotiate Q_ Mary's liberation, 356, is refused access to her
by the confederates, ibid. some letters of his, App. 303,

304, 305, 310, 313, 315, 316, 317, 318

- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy against Q' Eli-
zabeth, II. 93, at first he denies, but afterwards confesses
it, ibid. 94, reflecions on his confeflion, ibid. 95, executed

ibid.

7'ichourne designs to assassinate Q' Elizabeth - II. Izi
Treason, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law
of Scotland - - - I. 218

U.
IL MO T, a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland

I. 125
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of, II. 249,

250

W.
WV A.L LLACE, Sir William, bravely afflrted the liberty of

his country - I. o

Il'fiingham, secretary to Q. Elizabeth, sent ambassador to K.

James VI. II. 85, returns without fucccfs, ibid. makes a
favourable report to her concerning Janles, 86, interpnoes in
favour of Q. Mary, loo, discovers Babington's conspiracy,
122, whya determined and inveterate enemy to Q Mary,
125, a letter from him, Append. 380
llJ'rtvi k, Earl of, lucceeds Somerset in the govcrnnlent of

England -- - I. o05
Il flmitniler, the conferences concerning Q: Mary there,

I. 393

lli/tw-ln/and, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of (t

Mary, I. 412, his schemes discovered and defeated, 41 ,
he escapes to the Netherlands - ibd.
JlJ'ith orn, the prior of, imprisoned for celebrating 'ass I. 248

!s'*l' -,;

Oi&lax, a minister, declares for resistance and deprivation of

tyrannical rulers, I. 170, is called to attend the Q. Dow-
ager on her death-bed - - 91

Wi/Fart, George, his illegal execution, revenged I. 46
fWitclhcrft, igoroufly prosecuted in Scotland - II. 174
Wotion, dean of Canterbury, employed to negotiate a peace

with France - - - I. 192
---- Sir Edward, sent by Q. Elizabeth into Scotland, II.

I r 2, his character, ibid. soon gets into high favour with King
James, ibid. procures a league between the two kingdoms,
ibid. I13, undermines Arran's power, ibid. forms a plot on
King James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave

114, 115

Y.

O R K, the conferences there concerning Queen Mary,
1 I. 387

Z.
ZLOUCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q. Elizabeth, to

remonffrate against King James's lenity to the Popish
lords, II. 183, his treachery on that occasion ibid.

F I Ar I S.
