THE

H I S T O R Y

OF

AM E R I C A.

V OL. I.

6/ d" 44d'31 lid.],

G v 2; OP C/

6~~~~cI 1711· or~AAl 2ICe ~~i/R'r -f"

S~ 'VQ '~~ ______

5O 6

£guato orEunci1ln

Ca1ri

a

0.9i " YI ~ " S s--'5

~·~"cs~L :* ~20

23-'~dyd omjn $

-R
3 F _

0b~~m Litue

a ~q')

11

BO ye

.-

O~~iroj~ 100~z

6oi Z10

~pt0j·

·il~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~3b /38534 207Rd~r~P

~A ~~mSP Y"Ll~l~I' ~~oo

P~B~b~7~2 1~276

a ~~Pzi esP ;"

-, 40aa

" ~ ~ ~ iik?~m~~~ /?i,;E BhnJ'Yd0iA6 d~

~mc T ul am 9

O nrPEp A~

*- ays as0

45 45~

\

~ ,_ ~ BAl?

S Irof-

·'~ SoTTI

B aua AMERICA.

Tortz tlhel lev fIobe- tfcm's

-

ifiaor ofmria

-Z yZ'ko1icinS

Te~i~a J~~azs*4ze -~

~i t

l~

663~l ~3 ~L~~~

E~e·iZ, .;.--·

C""orn "

C'6 d 0 4'3 -25 2IiLi /h 0 00 5

Ia'm "f

ar/in ('~L7)

/77~rEa a.zrmWr

5r~rat.

THE

H I S T O R Y

OF

A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBUROGH, HISTORIOGRAPHEN

TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBER OF THM

ROYAL ACADEMY OF HISTORY AT MADRID.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VO L. I.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

LONDON:

Printed for A, STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BaLFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCXCII.

# PREFACE.

PREFAC E.

IN fulfilling the engagement which I had

come under to the Public with refpea

to the History of America, it was my inten-
tion not to have published any part of the
work until the whole was completed. The
present state of the British Colonies has in-
duced me to alter that resolution. While
they are engaged in civil war with Great Bri-
tain, inquiries and speculations concerning
their ancient forms of policy and laws,
which exist no longer, cannot be interest-
ing. The attention and expeaation of man-
kind are now turned towards their future
condition. In whatever manner this un-
happy contest may terminate, a new order
of things must arise in North America, and
its affairs will assume another afped. I wait,
with the solicitude of a good citizen, until
the ferment fibfide, and regular government
be re-established, and then I shall return to
this part of my work, in which I had made

A 3 some

some progress. That, together with the
history of Portuguese America, and of the
settlements made by the several nations of
Europe in the Weft India islands, will com-
plete my plan.

THE three volumes which I now publish,

contain an account of the discovery of the
New World, and of the progress of the Spa-
nifh arms and colonies there. This is not
only the most splendid portion of the Ame-
rican ifory, but so much detached, as, by
itself, to form a perfed whole, remarkable
for the unity of the fubje&. As the prin-
ciples and maxims of the Spaniards in plant-
ing colonies, which have been adopted in
some measure by every nation, are unfolded
in this part of my work; it will serve as a
proper introdution to the history of all the
European establishments in America, and
convey such information concerning this im-
portant article of policy, as may be deemed
no less interesting than curious.

IN describing the atchievements and infti-

tutions of the Spaniards in the New World,
I have departed in many instances from the
accounts of preceding historians, and have

often

often related fads which seem to have been
unknown to them. It is a duty I owe the
Public to mention the sources from which I
have derived such intelligence, as justifies me
either in placing tranfadions in a new light,
or in forming any new opinion with refped
to their causes and effecs. This duty I per-
form with greater fatisfadion, as it will afford
an opportunity of expressing my gratitude to
those benefacors, who have honoured me
with their countenance and aid in my re-
searches.

As it was from Spain that I had to exped

the most important information, with regard
to this part of my work, I considered it as
a very fortunate circumstance for me, when
Lord Grantham, to whom I had the honour
of being personally known, and with whole
liberality of sentiment, and disposition to
oblige, I was well acquainted, was appointed
ambaflador to the court of Madrid. Upon
applying to him, I met with such a reception
as -satisfied me that his endeavours would be
employed in the most proper manner, in or-
der to obtain the gratification of my wishes;
and I am perfedly sensible, that what pro-
grefs I have made in my inquiries among the

A 4 Spaniards,

Spaniards, ought to be ascribed chiefly to
their knowing how much his Lordship inte-
refled himself in my success.

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord

Grantham, than the advantages which I have
derived from his attention in engaging Mr.
Waddilove, the chaplain of his embassy, to
take the conduc of my literary inquiries in
Spain, the obligations I lie under to him
would be very great. During five years,
that gentleman has carried on researches for
my behoo , with such activity, perseverance,
and knowledge of the fubjet, to which his
attention was turned, as have filled me with
no less astonishment than fatisfadion. He
procured for me the greater part of the Spa-
nifh books, which I have consulted; and as
many of them were printed early in the fix-
teenth century, and are become extremely
rare, the collecing of these was such an occu-
pation, as, alone, required much time and
afiduity. To his friendly attention I am in-
debted for copies of several valuable manu-
scripts, containing fats and details which I
might have searched for in vain, in works
that have been made public. Encouraged by
the inviting good-will with which Mr. Wad-

dilove

dilove conferred his favours, I transmitted to
him a set of queries, with refped both to the
customs and policy of the native Americans,
and the nature of several institutions in the
Spanish settlements, framed in such a manner,
that a Spaniard might answer them, without
disclosing any thing that was improper to be
communicated to a foreigner. He translated
these into Spanish, and obtained from various
persons who had resided in most of the Spa-
nifh colonies, such replies as have afforded
me much inftruaion.

NOTWITHSTANDING those peculiar ad-

vantages with which my inquiries were car-
ried on in Spain, it is with regret I am
obliged to add, that their success must be
abfcribed to the beneficence of individuals,
not to any communication by public autho-
rity. By a singular arrangement of Philip II.
the records of the Spanish monarchy are de-
posited in the Archivo of Simancas, near Val-
ladolid, at the distance of a hundred and
twenty miles from the feat of government,
and the supreme courts of justice. The
papers relative to America, and chiefly to
that early period of its history, towards which
my attention was direted, are so numerous,

c that

that they alone, according to one account,
fill the largest apartment in the Archivo;
and according to another, they compose eight
hundred and feventy-three large bundles.
Conscious of poffeffing, in some degree, the
indufiry which belongs to an historian, the
profped of such a treasure excited my most
ardent curiosity. But the profped of it, is
all that I have enjoyed. Spain, with an ex-
cess of' caution, has uniformly thrown a veil
over her tranfations in America. From
firangers they are concealed with peculiar so-
licitude. Even to her own fubjeas the Ar-
chivo of Simancas is not opened without a
particular order from the crown; and after
obtaining that, papers cannot be copied,
without paying fees of office so exorbitant,
that the expence exceeds what it would be
proper to bestow, when the gratification of
literary curiosity is the only objea. It is to
be hoped, that the Spaniards will at last dif-
cover this system of concealment to be no
less impolitic than illiberal. From what I
have experienced in the course of my in-
quiries, I am satisfied, that upon a more
minute scrutiny into their early operations in
the New World, however reprehensible the
aaions of individuals may appear, the con-

duct

du& of the nation will be placed in a more
favourable light.

IN other parts of Europe very different

sentiments prevail. Having searched, with-
out fuccefsi in Spain, for a letter of Cortes
to Charles V. written soon after he landed
in the Mexican empire, which has not hi-
therto been published; it occurred to me,
that as the emperor was setting out for Ger-
many at the time when the messengers from
Cortes arrived in Europe, the letter with
which they were intruffted might possibly be
preserved in the Imperial library of Vienna.
I communicated this idea to Sir Robert Mur-
ray Keith, with whom I have long had the
honour to live in friendflip, and I had soon
the pleasure to learn, that upon his applica-
tion, her Imperial Majesty had been gra-
cioufly pleased to issue an order, that not only
a copy of that letter (if it were found), but
of any other papers in the library, which
could throw light upon the History of Ame-
rica, should be transmitted to me. The letter
from Cortes is not in the Imperial library,
but an authentic copy, attested by a notary,
of the letter written by the magifirates of the
colony planted by him at Vera Cruz, which

6 I have

I have mentioned, Vol. ii. p. 169, having
been found, it was transcribed and sent to
me. As this letter is no less curious, and as
little known as that which was the objeat of
my inquiries, I have given some account, in
its proper place, of what is most worthy of
notice in it. Together with it, I received a
copy of a letter from Cortes, containing a
long account of his expedition to Honduras,
with refpe&t to which, I did not think it
necessary to enter into any particular detail;
and likewise those curious Mexican paintings,
which I have described, Vol. iii. p. 173.

MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were car-

ried on with equal facility and success. In
examining into the nearest communication
between our continent and that of America,
it became of consequence to obtain authentic
information concerning the discoveries of the
Ruffians in their navigation from Kamchatka
towards the coast of America. Accurate re-
lations of their first voyage, in 1741, have
been published by Muller and Gmelin. Se-
veral foreign authors have entertained an
opinion, that the court of Russia studiously
conceals the progress which has been made by
more recent navigators, and fuffers the Public

to

to be amused with false accounts of their
route. Such conduct appeared to me unfuit-
able to those liberal sentiments, and that pa-
tronage of science, for which the present so-
vereign of Russia is eminent; nor could I dif-
cern any political reason, that might render
it improper to apply for information con-
cerning the late attempts of the Ruffians to
open a communication between Asia and
America. My ingenious countryman, Dr.
Rogerfon, first physician to the emprefs,pre-
fented my request to her Imperial Majesty,
who not only disclaimed any idea of con-
cealment, but instantly ordered the journal
of Captain Krenitzin, who conducted the
only voyage of discovery made by public
authority since the year 1741, to be tranf-
lated, and his original chart to be copied for
my use. By consulting them, I have been
enabled to give a more accurate view of the
progress and extent of the Ruffian disco-
veries, than has hitherto been communicat-
ed to the Public.

FROM other quarters I have received in-

formation of great utility and importance.
M. le Chevalier de Pinto, the minister from
Portugal to the court of Great Britain, who

com-

commanded for several years at Matagroffo,
a settlement of the Portuguese in the interior
part of Brazil, where the Indians are nu-
merous, and their original manners little
altered by intercourse with Europeans, was
pleased to fend me very full answers to some
queries concerning the characer and infti-
tutions of the natives of America, which his
polite reception of an application made to
him in my name, encouraged me to pro-
pose. These satisfied me, that he had con-
templated with a discerning attention the
curious objeds which his situation presented
to his view, and I have often followed him
as one of my belt inftruaed guides.

M. SUARD, to whole elegant translation of

the History of the Reign of Charles V. I owe
the favourable reception of that work on the
continent, procured me answers to the fame
queries from M. de Bougainville, who had
opportunities of observing the Indians both
of North and South America, and from M.
Godin le Jeune, who resided fifteen years
among Indians in Quito, and twenty years
in Cayenne. The latter are more valuable
from having been examined by M. de la
Condamine, who, a few weeks before his

death,

death, made some short additions to them,
which may be considered as the last effort of
that attention to science which occupied a
long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one

region in America. Governor Hutchinson
took the trouble of recommending the confi-
deration of my queries to Mr. Hawley and
Mr. Brainerd, two protestant miflionaries,
employed among the Indians of the Five
Nations, who favoured me with answers,
which discover a considerable knowledge of
the people whose customs they describe.
From William Smith, Efq; the ingenious
historian of New York, I received some
useful information. When I enter upon the
Hiftoi y of our Colonies in North America,
I thall have occasion to acknowledge how
much I have been indebted to many other
gentlemen of that country.

FROM the valuable Colle&ion of Voyages

made by Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with
whose attention to the History of Navigation
and Discovery the Public is well acquainted,
I have received some very rare books, parti-
cularly two large volumes of Memorials,

partly

partly manu' ript, and partly in print, which
were present 1 to the court of Spain during
the reigns of Philip III. and Philip IV.
From these I have learned many curious
particulars with refpeQ to the interior state
of the Spaniuh colonies, and the various
schemes formed for their improvement. As
this Colledion of Memorials formerly be-
longed to the Colbert Library, I have quot-
ed them byv that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have

consulted with that attention which the re-
sped due from an Author to the Public re-
quired; and by minute references to them,
I have endeavoured to authenticate whatever
I relate. The longer I reflect on the nature
ofhiftorical composition, the more I am con-
vinced that this scrupulous accuracy is
necessary. The hifftorian who records the
events of his own time, is credited in pro-
portion to the opinion which the Public en-
tertains with refpea to his means of inform-
ation and his veracity. He who delineates
the tranfations of a remote period, has no
title to claim assent, unless he produces evi-
dence in proof of his assertions. Without
this, he may write an amusing tale, but

cannot

cannot be laid to have composed an authen-
tic history. In those sentiments I have been
confirmed by the opinion of an Author ÷,
whom his industry, erudition, and discern-
ment, have deservedly placed in a high rank
among the most eminent historians of the
age. Emboldened by a hint from him, I
have published a catalogue of the Spaniih
books which I have consulted. This prac-
tice was frequent in the last century, and
was considered as an evidence of laudable
industry in an author; in the present, it
may, perhaps, be deemed the effeQ of often-
tation; but as many of these books are un-
known in Great Britain, I could not other-
wife have referred to them as authorities,
without encumbering the page with an in-
fertion of their full titles. To any person
who may chufe to follow me in this path of
inquiry, the catalogue mufft be very useful.

IMY readers will observe, that in men-

tioning sums of money, I have uniformly
followed the Spanish method of computing
by pcfos. In America, the peso fuerte, or
duro, is the only one known, and that is
always meant when any fum imported from

* Mr. Gibbon,

. VOL. I. America

America is mentioned. The peso fuerte, as
well as other coins, has varied in its nume-
rary value ; but I have been advised, with-
out attending to such minute variations, to
confider it as equal to four shillings and
sixpence of our money. It is to be remem-
bered, however, that in the sixteenth cen-
tury, the effeaive value of a peso, i. e. the
quantity of labour which it represented, or
of goods which it would purchase, was five
or fix times as much as at present.

N. B. Since this edition was put into the

press, a History of Mexico, in two volumes
in quarto, translated from the Italian of the
Abbe D. Francesco Saverio Clavigero, has
been published. From a person, who is a
native of New Spain, who has resided forty
years in that country, and who is acquaint-
ed with the Mexican language, it was na-
tural to expect much new information.
Upon perusing his work, however, I find
that it contains hardly any addition to the
ancient History of the Mexican empire, as
related by Acofta and Herrera, but what is
derived from the improbable narratives and

fanciful

fanciful conjeaures of Torquemada and Bo-
turini. Having copied their splendid de-
fcriptions of the high state of civilization in
the Mexican empire, M. Clavigero, in the
abundance of his zeal for the honour of his
native country, charges me with having
mistaken some points, and with having
misrepresented others, in the History of it.
When an author is conscious of having ex-
erted industry in research and impartiality
in decision, he may, without presumption,
claim what praise is due to these qualities,
and he cannot be insensible to any accufa-
tion that tends to weaken the force of his
claim. A feeling of this kind has induced
me to examine such ftricures of M. Clavi-
gero on my History of America as merited
any attention, especially as these are made
by one, who seemed to possess the means of
obtaining accurate information; and to
shew that the greater part of them is defti-
tute of any just foundation. This I have
done in notes upon the passages in my Hii-
tory, which gave rife to his criticisms.

COLLEGE of EDINBURGH,

March ift, 1788.

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOOK I.

p R 0 GRESS of navigation among the ancients

-View of their discoveries as preparatory to
those of the moderns-Imperfection of ancient na-
vigation and geography-DoEtrine of the Zones
-Farther discoveries checked by the irruption of
barbarous nations-Geographical knowledge flill
preserved in the Eart, and among the Arabians-
Revival of commerce and navigation in Europe-
favoured by the Croifades-extended by travellers
into the Eaji-promoted by the invention of the
mariner's compafs-FirfJ regular plan of disco-
very formed by Portugal-State of that kingdom
-Schemes ofPrince Henry -Early attempts feeble
-Progress along the weflern coast of Africa-
Hopes of discovering a new route to the East
Indies-Attempts to accomplh{y this-Profpefis
offcceBOOK

i *? BOOK

BOOK 1I.

Birth and education of Columbus-acquires naval

Jkill in the service of Portugal-conceives hopes
of reaching the East Indies by holding a westerly
courfe-his fyfJem founded on the ideas of the
ancients, and knowledge of their navigation-
and on the discoveries of the Portuguefe--His
negociations with different courts-Obftacles
which he had to surmount in Spain-Voyage of
di/covery-diffculties-fuccefs-return to Spain

I-AfloniJhment of mankind on this discovery
of a New World-Papal grant of it-Second
voyage-Colony fettled-Farther discoveries--
War with the Indians-Fir/f tax imposed on them
--third voyage-He discovers the continent-
State of the Spani/h colony-Errors in the Jirfi
system of colonizing--Voyage of the Portuguese
to the EafJ Indies by the Cape of Good Hope-
Effetos of this-Difcoveries made by private ad-
venturers in the New World-Name of America
given to it-Machinations against Columbus-
Disgraced andfent in chains to Europe-Fourth
voyage of Columbus-His difcoveries-difafters-
death.

BOOK III.

State of the colony in Hifpaniola-New war with

the Indians-Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal
regulations concerning the condition of the In-

dians-

dians-Diminuti:-n of that people-Difcoveries
andfettlements-Fi;ft colony planted on the con-
tinent-Conqueft of Cuba-Di2covery of Florida
--of the South Sea-Great expeiations raicd
by this-Caufes of disappointment with reJpebE
to these fcr Jfme time--Controve:fy concerning
the treatment of the Indians-Contrcry decisions
--Zeal of the ecclefjafiics, particularly of Las
Cafas-Singular proceedings of Ximenes-Ne-
groes imported into America-Las Cafas' Idea of
a new colony-permitted to attempt it-unfuc-
cefsful-Difcjveries towards the Weft-Yucatan
*-Campeachyb-New Spain.-Preparations for
invading it.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

BOOK IV.

View of America when firJf discovered, and of the

manners and policy of its m;Zf uncivilized inhabit-
ants--Vaft extent of America-Grandeur of the
obje&'s it presents to view-Its mountains-rivers
-lakes-Its form favourable to commerce-Tem-
perature-predominance of cold-Cau/es of this
-uncultivated-unwholefome-its animals-foil
-Inquiry how America was peopled--various
theories-what appears most probable- Condition
and character of the Americans-All, the Mexi-

a 4 cans

cans and Peruvians excepted, in the state of fa-
vages-Inquiry confined to the uncivilized tribes
-Difficulty of obtaining information-various
calfes of this-Method observed in the inquiry-
L The bodily confJitution of the Americans con-
Jidered-II. The qualities of their minds-
III. Their domestic ftate-IV. Their political
ft ate and inflitutions--V. Their system of war
and public fecurity-VI. The arts with which
they were acquainted-VII. Their religious ideas
and inftitutions-VIII. Such singular and de-
tached customs as are not reducible to any of the
former heads-IX. General review and estimate
of their virtues and defet7s.

BOOK V.

Hifory of the conquefJ of New Spain by Cortes.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

BOOK VI.

liflory of the conquefl of Peru, by Pizarro-and

of the dijnj.;cns and civil wars of the Spaniards
in that count jy-Origin-progrefs-and effets
f thfe.

BOOK

BOOK VII.

S"iew of the infitutions and manners of the Mexi-

cans and Peruvians-Civilized fates in compa-
rifon of other Americans-Recent origin of the
Mexicans-Falfs which prove their progress in
civilization--View of their policy in its various
branches-of their arts--Fafs which indicate
a small progress in civilization-What opinion
jbhould be formed on comparing those contradittory
fats--Genius of their religion-Peruvian mo-
narchy more ancient-Its policy founded on reli-
gion-Singular effels of this-Peculiar slate of
property among the Peruvians--Their public
works and arts-roads-bridges-buildings--
Their unwarlike fpirit--View of other domi-
nions of Spain in America-Cinaloa and Sonora-
California-Tucatan and Honduras-Chili-
Tucuman--Kingdom of Tierra Firms-New
Kingdom of Granada.

B OOK VIII.

k iew of the interior government, commerce, &c.

of the Spanikf colonies-Depopulation of America
-firfi effet of their fettlements-not the confe-
quence of any fyJ em of policy-nor to be im-
puted to religion-Number of Indians still re-
maining-Fundamental Maxims on which the
Spanifj fvyfem of colonization is founded-Con-
dition of dijferent orders of men in their co-
lonies- Chapetones-.- Creoles-Negrces-Indians

-Eccle-

Ecclefjaftical slate and policy-Charafter of
secular and regular clergy-Small progress of
Chrifianity among the natives-Mines chief
object of their attention-Mode of working
thefe-their produce-Effects of encouraging this
species of indufry-Other commodities of Spanimh
America-Firft effects of this new commerce with
America on Spain-Why the Spanij colonies
have not been as beneficial to the parent-ftate
as those of other nations-Errors in the Spanijh
fyfem of regulating this commerce-confined to
one port-carried on by annual fleets-Contra·
band trade-Decline of Spain both in population
and wealth--Remedies propofed-View of the
wife regulations of the Bourbon princes-A new
and more liberal system introduced-Beneficial
effects of this-Probable confequences-frade
between New Spain and the Philippines-Revenue
of Spain from America--whence it arifes-to
what it amounts.

# A CATALOGUE OF Spanish Booksand Manuscripts.

CATALOGUE'

OF

Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A.

A C ARE T E de Biscay, Relation 'des Voyages dans la

Riviere de la Plata, & de 1a par Terre av Perou.

Exit. Recueil de Thvenot, Part IV.

---- -- A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and

thence by Land to Peru, 8vo. L'.,don, 1698.

Acofta (P. Jos. de) Hiitoria Natural y Moral de las Indias.

4to. Madrid, 1590.

---- (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturelle & Morale des Indes

tant Orientales qu' Occidentales, 8vo. Paris, 1600.

-- -- Novi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis.

Ext. in Collef. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

------ De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de pro-

curanda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salmant. 8vo. 1589.

------- (Chriftov.) Tratado da las Drogas y Medecinas

de las Indias Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al vivo,
4to. Burgos, 1578.

Acugna (P. Christoph.) Relation de la Riviere des Ama.

zones, I2mo. Tom. ii. Paris, 1682.

Acugna's Relation of the great River of the Amazons in

South America, 8vo. Load. 1698.

Alarchon

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprere il Regno di

fette Citta. Ramufio, III. 363.

Albuquerque Coello, (Duarte de) Memorial de Artes de

Ia Guerra del Brasil, 4to. Mad. 1634.

Alcafarado (Franc.) An Hiaorical Relation of the Discovery

of the Isle of Madeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Alcedo y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiftorico-

Politico-Geografico, con las Noticias mas particulares, del
Peru, Tierra Firme, Chili, y neuvo Reyno de Granada, 4to.
Mad. r740.

- Compendi Hiftorico de la Provincia y Paerto de
Guayaquil, 4to. Mad. 1741.

- Memorial fobre diferentes Puntos tocantes al

eftado de la Real hazienda, y del Comercio, &c. en las
Indias, fol.

Aldama y Guevara (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Arde de i

Lengua Mexicana, izmo. Mexico, 1754.

Alvarado. (Pedro de) Dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortae

Referiendole sus Expediciones y Conquiftas en varias Pro-
vincias de N. Efpagna. Exft. Barcia Hiftoriad. Primit.
tom. i.

--- Lettere due, &c. Exit. Ramus. III. z96.
Aparicio y Leon (D. Lorenzo de) Difcurfo Hiftorice.

Politico del Hospital San Lazaro de Lima, 8vo. Lin.
1761.

Aranzeles Reales de los Miniftros de la Real Audiencia de

N. Efpagna, fol. Mexica, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Illi

Malucas, fol. Mad. 1609.

-- Anales de Aragon, fol. Saragoca, 1630.
Arguello (Eman.) Sentum Confeflionis, Izmo, Mex.

1703.

Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria de

Peru, 4to. Lima, 6z r.

Avendagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus, ceu generali

Inftruator pro Regimine Confcientiae, in ijs qua: ad Indiai
fpectant, fol. 2z vols. Antwerp, 166o.

Aznar (D. Bern. Fran.) Difcurfo tocante a la real hazienda

y adminiftracion de ella, 4to.

B

Bandini (Angelo Maria) Vita e Lettere di Amerigo

Vespucci, 4to. Firenze, 1745.

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hifloriadores Primitivos de las

Indias Occidentales, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centinera (D. Martin de) Argentina y Conquifta

del Rio de la Plata Poema. Exft. Barcia Hi(toriad.
Primit. III.

Barros Joao de) Decadas de Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lifboa,

168z.

Bellefteros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, fol.

z vols. Lima, i685.

Beltran (P. F. Pedro) Arte de el Idioma Maya reducido a

fucintas reghs, y Semilexicon, 4to. Mex. 1746.

Benzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hiltore--De Bry America,

Part IV. V. VI.

Betancurt y Figueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las Iglefias

Metropolitanas de las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Conversion de Piritu de Indios

Cumanagotos y otros, izmo. Mad. 1690.

Boturini Benaduci (Lorenzo) Idea de una neuva Hifloria

general de la America Septentrional, fundada fobre material
copiofa de Figuras, Symbolas Cara&eres, Cantares y Manu-
fcritos de Antores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (1). Francisco de) El

Nuevo Mundo Poema Heroyco, 4to. Barcelona, 17or.

BEtero BEnes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provincias,

Rey nos, y Ciudades del Mundo,'4to. Girona, 1748.

Brnetius (Phil.) Paralela Geographias Veteris & Nova;, 4to.

Paris, 16j8.

C

Cabcza de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) Relacion de los Nau-

fragios. Exit. Balcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

Cabeza

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) Examen Apologetico de

la Hiftorica Narration de los Naufrgios. Exft. Barcia Hill.
Prim. tom. i.

------- Commentarios de lo fuccedido duarants

fu gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exit. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exit. Ramus. III. 310.
Cabota (Sebaft.) Navigazione de. Exit. Ramus. II. 21r.
Cadamuftus (Aloyfius) Navigatio ad Terras incognitas.

Exit. Nov. Orb, Grynzei, p. I.

Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Orden

de San Auguftin en el Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario Hiftorico de los Viages de Mar y Tierra

hechos en 1768, al Norte de California di orden del Marques
de Croix Vi-rey de Nueva Efpagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo que

a fu Mageftad Provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to.
1645.

Campomanes (D. Pedro Rodrig.) Ahtiguedad Maritima de

la Republica de Cartago, con el Periplo de fu general Hannon
traducido e illuftrado, 4to. Mad. 1756.

- - Difcurfo fobre el fomento de la Induftria

popular, 8vo. Mad. 1774.

------- Difcurfo fobre la Educacion popular de los

Artefanos, 8vo. 5 vol. Mad. 1775, &c.

Caracas-Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Compagnia

Guipufcoana de Caracas, izmo. Mad. 5765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias que

tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe Provien,
y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageftad, lo que fe Gafta de
ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dedicado al Marques de
Santos Claros, Agno, de i61I. MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfayo Cronologico para la

Hi:loria general dela Florida, fol. Mad. 1733.

Carranzana (D. Goncales) A Geographical Description of

the Coasts, &c. of the Spanilh Weft-Indies, 8vo. Lond. 1740.

Cafas (Bart. de las) Breviffima Relacion de la Deftruycion

de las Indias, 4to. 1552.

Cafas

Cafas (Bart. de las) Narratio Iconibus illuftrata per Theod.

deBry. 4to. Oppent. 1614.

- (Bart. de las) An Account of the first Voyages

and Discoveries of the Spaniards in America, 8vo. Lond.
1693.

Caffani (P. JoCeph) Hiftloria de la Provincia de Com-

pagnia de Jesus del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Mad.
1741.

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hifforia do Defcobrimento

& Conquifta de India pelos Portuguefes, fol. z vol. Lilbon,
1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera y Secunda de las Elegias de

Varones Illuftres de Indias, 4to. z vol, Mad. 1589.

Castillo (Bernal Dias del) Hiftoria Verdadera de la Con-

quilta de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1632.

Castro, Figueroa y Salazar (D. Pedro de) Relacion di fu

ancimiento y fervicios, izmo.

Cavallero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las

pefas y Medidas di varias Naciones, reducidas a las qua
Corren en Castilla, 4t0. Mad. 1731.

Cepeda (D. Fern.) Relacion Universal del Sitio en que

efta fundada la Ciudad de Mexico, fol. 1637.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Chronica del Peru, fol. Sevill.

1533-

Cifieros (Diego) Sitio, Naturaleza y Propriedades de la

Ciudad de Mexico 4to. Mexico, 1618.

Clemente (P. Claudio) Tablas Chronologicas, en que

contienen los Sucefos Ecclefiafticos y Seculares de Indias,
4to. Val. 1689.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hifloria de Yucatan, fol.

Mad. 1688.

Coilecao dos Brives Pontificos e Leyes Regias que foiao

Expedidos y Publicadas defde o Anno 1741, fobre a la Li-
berdada des Pcffias bene e Commercio dos Indos de Brefil.

Colleccion General de las Providencias halfa aqui tomadas

par el Gobierno fobre el Eitragnimento, y Occupacion de

4 Tempo-

Temporalidades de los Regulares de la Compagnia, de
Efpagna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirante, D.

Chrifioval Colon. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. I. I.

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua multas Regiones hac-

tenus incognitas invenit. F.xdt. Nov. Orb. Gryn i, p. 90.

---- (Ferd.) Life and Afions of his Father Admiral

Christoph. Calumbus. Exit. Cnurchill's Voyages, II. 479.

Compagnia Real de Comercio para las Jflas de Sto.

Domingo, Puerto-rico y la Margarita, I2mo.

,

Compendio General de las contribuciones y gattos que

ocafionan todos los eff<ctos, frutos, caudales, &c. que trafican
entre los reynos de Caflilla y America, 4to.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en

la muy Noble y muy leal Ciudad de Mexico en los Aguos de
1555 & 1565, fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provincia!e tertium celebratum

Mexici, Anno i5g5, fol. Mexici, 1770.

Continente Americano, Argonauta de las coffas de Nueva

Efpagna y Tierra Firme. Izmo.

Cordeyro (Antonio) Hifforia Infulana das ilhas a Portugas

fugeytas no Oceano Occidental. fol. Liib. 1717.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Reiacion de los

Segnores, manera y Differencia de ellos, que havia en la
Nueva Efpagna, y otras Provincias sus Comarcanas, y de
sus Leyes, Uoibs y Coftumbres, y de la Forma que tenian en
Tributar sus Vafalios en Tiempo de fu Gentilidad, &c. MS.
4t0. pp- 307.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Lettere del

Viaggio fatto del Fra. Marco da Nizza al fette Citta de
Cevola. Exit. Ramufio I11. 354.

---- Relacion Viaggio alle fette Ci:ta. Ramufio III.

359-

Cortes (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperador

Carlos V. en que ha Relacion de sus Conquiftas en la Nueva
Efpagna. Exft. Barcia Hill. Prim. tom. i.

Cortefflii (Ferd.) De infulis nuper inventis Narrationes ad

Carolum V. fol. 1532.

Cortcfe

Cortefe (Fern.) Relacioni, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 225.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte del

Mundo, Zaragoff. 4to. 1688.

Cumana-Govierno y Noticia de, fol. MS.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hiftoria de la Fundacion y

Difcurfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Bruff.
1625.

----- (Gil Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaftico de la Pri-

mitiva Iglefia de los Indias Occidentales, fol. z vols.
1649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regulares

de la Compagnia fufcitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas Obifpo
de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echaveri (D. Bernardo Ibagnez de) El Reyno Jefuitico del

Paraguay. Exit. tom. iv. Colleccion de Documentos, 4t6.
Mad. 1770.

Echave y Affu (D. Francisco de) La Efitrella de. Lima

convertida en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes,
1688.

Eguiara El Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicana,

five Eruditorum Hiftoria Virorum in America Boreali natorum,
&c. tom. prim. fol. Mex. 1775. N. B. No more than one
volume of this work has been publilhed.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana, Poema

Eroico, fol. Mad. 1733.

----- 2 vols. 8vo. Mad. 1777.
Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Peru-

vicum, fol. Mad. 1775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiftoria del Reyno de Portugal,

fol. Amber. 1730.

VOL. I. b Faria

Faria y Sousa, History of Portugal from the firit Ages to the

Revolution under John IV. 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Prima y fecunda Parte de la Hiftoria

del Peru, fol. Sevill. 1571.

----- (P. Juan Patr.) Relacion Hifitorial de las

Miflliones de los Indias que claman Chiquitos, 4to. Mad.
1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Efpagnoles Americanos-Difcurfo

VI. del tom. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

--- -- Solucion del gran Problema Hiftorico fobre

la Poblacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del tom. v. del
Teatro Critico.

------ (D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de la

Ciudad y Provincia Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

Freyre (Ant.) Piratas de la America, 4to.
Fraffo (D. Petro) De Regio Patronatu Indiarum, fol.

2 vols. Matriti, 1775.

G

Galva6 (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos Antigos y

Modernos, fol. Lilboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the

first Original unto the Year 1555. Olborne's Colle&. 11.

354. Gamboa (D. Fran. Xavier de) Comentarios a los ordi-
nanzas de Minas, fol. Mad. 1761.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hiftoria Ecclefiaftica y Seglar de la

India Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacion de la Santa Evan-
geliaen ella, Izmo. Baeca, 1626.

- (Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo

Mundo, fol. Mad. 1729.

Gaftelu (Anton. Valefquez) Arte de Lengua Mexicana,

4to. Puibla de los Angeles. 1716.

Gazeta de Mexico pos los Annos 1728, 1729, 1730, 4to,
Girava (Hieronymo) Dos Libros de Cofmograghia. Milan,

1556. Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata
del Defcubrimiento de diverfas Ciudades, y Provincias, y

Guerras

Guerras que tuio con los Indios. Exft. Barcia Hillt. Prim,
tom. i.

Godoy Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exist. Ramuflo III. 300.
Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hitloria general de las Indias,
Izmo. Any. 1554.

------ Hilloria general de las Indias. Exit. Barcia Hiit.

Prim. torn. ii.

- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna 6 Conquifta de

Mexico. Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

Guatemala-Razon puntual de los fucceffos mas memora-

biles, y de los eftragos y dannos que ha padecido la rindad de
Guatemala, fol. 1774.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) El Orinoco illuftrado y defendido;

Hiitoria Natural, Civil, y Geographica de elte Gran Rio, &c.
4to. z tom. Mad. 1745.

-- ---- Hiftoire Naturelle, Civile, & Geogra-

phique de l'Orenoque. Traduite par M. Eidous, Izmo.
torn. iii. Avig. 1758.

Gufman (Nugnode) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Provincia

de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell 1530. Exit. Ra-
mufio III. 331.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides Belli Guiaranici, ab

Anno 1754. Exit. Colleccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Piantarum, Animalium & Mineralium

Mexicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Rom. 1651.

Herera (Anton. de) HiRforia general de los Hechos de

los Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tierra Firma de Mar Oceano,
fol. 4 vols. Mad. 16o01.

----Hiftoria General, &c. 4 vo!s. Mad. 17.30.
--- General Hiitory, &c. Translated by Stephens,

Svo. 6 vols. Lond. 1740.

--- Defcriptio India: Occidentalis, fol. Amft. 1622.
Huemez y Horcafitas (D. Juan Francisco de) Extraao de

los Autos de Diligencias y reconocimientos de los rios, lagunas,

b z vertientes,

vertientes, y defaguas de Mexico y fu valle, &c. fol. Mex.
1748.

I

Jefuitas-Colleccion de las applicaciones que fe van ha-

ciendo de los Cienes, cafas y Coligios que ,fueron de la Com-
pagnia de Jesus, expatriados de eftos Reales dominios, 4to.
z vols. Lima, 1772 y 1773.

- Colleccion General de Pr,,videncias hafta aqui

tomadas por el Gobierno fobre el Efirannamiento y Occupa.
cion de temporalidades, de los Regulares de la Compagnia de
Efpagna, Indias, e Iflas Filipinas, 4to. Mad. 1767.

------ Retrato de los Jefuitas formado al natural, 4to.

2 vols. Mad. 1768.

----- Relacion Abbreviada da Republica que os Reli.

giofos Jefuitas efiabeleceraon, izmo.

--- Idea del Origen, Gobierno, &c. de la Comrn

pagnia de Jesus, 8vo. Mad. 1768.

L

Lrevinius (Apollonius) Libri V. de Peruvia Invention. &

rebus in eadem geftis, izmo. Ant. i567.

Leon (Fr. Ruiz. de) Hernandia, Poema Heroyco de Con-

quifta de Mexico, 4to. Mad. 1755.

--- (Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental y

Occidental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. 1737.

Lima, A true Account of the Earthquake which happened

there, z8th Otober 1746. Translated from the Spanish, 8vo.
Lond. 1748.

Lima Gozofa, Defecription de las feflibas Demonfiraciones,

con que efta ciudad Celebrb la real Proclamacion de el
Nombre Auguito del Catolico Monarcho D. Carlos III.
Lima, 4to. 1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tomo I. de

las Memorias Hiftorico-Phyficas,, Critico-Apologeticas de la
America Meridional, Svo. Cadiz, 1759.

i Lopez

Lopez (D. Juan Luis) Difcurfo Hiftorico Politico en defenfo

de la Jurifdicion Real, fol. 1685.

---- (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Sep-

tentrional y Meridional, Izmo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant.) Arzobifpo de Mexico, ahora, de

Toledo, Hiftoria de Nueva Efpagna, efcrita por fu Efclarecido
Conquistador Hernan Cortes, Aumentada con otros Docu-
mentos y Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Description Chorographica, del Terre-

torios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los Ritos
y Coftumbres, de las innumerabiles Naciones que la habitan.
4to. Cordov. 1733.

--- Hiftoria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la Pro-

vincia del Paraguay, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Description de la Gouvernement du

Perou. Exit, Voyages qui ont fervi a l'etabliffement de la
comp. des Indes, tom. ix. o10.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfermedades de la

Compagnia de Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las Hiftorias

de los Defcubrimientos, Conquiftas, y Guerras de ]a India
Oriental, y sus Iflas, defde los Tiempos del Infante Don
Enriqeu de Portugal fu inventor. 4to. Mad. 1681.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rebus Oceanicis & Novo

Orbe Decades tres, izmo. Colon. 1574.

---- De Infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus

Incolarum. Ibid. p. 329.

--- Opus Epiftolarum, fol. Amft. 1670.
- II Sommario cavato della fua Hiftoria del Nuevo

Mundo. Ramufio III. i.

Mata (D. Geron. Fern. de) Ideas politicas y morales,

Izmo. Toledo, 1640.

Mechuacan-Relacion de las Ceremonias, Ritos, y Pob-

lacion de los Indios de Mechuacan hecha al I. S. D. Ant. de
Nendoza Virrey de Nueva Efpagna, fol. MS.

b 3 Melende.

Melendez (Fr. Juan) Teforos Verdaderos de las Indias

Hiftoria de la Provincia de S. Juan Baptifia del Peru, del
Orden de Predicadores, fol. 3 vols. Rom. 1681.

Memorial Ajuftado por D. A. Fern. de Heredia Gobernador

de Nicaragua y Honduras, fol. 1753.

Memorial Adjuftado contra los Officiales de Casa de Moneda

a Mexico de el anno 1729, fol.

Mendoza (D. Ant. de) Lettera al Imperatore del Difcopri-

mento della Terra Firma della N. Spagna verso Tramontano.
Exft. Ramufio III. 355.

-- (Juan Gonz. de) Hilforia del gran Reyno de

China, con un Itinerario del Nuevo Mundo. 8vo. Rom.

1585. Miguel (Vic. Jos.) Tablas de los Sucefos Ecclefiafficos
en Africa, Indias Orientales y Occidentales, 4to. Va!.
1689.

Miscellanea Economico-Politica, &c. fol. Pampl. 1749.
Molina (P. F. Anton.) Vocabulario Caftellano y Mexicano,

fol. 1571.

Monardes (El Dottor) Primera y Segunda y Tercera

Parte de la Hiftoria Medicinal, de las Colas que fe traen de
nueftras Indias Occidentales, que firven en Medicina, 4to.
Sevilla, 1754.

Moncada (Sancho de) Reftauracion Politica de Efpagna y

defeos Publicos, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Morales (Ambrofid de) Coronica General de Efpagnia,

fol. 4 vols. Alcala, 1574.

Moreno y Efcaudon (D. Fran. Aut.) Defcripcion y Eitado

del Virreynato de Santa Fee, Nuevo Reyno de Granada, &c.
fol. MS.

Munoz (D. Antopio) Difcurfo fobre economia politica, 8vo.

Nlad. 1769.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fatta per Terra al

Cevole, Regno di cette Citta. Exft. Ramus. III. 356.

Nodal

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes

Earth. y Gonz. de Nodalal defcubrimiento del Eftrecho que hoy
es nombrado de Maire, y reconocimiento del de Magellanes,
4to. Mad.

Noticia Individual de los derechos fegun lo reglado en

ultimo proyeao de 1720. 4to. Barcelona, 1732.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna

dibidida en tres Partes. En la primera trata de los Ritos,
Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad. En la
fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y modo de
celebrar las Fieftas de Nuefitra Santa Iglefia. En la tercera
del Genio y Cara&er de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que
notaban sus Acontecimientos, con otras particularidades; y
Noticias de las principales Ciudades en aquel Reyno. Efcrita
en el Agno 154! por uno de los doce Religiofos Francifcos
que primero Paffaron a entender en fu Conversion. MS. fol.
pp. 618.

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, izmo. Mad.
1605.

Ordenanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad.

1681.

Ortega (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftoico del primer

Viage hecho al rededor del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1769.

Offorio (Jerome) History of the Portuguese, during the

Reign of Emmanuel, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1752.

Offorius (Hieron.) De rebus 1mmanuelis Lusitania Regis,

8vo. Col. Agr. 1572z.

Ovalle (Alonfo) Hiftorica Relacion del Reyno de Chili,

fol. Rom. 1646.

- An Hifforical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili.

Exft. Churchill Collea. III. I.

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiftoria la Conquilla y Publi-

cacion ce Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Oviedo Sommaria, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 44.

b a Oviedo

Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommariade la Hiftoria,

Natural de los Indias. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

Oviedo Hiftoria Generale & Naturale dell Indie Occidentale.

Exit. Ramufio III. 74.

-- Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandiflima

Fiume Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. III. 415.

P

Palacio (D. Raim. Mig.) Difcurfo Economico Politico, 4to.

Mad. 1778.

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios a

NaturalizA y Coftumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

---- Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque de

I'Angelopolis, 12mo. Cologne, 177z.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de las

Iflas de Gran Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pegna Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Pa-

rochos de Indios, en que tratan les materias mas particulares,
tocantes a ellos para fu buen adminiflracion, 4to. Amberes,
I754.

Penalofa y Mondragon (Fr. Benito de) Cineo Excellen-

clas del Espagnol que des pueblan a Efpagna, 4to. Pampl.
1629.

Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Conquifta

del Peru Poema Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apoftol de las In,

dias y nueves gentes San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia
de Jesus Epitome de sus Apoftolicos hechos, 4to. Pampl,
1665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annaes Hiftoricos do eftado do

Maranchao, fol. Lifboa, I749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Defcopri-

mnento y Conquifta del Peru. Exft. Ramus. III. 371.

Peru-Relatione d'un Secretario de Franc. Pizzarro della

Conqueftadel Peru. Exit. Ramufio III. 371.

Relacion del Peru, MS.

Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme Mug-

nos,

nos, &c. por -haverlos Commerciado illicitamente en tiempo
de Guerro, fol. 1755.

Philipinas-Carta que escribe un Religiofo antiguo de

Philipinas, a un Amigo fuyo en Efpagna, que le pregunta
el Naturel y Genio de los Indios Naturales de Eftas Iflas.
MS. 4to.

Piedrahita (Luc. Fern.) Hifloria general de las Conqui{las

del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Ambres.

Pinelo (Ant. de Leon) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental

y. Occidental en que fe contienen los Efcritores de las Indias
Orientales y Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1737.

Pinzonius focius Admirantis Columbi-Navigatio & res per

eum reperte. Exit. Nov. Orb. Grynaei, p. 119.

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illuftres del N.

Mundo, fol. Mad. 1639.

.Plantus Judorum Chriftianorum in America Peruntina,
I zmo.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hiftorias

de los Defcubrimientos de la India Oriental y sus Iflas, 4to.
Mad. 1681.

Q

Quir (Ferd. de) Terra Australis Incognita; or, a new

Southern Discovery, containing a fifth Part of the World lately
found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

Ramuflo (Giov. Battifia) Racolto delle Navigationi e

Viaggi, fol. 3 vols. Venet. 1588.

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias hifto-

riales Praaicas, de los Succeffos y Adelantamientos de efta
Compagnia defde fu Fundacion en 1728 hafta 1764, 4t0.
1765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, fol.

4 vols. Mad. 1756. Reglamentc,

Reglamento y Aranceles Reales para el Comercio de

Efpagna a Indias, fol. Mad. 1778.

Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe della

gran Citti Temiftatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe della Nova
Spagna. Exft. Ramus. III. 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria general de las Indias Occi-

dentales y particular de la Governacion de Chiapa y Guatimala,
fol. Mad. 16zo.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relacion del Viage

defde que falio de Lima, haita que Ilegb a Efpagna, 4to. Mad.
1657.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manuel Com-

pendio de el Regio Patronato Indiaio, fol. Mad. 1755".

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) Hiftoria de los Triumphos de

Nueftra Sta Fe, entre Gentes la mas Barbaras, en las mifliones
de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre el

eftado a&ual de los Papeles univerfales de la Monarchia,
MS.

Ripia (Juan de la) Pra&ica de la Adminifiracion y cobranza

de las rentas reales, fol. Mad. 1768.

Rocha Pitta (Sebaftianb de) Hiftoria de America Portou-

gueza des de o Anno de 1500oo du fu Defcobrimento ate o de
1724, fol. Lifboa, 1730,

Rodriguez (Manuel) Explicacion de la Bulla de la Santa

Cruzada, 4to. Alcala, 1589.

---- (P. Man.) El Maragnon y Amazonas, Hiftoria

de los Defcubrimientos, Entradas y Reducion de Naciones, fol.
Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols. Mad.

1595.

Roma y Rofell (De Franc.) Las fegnales de la fell.

cidad de Efpagna y medios de hacerlas efficaces, 8vo. Mad.
1768.

Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palafox
Arzobifpo de Mexico, fol. Mad. 1671.

Rubaclaa

Rubaclava (Don Jos. Gutierrez de) Tratado Hiftorico Poli-

tico, y Legal de el commercio de las Indias Occidentales, I amo.
Cad. 1750.

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual hecha por los Religiofos

de la Compagnia de Jesus, en las Provincias dela Paraguay
Uraguay, Parana y Tape, 4to. Mad. 1639.

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Efpagna,

tom. i, ii, iii. fol. Mad. 1770.

--- y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hifloria de la Conquifta de

Mexico-Segunda parte, Cordov. 1743.

.------ y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conitituciones

y Ordenanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real
Univerfidad y eftudio general fte San Marcos de la Ciudad de
los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Reyes, 1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur l'Origine de la

Maladie Venerienne, dans laquelle on preuve qu'elle n'a point
ete portee del'Amerique, 1zmo. Paris, 1765.

Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al Efitrecho de

Magellanes, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto y en Companias

General, Izmo. Mad. 1732.

Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, y Margarita, Real Com-

pagnia de Comercio, 12mo. 1756.

Schemidel (Hulderico) Hiftoria y Defcubrimiento del Rio de

la Plata y Paraguay. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara da Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique & Ana.

lytique de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Societ6 dite de Jesus,
depuis son Entree dans ce Royaume en 1540 jufqu'a son Ex-
pulfion 1759, Izmo. 3 vols. Lifb. 1769.

Segni (P. Diego Raymundo) Antiquario Noticiofa General

de Efpagna y sus Indios, Izmo. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus dejuftis belli caufis, praefertim

in Indos Novi Orbis. MS.

- ---- (Jo. GcnefiTs) Epiftolarum Libri VII. xzmo.

Salam, '557. Sepulveda

Sepulveda de regno, Libri III. 12mo. 1Ierd;, I570.
Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval Hydrographico,

4t0o. 1648.

------- Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotera de la

Region Aufiral Magellanica, 4to. Mad. 1690.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las Conquiitas de

Tierra Firme en las Indias Occidentales, fol. Cuenca, 1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hiftorias de las Conquiftas de Mexico, fol.

Mad. 1684.

----- History of the Conquest of Mexico.-Tranflated

by Townsend, fol. 1724.

Solarzano y Pereyrra (Joan.) Politica Indiana, fol. z vols.

Mad. 1776.

--- De Indiarum jure, five de jufta Indiarum Occi.

dentalium Gubernatione, fol. z vols. Lugd. 1672.

Obras Varias pofthumas, fol. Mad. 1776.

Soto y marne (P. Franc. de) Copia de la Relacion de Viage

que defde la ciudad de Cadiz a la Cartagena de Indias hizo, 4to.,
Mad. 1753.

Spilbergen et Le Maire Speculum Orientalis Occidentalifque

Navigationum, 4to. L. Bat. i619.

Suarez de Figueroa (Chriftov.) Hechos de D. Garcia

Hurtado de Mendoza, 4to. Mad. 1613.

T

Tanco (Luis Bezerra) Felicidad de Mexico en la admi-

rable Aparicion de N. Signora di Guadalupe, 8vo. Mad,
'745-

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofmographia,

4to. Milan, 1556.

Techo (F. Nichol. de) The History of the Provinces,

Paraguay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exft. Churchill's
Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols.

Mad. 1723.

Torres (Sim. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exit. Barcia Hit,

Plii . III.

Torrc

Torres (Franc. Caro de) Hifforia de las Ordenes Militares

de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcantara, defde fu Fundacion hafita
el Rey D. Felipe II. Adminiftador perpetuo dellas, fol.
Mad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hiitoria Natural

Efpagnala, fol. Mad. 1754.

-- - Differtacion Hiftorico Politica y en mucha parte

Geographica de las Iflas Philipinas, Izmo. Mad. 1753.

Totanes (F. Sebastian de) Manual Tagalog para auxilio de

Provincia de las Philipinas, 4to. Samplai en las Philipinas,
1745.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de l'Amerique

Meridionale, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, 1752.

- (D. Ant. de) Noticias Americanas, Entretenimientos

Phyficos-Hiftoricos, fobre la America Meridional y la Septen-
trional Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

--- (D. Bern. de) Reftablecimiento de las Fabricas,

trafico, y comercio maritimo de Efpagna, *zmo. 2 vols.
Mad. 1740.

--*- (Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire l'Ifole delle

Specierie fino al Mare detto Vermejo nel 1539. Exit. Ra-
mul. III. 339.

--- (D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Manufaaures &

du Commerce d'Efpagne, izmo. Amft. 1753.

Uztariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y Praaica de Commercio & de

Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

--- The Theory and Pra&ice of Commerce, and Ma-

ritime Affairs, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Verages (D. Thorn. Tamaio de) Reftauracion de la Ciudad

del Salvador y Baia de Todos San&os en la Provincia delBrafil,
4t6. Mad. 1628.

Vargas

Vargas Machuca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Defcripcion de las

Indias, 4to. Mad. 1699.

Vega (Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire de la Conquete de la

Floride. Traduite par Richelet, izmo. 2 torn. Leyd. 1731.

-.- Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol.

Lond. 1688.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire des Guerres Civiles

dos Efpagnoles dans les Indes, par Baudouin, 4to. z tom.
Paris, 1648.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanish Rule of Trade to the

Weft Indies, 8vo. Lond. 1702.

-- Linage (Jos.) Declamacion Oratoria en Defenfa de

D. Jos. Fern. Veitia Linage, fol. 1702.

- Norte de la Contratacion de las Indias Occidentales,

fol. Sevill. 1672.

Venegas (Miguel) A Natural and Civil Hiflory of California,

Svo. z vols. Lond. 1759.

Verazzano (Giov.) Relatione delle Terra per lui Scoperta

nel 1524. Exft. Ramuflo III. p. 420.

Vefputius (Americus) Duae Navigationes sub aufpiciis

Ferdinandi, &c. Exft. De Bry America. Pars X.

--- Navigatio prima, fecunda, tertia, quarta. Exft.

Nov. Orb. Grynaei, p. 155.

Viage de Efpagna, Izmo. 6 tom. Mad. 1776.
ViAoria (Fran.) Relationes Theologice de Indis & dejure

belli contra eos, 4to. 1765.

Vieray Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la Hifloria general de

las Iflas de Canaria, 4to. 3 tom. Mad. 1772.

Villalobos (D. Juan de) Manifieflo fobre in introduccion

de efclavos negros en las Indias Occidentales, 4to. Sevilla,
1682.

Villagra (-Gasp. de) Hilloria de Nueva Mexico Poema,
Izmo. Alcala. 1610.

Villa Segnory Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant.) Theatro Americano.

Defcripcion general de los Reynos y Provincias de la Nueva
Efpagna, fol. z tom. Mex. 1746.

---- Res puefia fobre el precio de Azogue, 4t0.
Vocabulario Brafiliano y Portugues, 4to. MS.

Ward

W

Ward (D. Bernardo) Proye&to Economico fobre la poblacioa

de Efpagna, la agricultura en todos sus ramos, y de mas eftable-
cimientos de induftria, comercio con nueftra marina, arreglo de
nuefira interefes en America, libertad del commercio en Indias.
&c. zvols. 4to. MS.

X

Xeres (Franc, de) Verdadera Relacion de Ia Conquifta del

Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Carlos V.
Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. iii.

.----- - Relatione, &c. &c. Exist. Ramufio III. 372.

Z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hifloria del Defcubrimiento y Conquifia

de la Provincia del Peru. Exft. Barcia Hilft. Prim. tom. iii.

----- Hifitoire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du

Perou, i2mo. z tom. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Miguel de) Reprefentacion al Rey

N. Segnor D. Philipe V. dirigida al mas feguro Aumento del
Real Erario. No place. 1732z.

Zevallos (D. Pedro Ordognez de) Hiitoria y Viage del

Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1691.

VC172

40

sIS~ TIE

So12 #-I~lI

-,

2?ae L

~

dddedm/686 ~

_________________

the

-....... ~A/J2GULFOfMEXICO

Co

trATTRIES
d~e ISZA.2VDS and
YbeIv.DoI~erg~on~

fliftory ofAnierica

BY2~O21AT/1~biS~,tr

]~ace1

~%

> '- y.

S--- 1*

~

/1~d,~ T T o p i c of C a 11 c er

F ~4nk -A.

21~y

1'

~2W7UCA

20 StlFrancis ~

Ci~bao ~ A..

"ICA2YACAi? 0 ~amafla ~ ~ l:S-~z~

f/s

~ . . $7

s Z1'anal'e ~. 0~drerz~

a ,~aV ~K4~

il3ayor Cazripe ac~hy Cafl/z&~Ay S~2~I~V ~9RZV Rico ~

Chiax

Seva*me~z JA .2147 -4

~ ~A An~1dItL.11 ,io'~

/0 G(-,jo ~ i'~a1 okjDa~- 0yP

20/1, a~9ree

6.w'6~0 40
~&2h)h~ L~9/38 ~207

4;

lvi tc7I~W/1d/1/ .Y~yt ,2Q Z/77. ly /k.i/,~,/ua, ~ ~'kd*,y~,, //i~"~ ~//ii//'/. 45~ 0

30

0

'I

If

a

I0

# BOOK I.

THE

H I S T O R Y

OF

A M E R I C A.

BOOK I.

T H E progress of men in discovering and K '

peopling the various parts of the earth,

T 1 pearth

has been extremely flow. Several ages elapsed pled.
before they removed far from those mild and
fertile regions in which they were originally
placed by their Creator. The occasion of their
first general dispersion is known ; but we are un-
acquainted with the course of their migrations,
or the time when they took poffeffion of the dif-
ferent countries which they now inhabit. - Nei-
ther Lifiory nor tradition furnish such informa-
tion concerning those remote events, as enables
us to trace, with any certainty, the operations
of the human race in the infancy of society.

X;TE may conclude, however, that all the First migr?;

tions by

early migrations of mankind were made by land.

VOL. I. B land.

B o o K I. land. The ocean, which surrounds the habita-

ble earth, as well as the various arms of the sea
which separate one region from another, though
destined to facilitate the communication between
distant countries, seem, at first view, to be form-
ed to check the progress of man, and to mark
the bounds of that portion of the globe to which
nature had confined him. It was long, we may
believe, before men attempted to pass these
formidable barriers, and became so skilful and
adventrous as to commit themselves to the mercy
of the winds and waves, or to quit their na-
tive (hores in quest of remote and unknown re-
gions.

Fira ae- NAVIGATION and (hip-building are arts so
tempts to-
waids nIvi. nice and complicated, that they require the in-

genuity, as well as experience, of many fuc-
ceflive ages to bring them to any degree of
pcrfetion. From the raft or canoe, which first
served to carry a savage over the river that
obitruded him in the chace, to the confiruc-
tion of a vessel capable of conveying a nume-
rous crew with safety to a distant coast, the
progress in improvement is immense. Many
efforts would be made, many experiments
would be tried, and much labour as well as
invention would be employed, before men
could accomplish this arduous and important

undertaking.

undertaking. The rude and imperfect slate in BOOK r.
which navigation is still found among all na-
tions which are not considerably civilized, cor-
responds with this account of its progress, and
demonfitrates that, in early times, the art was
not so far improved as to enable men to under-
take distant voyages, or to attempt remote dif-
coveries.

As soon, however, as the art of navigation ptro-iuc.

tion of

became known, a new species of correspondence co"'~er;e.
among men took place. It is from this tera,
that we muff date the commencement of such
an intercourse between nations as deserves the
appellation of commerce. Men are, indeed,
far advanced in improvement before commerce
becomes an objea of great importance to them.
They muff even have made some conliderable
progress towards civilization, before they ac-
quire the idea of property, and ascertain it so
perfetly as to be acquainted with the mocf
simple of all contracs, that of exchanging by
barter one rude commodity for another. But
as soon as this important right is established,
and every individual feels that he has an ex-
clufive title to possess or to alienate whatever
be has acquired by his own labour or dexte-
rity, the wants and ingenuity of his nature
fiiggeft to him a new method of increasing his

B z acquilitions

BOOK I. acqulfitions and enjoyments, by disposing of

what is superfluous in his own stores, in order
to procure what is necessary or desirable in
those of other men. Thus a commercial in-
tercourfe begins, and is carried on among the
members of the fame community. By degrees,
they discover that neighbouring tribes possess
what they themselves want, and enjoy comforts
of which they wish to partake. In the fame
mode, and upon the fame principles, that do.
meftic traffic is carried on within the society,
an external commerce is established with other
tribes or nations. Their mutual interest and
mutual wants render this intercourse desirable,
and imperceptibly introduce the maxims and
laws which fac;litate its progress and render it
secure. But no very extensive commerce can
take place between contiguous provinces, whose
foil and climate being nearly the fame, yield
similar produ&ions. Remote countries cannot
convey their commodities by land, to those
places, where on account of their rarity they
are desired, and become valuable. It is to na-
vigation that men are indebted for the power of
transporting the superfluous flock of one part
of the earth, to supply the wants of another.
The luxuries and bleflings of a particular cli-
mate are no longer confined to itself alone, but

the

the enjoyment of them is communicated to the B oK i.
most distant regions.

IN proportion as the knowledge of the ad-
vantages derived from navigation and com-
merce continued to spread, the intercourse
among nations extended. The ambition of
conqueff, or the necessity of procuring new set-
tlements, were no longer the sole motives of
visiting distant lands. The desire of gain be-
came a new incentive to adivity, roused ad-
venturers, and sent them forth upon long voy-
ages, in search of countries, whose produts or
wants might increase that circulation, which
nourishes and gives vigour to commerce. Trade
proved a great source of discovery, it opened
unknown seas, it penetrated into new regions,
and contributed more than any other cause, to
bring men acquainted with the situation, the
nature, and commodities of the different parts
of the globe. But even after a regular com-
merce was established in the world, after
nations were considerably civilized, and the
sciences and arts were cultivated with ardour
and success, navigation continued to be so im-
perfec, that it can hardly be said to have ad-
vanced beyond the infancy of its improvement
in the ancient world.

AMONG

B3

BOOK I. AMONG all the nations of antiquity the
impcflion fIruauRe of their vessels was extremely rude,
Ot nvig ition
among the and their method of working them very de-
ancients.

feAivc. They were unacquainted with feve-
ral principles and operations in navigation,
which are now considered as the first ele-
ments on which that science is founded. Though
that property of the magnet, by which it
attraas iron, was well known to the ancients,
its more important and amazing virtue of
pointing to the poles had entirely escaped their
observation. Destitute of this faithful guide,
which now condu&s the pilot with so much
certainty in the unbounded ocean, during the
darkness of night, or when the heavens are
covered with clouds, the ancients had no other
methbd of regulating their course than by obh
serving the fun and stars. Their navigation
was of consequence uncertain and timid. They
durfi seldom quit fight of land, but crept along
the coast, exposed to all the dangers, and re-
tarded by all the obstructions, unavoidable in
holding such an aukward course. An incre-
dible length of time was requisite for perform-
ing voyages, which are now finilhed in a short
space. Even in the mildest climates, and in
seas the least tempestuous, it was only during
the summer months that the ancients ventured
out of their harbours. The remainder of the

yeat

year was loft in inacivity. It would have been BOO K i.
deemed most inconsiderate rashness to have
braved the fury of the winds and waves during
winter a.

WHILE both the science and pra&ice of na-

vigation continued to be so defeaive, it was an
undertaking of no small difficulty and danger
to visit any remote region of the earth. Under
every disadvantage, however, the active spirit
of commerce exerted itself. The Egyptians, Navigation
soon after the establishment of their monarchy, ere of the
are said to have opened a trade between the Egyptians.
Arabian Gulph or Red Sea, and the western
coast of the great Indian continent. The com-
modities which they imported from the east,
were carried by land from the Arabian Gulph
to the banks of the Nile, and conveyed down
that river to the Mediterranean. But if the
Egyptians in early times applied themselves to
commerce, their attention to it was of short
duration. The fertile foil and mild climate of
Egypt produced the necessaries and comforts of
life with such profusion, as rendered its inha-
bitants so independent of other countries, that
it became an established maxim among that
people, whose ideas and infititutions differed in

a Vcgetius de Re milit. lib. iv.

almoit

B 4

BOOK T, almost every point from those of other nations,

to renounce all intercourse with foreigners. In
consequence of this, they never went out of their
own country; they held all sea-faring persons in
detestation, as impious and profane; and forti-
fying their own harbours, they denied fitrangers
admittance into them b. It was in the decline
of their power, and when their veneration for
ancient maxims had greatly abated, that they
again opened their ports, and resumed any com.
munication with foreigners.

of the THE chara&er and situation of the Phenici-
Phenicians.

ans were as favourable to the spirit of commerce
and discovery as those of the Egyptians were
adverse to it. They had no distinguishing pe-
culiarity in their manners and inflitutions ; they
were not addi&ed to any singular and unsocial
form of fuperifltion; they could mingle with
other nations without scruple or reluctance.
The territory which they poffeffed was neither
large nor fertile. Commerce was the only
source from which they could derive opulence
or power. Accordingly, the trade carried on
by the Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was more
extensive and enterprising than that of any slate
in the ancient world. The genius of the Phe-

b Diod. Sicul. lib. i. p. 78. Ed. Welfelingi. Amit.

1756. Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 1142. Ed. Amft. 1707.

nicians,

nicians, as well as the objea of their policy and BOOK I.
the spirit of their laws, were entirely commer-
cial. They were a people of merchants who
aimed at the empire of the sea, and aaually
poffeffed it. Their ihips not only frequented
all the ports in the MIediterranean, but they
were the first who ventured beyond the ancient
boundaries of navigation, and passing the
Streights of Gades, visited the wefftern coasts of
Spain and Africa. In many of the places to
which they resorted, they planted colonies, and
communicated to the rude inhabitants some
knowledge of their arts and improvements.
While they extended their discoveries towards
the north and the we.f, they did not neglec to
penetrate into the more opulent and fertile re-
gions of the south and east. Having rendered
themselves masters of several commodious har-
bours towards the bottom of the Arabian
Gulph, they, after the example of the Egypti-
ans, established a regular intercourse with Ara-
bia and the continent of India on the one hand,
and with the eastern coast of Africa on the
other. From these countries they imported
many valuable commodities, unknown to the
reft of the world, and, during a long period,
engrossed that lucrative branch of commerce
without a rival c.

C See NOTE I. at the End of the Volume.

THE

BOO K . TiHE vast wealth which the Phenicians ac.
of the Jews. quired by monopolizing the trade carried on

in the Red Sea, incited their neighbours the
Jews, under the prosperous reigns of David
and Solomon, to aim at being admitted to
some ihare of it. This they obtained, partly
by their conquest of Idumea, which stretches
along the Red Sea, and partly by their alli-
ance with Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon
fitted out fleets, which, under the direaion of
Phenician pilots, failed from the Red Sea to
Tarshish and Ophir. These it is probable
were ports in India and Africa which their
condutors were accustomed to frequent, and
from them the Jewish ships returned with such
valuable cargoes as suddenly diffufed wealth
and splendour through the kingdom of Israel d.
But the singular institutions of the Jews, the
observance of which was enjoined by their
divine legislator, with an intention of preferv-
ing them a separate people, uninfeced by ido-
latry, formed a national character incapable of
that open and liberal intercourse with firangers
which commerce requires. Accordingly, this
unsocial genius of the people, together with
the disasters which befel the kingdom of Israel,

 Memoire fur le Pays d'Ophir par M. D'Anville,

Mem. de 1'Academ. des Infecript. &c. tom. xxx. 83.

prevented

prevented the commercial spirit which their BOOK I.
monarchs laboured to introduce, and to cheribh,
from spreading among them. The Jews can-
not be numbered among the nations which
contributed to improve navigation, or to ex-
tend discovery.

BUT though the inftruaions and example of of tae car-

thaginians.

the Phenicians were unable to mould the man-
ners and temper of the Jews, in opposition to
the tendency of their laws, they transmitted
the commercial spirit with facility, and in full
vigour, to their own descendants the Cartha-
ginians. The commonwealth of Carthage ap-
plied to trade and to naval affairs, with no less
ardour, ingenuity, and success, than its parent
slate. Carthage early rivalled, and soon fur-
passed Tyre, in opulence and power, but seems
not to have aimed at obtaining any share in
the commerce with India. The Phenicians
had engrossed this, and had such a command
of the Red Sea, as secured to them the exclu-
five poffeffion of that lucrative branch of trade.
The commercial a&ivity of the Carthaginians
was exerted in another diredion. Without
contending for the trade of the eafl with their
mother-country, they extended their naviga-
tion chiefly towards the weft and north, Fol-
lowing the course which the Phenicians had

opened,

BOOK I. opened, they pafled the Streights of Gades,

and pushing their discoveries far beyond those
of the parent slate, visited not only all the
coasts of Spain, but those of Gaul, and pene-
trated at laIt into Britain. At the fame time
that they acquired knowledge of new countries
in this part of the globe, they gradually car-
ried their researches towards the South. They
made considerable progress, by land, into the
interior provinces of Africa, traded with some
of them, and fubjeted others to their empire.
They failed along the weffern coast of that
great continent, almost to the tropic of Cancer,
and planted several colonies, in order to civi.
lize the natives, and accustom them to com-
merce. They discovered the Fortunate Islands,
now known by the name of the Canaries, the
utmost boundary of ancient navigation in the
western ocean e.

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending their
trade from one country to another. Com.
merce was followed by its usual effecs among
both these people. It awakened curiosity, en-

e Plinji Nat. Hist. lib. 'i. c. 3-. edit. in ufum Delph.

4to. 1685.

larged

larged the ideas and desires of men, and incited BOOK r.
them to bold enterprises. Voyages were un-
dertaken, the sole obje& of which was to dif-
cover new countries, and to explore unknown
seas. Such, during the prosperous age of the
Carthaginian republic, were the famous navi-
gations of Hanno and Himilco. Both their
fleets were equipped by authority of the senate,
and at public expence. Hanno was direCced
to fleer towards the south, along the coast of
Africa, and he seems to have advanced much
nearer the equinocial line than any former
navigator f. Himilco had it in charge to pro-
ceed towards the north, and to examine the
western coafs of the European continent ". Of
the fame nature was the extraordinary naviga-
tion of the Phenicians round Africa. A Phe-
nician fleet, we are told, fitted out by Necho
king of Egypt, took its departure about fx
hundred and four years before the Chriifian
era, from a port in the Red Sea, doubled the
southern promontory of Africa, and after a
voyage of three years, returned by the Streights

f Plinli Nat. Hist. lib. v. c. I. Hannonis Periplus ap.

Geograph. minores, edit. Hudfoni, vol. i. p. I.

g P!inii Nat. Hitt. lib. ii. c. 67. Feftrs Avi'-nus apud

Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. lib. i. c. 60. p. 652. Oper. vol.
iii. L. Bat. i"o-.

BOO K I. of Gades, to the mouth of the Nile h. Eudoxus
'Y- of Cyzicus is' said to have held the fame course,

and to have accomplished the fame arduous
undertaking '.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may justly be reckoned
the greateit effort of navigation in the ancient
world; and if we attend to the imperfe fltate
of the art at that time, it is difficult to deter-
mine, whether we should most admire the
courage and sagacity with which the design
was formed, or the condu& and good fortune
with which it was executed. But unfortunately,
all the original and authentic accounts of the
Phenician and Carthaginian voyages, whether
undertaken by public authority, or in prose-
cution of their private trade, have periihed.
The information which we receive concerning
them from the Greek and Roman authors, is
not only obscure and inaccurate, but, if we
except a short narrative of Hanno's expedition,
is of suspicious authorityk. Whatever ac-
quaintance with the remote regions of the earth
the Phenicians or Carthaginians may have ac-

h Herodot. lib. iv. c. 42.
i Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. ii. c. 67.
k See NOTE II.

quired,

quired, was concealed from the reft of mankind BOOK I.
with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing rela- Y
tive to the course of their navigation was not
only a mystery of trade, but a secret of tfate.
Extraordinary faas are recorded concerning
their solicitude to prevent other nations from
penetrating into what they wished should re-
main undivulged '. Many of their discoveries
seem, accordingly, to have been scarcely
known beyond the precints of their own state.
The navigation round Africa, in particular, is
recorded by the Greek and Roman writers,
rather as a strange amusing tale, which they
did not comprehend, or did not believe, than
as a real tranfadion, which enlarged their
knowledge and influenced their opinions ". As
neither the progress of the Phenician or Car-
thaginian discoveries, nor the extent of their
navigation, were communicated to the reft of
mankind, all memorials of their extraordinary
skill in naval affairs seem, in a great measure,
to have perished, when the maritime power of
the former was annihilated by Alexander's con-
quest of Tyre, and the empire of the latter
was overturned by the Roman arms.

i Strab. Geogr. lib. ill. p. 265. lib. xviii. p. 1154.
m See NOTE III.

LEAVING,

BOOK i. LEAVING, then, the obscure and pompous

o accounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian
GCeeks. voyages to the curiosity and conjecures of an.

tiquaries, history mufft reft satisfied with relat-
ing the progress of navigation and discovery
among the Greeks and Romans, which, though
less splendid, is better ascertained. It is evident
that the Phenicians, who inftru&ed the Greeks
in many other useful sciences and arts, did not
communicate to them that extensive knowledge
of navigation whiqh they themselves poffeffed;
nor did the Romans imbibe that commercial
spirit and ardour for discovery which diftin.
guifhed their rivals the Carthaginians. Though
Greece be almost encompassed by the sea,
which formed many spacious bays and commo-
dious harbours, though it be surrounded by a
great number of fertile islands, yet, notwith-
standing such a favourable situation, which
seemed to invite that ingenious people to apply
themselves to navigation, it was long before
this art attained any degree of perfecion among
them. Their early voyages, the objea of
which was piracy rather than commerce, were
so inconsiderable, that the expedition of the
Argonauts from the coast of Thessaly to the
Euxine sea, appeared such an amazing effort
of skill and courage, as entitled the condudors
of it to be ranked among the demigods, and

22 exalted

exalted the vessel in which they failed to a Bno K r
place among the heavenly constellations. Even
at a later period, when the Greeks engaged in
their famous enterprize against Troy, their
knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have
been niuch improved. According to the ac-
count of Homeir, the only poet to whom history
ventures to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous
accuracy in describing the manners and arts of
early ages, merits this diftinaion, the science
of navigation, at that time, had hardly advan-
ced beyond its rudest state. The Greeks in the
heroic age seem to have been unacquainted with
the use of iron, the most serviceable of all the
metals, without which no considerable progress
was ever made in the mechanical arts. Their
vessels were of inconsiderable burthen, and
mostly without decks. They had only one
malR, which was ereaed or taken down at
pleasure. They were strangers to the use of
anchors. All their operations in failing were
clumsy and unskilful. They turned their ob-
servation towards flars, which were improper
for regulating their course, and their mode of
observing them was inaccurate and fallacious.
When they had finished a voyage they drew
their paltry barks ashore, as savages do their
canoes, and these remained on dry land until
the season of returning to sea approached. It

VOL. I. C is

BOOK 1. is not then in the early or heroic ages of

Greece, that we can expe& to observe the
science of navigation, and the spirit of disco-
very, making any considerable progress. Dur-
ing that period of disorder and ignorance, a
thousand causes concurred in restraining cu-
riofity and enterprize within very narrow
bounds.

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to

a state of greater civilization and refinement.
Government, in its most liberal and perfed
form, began tobeeftablifhed intheirdifferenfcom-
munities; equal laws and regular police were
gradually introduced; the sciences and arts
which are useful or ornamental in life were
carried to a high pitch of improvement, and
several of the Grecian commonwealths applied
to commerce with such ardour and success,
that they were considered, in the ancient world,
as maritime powers of the first rank. Even
then, however, the naval vicories of the
Greeks must be ascribed rather to the native
spirit of the people, and to that courage which
the enjoyment of liberty inspires, than to any
extraordinary progress in the .science of navi.
gation. In the Persian war, those exploits
iwhich the genius of the Greek historians
Ias rendered so famous, were performed 6y

fleets,

fleets, composed chiefly of finall vessels with- BOOK I.
out decks "; the crews of which rushed forward
tfith impetuous valour, but little art, to board
those of the enemy. In the war of Pelo-
ponnefus, their ships seem still to have been
of inconsiderable burthen and force. The ex-
tent of their trade, how highly soever it may
have been estimated in ancient times, was in pro-
portion to this low condition of their marine.
The maritime states of Greece hardly carried oh
any commerce beyond the limits of the Medi-
terranean sea. Their chief intercourse was
with the colonies of their countrymen, planted
in the lesser Asia, in Italy and Sicily. They
sometimes visited the ports of Egypt, of the
southern provinces of Gaul, and of Thrace, or
passing through the Hellespont, they traded
with the countries situated around the Euxine
sea. Amazing instances occur of their ig-
norance, even of those countries, which lay
within the narrow precincts to which their
navigation was confined. When the Greeks
had assembled their combined fleet against
Xerxes at Egina, they thought it unadvifable
to fail to Samos, because they believed the
diflance between that island and Egina to be
as great as the diRfance between Egina and the
Pillars of Hercules o. They were either utterly

SThucyd. lib, i. c. Iq. O Herodot. lib. viii. c. I32.

C 2 unac-

JBOOK i. unacquainted with all the parts of the globe

beyond the Mediterranean sea, or what know-
ledge they had of them was founded on con-
jeaure, or derived from the information of a
few persons, whom curiosity and the love of
ifcience had prompted to travel by land into the
Upper Asia, or by sea into Egypt, the ancient
feats of wisdom and arts. After all that the
Greeks learned from them, they appear to have
been ignorant of the most important faas, on
which an accurate and feientific knowledge of
the globe is founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great into

the east, considerably enlarged the sphere of
navigation and of geographical knowledge
among the Greeks. That extraordinary man,
notwithstanding the violent passions which in.
cited him, at some times, to the wildest ations,
and the molt extravagant enterprises, poffeffed
talents which fitted him not only to conquer,
but to govern the world. Hie was capable of
framing those bold and original schemes of
policy, which gave a new form to human
affairs. The revolution in commerce, brought
about by the force of his genius, is hardly in-
ferior to that revolution in empire, occasioned
by the success of his arms. It is probable,
that the opposition and efforts of the republic

'5 of

of Tyre, which checked him so long in the Boo r r.
career of his vi&ories, gave Alexander an op-
portunity of observing the vafl resources of a
maritime power, and conveyed to him some
idea of the immense wealth which the Tyrians
derived from their commerce, especially that
with the East Indies. As soon as he had ac-
complifhed the deftru&ion of Tyre, and re-
duced Egypt to fubjeaion, he formed the plan
of renidering the empire which he proposed to
establish, the centre of commerce as well as
the feat of dominion. With this view he
founded a great city, which he honoured with
his own name, near one of the mouths of the
river Nile, that by the Mediterranean sea, and
the neighbourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it
might command the trade both of the east and
welt P., This situation was chosen with such
discernment, that Alexandria soon became the
chief commercial city in the world. Not only
during the subsistence of the Grecian empire
in Egypt and in the eafl, but amidst all the
successive revolutions in those countries, from
the time of the Ptolemies to the discovery of
the navigation by the Cape of Good Hope,
commerce, particularly that of the East Indies,
continued to flow in the channel which the

P Strab. Geogr. lib. xvii. p. 1143. 1149.

. C 3 sagacity

BOOK I. sagacity and foresight of Alexander had marked

out for it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having

opened to the Greeks a communication with
India by sea; he aspired to the sovereignty of
those regions which furnished the reft of man,
kind with so many precious commodities, and
condu&ed his army thither by land. Enter-
prifing, however, as he was, he may be laid
rather to have viewed, than to have con-
quered that country. He did not, in his pro-
grefs towards the east, advance beyond the
banks of the rivers that fall into the Indus,
which is now the western boundary of the vail
continent of India. Amidfl the wild exploits
which distinguish this part of his history, he
pursued measures that mark the superiority
of his genius, as well as the extent of his
views. He had penetrated as far into India
as to confirm his opinion of its commercial
importance, and to perceive that immense
wealth might be derived from intercourse with
a country, where the arts of elegance having
been more early cultivated, were arrived at
greater perfe&ion than in any other part of
the earth s. Full of this idea, he resolved tq

q Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1036. Q_ Curtius, lib.

xvii. c. 9.

examine

examine the course of navigation from the BOOK I.
mouth of the Indus to the bottom of the Per-
fian Gulf; and if it should be found praai-
cable, to efltablifh a regular communication
between them. In order to effea this, he
proposed to remove the cataraQs, with which,
the jealousy of the Persians, and their aversion
to correspondence with foreigners, had ob-
firuaed the entrance into the Euphrates '; to
carry the commodities of the east up that river,
and the Tigris, which unites with it, into the
interior parts of his Asiatic dominions; while,
by the way of the Arabian Gulf, and the river
Nile, they might be conveyed to Alexandria,
and distributed to the reft of the world,
Nearchus, an officer of eminent abilities, was
entrusted with the command of the fleet fitted
out for this expedition. He performed this
voyage, which was deemed an enterprise So
arduous and important, that Alexander reckon-
ed it one of the most extraordinary events
which distinguished his reign. Inconsiderable
as it may now appear, it was, at that time, an
undertaking of no little merit and difficulty.
In the prosecution of it, firiking instances
occur of the small progress which the Greeks
had made in naval knowledge s. Having never

* Strab, Geogr, lib.xvi. p. ·075. See NQTE IV.

C 4 failed

BOOK I. failed beyond the bounds of the Mediterranean,

where the ebb and flow of the sea are hardly
perceptible, - when they firit observed this pha.
nomenon at the mouth of the Indus, it ap-
peared to them a prodigy, by which the gods
testified the displeasure of Heaven againt their
enterprife'. During their whole course, they
seem never to have loft fight of land, but fol.
lowed the bearings ,of the coast so servilely,
that they could not much avail themselves of
those periodical winds, which facilitate navi-
gation in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they
spent no less than ten months" in performing
this voyage, which,, from the mouth of thd
Indus to that of the Persian Gulf, does not
exceed twenty degrees. It is probable, .that
amidst the violent convulsions, and frequent
revolutions in the East, occasioned by the con-
tests among the successors of Alexander, the
navigation to India, by the course which Near-
chus had opened, was discontinued. The In-
dian trade carried on at Alexandria, not only
subsisted, but was so much extended under the
Grecian monarchs of Egypt, that it proved a
great source of the wealth which diftinguilhed
their kingdom.

V Piin. Hist. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

t Sfe NOTE V.

THE progress which the Romans made in B o oK .

navigation and discovery, was Rill more in- Of the Ro-
considerable than that of the Greeks. The
genius of the Roman people, their military
education, and the spirit of their laws, con-
curred in estranging them from commerce and
naval affairs, It was the neceflity of opposing
a formidable rival, not the desire of extending
trade, which first prompted them to aim at
maritime power. Though they soon perceived
that, in order to acquire the universal domi-
nion after which they aspired, it was necessary
to render themselves maiters of the sea, they
ilill considered the naval service as a fubordi-
nate itation, and reserved for it such citizens
as were not of a rank to be admitted into the
legions x. In the history of the Roman re-
public, hardly one event occurs, that marks
attention to navigation any farther than as it
was instrumental towards conquest. When the
Roman valour and discipline had subdued all
the maritime slates known in the ancient
world; when Carthage, Greece, and Egypt,
had submitted to their power, tie Romans
did not imbibe the commercial spirit of the
conquered nations. Among that people of
soldiers, to have applied to trade would have

been

r Polyb. lib. v.

BOOK I. been deemed a degradation of a Roman citizen.

They abandoned the mechanical arts, com-
merce, and navigation, to slaves, to freedmen,
to provincials, and to citizens of the lowest
class. Even after the subversion of liberty,
when the severity and haughtiness of ancient
manners began to abate, commerce did not rife
into high estimation among the Romans. The
trade of Greece, Egypt, and the other con-
quered countries, continued to be carried on in
its usual channels, after they were reduced into
the form of Roman provinces. As Rome was
the capital of the world, and the feat of govern.
ment, all the wealth and valuable produaions
of the provinces flowed naturally thither. The
Romans, satisfied with this, seem to have sus-
fered commerce to remain almost entirely in
the hands of the natives of the refpeaive coun-
tries. The extent, however, of the Roman
power, which reached over the greatest part of
the known world, the vigilant infpeaion of the
Roman magiifrates, and the spirit of the Ro-
man government, no less intelligent than adive,
gave such additional security to commerce, as
animated it with new vigour. The union
among nations was never so entire, nor the in-
tercourfe so perfect, as within the bounds of
this vast empire. Commerce, under the Ro-
man dominion, was not obftru&ed by the jea-

lousy

foufy of rival slates, interrupted by frequent BOOK I,
hostilities, or limited by partial reftridions.
One fuperintending power moved and regulated
the induifry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits
of their joint efforts.

NAVIGATION felt this influence, and im-

proved under it. As soon as the Romans ac,
quired a taste for the luxuries of the East, the
trade with India through Egypt was pushed
with new vigour, and carried on to greater ex-
tent. By frequenting the Indian continent,
navigators became acquainted with the periodi,
cal course of the winds, which, in the ocean
that separates Africa from India, blow with
little variation during one half of the year from
the east, and during the other half blow with
equal steadiness from the weft. Encouraged by
observing this, the pilots who failed from Egypt
to India abandoned their ancient flow and dan-
gerous course along the coast, and as soon as
the western monsoon set in, took their depar-
ture from Ocelis, at the mouth of the Arabian
Gulf, and firetched boldly across the ocean r.
The uniform dire&ion of the wind, supplying
the place of the compass, and rendering the
guidance of the flars less necessary, conduced
them to the port of Mufiris, on the wester»

shore

r Plin: Hia. NBt· lib, vi. c. 2~.

BOOK . shore of the Indian continent. There they took

on board their cargo, and returning with the east-
ern monsoon, finished their voyage to the Ara-
bian Gulf within the year. This part of India,
now known by the name of the Malabar coast,
seems to have been the utmost limit of ancient
navigation in that quarter of the globe. What
imperfe& knowledge the ancients had of the
immense countries which fitretch beyond this to,
wards the east, they received from a few adven.
turers, who had visited them by land. Such
excursions were neither frequent nor extensive,
and it is probable, that while the Roman in-
tercourfe with India subsisted, no traveller ever
penetrated farther than to the banks of the
Ganges Z. The fleets from Egypt which traded
at Mufiris were loaded, it is true, with the
spices and other rich commodities of the con-
tinent and islands of the farther India; but
these were brought to that port, which be-
came the staple of the commerce between the
East and Weft, by the Indians themselves, in ca-
noes hollowed out of one tree a. The Egyptian
and Roman merchants, satisfied with acquiring
those commodities in this manner, did not think
it necessary to explore unknown seas, and ven-
ture upon a dangerous navigation in quest of

2 Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1oo6. loio. See NOTE

VI t. Hist. lib. vi. c. 6.

Sl Plin, Nat. Hist. lib. vi. c. 26.

the countries which produced them. But though o00 K r.
the discoveries of the Romans in India were so

limited, their commerce there was such as will
appear considerable, even to the present age, in
which the Indian trade has been extended far be-
yond the pradice or conception of any preceding
period. We are informed by one author of cre-
dit b, that the commerce with India drained the
Roman empire every year of more than four
hundred thousand pounds ; and by another, that
one hundred and twenty ships failed annually
from the Arabian Gulf to that country C.

THE discovery of this new method of failing Discoveries

to India, is the most considerable improvement in cirnts by

land.

navigation made during the continuance of the land
Roman power. But in ancient times, the know-
ledge of remote countries was acquired more fre-
quently by land than by tea d; and the Romans,
from their peculiar disinclination to naval affairs,
may be said to have negleaed totally the latter,
though a more easy and expeditious method of
discovery. The progress, however, of their vic-
torious armies through a considerable portion of
Europe, Asia, and Africa, contributed greatly
to extend discovery by land, and gradually

b Plin. Nat. Hilft. lib. vi. c. 26.
S Strab. Geogr. lib. ii. p. 179.
d See NOTE VII.

opened

noo K i. opened the navigation of new and unknow'n

seas. Previous to the Roman conquests, the ci-
vilized nations of antiquity had little communi-
cation with those countries in Europe, which
now form its most opulent and powerful king-
doms. The interior parts of Spain and Gaul
were imperfecly known. Britain, separated from
the reft of the world, had never been visited,
except by its neighbours the Gauls, and by a
few Carthaginian merchants. The name of
Germany had scarcely been heard of. Into all
these countries the arms of the Romans pene-
trated. They entirely subdued Spain and Gaul;
'they conquered the greatest and most fertile part
of Britain ; they advanced into Germany, as far
as the banks of the river Elbe. In Africa,
they acquired a considerable knowledge of the
provinces, which fitretch along the Mediter-
ranean sea, from Egypt westward to the straits
of Gades. In Asia, they not only fubjeted to
their power most of the provinces which corn-
posed the Persian and Macedonian empires,
but, after their victories over Mithridates and
Tigranes, they seem to have made a more ac-
curate survey of the countries contiguous to the
Euxine and Caspian teas, and to have carried
on a more extensive trade than that of the
Greeks with the opulent and commercial na-
tions, then seated round the Euxine sea.

FROi

FROM this fuccinet survey of discovery and na- BOOK

o .

vigation, which I have traced from the earliest imperfeii-

on of ge>-

dawn of historical knowledge to the full efta- Rrapiical knowlkdge
blifhment ps the Roman dominion, the progress amon tSe
of both appears to have been wonderfully flow.
It seems neither adequate to what we might
have expeaed from the a&ivity and enterprise
of the human mind, nor to what might have
been performed by the power of the great em-
pires which successively governed the world. If
we rejet accounts that are fabulous and ob-
fcure; if we adhere steadily to the light and
information of authentic history, without sub-
flituting in its place the conjetures of fancy,
or the dreams of etymologists, we must con-
clude, that the knowledge which the ancients
'had acquired of the habitable globe was ex-
tremely confined. In Europe, the extensive
provinces in the eastern part of Germany were
little known to them. They were almost to-
tally unacquainted with the vast countries which
are now fubjea to the kings of Denmark, Swe-
den, Prussia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire.
The more barren regions, that stretch within
the araic circle, were quite unexplored. In
Africa, their researches did not extend far be-
yond the provinces which border on the Medi-
terranean, and those situated on the western
thore of the Arabian Gulf. In Asia, they were

unac-

OOK L. unacquainted, as I formerly observed, with all

the fertile and opulent countries beyond the
Ganges, which furnish the molt valuable com-
modities that, in modern times, have been the
great objea of the European commerce with
India; nor do they seem to have ever penetrat-
ed into those immense regions occupied by the
wandering tribes, which they called by the ge.
neral name of Sarmatians or Scythians, and
which are now poffeffed by Tartars of various
denominations, and by the Asiatic fubje&s of
Russia.

A remark- BUT there is one opinion, that universally
able proof
of thii. prevailed among the ancients, which conveys a

more striking idea of the finall progress they
had made in the knowledge of the habitable
globe, than can be derived from any detail of
their discoveries. They supposed the earth to
be divided into five regions, which they di-
ftinguifhed by the name of zones. Two of
these, which were nearest the Poles, they termed
frigid zones, and believed that the extreme
cold which reigned perpetually there, rendered
them uninhabitable. Another, seated under
the line, and extending on either fide towards
the tropics, they called the torrid zone, and
imagined it to be so burnt up with unremitting
heat, as to be equally defditute of inhabitants.
On the two other zones, which occupied the

remainder

remainder of the earth, they bellowed the ap- Bo 0 oK r.
pellation of temperate, and taught that these, L'
being the only regions in which life could sub-
sift, were allotted to man for his habitation.
This wild opinion was not a conceit of the un-
informed vulgar, or a fanciful fidion of the
poets, but a fyfitem adopted by the most en-
lightened philosophers, the molt accurate hifito
rians and geographers in Greece and Rome.
According to this theory, a vast portion of the
habitable earth was pronounced to be unfit for
sustaining the human species. Those fertile
and populous regions within the torrid zone,
which are now known not only to yield their
own inhabitants the necessaries and comforts of
life, with most luxuriant profusion, but to
communicate their superfluous stores to the reft
of the world, were supposed to be the mansion
of perpetual sterility and desolation. As all the
parts of the globe, with which the ancients were
acquainted, lay within the northern temperate
zone, their opinion that the other temperate
zone was filled with inhabitants, was founded
on reasoning and conjeaure, not, on discovery.
They even believed that, by the intolerable
heat of the torrid zone, such an insuperable
barrier was placed between the two temperate
regions of the earth, as would prevent for ever
any intercourse between their refpeaive inha-

Voi.. L D bitants.

O O K ,. bitants. Thus this extravagant theory not only

proves that the ancients were unacquainted with
the true slate of the globe, but it tended to
render their ignorance perpetual, by represent-
ing all attempts towards opening a communi-
cation with the remote regions of the earth, as
utterly impradicable f.

BUT, however imperfe& or inaccurate the

geographical knowledge which the Greeks and
Romans had acquired may appear, in refped
of the present improved state of that science,
their progress in discovery will seem confider-
able, and the extent to which they carried na-
vigation and commerce must be reckoned great,
when compared with the ignorance of early
times. As long as the Roman empire retained
such vigour as to preserve its authority over the
conquered nations, and to keep them united,
it was an objea of public police, as well as of
private curiosity, to examirie and describe the
countries which composed this great body.
Even when the other sciences began to decline,
geography, enriched with new observations,
and receiving some accession from the expe-
rience of every age, and the reports of every
traveller, continued to improve. It attained

f See NOTE VIII.

to the highest point of perfeaion and accuracy BOOK r.
to which it ever arrived in the ancient world,
by the induifry and genius of Ptolemy the phi- Improve-
lofopher. He flourished in the second century geography
of the Christian aera, and published a defcrip-
tion of the terrestrial globe, more ample and
exac than that of any of his predecessors.

BUT, soon after, violent convulsions began The inva,

to ihake the Roman state; the fatal ambition Roman em-
or caprice of Constantine, by changing the feat baous na-
of government, divided and weakened its force; tions,
the barbarous nations, which Providence pre-
pared as infiruments to overturn the mighty
fabric of the Roman power, began to assemble
and to muster their armies on its frontier; the
empire tottered to its fall. During this decline
and old age of the Roman state, it was impof-
fible that the sciences thould go on improving.
The efforts of genius were, at that period, as
languid and feeble as those of government.
From the time of Ptolemy, no considerable ad-
dition seems to have been made to geographical
knowledge, nor did any important revolution
happen in trade, excepting that Constantinople,
by its advantageous situation, and the encou-
ragement of the eastern emperors, became a
commercial city of the first note.

BOOK I. AT length, the clouds which had been to
Efres of long gathering round the Roman empire, burnt
their con-
queas on into a storm. Barbarous nations rushed in from
commercial
internourfe. several quarters with irresistible impetuosity,

and, in the general wreck, occasioned by the
inundation which overwhelmed Europe, the arts,
sciences, inventions and discoveries of the Ro.
mans, perished in a great measure, and disappear.
ed e. All the various tribes, which fettled in the
different provinces of the Roman empire, were
uncivilized, itrangers to letters, destitute of arts,
unacquainted with regular government, fubor.
dination, or laws. The manners and inftitu.
tions of some of them were so rude, as to be
hardly compatible with a fiate of social union.
Europe, when occupied by such inhabitants,
may be said to have returned to a second in.
fancy, and had to begin anew its career in im-
provement, science, and civility. The firit
effe& of the settlement of those barbarous in.
vaders was to dissolve the union by which the
Roman power had cemented mankind together.
They parcelled out Europe into many small and
independent slates, differing from each other in
language and customs. No intercourse fubfifled
between the members of those divided and
hostile communities. Accustomed to a simple

g Hilt. of Char!es V. vol. i. p. 18. 72.

mode

mode of life, and averse to industry, they had BOOK I.
few wants to supply, and few superfluities to dif-
pose of. The names of flranger and of enemy
became once more words of the fame import.
Cufftoms every where prevailed, and even laws
were established, which rendered it disagreeable
and dangerous to visit any foreign countryh.
Cities, in which alone an extensive commerce
can be carried on, were few, inconsiderable,
and destitute of those immunities which produce
security or excite enterprise. The sciences, on
which geography and navigation are founded,
were little cultivated. The accounts of ancient
improvements and discoveries, contained in the
Greek and Roman authors, were negleaed or
misunderstood. The knowledge of remote re-
gions was loft, their situation, their commo-
dities, and almost their names, were unknown,

ONE circumstance prevented commercial in- commerce

still pre-

tercourfe with distant nations from ceasing al- served in

the Eastern

together. Constantinople, though often threat- empire,
ened by the fierce invaders, who spread defola-
tion over the reft of Europe, was so fortunate
as to escape their deftrudive rage. In that
city, the knowledge of ancient arts and dif-
coveries was preserved; a taste for splendour

b Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 77. 327.

D3 and

.. oOK I. and elegance fublifted; the producions and

luxuries of foreign countries were in request;
and commerce continued to flourish there when
it was almost extina in every other part of Eu-
rope. The citizens of Constantinople did not
confine their trade to the islands of the Archi-

pelago, or to the adjacent coasts of Asia; they
took a wider range, and following the course
which the ancients had marked out, imported
the commodities of the East Indies from Alex-
andria. When Egypt was torn from the Ro-
man empire by the Arabians, the induffry of
the Greeks discovered a new channel, by which
the producTions of India might be conveyed to
Constantinople. They were carried rp the
Indus, as far a; that great river is navigable;
thence they were tranfportcd by land to the
banks of the river Oxus, and proceeded down
its stream to the Caspian sea. There they en-
tered the Volga, and failing up it, were carried
by land to the Tanais, which conduted them
into the Euxine sea, where vessels from Con-
ftantinople waited their arrival'. This extra-
ordinary and tedious mode of conveyance merits
attention, not only as a proof of the violent
passion which the inhabitants of Constantinople
had conceived for the luxuries of the east, and

i Ramufio, vol. i. p. 372, F.

as a specimen of the ardour and ingenuity with BOOK r.
which they carried on commerce; but because it
demonifrates, that, during the ignorance which
reigned in the reft of Europe, an extensive
knowledge of remote countries was still pre-
served in the capital of the Greek empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of light and and among

the Arabi-

knowledge broke in upon the eafft. The Arar ans.
bians having contraaed some relish for the
sciences of the people whose empire they had
contributed to overturn, translated the books
of several of the Greek philosophers into their
own language. One of the first was that va-
luable work of Ptolemy, which I have already
mentioned. The fludy of geography became,
of consequence, an early object of attention to
the Arabians. But that acute and ingenious
people cultivated chiefly the speculative and
scientific parts of geography. In order to as-
certain the figure and dimensions of the ter-
reftrial globe, they applied the principles of
geometry, they had recourse to astronomical
observations, they employed experiments and
operations, which Europe, in more enlightened
times, has been proud to adopt and to imitate.
At that period, however, thle fame of the im-
provements made by the Arabians did not reach
Europe. The knowledge of their difcoverics

D 4 was

BOOK I. was reserved for ages capable of comprehending

and of perfeaing them.

Revival of BY degrees, the calamities and desolation
commerceC
and navia- brought upon the weitern provinces of the Ro.
tion in Eu-
rope. man empire by its barbarous conquerors, were

forgotten, and in some measure repaired. The
rude tribes which fettled there, acquiring in-
sensibly some idea of regular government, and
some relish for the fun&ions and comforts of
civil life, Europe began to awake from its
torpid and unative slate. The first symptoms
of revival were discerned in Italy. The north.
ern tribes which took poffeffion of this coun-
try, made progress in improvement with greater
rapidity than the people fettled in other parts of
Europe. Various causes, which it is not the
objec of this work to enumerate or explain,
concurred in restoring liberty and independence
to the cities of Italy k. The acquisition of these
roused industry, and gave motion and vigour
to all the acive powers of the human mind.
Foreign commerce revived, navigation was at,
tended to and improved. Conflantinople be.
came the chief mart to which the Italians re,
sorted. There they not only met with a fa.
vourable reception, but obtained such mercan.

k Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 33"

tile privileges as enabled them to carry on trade B oOK r.
with great advantage. They were supplied
both with the precious commodities of the east,
and with many curious manufa&ures, the pro-
duct of ancient arts and ingenuity which still
subsisted among the Greeks. As the labour and
expence of conveying the productions of India
to Constantinople by that long and indirec
course which I have described, rendered them
extremely rare, and of an exorbitant price, the
industry of the Italians discovered other me-
thods of procuring them in greater abundance,
and at an easier rate. They sometimes pur-
chased them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other
ports on the coast of Syria, to which they were
brought by a route not unknown to the ancients,
They were conveyed from India by sea, up the
Persian Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates and
Tigris, as far as Bagdat, were carried by land
across the desert to Palmyra, and from thence
to the towns on the Mediterranean. But from
the length of the journey, and the dangers to
which the caravans were exposed, this proved
always a tedious, and often a precarious mode
of conveyance. At length, the Soldans of
Egypt, having revived the commerce with In.
dia in its ancient channel, by the Arabian Gulf,
the Italian merchants, notwithflanding the vio.
lent antipathy to each other with which Chri-

ftians

BOOK I. f(Hans and the followers of Mahomet were then

poffeffed, repaired to Alexandria, alid enduring,
from the love of gain, the insolence and exac.
tions of the Mahometans, established a lucrative
trade in that port. From that period, the com.
mercial spirit of Italy became aaive and enter.
prifing. Venice, Genoa, Pisa, rose from incon.
fiderable towns, to be populous and wealthy ci-
ties. Their naval power increased ; their vessels
frequented not only all the ports in the Mediter.
ranean, but venturing sometimes beyond the
Streights, visited the maritime towns of Spain,
France, the Low Countries, and England; and,
by distributing their commodities over Europe,
began to communicate to its various nations
some tafre for the valuable produaions of the
east, as well as some ideas of manufaaures and
arts, which were then unknown beyond the pre.
cinAs of Italy.

Their pr- HILE the cities of Italy were thus advancing
voued by in their career of improvement, an event happen.

ed the most extraordinary perhaps in the hiflory
of mankind, which, instead of retarding the com-
mercial progress of the Italians, rendered it more
rapid. The martial spirit of the Europeans,
heightenedandinflamedby religious zea!,prompt-
ed them to attempt the deliverance of the Hoiy
Land from the dominion cf infidels. Vast

21 armies,

armies, composed of all the nations in Europe, B.o 2r.
marched towards Asia, upon this wild enter-
prise. The Genoese, the Pifans, and Vene-
tians furnished the transports which carried them
thither. They supplied them with provisions
and military stores. Beside the immense sums
which they received on this account, they ob-
tained commercial privileges and establish-
ments, of great consequence in the settlements
which the Crusaders made in Palestine, and in
other provinces of Asia. From those sources,
prodigious wealth flowed into the cities which I
have mentioned. This was accompanied with
a proportional increase of power, and by the
end of the Holy War, Venice, in particular,
became a great maritime state, poffefling an ex-
tensive commerce, and ample territories'. Italy
was not the only country in which the Crusades
contributed to revive and diffufe such a spirit as
prepared Europe for future discoveries. By
their expeditions into Asia, the other Eum pean
nations became well acquainted with remote
regions, which formerly they knew only by
name, or by the reports of ignorant and cre-
dulous pilgrims. They had an opportunity of
observing the manners, the arts, and the ac-
commodations of people more polished than

1 Effai de l'Hifloire du Commerce de Venife, p. 52, &c.

themselves.

So OK I. themselves. This intercourse between the east

and well subsisted almost two centuries. The
adventurers, who returned from Asia, commu-
nicated to their countrymen the ideas which
they had acquired, and the habits of life they
had contraaed by visiting more refined nations.
The Europeans began to be sensible of wants
with which they were formerly unacquainted;
new desires were excited; and such a tate for
the commodities and arts of other countries
gradually spread among them, that they not
only encouraged the resort of foreigners to their
harbours, but began to perceive the advantage
and necessity of applying to commerce them.
selves m.

ly the dif- THIS communication, which was opened be.
coveriesof
travellers by tween Europe and the western provinces of

Asia, encouraged several persons to advance far
beyond the countries in which the Crusaders
carried on their operations, and to travel by
land into the more remote and opulent regions
of the east. The wild fanaticifmin, which seems
at that period to have mingled in all the
schemes of individuals, no less than in all the
counsels of nations, first incited men to enter
upon those long and dangerous peregrinations,

SHlift. of CharlesV. vol. i. p. 25, &c.

They

They were afterwards undertaken from profpe&s s o o g r.
of commercial advantage, or from motives of
mere curiosity. Benjamin, a Jew of Tudela,
in the kingdom of Navarre, poffeffed with a
superstitious veneration for the law of Moses,
and solicitous to visit his countrymen in the east,
whom he hoped to find in such a slate of power
and opulence as might redound to the honour of
his set, set out from Spain in the year I160,
and travelling by land to Constantinople, pro-
ceeded through the countries to the north of
the Euxine and Caspian seas, as far as Chinese
Tartary. From thence he took his route to-
wards the south, and after traversing various
provinces of the farther India, he embarked on
the Indian ocean, visited several of its islands,
and returned at the end of thirteen years, by
the way of Egypt, to Europe, with much in-
formation concerning a large diftriEc of the
globe, altogether unknown at that time to the
western world n The zeal of the head of the
Christian church co-operated with the fupertti-
tion of Benjamin the Jew, in discovering the
interior and remote provinces of Asia. All
Christendom having been alarmed with ac-
counts of the rapid progress of the Tartar arms
under Zengis Khan, Innocent IV. who enter-

D Bergeroi Recueil des Voyages, &e. tom. i. p. I.

17 tained

BOOK I. tained most exalted ideas concerning the pleni.

"z46. tude of his own power, and the fubmiflion due

to his injuncions, sent father John de Piano
Carpini, at the head of a milfion of Franciscan
monks, and father Afcolino, at the head of
another of Dominicans, to enjoin Kayuk Khan,
the grandson of Zengis, who was then at the
head of the Tartar empire, to embrace the
Christian faith, and to desist from desolating the
earth by his arms. The haughty descendant of
the greatest conqueror Asia had ever beheld,
astonished at this strange mandate from an Ita-
lian priest, whose name and jurifdicion were
alike unknown to him, received it with the
contempt which it merited, though he dismissed
the mendicants who delivered it with impunity.
But as they had penetrated into the country by
different routs, and followed for some time the
Tartar camps, which were always in motion,
they had an opportunity of visiting a great part
of Asia. Carpini, who proceeded by the way
of Poland and Russia, travelled through its
northern provinces as far as the extremities of
Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to have landed
somewhere in Syria, advanced through its
southern provinces, into the interior parts of
'Perfia ".

o Hakluyt, i. 2i. Bergeron, tom. i.

NOT long after, St. Louis of France contri- B o K I.

buted farther towards extending the knowledge " I53.
which the Europeans had begun to acquire of
those distant regions. Some designing im-
poffor, who took advantage of the slender ac-
quaintance of Christendom with, the slate and
charater of the Asiatic nations, having in-
formed him that a powerful Chan of the Tar-
tars had embraced the Chriflian faith, the
monarch lilftened to the tale with pious credu-
lity, and instantly resolved to fend ambassadors
to this illustrious convert, with a view of in-
citing him to attack their common enemy the
Saracens in one quarter, while he fell upon
them in another. As monks were the only
persons in that age who poffeffed such a degree
of knowledge as qualified them for a service of
this kind, he employed in it father Andrew, a
Jacobine, who was followed by father William
de Rubruquis, a Franciscan. With refpe& to
the progress of the former, there is no memo-
rial extant. The journal of the latter has been
published. He was admitted into the presence
of Mangu, the third khan in fucceflion from
Zengis, and made a circuit through the interior
parts of Asia, more extensive than that of any
European who had hitherto explored them P.

P Hakl. i. 71. Recueilde Voyages par Bergerou, tom. i.

To

B OO K i. To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent

forth to visit Asia, succeeded others who ven-
tured into remote countries, from the profpe&
of commercial advantage, or from motives of
mere curiosity. The first and moil eminent of
these was Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble

1269. family. Having engaged early in trade, ac.

cording to the custom of his country, his afpir-
ing mind wished for a sphere of adivity more
extensive than was afforded to it by the efta-
blifhed traffic carried on in those ports of
Europe and Asia, which the Venetians fre-
quented. This prompted him to travel into
unknown countries, in expetation of opening
a commercial intercourse with them, more
suited to the sanguine ideas and hopes of a
young adventurer.

As his father had already carried some

European commodities to the court of the
great Chan of the Tartars, and had disposed
of them to advantage, he resorted thither.
Under the protecion of Kublay Chan, the
most powerful of all the successors of Zengis,
he continued his mercantile peregrinations in
Asia upwards of twenty-fix years; and during
that time advanced towards the eaff, far be.
yond the utmoflt boundaries to which any
European traveller had ever proceeded. In.

flead

htead of following the course of Carpini and BooK I.
Rubruquis, along the vast unpeopled plains
of Tartary, he passed through the chief trad-
ing cities in the more cultivated parts of Asia,
and penetrated to Cambalu, or Peking, the
capital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or
China, fubjet at that time to the successors of
Zengis. He made more than one voyage, on
the Indian ocean, he traded in many of the
islands, from which Europe had long received
fpiceries and other commodities, which it held
in high estimation, though unacquainted with
the particular countries to which it was in-
debted for those precious produaions; and he
obtained information concerning several coun-
tries, which he did not visit in person, parti-
cularly the island Zipangri, probably the fame
now known by the name of Japan P. On his
return, he astonished his contemporaries with
his descriptions of vast regions, whose names
had never been heard of in Europe, and with
such pompous accounts of their fertility, their
populousness, their opulence, the variety of
their manufaaures, and the extent of their
trade, as rose far above the conception of an
uninformed age.

P Vigaggi di Marco Polo. Ramus. ii. 2. Bergeron,

tom. ii.

VOL. I. E ABOUT

BOOK J. ABOUT half a century after Marco Polo, Sir

13-2. John Mandeville, an Englishman, encouraged

by his example, visited most of the countries
in the east which he had described, and, like
him, published an account of them . The
narrations of those early travellers abound with
many wild incoherent tales, concerning giants,
enchanters, and monifers. But they were not,
from that circumfiance, less acceptable to an
ignorant age, which delighted in what was
marvellous. The wonders which they told,
mofily on hearsay, filled the multitude with
admiration. The fats which they related from
their own observation, attracted the attention
of the more discerning. The former, which
may be considered as the popular traditions
and fables of the countries through which they
had paffired, were gradually disregarded as
Europe advanced in knowledge. The latter,
however incredible some of them may have
appeared in their own time, have been con-
firmed by the observations of modern travellers.
By means of both, however, the curiosity of
mankind was excited with refpec to the re-
mote parts of the earth, their ideas were en-
larged, and they were not only insensibly dif-
posed to attempt new discoveries, but received

° Voyages and Travels, by Sir John Mandeville.

fach information as directed to that particu- BOOK I.
lar course in which these were afterwards car-
ried oni.

WHILE this spirit was gradually forming in and hy the

invention of

Europe, a fortunate discovery was made, which the manners

comFaif.

contributed more than all the efforts and inge-
nuity of preceding ages, to improve and to
extend navigation. That wonderful property
of the magnet, by which it communicates such
virtue to a needle or slender rod of iron, as to
point towards the poles of the earth, was ob-
served. The use which might be made of this
in directing navigation was immediately per-
ceived. That most valuable, but now familiar
instrument, the mariners compass, was con-
ftru&ed. When, by means of it, navigators
found that at all seasons, and in every place,
they could discover the north and south with so
much ease and accuracy, it became no longer ne-
ceffary to depend merely on the light of the stars
and the observation of the sea coast. They gra-
dually abandoned their' ancient timid and lin-
gering course along the mhore, ventured boldly
into the ocean, and relying on this new guide,
could iteer in the darkest night, and under the
most cloudy sky, with a security and precision
hitherto unknown. The compass may be said
to have opened to man the dominion of the

E 2 sea,

OOK I. sea, and to have put him in full poffeflion of

the earth, by enabling him to visit every part
of it. Flavio Gioia, a citizen of Amalfi, a
town of considerable trade in the kingdom of
Naples, was the author of this great discovery,
about the year one thousand three hundred
and two. It hath been often the fate of those
illustrious benefators of mankind, who have
enriched science and improved the arts by their
inventions, to derive more reputation than
benefit from the happy efforts of their genius.
But the lot of Gioia has been still more cruel;
through the inattention or ignorance of con-
temporary historians, he has been defrauded
even of the fame to which he had such a just
title. We receive from them no information with
refped to his profeflion, his charater, the
precise time when he made this important dif.
covery, -or the accidents and inquiries which
led to it. The knowledge of this event,
though produaive of greater effeas than any
recorded in the annals of the human race, is
transmitted to us without any of those circum-
frances, which can gratify the curiosity that it
naturally awakens'. But though the use of
the compass might enable the Italians to per-
form the short voyages to which they were

f Collinas & Trombellus de Acus nauticae Inventore.
nlftit. Acad. Bonon. tom. ii. part iii. p. 372.

accuf.

accuflomed, with greater security and expedi. BooK r.
tion, its influence was not so sudden or extensive,
as immediately to render navigation adventu-
rous, and to excite a spirit of discovery. Many
causes combined in preventing this beneficial
invention from producing its full effe& inftan-
taneoufly. Men relinquish ancient habits
slowly, and with relutance, They are averse
to new experiments, and venture upon them
with timidity. The commercial jealousy of
the Italians, it is probable, laboured to con-
ceal the happy discovery of their countryman
from other nations. The art of steering by
the compass, with such skill and accuracy as
to inspire a full confidence in its direaion, was
acquired gradually. Sailors, unaccustomed to
quit fight of land, durst not launch out at once
and commit themselves to unknown seas. Ac-
cordingly, near half a century elapsed from
the time of Gioia's discovery, before navigators
ventured into any seas which they had not been
accustomed to frequent.

THE first appearance of a bolder spirit may some ap-

be dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to BToeCe °r

spirit in

the Canary or Fortunate Islands. By what navigation.
accident they were led to the discovery of those
small isles, which lie near five hundred miles
from the Spanish coast, and above a hundred

E 3 and

B 0 0 K . and fifty miles from the coast of Africa, con.

temporary writers have not explained. But about
the middle of the fourteenth century, the people
of all the different kingdoms into which Spain
was then divided, were accuflomed to make
piratical excursions thither, in order to plunder
the inhabitants, or to carry them off as slaves.
Clement VI. in virtue of the right claimed by
the holy fee to dispose of all countries poffeffed
by infidels, ere&ed those isles into a kingdom,
in the year one thousand three hundred and
forty-four, and, conferred it on Lewis de la
Cerda, descended from the royal family of
Castile. But that unfortunate prince, deffitute
of power to assert his nominal title, having
never visited the Canaries, John de Bethen.
court, a Norman baron, obtained a grant of
them from Henry III. of Caftile". Bethen.
court, with the valour and good fortune which
distinguished the adventurers of his country,
attempted and effeaed the conquest, and the
poffeflion of the Canaries remained for some
time in his family, as a fief held of the crown
of Castile. Previous to this expedition of
Bethencourt, his countrymen fettled in Nor.
mandy are said to have visited the coast of

s Viera y Clavijo Notic. de la Hiftor. de Canaria, I.

26S, &c. Glas Hist. c. I.

Africa,

Africa, and to have proceeded far to the south B 0,0 K I.
of the Canary islands. But their voyages thither 1365.
seem not to have been undertaken in confe-
quence of any public or regular plan for ex-
tending navigation and attempting new disco-
veries. They were either excursions suggested
by that roving piratical spirit, which descended
to the Normans from their ancestors, or the
commercial enterprises of private merchants,
which attraaed so little notice, that hardly any
memorial of them is to be found in contempo-
rary authors. In a general survey of the pro-
grefs of discovery, it is fufficient to have men-
tioned this event; and leaving it among those
of dubious existence, or of small importance,
we may conclude, that though much additional
information concerning the remote regibns of
the East had been received by travellers who
visited them by land, navigation, at the begin-
ning of the fifteenth century, had not advanced
beyond the state to which it had attained before
the downfal of the Roman empire.

AT length the period arrived, when Provi- Sirs reguI

dence decreed that men were to pass the limits P"" on du"
within which they had been so long confined,
and open to themselves a more ample field
wherein to display their talents, their enter-
prise, and courage. The first considerable

E 4 efforts

BOOK I. efforts towards this were not made by any

of the more powerful. fates of Europe, or by
those who had applied to' navigation with the
greatest assiduity and success. The glory of
leading the way in this new career was reserved

thfort- for Portugal, one of the smallest and least

f. powerful of the European kingdoms. As

the attempts of the Portuguese to acquire the
knowledge of those parts of the globe with
which mankind were then unacquainted, not
only improved and extended the art of naviga-
tion, but roused such a spirit of curiosity and
enterprise, as led to the discovery of the New
TWorld, of which I propose to write the hiflory,
it is necessary to take a full view of the rife, the
progress, and success of their various naval
operations. It was in this school that the dif-
coverer' of America was trained; and unless
we trace the fiteps by which his infitrutors and
guides advanced, it will be impossible to com-
prehend the circumfitances which fuggefied the
idea, or facilitated the execution of his great
design.

circumLtan. VARIOUS circumflances prompted the Por-
ces which
Icd to wms. tuguefe to exert their acivity in this new

dire&ion, and enabled them to accompliih un-
dertakings apparently superior to the natural
force of their monarchy. The kings of Pord

tugal,

togal, having driven the Moors out of their BOOK i.
dominions, had acquired power, as well as
glory, by the success of their arms against the
infidels. By their vidories over them, they
had extended the royal authority beyond the
narrow limits within which it was originally
circumscribed in Portugal, as well as in other
feudal kingdoms. They had the command of
the national force, could rouse it to ad with
united vigour, and, after the expulsion of the
Moors, could employ it without dread of in-
terruption from any domestic enemy. By the
perpetual hostilities carried on for several cen-
turies against the Mahometans, the martial and
adventurous spirit which diftinguiflhed all the
European nations during the middle ages, was
improved and heightened among the Portu-
guefe. A fierce civil war towards the close of
the fourteenth century, occasioned by a dif-
puted succession, augmented the military ar-
dour of the nation, and formed or called forth
men of such aaive and daring genius, as are
fit for bold undertakings. The situation of
the kingdom, bounded on every fide by the
dominions of a more powerful neighbour, did
not afford free scope to the adivity of the
Portuguese by land, as the firength of their
monarchy was no match for that of Castile.
But Pqrtugal was a maritime slate, in which

there

BOOK i. there were many commodious harbours; the
y people had begun to make some progress in

the knowledge and practice of navigation ; and
the sea was open to them, presenting the only
field of enterprise in which they could diftin.
guiflh themselves.

Firt, at- SUCH was the state of Portugal, and such

the disposition of the people, when John I.
surnamed the Bastard, obtained secure posses.
lion of the crown by the peace concluded with
Castile in the year one thousand four hundred
and eleven. He was a prince of great merit,
who, by superior courage and abilities, had
opened his way to a throne which of right did
not belong to him. He inflantly perceived
that it would be impoftible to preserve public
order, or domeffic tranquillity, without find.
ing some employment for the restless spirit of
his fubjeds. With this view, he assembled a
numerous fleet at Lisbon, composed of all the
ihips which he could fit out in his own kingdom,
and of many hired from foreigners. This
great armament was destined to attack the

my. Moors fettled on the coast of Barbary. While

it was equipping, -a few vessels were appointed
to fail along the western shore of Africa bounded
by the Atlantic ocean, and to discover the un-
known countries situated there. From this

incon-

inconsiderable attempt, we may date the corn- B oo K I.
mencement of that spirit of discovery which
opened the barriers that had so long shut out
mankind from the knowledge of one half of the
terrestrial globe.

AT the time when John sent forth these ships

on this new voyage, the art of navigation was
still very imperfec. Though Africa lay so
near to Portugal, and the fertility of the coun-
tries already known on that continent invited
men to explore it more fully, the Portuguese
had never ventured to fail beyond Cape Non.
That promontory, as its name imports, was
hitherto considered as a boundary which could
not be passed. But the nations of Europe had
now acquired as much knowledge, as embold-
ened them to disregard the prejudices and to
correc the errors of their ancestors. The long
reign of ignorance, the constant enemy of every
curious inquiry, and of every new undertak-
ing, was approaching to its'period. The light
of science began to dawn. The works of the
ancient Greeks and Romans began to be read
with admiration and profit. The sciences cul-
tivated by the Arabians were introduced into
Europe by the Moors fettled in Spain and
Portugal, and by the Jews, who were very
numerous in both these kingdoms. Geometry,

aftro-

BOOK i. afironomy, and geography, the sciences on

which the art of navigation is founded, became
objeds of studious attention. The memory
of the discoveries made by the ancients was
revived, and the progress of their navigation
and commerce began to be traced. Some of the
causes which have obftruded the cultivation of
science in Portugal, during this century and the
lass, did not exist, or did not operate in the
fame manner, in the fifteenth century t; and
the Portuguese, at that period, seem to have
kept pace with other nations on this fide of the
Alps in literary pursuits.

Its fucefs. As the genius of the age favoured the execu-

tion of that new undertaking, to which the
peculiar state of the country invited the Por-
tuguefe, it proved fuccefsful. The vessels sent
on the discovery doubled that formidable Cape,
which had terminated the progress of former
navigators, and proceeded a hundred and fixfy
miles beyond it, to Cape Bojador. As its
rocky cliffs, which stretched a considerable
way into the Atlantic, appeared more dreadful
than the promontory which they had passed,
the Portuguese commanders durst not attempt
to fail round it, but returned to Lisbon, more

f See NOTE IX.

satisfied

satisfied with having advanced so far, than BOOK L.
ashamed of having ventured no farther.

INCONSIDERABLE as this voyage was, it in- Pr:nce

Hn y tile

creased the pailion for discovery, which began aiutlorof
to arise in Portugal. The fortunate iffe .i.r diio-
of the king's expedition against the Moors
of Barbary, added strength to that spirit in the 14,7.
nation, and pushed it on to new undertakings.
In order to render these fuccefsful, it was
necessary that they should be conducted by a
person who poffeffed abilities capable of dif-
cerning what was attainable, who enjoyed
leisure to form a regular fyfiem for prosecuting
discovery, and who was animated with ardour
that would persevere in spite of obitacles and
repulses. Happily for Portugal, the found all
those qualities in Henry Duke of Vifeo, the
fourth son of king John by Philippa of Lan-
caller, filfter of Henry IV. king of England.
That prince, in his early youth, having ac-
companied his father in his expedition to Bar-
bary, distinguished himself by many deeds of
valour. To the martial spirit, which was the
charateriftic of every man of noble birth at
that time, he added all the accomplishments
of a more enlightened and polished age. He
cultivated the arts and sciences, which were
then unknown and despised by persons of his

rank.

BOOK I. rank. He applied with peculiar fondness to

the ifudy of geography; and by the infiruiion
of able masters as well as by the accounts of
travellers, he early acquired fich knowledge
of the habitable globe as discovered the great
probability of finding new and opulent coun-
tries, by failing along the coast of Africa.
Such an objet was formed to awaken the en.
thufiafin and ardour of a youthful mind, and
he espoused with the utmost zeal the patronage of
a design which might prove as beneficial, as it
appeared to be splendid and honourable. In
order that he might pursue this 'great scheme
without interruption, he retired from court im.
mediately after his return from Africa, and
fixed his residence at Sagres, near Cape St.
Vincent, where the profpea of the Atlantic
ocean invited his thoughts continually towards
his favourite project, and encouraged him to
execute it. In this retreat he was attended
by some of the most learned men in his country
who aided him in his researches. He applied
for information to the Moors of Barbary, who
were accuflomed to travel by land into the
interior provinces of Africa, in quell of ivory,
gold-dunf, and other rich commodities. He
consulted the Jews fettled in Portugal. By
promises, rewards, and marks of refpe&, he
allured into his service several persons, foreign.

ers

ers as well as Portuguese, who were eminent BOOK r.
for their skill in navigation. In taking those
preparatory ftcps, the great abilities of the
prince were seconded by his private virtues.
His integrity, his affability, his refpeEt for
religion, his zeal for the honour of his country,
engaged persons of all ranks to applaud his
design, and to favour the execution of it. His
schemes were allowed by the greater part of
his countrymen to proceed neither from ambi-
tion, nor the desire of wealth, but to flow

from the warm benevolence of a heart eager to
promote the happiness of mankind, and which
justly intitled him to assume a motto for his
device, that described the quality, by which
he wished to be distinguished, the talent of
doing good.

His first effort, as is usual at the commence- Dicovery of

Pcrto Santo,

ment of any new undertaking, was extremely 14,s.
inconsiderable. He fitted out a tingle ship,
and giving the command of it to John Gon-
zalez Zarco and Tristan Vaz, two gentlemen
of his household, who voluntarily offered to
condua the enterprise, he inftruded them to
use their utmost efforts to double Cape Boja-
dor, and thence to flteer towards the south.
They, according to the mode of navigation
which still prevailed, held their course along

the

Boo K I. the shore; and by following that direaion,

they must have encountered almost insuperable
difficulties in attempting to pals Cape Bojador.
But fortune came in aid to their want of skill,
and prevented the voyage from being alto.
gether fruitless. A sudden fqual] of wind arose,
drove them out to sea, and when they expeced
every momient to perifl, landed them on an
unknown island, which from their happy escape
they named Porto Santo. In the infancy of
navigation, the discovery of this finall island
appeared a matter of such moment, that they
instantly returned to Portugal with the good
tidings, and were received by Henry with the
applause and honour due to fortunate adven-
turers. This faint dawn of success filled a
mind ardent in the pursuit of a favourite objc&
with such sanguine hopes as were fufficient in.

3419. citements to proceed. Next year, Henry sent

out three flips under the fame commanders,
to whom he joined Bartholomew Pereftrello,
in order to take poffeflion of the island which
they had discovered. When they began to
fettle in Porto Santo, they observed towards
the south a fixed spot in the horizon like a

of Maaeira. small black cloud. By degrees, they were led

to conjecure that it might be land, and fleer-
ing towards it, they arrived at a considerable
island uninhabited and covered with wood,

IF which

Which on that account they called Madeira . oo o K t.
As it was Henry's chief objet to render his
discoveries useful to his country, he imme-
diately equipped a fleet to carry a colony of ,42o
Portuguese to these islands. By his provident
care, they were furnished not only twith th6
feeds, plants, and domestic animals common
in Europe; but as he foresaw that the warmth
f the climate and fertility of the foil would
prove favourable to the rearing of other pro.
dutions, he procured flips of the vine from
the island of Cyprus, the rich wines of which
were then in great request, and plants of the
sugar-cane from Sicily, into which it had been
lately introduced. These throve so profpe-
roufly in this new country, that the benefit of
cultivating them was immediately perceived,
and the sugar and wine of Madeira quickly
became articles of some consequence in the
commerce of Portugal .

As soon as the advantages derived from this Doe, rCap

first settlement to the weft of the European
continent began to be felt, the spirit of disco-

' Hillorical Relation of the firfl Discovery of Madeira,

translated from the Portuguese of Fran. Alcafarana,
p. TI, &c.

SLud. Guicciardini Defcritt. de Paefi Bassi, p. 180, 181.

VOL. L F very

BoOK 1- very appeared less chimerical, and became

more adventurous. By their voyages to Ma.
deira, the Portuguese were gradually accuflom.
ed to a bolder navigation, and instead of creep.
ing servilely along the coalt, ventured into the
open sea. In consequence of taking this course,
Gilianez, who commanded one of Prince Hen.
ry's ships, doubled Cape Bojador, the boundary
of the Portuguese navigation upwards of twenty
years, and which had hitherto been deemed

143s. unpaffable. This fuccefsful voyage, which the

ignorance of the age placed on a level with
the molt famous exploits recorded in hifltory,
opened a new sphere to navigation, as it disco.
vered the vai: continent of Africa, still washed
by the Atlantic ocean, and stretching towards
the south. Part of this was soon explored; the

Advtace Portuguese advanced within the tropics, and in
tropic. the space of a few years they discovered the

river Senegal, and all the coast extending from
Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

ArIonirhed HITHERTO the Portuguese had been guided
at what they
discovered in their discoveries, or encouraged to attempt

, them, by the light and information which they
received from the works of the ancient mathe.
maticians and geographers. But, when they
began to enter the torrid zone, the notion
which prevailed among the ancients, that the

heat,

heat, which reigned perpetually there, was so Boo0 K
excessive as to render it uninhabitable, deterred
them, for some time, from proceeding. Their
own observations, when they first ventured
into this unknown and formidable region,
tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity con-
cerning the violent operation of the direc rays
of the fun. As far as the river Senegal, the
Portuguese had found the coast of Africa in-
habited by people nearly resembling the Moors
of Barbary. When they advanced to the south
of that river, the human form seemed to put
on a new appearance. They beheld men with
skins black as ebony, with thort curled hair,
flat noses, thick lips, and all the peculiar sea-
tures which are now known to distinguish the
race of negroes. This surprising alteration
they naturally attributed to the influence of
heat, and if they should advance nearer to the
line, they began to dread that its effecs would
be flill more violent. Those dangers were_
exaggerated, and many other objecions againif
attempting farther discoveries were proposed
by some of the grandees, who, from ignorance,
from envy, or from that cold timid prudence
which rejets whatever has the air of novelty
or enterprise, had hitherto condemned all prince
Henry's schemes. They represented, that it
was altogether chimerical to expect any advan-

F 2 tage

BOOK I. tage from countries situated in that region

which the wisdom and experience of antiquity
had pronounced to be unfit for the habitation
of men; that their forefathers, satisfied with
cultivating the territory which Providence had
allotted them, did not waste the firength of the
kingdom by fruitless projeas, in quest of new
settlements; that Portugal was already ex.
haufted by the expence of attempts to discover
lands which either did not exist, or which
nature destined to remain unknown; and was
drained of men, who might have been em.
ployed in undertakings attended with more
certain success, and produaive of greater bene.
fit. But neither their appeal to the authority
of the ancients, nor their reasonings concern-
ing the interest of Portugal, made any im-
prefflion upon the determined philosophic mind
of prince Henry. The discoveries which he,
had already made convinced him that the an.
cients had little more than a conjeaural know.
ledge of the torrid zone. He was no less fatis.
fled that the political arguments of his oppo-
nents with refpeQ to the interest of Portugal
were malevolent and ill founded. In those
sentiments he was firenuoufly supported by his
brother Pedro, who governed the kingdom as
guardian of their nephew Alphonfo V. who had(

1438. succeeded to the throne during his minority;

23 and

and instead of slackening his efforts, Henry BOOK I.
continued to pursue his discoveries with fresh
ardour.

BuT, in order to silence all the murmurs of apal grant

to Portugal

opposition, he endeavoured to obtain the of what

coun~liesit

fan&ion of the highest authority in favour of thould di.-
his operations. With this view, he applied to
the Pope, and represented, in pompous terms,
the pious and unwearied zeal, with which he
had exerted himself during twenty years, in
discovering unknown countries, the wretched
inhabitants of which were utter firangers to true
religion, wandering in heathen darkness, or led
affray by the delusions of Mahomet. He be-
fought the holy father, to whom, as the vicar
of Christ, all the kingdoms of the earth were
fubje&, to confer on the crown of Portugal a
right to all the countries poffeffed by Infidels,
which ihould be discovered by the industry of
its fubje&s, and subdued by the force of its
arms. He intreated him to enjoin all Chriffian
powers, under the highest penalties, not to
molest Portugal while engaged in this laudable
enterprise, and to prohibit them from fettling
in any of the countries which the Portuguese
should discover. He promised that, in all
their expeditions, it should be the chief object
of his countrymen to spread the knowledge of

F 3 the

BOOK I. the Christian religion, to eitablifh the autho.

rity of the holy fee, and to increase the flock
of the universal pastor. As it was by improv.
ing with dexterity every favourable conjun&ure
for acquiring new powers, that the court of
Rome had gradually extended its ufurpations,
Eugene IV. the Pontiff to whom this applica.
tion was made, eagerly seized the opportunity
which now presented itself. He instantly per.
ceived, that by complying with prince Henry's
request, he might exercise a prerogative no less
flattering in its own nature, than likely to prove
beneficial in its consequences. A Bull was ac.
cordingly issued, in which, after applauding in
the strongest terms the palt efforts of the Por.
tuguefe, and exhorting them to proceed in that
laudable career on which they had entered, he
granted them an exclusive right to all the coun-
tries which they lhould discover, from Cape
Non to the continent of India.

EXTRAVAGANT as this donation, compre.

hending such a large portion of the habitable
globe, would now appear even in Catholic
countries, no person in the fifteenth century
doubted that the pope, in the plenitude of his
apostolic power, had a right to confer it.
Prince Henry was soon sensible of the advan.
tages which he derived from this tranfaaion.

His

His schemes were authorised and fan&ified by B o o K I.
the bull approving of them. The spirit of dif-
covery was conne&ed with zeal for religion,
which, in that age, was a principle of such
activity and vigour, as to influence the conduc
of nations. All Christian princes were deterred
from intruding into those countries which the
Portuguese had discovered, or from interrupting
the progress of their navigation and conqueis r.

THE fame of the Portuguese voyages soon Fame and

spread over Europe. Men, long accustomed the' t,-
to circumscribe the acivity and knowledge of erris.l
the human mind within the limits to which
they had been hitherto confined, were astonished
to behold the sphere of navigation so suddenly
enlarged, and a profpea opened of visiting re-
gions of the globe, the existence of which was
unknown in former times. The learned and
speculative reasoned and formed theories con-
cerning those unexpected discoveries. The
vulgar inquired and wondered; while enter.
prifing adventurers crouded from every part of
Europe, soliciting prince Henry to employ
them in this honourable service. Many Vene-
tians and Genoese, in particular, who were, at
that time, superior to all other nations in the

y See NOTE X.

fcicence

F4

B o00 i . fdence of naval affairs, entered aboard the Por,

tuguefe Ihips, and acquired a more perfea and
fextenfive knowledge of their profeffion in that
new school of navigation. In emulation of
these foreigners, the Portuguese exerted their
own talents. The nation seconded the designs
of the prince. Private merchants formed corn.

1446. panies, with a view to search for unknown coun-

tries. The Cape de Verd islands, which lie
off the promontory of that name, were disco.

,449. vered, and soon after the iies called Azores,

As the former of there are above three hundred
miles from the African coast, and the latter
nine hundred miles from any continent, it is
evident, by their venturing so boldly into the
open seas, that the Portuguese had, by this
time, improved greatly in the art of naviga,

tion.

Death of WHILE the pation for engaging in new un.
ery, dertakings was thus warm and adive, it re-

ceived an unfortunate check by the death of
prince Henry, whose superior knowledge had
hitherto dire&ed all the operations of the dif-
coverers, and whose patronage had encouraged
and proteced them. But notwithstanding all
the advantages which they derived from these,.
the Portuguese, during his life, did not ad.
vance, in their utimoft progress towards the

south,

south, within five degrees of the equino&ial BOOK i.
line; and, after their continued exertions for ~
half a century, hardly fifteen hundred miles of From T41x

to X463,

the coast of Africa were discovered. To an
age acquainted with the efforts of navigation in
its slate of maturity and improvement, those
essays of its early years must necessarily appear
feeble and unskilful, But, inconsiderable as
they may be deemed, they were fufficient to
turn the curiosity of the European nations into
a new channel, to excite an enterprising spirit,
and to point the way to future discoveries,

ALPHONSO, who poffeffed the throne of Por. nThe rpafon

for dilfcively

tugal at the time of prince Henry's death, was lhnFi'heS

for fo'0 e

so much engaged in supporting his own preten, taml.
fions to the crown of Castile, or in carrying on
his expeditions against the Moors in Barbary,
that the force of his kingdom being exerted in
other operations, he could not prosecute the
discoveries in Africa with ardour. He com-
witted the conduc of them to Fernando GoT
mez, a merchant in Lisbon, to whom he granted
an exclusive right of commerce with all the
countries of which prince Henry had taken-pof-.
feftion. Under the restraint and oppression of
a monopoly, the spirit of discovery la-nguished,
It ceased to be a national objeft, and became
the concern of a private man, more attentive

to

BOOK 1. to his own gain, than to the glory of his coun.

try. Some progress, however, was made. The

'471. Portuguese ventured at length to cross the line,

and, to their aflonifhment, found that region
of the torrid zone, which was supposed to be
scorched with intolerable heat, to be not only
habitable, but populous and fertile.

* 4ive. JOHN II. who succeeded his father Alphonfb,
wcvit add - d c
thad- poffeffed talents capable both of forming and
*"'* executing great designs. As part of his reve-

nues, while prince, had arisen from duties on
the trade with the newly discovered countries,
this naturally turned his attention towards them,
and satisfied him with refpea to their utility and
importance. In proportion as his knowledge
of these countries extended, the poffeffion of
them appeared to be of greater consequence.
While the Portuguese proceeded along the coat
of Africa, from Cape Non to the river of Sene-
gal, they found all that extensive tra& to be
sandy, barren, and thinly inhabited by a
wretched people, profefling the Mahometan
religion, and fubjea to the vast empire of Mo-
rocco. But to the south of that river, the
power and religion of the Mahometans were
unknown. The country was divided into small
independent principalities, the population was

considerable,

considerable, the foil fertile Z, and the Portu-. o oK 1.
guefe soon discovered that it produced ivory, rich
gums, gold, and other valuable commodities.
By the acquisition of these, commerce was en-
larged, and became more adventurous. Men,
animated and rendered aaive by the certain
profpe& of gain, pursued discovery with greater
eagerness, than when they were excited only by
curiosity and hope.

THIS spirit derived no small reinforcement of Its progress.

vigour from the countenance of such a monarch
as John. Declaring himself the patron of every
attempt towards discovery, he promoted it with
all the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry,
and with superior power. The effecs of this
were immediately felt. A powerful fleet was z4I4.
fitted out, which, after discovering the king-
doms of Benin and Congo, advanced above sis-
teen hundred miles beyond the line, and the
Portuguese, for the firfi time, beheld a new
heaven, and observed the stars of another he-
mifphere. John was not only solicitous to dif-
cover, but attentive to secure the poffeflion of
those countries. He built forts on the coast of
Guinea; he sent out colonies to fettle there;

* Navigatio Aloyfii Cadamufti apud Novum Orbem
Grynzi, p. 2. 18. Navigat. all Ifola di San Tome per
un Pilotto Portugh. Ramufio, i. I ij.

SooK I he established a commercial intercourse with

the more powerful kingdoms; he endeavoured
to render such as were feeble or divided, tri.
butary to the crown of Portugal, Some of the
petty princes voluntarily acknowledged them,
selves his vassals. Others were compelled to
do so by force of arms. A regular and well
digested system was formed with refped to this
new obje& of policy, and by firmly adhering to
it, the Portuguese power and commerce in Afri.
ca were established upon a solid foundation.

Hopes of By their constant intercourse with the people
a ve''w te of Africa, the Portuguese gradually acquired
J.dEs, some knowledge of those parts of that country

which they had not visited. The information
which they received from the natives, added to
what they had observed in their own voyages,
began to open profpeas more extensive, and to
suggest the idea of schemes more important,
than those which had hitherto allured and oc-
cupied them. They had deteaed the error of
the ancients concerning the nature of the torrid
zone. They found, as they proceeded south-
wards, that the continent of Africa, instead of
extending in breadth, according to the doc.
trine of Ptolemy , at that time the oracle and

- a Vide Nov. Orbia TabuL Geograph. fecund. Ptolem.
Amft. 730o.

guide of the learned in the science of geography, BOO K r.
appeared sensibly to contrac itself, and to bend
towards the east. This induced them to give
credit to the accounts of the ancient Phenician
voyages round Africa, which had long been
deemed fabulous, and led them to conceive
hopes that by following the fame route, they
might arrive at the East Indies, and engross
that commerce which has been the source of
wealth and power to every nation poffeffed of it.
The comprehensive genius of prince Henry, as
we may conjecure from the words of the pope's
bull, had early formed some idea of this naviga-
tion. But though his countrymen, at that pe-
riod, were incapable of conceiving the extent
of his views and schemes, all the Portuguese
mathematicians and pilots now concurred in
representing them as well-founded and practi-
cable. The king entered with warmth into
their sentiments, and began to concert measures
for this arduous and important voyage.

BEFORE his preparations for this expedition schemes for

accomolith-

were finithed, accounts were transmitted from isg this.
Africa, that various nations along the coast had
mentioned a mighty kingdom situated on their
continent, at a great distance towards the east,
the king of which, according to their defcrip-
tion, profeffed the Christian religion. The Fcr-

tugue.3

BOO K I. tuguefe monarch immediately concluded, that

this must be the emperor of Abyssinia, to whom
the Europeans, seduced by a mifiake of Rubru.
quis, Marco Polo, and other travellers to the
eafit, absurdly gave the name Prester or Pref-
byter John; and as he hoped to receive informa-
tion and aflifiance from a Christian prince, in
prosecuting a scheme that tended to propagate
their common faith, he resolved to open, if pof.
fible, some intercourse with his court. With
this view, he made choice of Pedro de Covillam
and Alphonfo de Payva, who were perfea maf-
ters of the Arabic language, and sent them into
the east, to search for the residence of this un-
known potentate, and to make him proffers of
friendship. They had in charge likewise to pro-
cure whatever intelligence the nations which they
visited could supply, with refpea to the trade of
India, and the course of navigation to that con,
tinent \

Voyage of WHILE John made this new attempt by land,

.,ew Daz. to obtain some knowledge of the country, which

he wished so ardently to diicover, he did not
neglea the prosecution of this great design by

4s*6. sea. The conducQ of a voyage for this purpose,

b Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26, Lafitau De-

couv. de Port. 1. 46.

the most arduous and important which the Por. B oo oK .
tuguefe had ever projected, was committed to
Bartholomew Diaz, an officer whose sagacity,
experience, and fortitude rendered him equal
to the undertaking. He firetched boldly to-
wards the south, and proceeding beyond the
utmost limits to which his countrymen had
hitherto advanced, discovered near a thousand
miles of new country. Neither the danger to
which he was exposed, by a fircceffion of violent
tempests in unknown seas, and by the frequent
mutinies of his crew, nor the calamities of fa-
mine which he fuffered from losing his store-
ihip, could deter him from prosecuting his en-
terprife. In recompence of his labours and
perseverance, he at last descried that lofty pro.
montory which bounds Africa to the south.
But to descry it, was all that he had in his
power to accomplish. The violence of the
winds, the flattered condition of his ships, and
the turbulent spirit of his sailors, compelled
him to return, after a voyage of sixteen months,
in which he discovered a far greater extent of
country than any former navigator. Diaz had
called the promontory which terminated his
voyage Cabo Tormentofo, or the stormy Cape;
but the king, his matter, as he now entertained
no doubt of having found the long desired route

1.8 to

B o o K i. to India, gave it a name more inviting, and of
'Cc better omen, The Cape of Good Hope .

More cer- THOSE sanguine expeCations of success were

confirmed by the intelligence which John re-
ceived over land, in consequence of his em.
baffy to Abyflinia. Covillam and Payva, in
obedience to their mailer's infirucions, had
repaired to Grand Cairo. From that city, they
travelled along with a caravan of Egyptian mer-
chants, and embarking on the Red Sea, ar-
rived at Aden in Arabia. There they fepa.
rated; Payva failed direcly towards Abyssinia;
Covillam embarked for the East Indies, and
having visited Calecut, Goa, and other cities
on the Malabar coast, returned to Sofala, on
the east fide of Africa, and thence to Grand
Cairo, which Payva and he had fixed upon as
their place of rendezvous. Unfortunately the
former was cruelly murdered in Abyssinia, but
Covillam found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews,
whom John, whose provident sagacity attended
to every circumitance that could facilitate the
execution 'of his schemes, had dispatched after
them, in order to receive a detail of their pro.
ceedings, and to communicate to them new in-
ftruaions. By one of these Jews, Covillam

C Faria y Sousa Port. 4Aia, vol. i. p. 26.

transmitted

transmitted to Portugal a journal of his travels BoOK 7.
by sea and land, his remarks upon the trade of
India, together with exadt maps of the coasts
on which he had touched; and from what he
himself had observed, as well as from the in-
formation of skilful seamen in different coun-
tries, he concluded, that by failing round Afri-
ca, a passage might be found to the East In-
dies '.

THE happy coincidence of Covillam's opi- aPre;
nion and report, with the discoveries which anther
Diaz had lately made, left hardly any shadow
of doubt with refpea to the possibility of failing
from Europe to India. But the vast length of
the voyage, and the furious florms which Diaa
had encountered near the Cape of Good Hope,
alarmed and intimidated the Portuguese to such
a degree, although by long experience they
were now become adventurous and skilful ma-
riners, that some time was requisite to prepare
their mjnds for this dangerous and extraordi-
r,ary voyage. The courage, however, and au-
thority of the monarch, gradually dispelled the
vain fears of his fubjeats, or made it neceflary
to conceal them. As John thought himself
now upon the eve of accomplishing that great

d Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 27. LafiGau De-

couv. i. 48.

VOL. I. G ' design,

BOOK I. design, which had been the principal obje& of

his reign, his earnestness in prosecuting it be.
came so vehement, that it occupied his thoughts
by day, and bereaved him of sleep through the
night. While he was taking every precaution
that his wisdom and experience could fugged,
in order to ensure the success of the expedition,
which was to decide concerning the fate of his
favourite projea, the fame of the vast disco.
veries which the Porruguefe had already made,
the reports concerning the extraordinary intel.

The atten- ligence which they had received from the East,
tion of man-
kind fixed and the profpet of the voyage which they now
upon it. meditated, drew the attention of all the Euro.

pean nations, and held them in fufpence and
expe&ation. By fomne, the maritime skill and
navigations of the Portuguese were compared
with those of the Phenicians and Carthaginians,
and exalted above them. Others formed con-
jedures concerning the revolutions which the
success of the Portuguese schemes might occa-
sion in the course of trade, and the political
state of Europe. The Venetians began to be
difquieted with the apprehension of losing their
Indian commerce, the monopoly of which was
the chief source of their power as well as opu.
lence, and the Portuguese already enjoyed in
fancy, the wealth of the East. But, during
this interval, which gave such scope to the va-

23 rious

rious workings of curiosity, of hope and of BOOK I.
fear, an account was brought to Europe of an suddenly

turned to a

event no less extraordinary than unexpeated, ,ew ojsa.
the discovery of a New World situated in the
weft; and the eyes and admiration of man-
kind turned immediately towards that great
objet.

# BOOK II.

THE

i I S TOR Y

OF

AM E R I C A.

i oOK It

A 0 ONG the foreigners whom the fame BOOK II.

of the discoveries made by the Portu- Birth and

education of

guefe had allured into their service, was Chri- Columbus.
flopher Colon or Columbus, a fubjea of the
republic of Genoa. Neither the time nor place
of his birth are known with certainty a ; but he
was descended of an honourable family, though
reduced to indigence by various misfortunes.
His ancestors having betaken theinfelves for
fubfifltence to a sea-faring life, Columbus dif-
covered, in his early youth, the peculiar cha-
raaer and talents which mark out a man for
that profeffion. His parents, infitead ofthivart-
ing this original propensity of his mind, feemn
to have encouraged and confirmed it, by the

a See NOTE XI;

G education

BO OK I. education which they gave him. After ac.

quiring some knowledge of the Latin tongue,
the only language in which science was taught
at that time, he was inftruaed in geometry,
cosmography, astronomy, and the art of draw.
ing. To these he applied with such ardour and
predileaion, on account of their conne8ion
with navigation, his favourite obje&, that he
advanced with rapid proficiency in the fiudy of

"*67' them. Thus qualified, he went to sea at the

age of fourteen, and began his career on that
element which conduaed him to fo' much

glory. His early voyages were to those ports
in the Mediterranean which his countrymen
the Genoese frequented. This being a sphere
too narrow for his aaive mind, he made an ex,

1467. curfion to the northern seas, and visited the

coasts of Iceland, to which the English and
other nations had begun to resort on account of
its fishery. As navigation, in every diretion,
was now become enterprising, he proceeded
beyond that island, the Thule of the ancients,
and advanced several degrees within the polar
.circle. Having satisfied his curiosity by a
voyage which tended more to enlarge his know.
ledge of naval affairs, than to improve his for-
tune, he entered into the service of a famous
fea-captain, of his own name and family. This
man commanded a small squadron. fitted out at

his

his own expence, and by cruising sometimes BOOK 11.
againfl the Mahometans, sometimes against the
Venetians, the rivals of his country in trade,
had acquired both wealth and reputation. With
him Columbus continued for several years, no
less distinguished for his courage, than for his
experience as a sailor. At length, in an ob-
Rtinate engagement, off the coast of Portugal,
with some Venetian caravels, returning richly
laden from the Low Countries, the vessel on
board which he served took fire, together with
one of the enemy's (hips, to which it was fast
grappled. In this dreadful extremity his intre-
pidity and presence of mind did not forsake
him. He threw himself into the sea, laid hold
of a floating oar, and by the support of it, and
his dexterity in swimming, he reached the
shore, though above two leagues distant, and
saved a life reserved for great undertakings b

As soon as he recovered strength for the He enters

into the

journey, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of Portuguefs
his countrymen were fettled. They soon con-
ceived such a fivourable opinion of his merit,
as well as talents, that they warmly solicited him
to remain in that kingdom, where his naval
skill and experience could not fail of rendering

b Life of Columbus, c. v.

G 4 Lim

BOOK In. him conspicuous. To every adventurer, anm-

mated either with curiosity to visit new coun-
tries, or with ambition to diftinguifll himself,
the Portuguese service was at that time ex-
tremely inviting. Columbus listened with a
favourable ear to the advice of his friends, and
having gained the esteem of a Portuguese lady,
whom he married, fixed his residence in Lisbon.
This alliance, instead of detaching him from a
sea-faring life, contributed to enlarge the sphere
of his naval knowledge, and to excite a desire
of extending it still farther. His wife was a
daughter of Bartholomew Pereftrello, one of
the captains employed by prince Henry in his
early navigations, and who, under his protec-
tion, had discovered and planted the islands of
Porto Santo and Madeira. Columbus got pof-
feflion of the journals and charts of this expe-
rienced navigator, and from them he learned
the course which the Portuguese had held in
making their discoveries, as well as the various
circumstances which guided or encouraged them
in their attempts. The study of these soothed
and inflamed his favourite passion; and while
he contemplated the maps, and read the defcrip-
tions of the new countries which Perefirello had
seen, his impatience to visit them became irre-
fiftible. In order to indulge it, he madea
voyage to Madeira, and continued during fe.

I .- - veral

veral years to trade with that island, with the B OOK Jt.
Canaries, the Azores, the settlements in Guinea,
and all the other places which the Portuguese
had discovered on the continent of Africa c.

BY the experience which Columbus acquired, T1he'ifrf,
during such a variety of voyages, to almofi every ""ohi.
part of the globe with which, at that time, any
intercourse was carried on by sea, he was now
become one of the most skilful navigators in
Europe. But, not satisfied with that praise,
his ambition aimed at something more. The
fuccefsful progress of the Portuguese navigators
had awakened a spirit of curiosity and emula-
tion, which set every man of science upon ex-
amining all the circumstances that led to the
discoveries which they had made, or that afforded
aprofpedt of succeeding in any new and bolder
undertaking. The mind of Columbus, natu-
rally inquisitive, capable of deep refleaion, and
turned to speculations of this kind, was so often
employed in revolving the principles upon which
the Portuguese had founded their schemes of dif-
covery, and the mode in which they had carried
them on, that he gradually began to form an
idea of improving upon their plan, and of ac-
complifhing discoveries which hitherto they had
attempted in vain.

' Life of Co'umbus, c. iv. v.

BOOK 00 To find out a passage by sea to the East In.

enorms dies, was the great objea in view at that period.

Snrfe to From the time that the Portuguese doubled
India. Cape de Verd, this was the point at which they

aimed in all their navigations, and, in comn.
parison with it, all their discoveries in Africa
appeared inconsiderable. The fertility and
riches of India had been known for many ages;
its spices and other valuable commodities were
in high requelt throughout Europe, and the
vast wealth of the Venetians arising from their
having engrossed this trade, had raised the envy
of all nations. But how intent soever the Por.

tuguefe were upon discovering a new route to
those desirable regions, they searched for it only
by fleering towards the south, in hopes of ar.
riving at India, by turning to the east, after
they had failed round the farther extremity of
Africa. This course was fill unknown, and,
even if discovered, was of such immense length,
that a voyage from Europe to India muff have
appeared, at that period, an undertaking ex-
tremely arduous, and of very uncertain issue.
More than half a century had been employed in
advancing from Cape Non to the equator; a
much longer space of time might elapse before
the more extensive navigation from that to India
could be accomplished. These refletions upon
the uncertainty, the danger and tcdioufnefs of

the

the course which the Portuguese were pursuing, BOOK I.
naturally led Columbus to confider whether a
thorter and more dire& passage to the East In-
dies might not be found out. After revolving
long and seriously every circumftance.fuggefited
by his superior knowledge in the theory as well
as practice of navigation, after comparing at-
tentively the observations of modern pilots with
the hints and conjeaures of ancient authors,
he at last concluded, that by failing direcly
towards the wefl, across the Atlantic ocean, new
countries, which probably formed a part of the
great continent of India, muif infallibly be dif-
covered.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, The princi-

ples on

and derived from different sources, induced him which his

theory was

to adopt this opinion, seemingly as chimerical founded.
-as it was new and extraordinary. The fpheri-
cal figure of the earth was known, and its mag.
nitude ascertained with some degree of accuracy.
From this it was evident, that the continents of
Europe, Aria, and Africa, as far as they were
known at that time, formed but a small por-
tion of the terraqueous globe. It was suitable
to our ideas concerning the wisdom and bene-
ficence of the Author of Nature, to believe that
the vast space, still unexplored, was not covered
entirely by a waste unprofitable ocean, but oc-

cupied

BooK IT. cupied by countries fit for the habitation of man.

It appeared likewise extremely probable, that the
continent, on this fide of the globe, was balan-
ced by a proportional quantity of land in. the
other hemisphere. These conclufioris concerning
the existence of another coritinent, drawn from
the figure and ftiruure of the globe, were con-
firmed by the obfervatiois and conjeatires of
moderti navigators. A Portuguese pilot,-havirg
stretched farther to the weft than was tufual 't
that time, took up a piece of timber artificially
carved, floating upon the sea; andas - it was
driven towards him by a westerly -wind,. he coio-
eluded that it came from fonie unknowivriland,
situated in that quarter. Columbus's broth'e -
in-law had found, to the weft of the.Madeira
isles, a piece of timber faihiored in the 4fanie
manner, and brought by the fame wind ;, and-had
seen likewise canes of an enormous size floating
upon the waves, which resembled those described
-by Ptolemy as produ&ions peculiar to the East
Indies d. After a course of westerly winds, trepe,
.torn up by the roots, were often driven upon
the coafis of the Azores, and at one time the
dead bodies of two men, with singular features,
Tefembling neither the inhabitants of Europe not
of Africa, were cast ashore there.

d ,ib. C.' 1.'i.; '

As the force of this united evidence, arising BOOK IT.

from theoretical principles and pratical obfer-
yations, led Columbus to expect the discovery
of new countries in the Western Ocean, other
reasons induced him to believe that these must
be conneded with the continent of India.
Though the ancients had hardly ever pene-
trated into India farther than the banks of the
Ganges, yet some Greek authors had ventured
to describe the provinces beyond that river.
As men are prone, and at liberty, to magnify
what is - remote or unknown, they represented
them as regions of an immense extent. Ctefias
*affirmed that India was as large as all the reft
ofAfia. Oneficritus, whom Pliny the natu-
.ralift follows e, contended .that it was equal to
·a third part of the habitable earth. Nearchus
asserted, that it would take four months to
march in a straight line from one extremity of
India to the other '. The journal of Marco Po-
lo, who had proceeded towards the East far be-
yond the limits to which any European had ever
advanced, seemed to confirm these exaggerated
accounts of the ancients. By his magnificent
descriptions of the kingdoms of Cathay and
Cipango, and of many other countries, the

* Nat. Hist. lib. vi. c. 17.
f Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 0iox.

names

BOOK It names of which were unknown in Europe,

India appeared to be a region of vast extent.
From these accounts, which, however defecive,
were the most accurate that the people of
Europe had received at that period, wth re-
fpet to the remote parts of the East, Columbus
drew a just conclusion. He contended, that,
in proportion as the continent of India stretched
out towards the East, it must, in consequence
of the spherical figure of the earth, approach
nearer to the islands which had lately been dif-
covered to the weft of Africa; that the distance
from the one to the other was probably not
very considerable; and that the most dire&, as
well as shortest course, to the remote regions
of the East, was to be found by failing due
weft g. This notion concerning the vicinity
of India to the western parts of our continent,
was countenanced by some eminent writers
among the ancients, the fan&ion of whose
authority was necessary, in that age, to pro,
cure a favourable reception to any teneti
Aristotle thought it probable that the Columns,
of Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not
far removed from the East Indies, and that
there might be a communication by sea between

£ See NOTE XII.

them.

them . Seneca, in terms still more explicit, BOO K

~ If

affirms, that, with a fair wind, one might fail
from Spain to India in a few days'. The
famous Atlantic island described by Plato, and
supposed by many to be a real country, beyond
which an unknown continent was situated,
is represented by him as lying at no great
distance from Spain. After weighing all these
particulars, Columbus, in whose character the
modefly and diffidence of true genius was
united with the ardent enthusiasm of a pro-
jetor, did not reft with such absolute assurance
either upon his own arguments, or upon the
authority of the ancients, as not to consult
such of his contemporaries as were capable of
comprehending the nature of the evidence
which he produced in support of his opinion.
As early as the year one thousand four hundred
and feventy-four, he communicated his ideas
concerning the probability of discovering new
countries, by failing westwards, to Paul, a
plhyfician of Florence, eminent for his know-
ledge of cosmography, and who, from the
learning as well as candour which he discovers
in his reply, appears to have been well intitled
to the confidence which Columbus placed in

h Ariftot. de Ccelo, lib. ii. c. 14. edit. Iu Val, Par.

1629, vol. i. p. 472.

i Senec. Quest. Natur. lib. i. in proem.

him.

BOOK IT. him. He warmly approved of the plan, fug.

gefted several fads in confirmation of it, and
encouraged Columbus to persevere in an un-
dertaking so laudable, and which must redound
so much to the honour of his country, and the
benefit of Europe k

soH (c,, To a mind less capable of forming and of
it into exe- ±ormsng
uion,ex" executing great designs than that of Columbus,

all those reasonings, and observations, and
authorities, would have served only as the
foundation of rome plausible and fruitless theory,
which might have furnished matter for inge-
nious discourse, or fanciful conjedure. But
with his sanguine and enterprising temper, fpe-
culation led direaly to ation. Fully satisfied
himself with refped to the truth of his system,
he was impatient to bring it to the test of ex-
periment, and to set out upon a voyage of
discovery. The first step towards this was to
secure the patronage of some of the confider.
able powers in Europe, capable of undertaking
such an enterprise. As long absence had not
extinguished the affection which he bore to his
native country, he wished that it should reap

Hre applies the fruits of his labours and invention. With
to the Ge-
Doefei this view, he laid his scheme before the senate

t Life of Columbus, c. viii.

bs Genoa, and making his country the firflt OOK n.
tender of his service, offered to fail under the
banners of the republic, in quest of the new
regions which he expeaed to discover. But
Columbus had resided for so many years in
foreign parts, that his countrymen were unac-
quainted with his abilities and chara&er; and,
though a maritime people, were so little accuf-
itomed to distant voyages, that they could form
no just idea of the principles on which he founded
his hopes of success. They inconsiderately re-
jefed his proposal, as the dream of a chimerical
projector, and loft for ever the opportunity of
restoring theii coinmonwealth to its ancient
iplenddur '.

IHAVINb perforined ivhat vad due to his to tie k~g

ot Portugal;

country, Columbus was so little discouraged
by the repulse which he had received, that, in-
stead of relinquishing his undertaking, he pur-
fuep it with irefh ardour. He made his next
overture to John II. king of Portugal, in
whose dominions he had been long eftablithed,
and whom he considered, on that account, as
having the second claim to his service. Here
every circumstance seemed to promise him a
more favourable reception. He applied to a

1 Herrera Hist. de las Indias Occid, dec. I. lib. i. c. 'f.

VOL. I. H monarch

BOOK II. monarch of an enterprising genius, no incom.

petent judge in naval affairs, and proud of
patronising every attempt to discover new
countries. His fubjeas were the most expe.
rienced navigators in Europe, and the least
apt to be intimidated either by the novelty
or boldness of any maritime expedition. In
Portugal, the profeflional skill of Columbus,
as well as his personal good qualities, were
thoroughly known; and as the former ren.
dered it probable that his scheme was not alto.
gether visionary, the latter exempted him
irom the suspicion of any finiffer intention in
proposing it. Accordingly, the king listened
to him in the most gracious manner, and
referred the consideration of his plan to Diego
Ortiz, bilhop of Ceuta, and two Jewish phy·
ficians, eminent cofmographers, whom he
wxas accustomed to consult in matters of this
kind. As in Genoa, ignorance had opposed
and d.isappointed Columbus; in Lisbon, he
had to combat with prejudice, an enemy no
less formidable. The persons, according to
whose decision his scheme was to be adopted
or rejeced, had been the chief direaors of the
Portuguese navigations, and had advised to
search for a passage to India, by fleering a
course dire&ly opposite to that which Columbus
recommended as shorter and more certain.

They could not, therefore, approve of his pro- BOOK 1.
pofal, without submitting to the double mor-
tification, of condemning their own theory,
and of acknowledging his superior sagacity.
After teasing him with captious questions, and by whom lie
starting innumerable objeaions, with a view of is deceived
betraying him into such a particular expla-
nation of his system, as might draw from him
a full discovery of its nature, they deferred
passing a final judgement with refpea to it.
In the mean time, they conspired to rob him
of the honour and advantages which he ex-
peted from the success of his scheme, advising
the king to dispatch a vessel, secretly, in order
to attempt the proposed discovery, by follow-
ing exaaly the course which Columbus seemed
to point out. John, forgetting on this occa-
sion the sentiments becoming a monarch,
meanly adopted this perfidious counsel. But
the pilot, chosen to execute Columbus's plan,
had neither the genius, nor the fortitude of its
author. Contrary winds arose, no fight of ap-
proaching land appeared, his courage failed,
and he returned to Lisbon, execrating the pro-
jet as equally extravagant and dangerous m.

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranf, ne reaves
action, Columbus felt the indignation natural tIoa lirs

to the court
of Spain.

a Life of Columbus, c. xi. Herrera, decad. I. lib. i. c. 7.

H 2 to

BOOK II. to aningenuous mind, and in the warmth of

his resentment determined to break off all in,
tercourfe with a nation capable of such flagrant
treachery. He instantly quitted the kingdom,
and landed in Spain towards the close of the
year one thousand four hundred and eighty.
four. As he was now at liberty to court the
proteaion of any patron, whom he could en-
gage to approve of his plan, and to carry it
into execution, he resolved to propose it in
perforn to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that
time governed the united kingdoms of Castile

sens his and Aragon. But as he had already expe-
brogl ain.to rienced the uncertain issue of applications to

kings and ministers, he took the precaution of
sending into England his brother Bartholomew,
to whom he had fully communicated his ideas,
in order that he might negociate, at the fame
time, with Henry VII. who was reputed one
of the most sagacious as well as opulent princes
in Europe.

Obftactes to IT was not without reason that Columbus en-
nis thccefs "n
Spa in. tertained doubts and fears with refpea to the

reception of his proposals in the Snanifh court.
Spain was, at that junaure, engaged in a dan.
gerous war with Granada, the last of the Moorilh
kingdoms in that country. The wary and fufpi-
clous temper of Ferdinand was not formed to

relifi

relilh bold or uncommon designs. Isabella, BOOK I1.
though more generous and enterprising, was
under the influence of her husband in all her
ations. The Spaniards had hitherto made no
efforts to extend navigation beyond its ancient
limits, and had beheld the amazing progress
of discovery among their neighbours the Por-
tuguefe, without one attempt to imitate or to
rival them. The war with the Infidels afforded
an ample field to the national acivity and
love of glory. Under circumifances so unfa-
vourable, .it was impossible for Columbus to
make rapid progress with a nation, naturally
flow and dilatory in forming all its resolutions.
His character, however, was admirably adapted
to that of the people, whose confidence and
protetion he solicited. He was grave, though
courteous in his deportment; circumfped in
his words and acions; irreproachable in his
morals; and exemplary in his attention to
all the duties and functions of religion. By
qualities so refpecable, he not only gained
many private friends, but acquired such gene-
ral esteem, that, notwithstanding the plainncfs
of his appearance, suitable to the mediocrity
of his fortune, he was not considered as a mere
adventurer, to whom indigence had fuggeited
a visionary project, but was received as a per-

H 3 foi

BOOK II. son to whose propositions serious attention

was due.

itcie~ne FERDINAND and Isabella, though fully occu-

ldus"', pied by their operations .against the Moors,

paid so much regard to Columbus, as to remit
the consideration of his plan to the queen's
confefibr, Ferdinand de Talavera. He con.
fulted such of his countrymen as were sup.
posed best qualified to decide with refped to

a

fubje& of this kind. But true science had,
hitherto, made so little progress in Spain, that
the pretended philosophers, feleted to judge
in a matter of such moment, did not compre.
hend the first principles upon which Columbus
founded his conje&tures and hopes. Some of
them, from miftakenr notions concerning the
dimensions of the globe, contended that a
voyage to those remote parts of the east, which
Columbus expe&ed to discover, could not be
performed in less than three years. Others
concluded, that either he would find the ocean
to be of infinite extent, according to the opi.
nion of some ancient philosophers; or, if he
thould persist in fleering towards the weft be.
yond a certain point, that the convex figure
of the globe would prevent his return, and
that he must inevitably perish, in the vain

attempt

attempt to open a communication between the BOOK IT.
two opposite hemispheres, which nature had for
ever disjoined. Even without deigning to
enter into any particular discussion, many re-
jeced the scheme in general, upon the credit
of a maxim, under which the ignorant and
unenterprifing shelter themselves in every age,
" That it is presumptuous in any person, to
suppose that he alone poffeffes knowledge fupe-
rior to all the reft of mankind united." They
maintained, that if there were really any such
countries as Columbus pretended, they could
not have remained so long concealed, nor
would the wisdom and sagacity of former ages
have left the glory of this invention to an ob-
fcure Genoese pilot.

IT required all Columbus's patience and who make

an unfa-

address to negociate with men capable of ad- vourable

report con-

vancing such strange propositions. He had to cerningm .
contend not only with the obstinacy of igno-
rance, but with what is itill more intra&able, the
pride of false knowledge. After innumerable
conferences, and wasting five years in fruitless
endeavours to inform and to satisfy judges so
little capable of deciding with propriety, Tala-
vera, at last, made such an unfavourable report
to Ferdinand and Isabella, as induced them to
acquaint Columbus, that until the war with

H 4 the

BOOK II. the Moors mhould be brought to a period, it

would be imprudent to engage in any new and
expensive enterprise.

"WHATEVER care was taken to soften the

harlhnefs of this declaration, Columbus con.
fidered it as a final rejection of his proposals.
But happily for mankind, that superiority of
genius, which is capable of forming great and
uncommon designs, is usually accompanied
with an ardent enthusiasm, which can neither
be cooled by delays, nor damped by difap.
pointment. Columbus was of this sanguine
temper. Though he felt deeply the cruel
blow given to his hopes, and retired immedi.
ately from a court, where he had been amused
so long with vain expedations, his confidence
i1 the jufinefs of his own system did not dimi.
nifh, and his' impatience to demonstrate the
truth of it by an acual experimcnt became
greater than ever. Having courted the pro-
iteion of sovereign states without success, he
applied, next, to persons of inferior rank, and
addressed successively the dukes of Medina
Sidonia, and Medina Cell, who, .though sub-
jeas, were poifeffed of power and opulence
more than equal to the enterprise which he
projeaed. His negociations with them proved
s fruitless, as those in which he had been

hitherto

hitherto engaged; for these noblemen were ooK n..
either as little convinced by Columbus's argu-
ments as their superiors, or they were afraid
of alarming the jealousy, and ofiending the
pride of Ferdinand, by countenancing a fchcme
which he had rejeted ".

AnMI the painful sensations occasioned by ~e~ociaion

such a fucceflion of disappointments, Columbus .~rig Epn-
had to sustain the additional diflrefs, of having
received no accounts of his brother, whom he
had sent to the court of England. In his
voyage to that country, Bartholomew had been
so unfortunate as to fall into the hands of
pirates, who having firipped him of every
thing, detained him a prisoner for several years.
At length, he made his escape, and arrived in
London, but in such extreme indigence, that
he was obliged to employ himself, during a
considerable time, in drawing and felling maps,
in order to pick up as much money as would
purchase a decent dress, in which he might
venture to appear at court. He then laid be-
fore the king the proposals, with which he had
been entrusted by his brother, and, notwith
flanding Henry's exceflive caution and parsi-
inony, which rendered him averse to new or

S Life of Columb. c. I3, Hierrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 7.

expensive

BooK IT. expensive undertakings, .he received Colum.

bus's overtures, with more approbation, than
any monarch to' whom they had hitherto been
presented.

Columbus MEANWHILE, Columbus being unacquainted
has some
profpeas of with his brother's fate, and having now no
encourage-

int in profpet of encouragement in Spain, resolved

Spain.

to visit the court of England in person, in
hopes of meeting with a more favourable
reception there. He had already made pre-
parations for this purpose, and taken measures
for the disposal of his children during his
absence, when Juan Perez, the guardian of
the monastery of Rabida, near Palos, in which
they had been educated, earnestly solicited him
to defer his journey for a lhort time. Perez
was a man of considerable learning, and of
some credit with Queen Isabella, to whom he
was known personally. He was warmly attach-
ed to Columbus, with whose abilities as well as
integrity he had many opportunities of being
acquainted. Prompted by curiosity or by
friendship, he entered upon an accurate exa-
mination of his system, in conjuncion with a
physician fettled in the neighbourhood, who
was a considerable proficient in mathematical
knowledge. This investigation satisfied them
so thoroughly, with respect to the solidity of

the

the principles on which Columbus founded his BooK n.
opinion, and the probability of success in exe-
cuting the plan which he proposed, that Perez,
in order to prevent his country from being
deprived of the glory and benefit, which must
accrue to the patrons of such a grand enter-
prise, ventured to write to Isabella, conjuring
her to confider the matter anew, with the
attention which it merited,

MOVED by the representations of a person

whom she refpeaed, Isabella desired Perez to
repair immediately to the village of Santa Fe,
in which, on account of the siege of Granada,
the court resided at that time, that she might
confer with him upon this important fubje&.
The first effea of their interview was a gracious
invitation of Columbus back to court, accom- 149!,
panied with the present of a finall fum to equip
him for the journey. As there was now a
certain profpe&, that the war with the Moors
would speedily be brought to an happy issue
by the reduction of Granada, which would
!eave the nation at liberty to engage in new
undertakings ; this, as well as the mark of
royal favour, with which Columbus had been
lately honoured, encouraged his friends to ap-
pear with greater confidence than formerly in
support of his scheme. The chief of these,

Alonfo

BOOK II. Alonfo de Quintanilla, comptroller of the

finances in Castile, and Luis de Santangel,
receiver of the ecclesiastical revenues in Aragon,
whose meritorious zeal in promoting this great
design entitles their names to an honourable
pl;ce in hiflory, introduced Columbus to many
persons of high rank, and interested them
warmaly in his behalf.

is again dif- Bu it was not an easy matter to inspire
appointed. Ferdinand with favourable. sentiments. He

fill regarded Columbus's projea as extrava.
gant and chimerical; and in order to render
the efforts of his partizans ineffe&ual, he had
the address to employ in this new negociation
with him, some of the persons who had for-
merly pronounced his scheme to be imprafi.
cable. To their astonishment, Columbus ap.
peared before them with the fame confident
hopes of ficcefs as formerly,, and insisted updh
the fame high recomnpence. He proposed that
a small fleet should be fitted out, under hiS
command, to attempt the discovery, and de.
manded to be appointed hereditary admiral
and viceroy of all the seas and lands which he
ihould discover, and to have the tenth of the
profits arising from them, fettled irrevocably
upon himself and his descendants. At the
fame time, he offered to' advance the eighth

part

part of the fum necessary for accomplishing his BOOK It.
design, on condition that he should be entitled ^
to a proportional share of benefit from the
adventure. If the enterprise should totally
miscarry, he made no flipulation for any reward
or emolument whatever. Instead of viewing
this condua as the clearest evidence of his full
persuasion with refped to the truth of his own
system, or being fitruck with that magnanimity
which, after so many delays and repulses,
would sloop to nothing inferior to its original
claims, the persons with whom Columbus
treated, began meanly to calculate the expence
of the expedition, and the value of the reward
which he demanded. The expence, moderate
as it was, they represented to be too great for
Spain, in the present exhausted state of its
finances. They contended, that the honours
and emoluments claimed by Columbus, were
exorbitant, even if he mhould perform the
utmost of what he had promised; and if all his
sanguine hopes thould prove illusive, such vast
concessions to an adventurer would be deemed
not only inconsiderate, but ridiculous. In this
imposing garb of caution and prudence, their
opinion appeared so plausible, and was so
warmly supported by Ferdinand, that Isabella
declined giving any countenance to Columbus,

and

BOOK IT. and abruptly broke off the negociation with

him which the had begun,

THIS was more mortifying to Columbus than

all the disappointments which he had hitherto
met with. The invitation to court from Ifa.
bella, like an unexpeaed ray of light, had
opened such profpeds of success, as encouraged
him to hope that his labours were at an end;
but now darkness and unicertainty returned,
and his mind, firm as it was, could hardly sup.
port the shock of such an unforeseen reverse.
He withdrew in deep anguish from court, with
an intention of prosecuting his voyage to Eng-
land, as his last resource.

Proves atlaft ABOUT that time Granada surrendered, and
,''as'1. Ferdinand and Isabella, in triumphal pomp,
January 2. took poffefion of a city, the reduaion of which

extirpated a foreign power from the heart of
their dominions, and rendered them matters
of all the provinces, extending from the bottom
of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portugal.
As -the flow of spirits which accompanies fuc-
cess elevates the mind, and renders it enter-
prifing, Quintanilla and Santangel, the vigilant
and discerning patrons of Columbus, took ad.
vantage of. this favourable situation, in order
to make one effort more in behalf of their

friend.

friend. They addressed themselves to Isabella, BOOK II.
and, after expressing some surprise, that ihe,
who had always been the munificent patroness
of generous undertakings, should hesitate so
long to countenance the most splendid scheme
that had ever been proposed to any monarch;
they represented to her, that Columbus was a
man of a found understanding and virtuous
chara&er, well qualified, by his experience in
navigation, as well as his knowledge of geo-
metry, to form just ideas with refpe&t to the
ftruaure of the globe and the situation of its
various regions; that, by offering to risk his
own life and fortune in the execution .of his
scheme, he gave the most satisfying evidence
both of his integrity and hope of success; that
the fum requisite for equipping such an arma-
ment as he demanded was inconsiderable, and
the advantages which might accrue from his
undertaking were immense; that he demanded
no recompence for his invention and labour,
but what was to arise from the countries which
he ihould discover; that, as it was worthy
of her magnanimity to make this noble attempt
to extend the sphere of human knowledge, and
to open an intercourse with regions hitherto
unknown, so it would afford the highest fatif.
faction to her piety and zeal, after re-establish-

15 ing

tOOK iI. ing the Christian faith in those provinces of

~492. Spain from which it had been long baniheld,

to discover a new world, to which she might
communicate the light and bleflings of divine
truth ; that if now she did not decide instantly,
the opportunity would be irretrievably loft;
that Columbus was on his way to foreign coun-
tries, where forrie prince, more fortunate or
adventurous, would close with his proposals,
and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal timi-
dity which had excluded her from the glory
and advantages that flie had- once in her power
to have eiijoyed.

THESE forcible arguments, urged by persons

of such authority, and at a junc2ure so well
chosen, produced the desired effea. They
dispelled all Ifabella's doubts and fears; she
ordered Columbus to be instantly recalled,
declared her resolution of employing him on
his own terms, and regretting the low slate of
her finances, generously offered to pledge her
own jewels, in order to rasse as much money
as might be needed in making preparations for
the voyage. Santangel, in a transport of gra-
titude, kissed the queen's hand, and in order
to save her from having recourse to such a
mortifying expedient for procuring money, en-

gaged

gaged to advance immediately the fum that was nBOOK In.
requisite o. 149.

CoLUMBUS had proceeded some leagues on The condi-

S0tions of his

his journey, when the messenger from Isabella agreement
overtook him. Upon receiving an account of
the unexpe&ed revolution in his favour, he
returned directly to Santo Fe, though some
remainder of diffidence flill mingled itself with
his joy. Eut the cordial reception which he
met with from Isabella, together with the near
profpeft of setting out upon that voyage which
had so long been the objea of his thoughts and
wishes, soon effaced the remembrance of all
that he had fuffered in Spain, during eight
tedious years of solicitation and suspense. The
negociation now went forward with facility and
dispatch, and a treaty or capitulation with
Columbus was signed on the seventeenth of
April, one thousand four lundred and ninety-
two. The chief articles of it were, i. Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, as sovereigns of the ocean,
conitituted Columbus their high admiral in
all the seas, islands, and continents which should
be discovered by his induitry; and stipulated,
that he and his heirs for ever should enjoy this
office, with the fame powers and prerogatives

o HIerrera, dec. I. ihb. i. c. 8.

which

VOL. I.

BOO K II. which belonged to the high admiral of Caflile,

,492', within the limits of his jurifdiaion. 2. They

appointed Columbus their viceroy in all the
illands and continents which he should dif.
cover; but if, for the better administration of
affairs, it should hereafter be necessary to efta-
blifh a separate governor in any of those coun.
tries, they authorised Columbus to name three
persons, of whom they would chufe one for
that office; and the dignity of viceroy, with
all its immunities, was likewise to be hereditary
in the family of Columbus. 3. They granted
to Columbus and his heirs for ever the tenth
of the free profits accruing from the pro.
dutions and commerce of the countries which
he mhould discover. 4. They declared, that if
any controversy or law-suit shall arise with
refpe& to any mercantile transaCtion in the
countries which fihuld be discovered, it should
be determined by the sole authority of Colum-
bus, or of judges to be appointed by him.
5. They permitted Columbus to advance one.
eighth part of what mhould be expended in pre-
paring for the expedition, and in carrying on
commerce with the countries which he should
discover, and intitled him, in return, to an
eighth part of the profit P.

P Life of Columbus, c. i5. Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 9.

THOUGH

THOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears eooK n.

conjoined with that of Isabella in this tranf- 142.
acion, his distrust of Columbus was still so
violent that he refused to take any part in the
enterprise as king of Aragon. As the whole
expence of the expedition was to be defrayed
by the crown of Castile, Isabella reserved for
her fubje&s of that kingdom an exclusive right
to all the benefits which might redound from
its success.

As soon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, Theprepa-

rations for

by her attention and a&ivity in forwarding the his voyage.
preparations for the voyage, endeavoured to
make some reparation to Columbus for the
time which he had loft in fruitless solicitation.
By the twelfth of May, all that depended upon
her was adjusted; and Columbus waited on the
king and queen, in order to receive their final
inftruSions. Every thing refpefing the defti-
nation and condua of the voyage, they com-
mitted implicitly to the disposal of his pru-
dence. But, that they might avoid giving any
just cause of offence to the king of Portugal,
they ftridly enjoined him not to approach near
to the Portuguese settlements on the coast of
Guinea, or in any of the other countries to
which the Portuguese claimed right as disco-
verers. Isabella had ordered thie flhips, of

I 2 which

BOOK II. which Columbus was to take the command, to

'492. be fitted out in the port of Palos, a small ma-

ritime town in the province of Andalusia. As
the guardian Juan Perez, to whom Columbus
had already been so much indebted, resided in
the neighbourhood of this place, he, by the in.
. fluence of that good ecclesiastic, as well as by
his o\n connecion with the inhabitants, not
only raised among them what he wanted of the
fumn that he was bound by treaty to advance,
but engaged several of them to accompany him
in the voyage. The chief of there associates
were three brothers of the name of Pinzon, of
considerable wealth, and of great experience in
naval affairs, who were willing to hazard their
lives and fortunes in the expedition.

BUT, after all the efforts of Isabella and Co.

lumbus, the armament was not suitable, either
to the dignity of the nation by which it was
equipped, or to the importance of the service
for which it was destined. It confilted of three
vessels. The larget, a ship of no considerable
burden, was commanded by Columbus, as ad-
miral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria,
out of respect for the Blefled Virgin, whom he
honoured with singular devotion. Of the fe-
cond, called the Pinta, IMartin Pinzon was cap.
tain, and his brother Francis pilot. The third,

named

named the Nigna, was under the command of BOOK IT.
Vincent Yanez Pinzon. These two were light ,19w.
vessels, hardly superior in burden or force to
large boats. This squadron, if it merits that
name, was vicualled for twelve months, and had
on board ninety men, mostly sailors, together
with a few adventurers who followed the fortune
of Columbus, and some gentlemen of Ifabella's
court, whom she appointed to accompany him.
Though the expence of the undertaking was
one of the circumstances which chiefly alarmed
the court of Spain, and retarded so long the ne-
gociation with Columbus, the sinn employed
in fitting out this squadron did not exceed four
thousand pounds.

As the art of flhip-building in the fifteenth

century was extremely rude, and the bulk of
vessels was accommodated to the short and easy
voyages along the coaf which they were accuf-
tomed to perform, it is a proof of the courage
as well as enterprising genius of Columbus, that
he ventured, with a fleet so unfit for a distant
navigation, to explore unknown seas, where he
had no chart to guide him, no knowledge of
the tides and currents, and no experience of the
dangers to which he might be exposed. His
eagerness to accomplish the great design which
had so long engrossed his thoughts, made him

I 3 overlook

BOOK II. overlook or disregard every circumifance that

-y would have intimidated a mind less adven.

turous. He pushed forward the preparations
with such ardour, and was seconded so effe&tually
by the persons to whom Isabella committed the
superintendence of this business, that every
thing was soon in readiness for the voyage. But
as Columbus was deeply impressed with senti,
ments of religion, he would not fet' out upon
an expedition so arduous, and of which one
great object was to extend the knowledge of the
Christian faith, without imploring publickly
the guidance and protecion of Heaven. With
this view, he, together with all the persons
under his command, marched in solemn pro-
ceflion to the monastery of Rabida. After con-
fefling their fins, and obtaining absolution, they
received the holy sacrament from the hands of
the guardian, who joined his prayers to theirs
for the success of an enterprise which he had so
zealously patronized,

His depar- NEXT morning, being Friday the third day
ture from
Spin. of August, in the year one thousand four hun.

dred and ninety-two, Columbus set fail, a little
before sun-rise, in presence of a vast crowd of
fpeaators, who sent up their fupplications to
Heaven for the prosperous iflue of the voyage,
which they wished, rather than expeaed. Co-

lumbus

lumbus fleered dire&ly for the Canary Islands, BOOK Ir.
and arrived there without any occurrence that 14.
would have deserved notice on any other occa-
sion. But, in a voyage of such expedation and
importance, every circumstance was the objet
of attention. The rudder of the Pinta broke
loose, the day after she left the harbour, and
that accident alarmed the crew, no less super-
flitious than unskilful, as a certain omen of the
unfortunate destiny of the expedition. Even
in the short run to the Canaries, the ihips were
found to be so crazy and ill appointed, as to be
very improper for a navigation which was ex-
peaEed to be both long and dangerous. Co-
lumbus refitted them, however, to the bert of
his power, and having supplied himself with
fresh provisions he took his departure from
Gomera, one of the most westerly of the Ca-
nary islands, on the sixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of discovery may properly The course

uwh h.

be said to begin; for Columbus holding his held.
course due weft, left immediately the usual track
of navigation, and firetched into unfrequented
and unknown seas. The first day, as it was
very calm, he made but little way; but on the
second, he loft fight of the Canaries; and many
of the sailors, dejeaed already and dismayed,
when they contemplated the boldness of the un-

I 4 dertaking,

BOOK U. dertaking, began to beat their breasts, and to

1492. shed tears, as if they were never more to behold

land. Columbus comforted them with affur-
ances of success, and the profpe& of vast wealth,
in those opulent regions whither he was con-
ducting them. This early discovery of the
spirit of his followers taught Columbus, that
he must prepare to struggle, not only with the
unavoidable difficulties which might be ex-
peced from the nature of his undertaking, but
with such as were likely to arise from the ig.
norance and timidity of the people under his
command; and he perceived that the art of go.
verning the minds of men would be no less re.
quifite for accomplishing the discoveries which
he had in view, than naval skill and undaunted
courage. Happily for himself, and for the
country by which he was employed, he joined
to the ardent temper and inventive genius of a
projeaor, virtues of another species, which are
rarely united with them. He poffeffed a
thorough knowledge of mankind, an insinuating
address, a patient perseverance in executing any
plan, the perfec government of his own pafiions,
and the talent of acquiring an ascendant over
those of other men. All these qualities, which
formed him for command, were accompanied
with that superior knowledge of his profcdon,
vwhich begets confdecnce in times of dificulty

and

and danger. To unskilful Spanish sailors, ac- BOOK I.
cuftomed only to coasting voyages in the Me- ,492.

Vigiince

diterranean, the maritime science of Columbus, and atten-

tion of Co.

the fruit of thirty years experience, improved lumbus.
by an acquaintance with all the inventions of
the Portuguese, appeared immense. As soon
as they put to sea, he regulated every thing by
his sole authority; he fuperintended the exe-
cution of every order; and allowing himself
only a few hours for sleep, he was at all other
times upon deck. As his course lay through
seas which had not formerly been visited, the
founding-line, or instruments for observation,
were continually in his hands. After the ex-
ample of the Portuguese discoverers, he at-
tended to the motion of tides and currents,
watched the flight of birds, the appearance of
fifaes, of sea-weeds, and of every thing that
floated on the waves, and entered every occur-
rence, with a minute exaanefs, in the journal
which he kept. As the length of the voyage
could not fail of alarming sailors habituated
only to ihort excursions, Columbus endeavoured
to conceal from them the real progress which
they made. With this view, though they run
eighteen leagues on the second day after they
left Gomera, he gave out that they had ad-
vanced only fifteen, and he uniformly employed
the fame artifice of reckoning ihort during the

22 whole

BOOK II. whole voyage. By the fourteenth of Septem.

1492,

i ber, the fleet was above two hundred leagues

to the wetll of the Canary Isles, at a greater
distance from land than any Spaniard had been

Apprehen. before that time. There they were struck with
fions and
alarms of an appearance no less astonishing than new.
his crew.

They observed that the magnetic needle, in
their compasses, did not point exatly to the
polar star, but varied towards the weft; and as
they proceeded, this variation increased. This
appearance, which is now familiar, though it
still remains one of the mysteries of nature, into
the cause of which the sagacity of man hath not
been able to penetrate, filled the companions
of Columbus with terror. They were now in
a boundless unknown ocean, far from the usual
course of navigation; nature itself seemed to
be altered, and the only guide which they had
left was about to fail them. Columbus, with
no less quickness than ingenuity, invented a
reason for this appearance, which, though it did
not satisfy himself, seemed to plausible to them,
that it dispelled their fears, or silenced their

murmurs.

HE f1ill continued to flteer due weft, nearly

in the fame latitude with the Canary islands. In
this course he came within the sphere of the
trade wind, which blows invariably from east

to weftll, between the tropics and a few degrees BOOK Ir.
beyond them. He advanced before this fleady ,49.
gale with such uniform rapidity, that it was
seldom necessary to shift a fail. When about
four hundred leagues to the weft of the Ca-
naries, he found the sea so covered with weeds,
that it resembled a meadow of vast extent; and
in some places they were so thick, as to retard
the motion of the vessels. This strange appear-
ance occasioned new alarm and disquiet. The
sailors imagined that they were now arrived at
the utmost boundary of the navigable ocean;
that these floating weeds would obftruc their
farther progress, and concealed dangerous
rocks, or some large trad of land, which had
funk, they knew not how, in that place. Co-
lumbus endeavoured to persuade them, that
what had alarmed, ought rather to have en-
couraged them, and was to be considered as a
sign of approaching land. At the fame time,
a brisk gale arose, and carried them forward.
Several birds were seen hovering about the
ihip P, and direced their flight towards the weft.
The defponding crew resumed some degree of
spirit, and began to entertain freih hopes.

UPON the first of Oaober they were, ac- 'There in-

cording to the admiral's reckoning, seven hun- ciatLe.

P See NOTE XIII.

dred

Boo0: nI. dred and seventy leagues to the weft of the Ca.

1492. narie. ; but left his men fllould be intimidated

by the prodigious length of the navigation, he
gave out that they had proceeded only five
hundred and eighty-four leagues; and, for.
tunately for Columbus, neither his own pilot,
nor those of the other ships, had skill fufficient
to correa this error, and discover the deceit,
They had now been above three weeks at sea;
they had proceeded far beyond what former na.
vigators had attempted or deemed pofible;
all their prognoftics of discovery, drawn from
the flight of birds and other circumstances, had
proved fallacious ; the appearances of land, with
which their own credulity or the artifice of their
commander had from time to time flattered and
amused them, had been altogether illusive, and
their profped of success seemed now to be as
diflant as ever. Thcfe reflecions occurred often
to men, who had no other object or occupation,
than to reason and discourse concerning the in-
tention and circumstances of their expedition.
They made impreflion, at first, upon the ig.
norant and timid, and extending, by degrees,
to such as were better informed or more refo-
lute, the contagion spread at length from (hip
to thip. From secret whispers or murmur-
ings, they proceeded to open cabals and public
complaints. They taxed their sovereign with

inconsiderate

inconsiderate credulity, in paying such regard BooK n.
to the vain promises and rash conjeaures of an oI'.
indigent foreigner, as to hazard the lives of so
many of her own fubjeds, in prosecuting a
chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they
had fully performed their duty, by venturing
so far in an unknown and hopeless course, and
could incur no blame, for refuting to follow, any
longer, a desperate adventurer to certain de-
ftrucion. They contended, that it was ne-
ceffary to think of returning to Spain, while
their crazy vefieis were still in a condition to
keep the sea, but expressed their fears that the
attempt would prove vain, as the wind, which
had hitherto been so favourable to their course,
must render it impossible to fail in the opposite
direcion. All agreed that Columbus thould
be compelled by force to adopt a measure on
which their common safety depended. Some
of the more audacious proposed, as the most
expeditious and certain method for getting rid
at once of his remonftrances, to throw him into
the sea, being perfladed that, upon their re-
turn to Spain, the death of an unfuccefsful pro-
je8tor would excite little concern, and be in-
quired into x ith no curiosity.

CoLUIMB~rs as fully sensible of his perilous Thie adrers

of Columbus

si tuation. He had observed, with great uneafi- in foohins

n efs, th.m.
ness,

BO OK II. ness, the fatal operation of ignorance and of

1492. fear in producing difaffeaion among his crew,

and saw that it was now ready to burst out into
open mutiny. He retained, however, perfed
presence of mind. He affeaed to seem ig.
norant of their machinations. Notwithftand.
ing the agitation and solicitude of his own
mind, he appeared with a cheerful countenance,
like a man satisfied with the progress which he
had made, and confident of success. Some.
times he employed all the arts of insinuation to
soothe his men. Sometimes he endeavoured to
work upon their ambition or avarice, by mag.
nificent descriptions of the fame and wealth
which they were about to acquire. On other
occasions, he assumed a tone of authority, and
threatened them with vengeance from their so-
vereign, if, by their dastardly behaviour, they
should defeat this noble effort to promote the
glory of God, and to exalt the Spanish name
above that of every other nation. Even witi
seditious sailors, the words of a man whom
they had been accustomed to reverence, were
weighty and persuasive, and not only restrained
them from those violent excesses, which they
meditated, but prevailed with them to accom-
pany their admiral for some time longer.

As they proceeded, the indications of ap- BOOK H.
proaching land seemed to be more certain, and 1492.
excited hope in proportion. The birds began
to appear in flocks, making towards the south-
welt. Columbus, in imitation of the Portu-
guefe navigators, who had been guided, in fe-
veral of their discoveries, by the motion of
birds, altered his course from due weft towards
that quarter whither they pointed their flight.
But, after holding on for several days in this
new dire&ion, without any better success than
formerly, having seen no objea, during thirty
days, but the sea and the iky, the hopes of his
companions subsided faster than they had risen;
their fears revived with additional force; im- Their fears

. . return.

patience, rage, and despair, appeared in every
countenance. All sense of subordination was Danger of a
loft: the officers, who had hitherto concurred mutiny.
with Columbus in opinion, and supported his
authority, now took part with the private men;
they assembled tumultuously on the deck, ex-
postulated with their commander, mingled
threats with their expoftulations, and required
him instantly to tack about and to return to
Elrope. Columbus perceived that it would be
of no avail to have recourse to any of his former
arts, which having been tried so often, had loft
their tffec&; and that it was impossible to re-
kindle any zeal for the success of the cxpedition

among

BOOK II. among men, in whose breasts fear had extin.

i49t . guifhed every generous sentiment. He saw

Colunmbus. that it was no less vain to think of employing

either gentle or fevele measures, to quell a mu-
tiny so general and so violent. It was necessary,
on all these accounts, to soothe passions which
he could no longer command, and to give way
to a torrent too impetuous to be checked. He
promised solemnly to his men that he would
comply with their request, provided they would
accompany him, and obey his commands for
three days longer, and if, during that time,
land were not discovered, he would then aban-
don the enterprise, and direct his course towards
Spain r.

Encouraging ENRAGED as the sailors were, and impatient
appearances
of fuccts. to turn their faces again towards their native

country, this proposition did not appear to them
unreasonable. Nor did Columbus hazard much

in confining himself to a term so short. The
presages of discovering land were now so nu-
merous and promising, that he deemed them
infallible. For some days the founding line
reached the bottom, and the foil which it
brought up indicated land to be at no great dif-
tance. The flocks of birds increased, and were

r Oic'do, Hist. ap. Ramus. vol. ill. p. 81. E.

ccipofed

Composed not only of sea fowl, but of such land BOOK II.
birds as could not be supposed to fly far from
the ihore. The crew of the Pinta observed a
cane floating, which seemed to have been newly
cut, and likewise a piece of timber artificially
carved. The sailors aboard the Nigna took up
the branch of a tree with red berries, perfectly
frelh. The clouds around the setting fun as-
fumed a new appearance; the air was more
mild and warm, and, during night, the wind
became unequal and variable. From all there
symptoms, Columbus was so confident of being
near land, that on the evening of the eleventh
of Otober, after public prayers for success, he
ordered the fails to be furled, and the ships to
lie to, keeping ftri& watch, left they mhould be
driven ashore in the night. During this inter-
val of fufpence and expeaation, no man shut
his eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing intently
towards that quarter where they expe&ed to dif-
cover the land, which had been so long the ob-
je& of their wilhes.

ABOUT two hours before midnight, Colum- Land airco.

bus itanding on the forecafftle, observed a light
at a distance, and privately pointed it out to
Pedro Gu'tierez, a page of the queen's ward-
robe. Guttierez perceived it, and calling to

VOL. I, K Salcedo,

BOOK II. Salcedo, comptroller of the fleet, all three saw

Sit in motion, as if it were carried from place to
1492.

place. A little after midnight, the joyful found
'of land, land, was heard from the Pinta, which
kept always ahead of the other ships. But,
having been so often deceived by fallacious ap.
pearances, every man was now become flow of
belief, and waited, in all the anguish of uncer.
tainty and impatience, for the return of day.

Friday, As soon as morning dawned, all doubts and

fears were dispelled. From every ship an island
was seen about two leagues to the north, whose
flat and verdant fields, well stored with wood,
and watered with many rivulets, presented the
afpea of a delightful country. The crew of
the Pinta initantly began the Te Deum, as a
hymn of thanksgiving to God, and were joined
by those of the other ships, with tears of joy
and transports of cor'ratulation. This office
of gratitude to Heaven was followed by an ac?
of juflice to their commander. They threw
themselves at the feet of Columbus, with feel.
ings of felf-condemnation mingled with reve-
rence. They implored him to pardon their ig.
norance, incredulity, and insolence, which had
created him so much unnecessary disquiet, and
had so often obftruded the prosecution of his
wevl-concerted plan; and pafling, in the warmth

of

of their admiration, from one extreme to an- Boo KI.
other, they now pronounced the man, whom *-v9
they had so lately reviled and threatened, to be
a person inspired by Heaven with sagacity and
fortitude more than human, in order to accom-
plifh a design, so far beyond the ideas and con-
ception of all former ages.

As soon as the fun arose, all their boats were First inter-

view with

manned and armed. They rowed towards the the native,.
island with their colours displayed, with warlike
music, and other martial pomp. As they ap-
proached the coast, they saw it covered with a
multitude of people, whom the novelty of the
fpetacle had drawn together, whose attitudes
and gestures expressed wonder and astonish-
ment at the strange objets which presented
themselves to their view. Columbus was the
firfl European who set foot in the New World
which he had discovered. He landed in a rich
dress, and with a naked sword in his hand. His
men followed, and kneeling down, they all
kissed the ground which they had so long desired
to fee. They next ereaed a crucifix, and pro-
ifrating themselves before it, returned thanks to
God for conduaing their voyage to such an
happy issue. They then took solemn poffeffion
of the country for the crown of Castile and
Leon, with all the formalities which the Portu-

K 2 guefe

Booe ii. guefe were accufltomed to observe in aas of this
,.-. kind, in their new discoveries '.

1492.

Their m,- THE Spaniards, while thus employed, were
nirhment. surrounded by many of the natives, who gazed,

in silent admiration, upon aaions which they
could not comprehend, and of which they did
not foresee the consequences. The dress of the
Spaniards, the whiteness of their skins, their
beards, their arms, appeared strange and fur.
prifing. The vast machines in which they had
traversed the ocean, that seemed to move upon
the waters with wings, and uttered a dreadful
found resembling thunder, accompanied with
lightning and smoke, struck them with such
terror, that they began to refpe& their new
gueflts as a superior order of beings, and con-
cluded that they were children of the Sun, who
had descended to visit the earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at

the scene now before them. Every herb, and
lhrub, and tree, was different from those which
flouriihed in Europe. The foil seemed to be
rich, but bore few marks of cultivation. The
climate, even to Spaniards, felt warm, though
extremely delightful. The inhabitants appeared

Life of Columbus, c. 22, 23. IIHerrera, dec. I. lib.

i. c. 13.

in the simple innocence of nature, entirely BOOK II.
naked. Their black hair, long and uncurled, ' 7"*
floated upon their shoulders, or was bound in
tresses around their heads. They had no beards,
and every part of their bodies was perfectly
smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky
copper colour, their features singular, rather
than disagreeable, their aspect gentle and timid.
Though not tall, they were well shaped, and
a&ive. Their faces, and several parts of their
body, were fantastically painted with glaring
colours. They were fliy at first through fear,
but soon became familiar with the Spaniards,
and with transports of joy received from them
hawks-bells, glass beads, or other baubles, in
return for which they gave such provisions as
they had, and some cotton yarn, the only com-
modity of value that they could produce. To-
wards evening, Columbus returned to his ships,
accompanied by many of the islanders in their
boats, which they called canoes, and though
rudely formed out of the trunk of a tingle tree,
they rowed them with surprising dexterity. Thus,
in the firfi interview between the inhabitants of
the old and new worlds, every thing was con-
duaed amicably, and to their mutual fatisfadion.
The former, enlightened and ambitious, formed
already vast ideas with respect to the advan-
tages which they might derive from the regions

K 3 that

BOOK II. that began to open to their view. The latter,

'-4a simple and undifcerning, had no foresight of

the calamities and desolation which were ap.
proaching their country.

Columbus COLUMBUS, who now afihmed the title and
titeof ad-h authority of admiral and viceroy, called the
i'raloand island which he had discovered San Salvador.

It is better known by the name of Guanahani,
which the natives gave to it, and is one of that
large cluster of islands called the Lucaya or Ba.
hama isles. It is situated above three thousand
miles to the weft of Gomera, from which the
squadron took its departure, and only four de-
grees to the south of it; so little had Columbus
deviated from the westerly course, which he had
chosen as the most proper.

Proceeds to- COLUMBUS employed the next day in visiting
south, the coasts of the island ; and from the universal

poverty of the inhabitants, he perceived that
this was not the rich country for which he
fought. But, conformably to his theory con-
cerning the discovery of those regions of Asia
which ifretched towards the east, he concluded
that San Salvador was one of the isles which
geographers described as situated in the great
ocean adjacent to India . Having observed

t Pet. Mart. epifit. 1'

that most of the people whom he had seen wore BOOK II.
fnmall plates of gold, by way of ornament, in g
their nofitrils, he eagerly inquired where they
got that precious metal. They pointed to-
wards the south, and made him comprehend
by signs, that gold abounded in countries
situated in that quarter. Thither he imme-
diately determined to direa his course, in full
confidence of finding there those opulent re-
gions which had been the obje& of his voyage,
and would be a recompence for all his toils and
dangers. He took along with him seven of the
natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring the
Spanish language, they might serve as guides
and interpreters; and those innocent people
considered it as a mark of diftintion when they
were feleted to accompany him,

HE saw several islands, and touched at three Dircovers

Cuba.

of the largest, on which he bellowed the names
of St. Mary of the Conception, Fernandina,
and Isabella. But as their foil, produaions,
and inhabitants, nearly resembled those of San
Salvador, he made no flay in any of them. He
inquired every where for gold, and the signs that
were uniformly made by way of answer, con-
firmed him in the opinion that it was brought
from the south. He followed that course, and
loon discovered a country which appeared very

K 4 extensive,

BOOK II. extensive, not perfecly level, like those which

^49 he had already visited, but so diversified with

rising grounds, hills, rivers, woods, and plains,
that he was uncertain whether it might prove
an island, or part of the continent. The natives
of San Salvador, whom he had on board, called
it Cuba; Columbus gave it the name of Juanna.
He entered the mouth of a large river with his
squadron, and all the inhabitants fled to the
mountains as he approached the shore. But as
-he resolved to careen his lhips in that place, he
sent some Spaniards, together with one of the
people of San Salvador, to view the interior
parts of the country. They, having advanced
above sixty miles from the lhore, reported,
upon their return, that the foil was richer and
more cultivated than any they had hitherto dif-
covered; that, besides many scattered cottages,
they had found one village, containing abovea
thousand inhabitants; that the people, though
naked, seemed to be m6re intelligent than those
of San Salvador, but had treated them with the
fame refpedful attention, killing their feet, and
honouring them as sacred beings allied to Hea-
ven; that they had given them to eat a certain
root, the taste of which resembled roasted chef-
nuts, and likewise a singular species of corn
called maize, which, either when roasted whole
or ground into meal, was abundantly palatable;

that

that there seemed to be no four-footed animals BooK in.
in the country, but a species of dogs, which ^
could not bark, and a creature resembling a
rabbit, but of a much smaller size; that they
had observed some ornaments of gold among the
people, but of no great value u.

THESE messengers had prevailed wkh some of nis conije.

tures with

the natives to accompany them, who informed regardtoit.
Columbus, that the gold of which they made
their ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By
this word they meant the middle or inland part
of Cuba; but Columbus, being ignorant of
their language, as well as unaccustomed to their
pronunciation, and his thoughts running con-
tinually upon his own theory concerning the
discovery of the East Indies, he was led, by the
resemblance of found, to suppose that they
spoke of the Great Khan, and imagined that
the opulent kingdom of Cathay, described by
Marco Polo, was not very remote. This in-
duced him to employ some time in viewing the
country. He visited almost every harbour,
from Porto del Principe, on the north coast of
Cuba, to the eastern extremity of the island:
but, though delighted with the beauty of the

" Life of Columbus, c. 24-28. Herrera, dec. x. lib.

i. c. 14.

scenes,

BOOK II. scenes, which every where presented themselves,
^'9 ^ and amazed at the luxuriant fertility of the foil,

both which, from their novelty, made a more
lively impreflion upon his imagination", he did
not find gold in such quantity as was fuffcient
to satisfy either the avarice of his followers, or
the expe&ations of the court to which he was to
return. The people of the country, as much
astonished at his eagerness in quest of gold, as
the Europeans were at their ignorance and fim.
plicity, pointed towards the eafi, where an
island which they called Hayti was situated, in
which that metal was more abundant than
among them. Columbus ordered his fquadroa
to bend its course thither; but Martin Alonfo
Pinzon, impatient to be the first who thould
take poffeflion of the treasures which this coun.
try was supposed to contain, quitted his com-
panions, regardless of all the admiral's signals
to slacken fail until they should come up with
him.

Dircover's COLUMBUS, retarded by contrary winds, did
the island

rpaniia. not reach Hayti till the sixth of December. He

called the port where he first touched St. Ni.
cholas, and the island itself Efpagnola, in ho-
nour of the kingdom by which he was em-
ployed; and it is the only country, of those he

x See NOTE XIV.

had yet discovered, which has retained the name BOOK II.
that he gave it. As he could neither meet with v
the Pinta, nor have any intercourse with the in-
habitants, who fled in great coniternation to-
wards the woods, he soon quitted St. Nicholas,
and failing along the northern coait of the
island, he entered another harbour, which he
called Conception. Here he was more for-
tunate; his people overtook a woman who was
flying from them, and after treating her with
great gentleness, difiniffed her with a present
of such toys as they knew were most valued in -
those regions. The description which she gave
to her countrymen of the humanity and won-
derful qualities of the fitrangers; their admira-
tion of the trinkets, which she fhewed with
exultation; and their eagerness to participate
of the fame favours; removed all their fears,
and induced many of them to repair to the har-
bour. The strange objeas which they beheld,
and the baubles, which Columbus beftllowed
upon them, amply gratified their curiosity and
their wishes. They nearly resembled the peo-
ple of Guanahani and Cuba. They were naked
like them, igno'ant, and simple; and seemed
to be equally unacquainted with all the arts
which appear most necessary in polished focie-
ties; but they were gentle, credulous, and ti-
mid, to a degree which rendered it easy to ac-

quire

BOOK II. quire the ascendant over them, especially as
'C~^' their exceflive admiration led them into the

1492.

.fame error with the people of the other islands,
in believing the Spaniards to be more than
mortals, and descended immediately from
Heaven. They poffeffed gold in greater abun.
dance than their neighbours, which they readily
exchanged for bells, beads, or pins; and in
this unequal traffic both parties were highly
pleased, each considering themselves as gainers
by the tranfaaion. Here Columbus was vilited
by a prince or cazique of the country. He
appeared with all the pomp known amonga
simple people, being carried in a fort of palan.
quin upon the shoulders of four men, and
attended by many of his fubjeas, who ferred
him with great refpea. His deportment was
grave and flately, very reserved towards his
own people, but with Columbus and the Spa.
niards extremely courteous. He gave the ad.
miral some thin plates of gold, and a girdle of
curious workmanship, receiving in return pre.
fents of small value, but highly acceptable to
himr.

COLUMBUS, fill intent on discovering the

mines which yielded gold, continued to inter.

y Life of Columbus, c. 32. Herrera, dec. x. lib.i.

c. 15, &c.

17 rogate

rogate all the natives with whom he had any BOOK 1I.
intercourse concerning their situation. They '/g '
concurred in pointing out a mountainous
country, which they called Cibao, at some
distance from the sea, and farther towards the
east. Struck with this found, which appeared
to him the fame with Cipango, the name by
which Marco Polo, and other travellers to the
east, diftinguiihed the islands of Japan, he no
longer doubted with refpea to the vicinity of
the countries which he had discovered to the
remote parts of Asia; and, in full expe&ation
of reaching soon those regions which had beenL
the obje& of his voyage, he dire&ed his course
towards the east. He put into a commodious
harbour, which he called St. Thomas, and
found that diftriat to be under the government
of a powerful cazique, named Guacanahari,
who, as he afterwards learned, was one of the
five sovereigns among whom the whole island
was divided. He immediately sent messengers
to Columbus, who, in his name, delivered to
him the present of a mask curiously fashioned,
with the ears, nose, and mouth of beaten gold,
and invited him to the place of his residence,
near the harbour now called Cape Francois,
some leagues towards the east. Columbus dif-
patched some of his officers to visit this prince,
who, as he behaved himself with greater dig-

nity,

BOOK II. nity, seemed to claim more attention. They
^ ^ returned, with such favourable accounts both

r49z. of the country and of the people, as made

Columbus impatient for that interview with
Guacanahari to which he had been invited.

one of his HE failed for this purpose from St. Thomas,
thips loft.

on the twenty-fourth of December, with a fair
wind, and the sea perfealy calm; and as,
amidst the multiplicity of his occupations, he
had not shut his eyes for two days, he retired
at midnight in order to take some repose, havy
ing committed the helm to the pilot, with
stria injuncions not to quit it for a moment.
The pilot, dreading no danger, carelessly left
the helm to an unexperienced cabin boy, and
the ship, carried away by a current, was dashed
against a rock. The violence of the lhock
awakened Columbus. He ran up to the deck.
There, all was confusion and despair. He
alone retained presence of mind. He ordered
some of the sailors to take a boat, and carry
out an anchor astern; but, instead of obeying,
they made off towards the Nigna, which was
about half a league distant. He then com-
manded the malts to be cut down, in order to
lighten the ship; but all his endeavours were
too late; the vessel opened near the keel, and
filled so fast with water that its loss was in.

evitable.

evitable. The smoothness of the sea, and the BOOK I.
timely alliftance of boats from the Nigna, i49z.
enabled the crew to save their lives. As soon
as the islanders heard of this disaster, they
crowded to the fhore,' with their prince Gua-
canahari at their head. Instead of taking ad-
vantage of the distress in which they beheld
the Spaniards, to attempt any thing to their
detriment, they lamented their misfortune with
tears of sincere condolance. Not satisfied with
this unavailing expression of their sympathy,
they put to sea a number of canoes, and,
under the direaion of the Spaniards, aflifted
in saving whatever could be got out of the
wreck; and by the united labour of so many
hands, almost every thing of value was carried
ashore. As fail as the goods were landed,
Guacanahari in person took charge of them.
By his orders they were all deposited in one
place, and armed centinels were potlled, who
kept the multitude at a difitance, in order to
prevent them not only from embezzling, but
from infpeaing too curiously what belonged
to their guests Z. Next morning this prince
visited Columbus, who was now on board the
Nigna, and endeavoured to console him for
his loss, by offering all that he poffeffcd to
repair it'.

Z See NOTE XV. a Herrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. IS.

THB

BooK Ix. THE condition of Columbus was such, that

^"'f'^ he flood in need of consolation. He had
 492.
ol^..r hitherto procured no intelligence of the Pinta,

and no longer doubted but that his treacherous
associate had set fail for Europe, in order to
have the merit of carrying the first tidings of
the extraordinary discoveries which had been
made, and to pre-occupy to far the ear of their
sovereign, as to rob him of the glory and
reward to which he was jutfly entitled. There
remained but one vessel, and that the smallest
and most crazy of the squadron, to traverse
such a vaif ocean, and carry so many men
back to Europe. Each of those circumiftances
was alarming, and filled the mind of Columbus
with the utmofi solicitude. The desire of over.
taking Pinzon, and of effacing the unfavour.
able impreflions which his misrepresentations
might make in Spain, made it necessary to

ReTolves to return thither without delay. The difficulty
leave a pat t
of hicrew of taking such a number of persons aboardthe
in the island.

Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion, which
the fertility of the country, and the gentle
temper of the people, had already induced
him to form. He resolved to leave a part of
his crew in the island, that, by residing there,
they might learn the language of the natives,
fludy their disposition, examine the nature of
the country, search for mines, prepare for the

commo.

commodious settlement of the colony, with which o K

n.

he purposed to return, and thus secure and faci- 49,-'
litate the acquisition of those advantages which
he expected from his discoveries. When he
mentioned this' to his men, all approved of
the design; and from impatience under the
fatigue of a long voyage, from the levity na-
tural to sailors, or from the hopes of amafl-
ing wealth in a country which afforded such
promising specimens of its riches, many offered
voluntarily to be among the number of those
who ihould remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the exe- obtains the

a * consent of

cution of this scheme, but to obtain the con- the natives.
sent of Guacanahari; and his unfufpicious fim-
plicity soon presented to the admiral a favourable
opportunity of proposing it. Columbus hav-
ing, in the befl manner he could, by broken
words and signs, expressed some curiosity to
know the cause which had moved the island-

ers to fly with such precipitation upon the
approach of his mhips, the cazique informed
him that the country was much infefied by
theincurfions ofcertain people, whom he called
Carribeans, who inhabited several islands to the
south-east. These he described as a fierce and.
warlike race of men, who del:ghted in blood,
and devoured the flefl of the prisoners who

VaL. I. L were

o re n. were so unhappy as to fall into their hands;

1I9. and as the Spaniards, at their first appearance,

were supposed to be Carribeans, whom the
natives, however numerous, durst not face in
battle, they had recourse to their usual method
of securing their safety, by flying into the
thickest and most impenetrable woods. Gua.
canahari, while speaking of those dreadful in.
vaders, discovered such symptoms of terror,
as well as such consciousness of the inability
of his own people to refill them, as led Colum-
bus to 9onclude that he would not be alarmed
at the proposition of any scheme which afforded
him the profpea of an additional security
against their attacks. He inllantly offered him
the assistance of the Spaniards to repel his
enemies; he engaged to take him and his
people under the proteaion of the powerful
monarch whom he served, and offered to leave
in the island fiuch a number of his men as should
be fuflicient, not only to defend the inhabitants
from future incursions, but to avenge their palt

wrongs.

Buids a THE credulous prince closed eagerly with
korC. the proposal, and thought himself already safe

under the patronage of beings sprung from
Heaven, and superior in power to mortal men.
The ground was marked out for a small fort,

which

which Columbus called Navidad, because he BOOK II.
had landed there on Christmas day. A deep ,49r.
ditch was drawn around it. The ramparts
were fortified with pallifades, and the great
guns, saved out of the admiral's ship, were
planted upon them. In ten days the work
was finished; that simple race ds men labour-
ing with inconsiderate assiduity in ereaing this
firit monument of their own servitude. During
this time Columbus, by his caresses and libe-
rality, laboured to increase the high opinion
which the natives entertained of the Spaniards.
But while he endeavoured to inspire them with
confidence in their disposition to do good, he
wished likewise to give them some striking
idea of their power to punish and destroy such
as were the objeas of their indignation. With
this view, in presence of a vafit assembly, he
drew up his men in order of battle, and made
an ostentatious but innocent display of the
Iharpnefs of the Spanish swords, of the force
of their spears, and the operation of their
crofs-bows. These rude people, strangers to
the use of iron, and unacquainted with any
hostile weapons, but arrows of reeds pointed
with the bones of fishes, wooden swords, and
javelins hardened in the fire, wondered and
trembled. Before this surprise or fear had
time to abate, he ordered the great guns to be

L 2 fired.

1BOOK HI. fired. The sudden explosion firuck them with

1492. such terror, that they fell flat to the ground,

covering their faces with their hands; and when
they beheld the astonishing effea of the bullets
among the trees, towards which the cannon had
been pointed, they concluded that it was im-
possible to resist men, who had the command of
such deftrudive infiruments, and who came
armed with thunder and lightning against their
enemies.

His infiruc- AFTER giving such imprefions both of the
tions to
thole he last beneficence and power of the Spaniards, as
in it.

might have rendered it easy to preserve an
ascendant ove. the minds of the natives, Co.
lumbus appointed thirty-eight of his people
to remain in the island. He entrufled the
command of these to Diego de Arada, a gen-
tleman of Cordova, inveffting him with the
fame powers which he himself had received
fiom Ferdinand and Isabella; and furnished
him with every thing requisite for the sub-
fifience or defence of this infant colony. He
ftricly enjoined them to maintain concord
among themselves, to yield an unreserved obe-
dience to their commander, to avoid giving
offence to the natives by any violence or
exaction, to cultivate the friendship of Gua-
canahari, but not to put themselves in his

power

power by firaggling in small parties, or march. BOOK 11.
ing too far from the fort. He promised to 1492.
revisit them soon, with such a reinforcement
of strength as might enable them to take full
poffeffion of the country, and to reap all the
fruits of their discoveries. In the mean time,
he engaged to mention their names to the king
and queen, and to place their merit and services
in the most advantageous light b.

HAVING thus taken every precaution for the
security of the Colony, he left Navidad on the
fourth of January, one thousand four hundred 1493.
and ninety-three, and flteering towards the
east, discovered, and gave names to moif of
the harbours on the northern coast of the island.
On the sixth, he descried the Pinta, and soon
came up with her, after a separation of more
than fix weeks. Pinzon endeavoured to justify
his condua, by pretending that he had been
driven from his course by stress of weather,
and prevented from returning by contrary
winds. The admiral, though he fill fufpeaed
his perfidious intentions, and knew well what
he urged in his own defence to be frivolous as
well as false, was so sensible that this was not
a proper time for venturing upon any high

b Oviedo ap. Ramufio, iii. p. 82, E. Herrera, dec. I.
lib. i. c. zo. Life of Columbus, c. 34.

L 3 firain

BOO K IT. strain of authority, and felt such fatisfa&ion

i493. in this jundion with his consort, which deli.

vered him from many disquieting apprehen.
fions, that lame as Pinzon's apology was, he
admitted of it without difficulty, and restored
him to favour. During his absence from the
admiral, Pinzon had visited several harbours
in the island, had acquired some gold by traf.
sicking with the natives, but had made no dif.
covery of any importance.

efrolves to FROM the condition of his ships, as well as
return to
Europe. the temper of his men, Columbus now found

it necessary to hafien his return to Europe.
The former, having fuffered much during a
voyage of such an unusual length, were ex-
tremely leaky. The latter expressed the utmost
impatience to revisit their native country, from
which they had been so long absent, and where
they had things so wonderful and unheard-of
to relate. Accordingly, on the sixteenth of
January, he direted his course towards the
north-east, and soon loft fight of land. He
had on board some of the natives, whom he
had taken from the different islands which he
discovered; and besides the gold, which was
the chief objea ofrefearch, he had colleaed
specimens of all the produaions which were
likely to become fubjets of commerce in the

several

several countries, as well as many unknown BOOK II.
birds, and other natural curiosities, which 1493.
might attra& the attention of the learned, or
excite the wonder of the people. The voyage
was prosperous to the fourteenth of February,
and he had advanced near five hundred leagues
across the Atlantic Ocean, when the wind Avio'ent

form arise.

began to rife, and continued to blow with
increasing rage, which terminated in a furious
hurricane. Every expedient that the naval
skill and experience of Columbus could devise
was employed, in order to save the ships. But
it was impossible to withstand the violence of
the iform, and as they were still far from any
land, deftruaion seemed inevitable. The
sailors had recourse to prayers to Almighty
God, to the invocation of faints, to vows and
charms, to every thing that religion dicates,
or superstition suggests, to the affrighted mind
of man. No profpea of deliverance appearing,
they abandoned themselves to despair, and ex-
peted every moment to be swallowed up in
the waves. Besides the paflions which natu-
rally agitate and alarm the human mind in
such awful situations, when certain death, in
one of his mofl terrible forms, is before it,
Columbus had to endure feelings of distress
peculiar to himself. He dreaded that all The can

dut of Co.-

knowledge of the amazing discoveries which lumbus.

L 4 he

BOO K ii. he had made was now to perish; mankind were

1493. to be deprived of every benefit that might

have been derived from the happy success of
his schemes, and his own name would descend
to posterity as that of a rash deluded adven-
turer, instead of being transmitted with the
honour due to the author and condudor of the
most noble enterprise that had ever been under.
taken. These reflections extinguifhced all sense
of his own personal danger. Less affefed
with the loss of life, than solicitous to preserve
the memory of what he had attempted and
achieved, he retired to his cabbin, and wrote,
upon parchment, a short account of the voyage
which he had made, of the course which he
had taken, of the situation and riches of the
countries which he had discovered, and of the
colony that he had left there. Having wrapt
up this in an oiled cloth, which he inclosed in
a cake of wax, he put it into a cask carefully
flopped up, and threw it into the sea, in hopes
that some fortunate accident might preserve a
deposit of so much importance to the world'.

Te e- - AT length Providence interposed, to save a
Azores. life reserved for other services. The wind

abated, the sea became calm, and on the even-

C Life of Columbus, c. 37. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii.

c. 1,z. See NOTE XVI.

ing of the fifteenth, Columbus and his corn- BOOK I.
panions discovered land; and though uncer- '493.
tain what it was, they made towards it. They
soon knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores
or western isles, fubje& to the crown of Por-
tugal. There, after a violent contest with the
governor, in which Columbus displayed no
less spirit than prudence, he obtained a supply
of fresh provisions, and whatever else he needed.
One circumstance, however, greatly difquieted
him. The Pinta, of which he had loft fight
on the first day of the hurricane, did not ap-
pear; he dreaded for some time that she had
foundered at sea, and that all her crew had
perished: afterwards, his former suspicions re-
curred, and he became apprehensive that Pin-
zon had born away for Spain, that he might
reach it before him, and, by giving the first
account of his discoveries, might obtain some
lhare of his fame.

IN order to prevent this, he left the Azores Feb. 24.

Arrives at

as soon as the weather would permit. At no Limbon.
great distance from the coast of Spain, when
near the end of his voyage, and seemingly
beyond the reach of any disaster, another florm
arose, little inferior to the former in violence;
and after driving before it during two days
and two nights, he was forced to take ihelter

in

BOOK II. in the river Tagus. Upon application to the

4ll king of Portugal,

. he was allowed-to come up

to Lisbon; and, notwithltanding the envy
which it was natural for the Portuguese to feel,
when they beheld another nation entering upon
that province of discovery which they had
hitherto deemed peculiarly their own, and in
its first essay, not only rivalling but eclipsing
their fame, Columbus was received with all the
marks of diftinaion due to a man who had
performed things so extraordinary and unex.
peaed. The king admitted him into his pre-
fence, treated him with the highest refpe&,
and listened to the account which he gave of
his voyage with admiration mingled with re-
gret. While Columbus, on his part, enjoyed
the fatisfadion of describing the importance
of his discoveries, and of being now able to
prove the solidity of his schemes to those very
persons, who with an ignorance disgraceful to
themselves, and fatal to their country, had
lately 'rejected them as the projets of a visionary
or designing adventurer d.

Returns to COLUMBUS was so impatient to return to

Spain, that he remained only five days in Lisbon,
On the fifteenth of March he arrived in the

d Life of Columbus, c. 40, 41. Herrera;, dec. i. lib.

i. . 3. *

port of Palos, seven months and eleven days BOOK iT.
from the time when he set out thence upon his 49i.
voyage. As soon as his ship was discovered
approaching the port, all the inhabitants of
Palos ran eagerly to the thore, in order to
welcome their relations and fellow-citizens,
and to hear tid;:,gs of their voyage. When
the prosperous issue of it was known, when
they beheld the strange people, the unknown
animals, and singular produaions brought from
the countries which had been discovered, the
effufion of joy was general and unbounded.
The bells were rung, the cannon fired; Co-
lumbus was received at landing with royal
honours, and all the people, in solemn pro-
cession, accompanied him and his crew to the
church, where they returned thanks to Heaven,
which had so wonderfully conduEed and crown-
ed with success, a voyage of greater length
and of more importance, than had been at-
tempted in any former age. On the evening
of the fame day, he had the fatisfa&ion of
feeing the Pinta, which the violence of the
tempelt had driven far to the north, enter the
harbour.

THE first care of Columbus was to inform His recep.

tion.

the king and queen, who were then at Barce-
lona, of his arrival and success. Ferdinand

and

BOOK IT. and Isabella, no less affoniihed than delighted

£493. with this unexpe&ed event, desired Columbus,

in terms the molt refpeaful and flattering, to
repair immediately to court, that from his own
mouth they might receive a full detail of his
extraordinary services and discoveries. During
his journey to Barcelona, the people crowded
from the adjacent country, following him every
where with admiration and applause. His en.
trance into the city was condu&ed, by order
of Ferdinand and Isabella, with pomp suitable
to the great event, which added such diftin.
guifhing luffre to their reign. The people
whom he brought along with him from the
countries which he had discovered, marched
first, and by their singular complexion, the
wild peculiarity of their features, and uncouth
finery, appeared like men of another species.
Next to them were carried the ornaments of
gold, fashioned by the rude art of the natives,
the grains of gold found in the mountains, and
dust of the fame metal gathered in the rivers.
After these, appeared the various commodities
of the new discovered countries, together with
their curious productions. Columbus himself
closed the procession, and attraaed the eyes of
all the fpeaators, who gazed with admiration
on the extraordinary man, whose superior saga-
city and fortitude had conduced their country.

men,

men, by a route concealed from palft ages, to BOOK II.
the knowledge of a new world. Ferdinand '493.
and Isabella received him clad in their royal
robes, and seated upon a throne, under a mag-
nificent canopy. When he approached they
flood up, and raising him as he kneeled to kiss
their hands, commanded him to take his feat
upon a chair prepared for him, and to give a
circumstantial account of his voyage. He de-
livered it with a gravity and composure no
less suitable to the disposition of the Spanish
nation, than to the dignity of the audience in
which he spoke, and with that modefl fimpli-
city which charaterifes men of superior minds;
who, satisfied with having performed great
ations, court not vain applause by an oftenta-
tious display of their exploits. When he had
finished his narration, the king and queen,
kneeling down, offered up solemn thanks to
Almighty God for the discovery of those new
regions, from which they expeaed so many ad-
vantages to flow in upon the kingdoms sub-
jest to their government . Every mark of
honour that gratitude or admiration could fug-
gefl was conferred upon Columbus. Letters
patent were issued, confirming to him and to
his heirs all the privileges contained in the

* See NOTE XVII.

capitulation

BOOK II. capitulation concluded at Santa Fe ; his family

*493. was ennobled; the king and queen, and, after

their example, the courtiers, treated him, on
every occasion, with all the ceremonious refpea
paid to persons of the highest rank. But what
pleased him most, as it gratified his a&ive
mind, bent continually upon great objecs, was,
an order to equip, without delay, an arma.
ment of such force, as might enable him not
only to take poffeflion of the countries which
he had already discovered, but to go in search
of those more opulent regions, which he fill
confidently expeted to find f.

Anonmih- WHILE preparations were making for this
manid at expedition, the fame of Columbus's fuccefsful
his disco-
cries,. voyage spread over Europe, and excited gene.

ral attention. The multitude, struck with
amazement when they heard that a new world
had been found, could hardly believe an event
so much above their conception. Men of
science, capable of comprehending the nature,
and of discerning the effecs, of this great dif.
covery, received the account of it with admi-
ration and joy. They spoke of his voyage
with rapture, and congratulated one another
upon their felicity, in having lived in the

f Life of Columbus, c. 42, 43. Herrera, dec. r.

lib. ii. c. 3.

period

period when, by this extraordinary event, the B oK IL
boundaries of human knowledge were so much 21493
extended, and such a new field of inquiry and
observation opened, as would lead mankind to
a perfec acquaintance with the ftrudure and
productions of the habitable globe g. Various
opinions and conje&ures were formed concern-
ing the new-found countries, and what divi-
sion of the earth they belonged to. Columbus
adhered tenaciously to his original opinion,
that they should be reckoned a part of those
vast regions in Asia, comprehended under the
general name of India. This sentiment was
confirmed by the observations which he made
concerning the produacions of the countries he
had discovered. Gold was known to abound
in India, and he had met with such promising
famnples of it in the islands which he visited, as
led him to believe that rich mines of it might
be found. Cotton, another produdion of the
East Indies, was common there. The pimento
of the islands he imagined to be a species of
the Eaat-Indian pepper. He mistook a root,
somewhat resembling rhubarb, for that valu-
able drug, which was then supposed to be a
plant peculiar to the East Indies h. The birds
brought home by him were adorned with the

E P. Mart. epift. 33, 34, 135. See NOTE XVIII.
h Herrera, dec. I, lib. i. c. 20. Gomara Hist. c. X7.

fame

00ooK ,I. fame rich plumage which diffinguifhes those
1493. of India. The alligator of the one country

appeared to be the fame with the crocodile
of the other. After weighing all. these circum.
fitances, not only the Spaniards, but the other
nations of Europe, seem to have adopted the
opinion of Columbus. The countries which
he had discovered were considered as a part of
India. In consequence of this notion, the
name of Indies is given to them by Ferdinand
and Isabella, in a ratification of their former
agreement, which was granted to Columbus
upon his return'. Eiven after the error which
gave rife to this opinion was deteQ&d, a nd.t
true position of the New World was afcer.

Dininguirh- tained, the.name has, remained,, and the appel.
name of the. lation of Weft Indies is given by all the people
Weft Indies. of Europe to the country, and that of Indian

to its inhabitants.

Prepara. THE name by which Columbus diffinguifhed
second the countries which he had discovered was /o

inviting, the specimens of their riches 'and ser-
tility, which he produced, were to confider.
able, and the reports of his companions, deli-
vered frequiently with the exaggeration natural
to travellers, so favourable, as to 'excite a
wonderful spirit of enterprise among the Spa.

. Life of Columbus, c. 44. niards.

niards. Though little accustomed to naval ex- s

o II.

peditions, they were impatient to set out upon 493-
the voyage. Volunteers of every rank soli.
cited to be employed. Allured by the inviting
profpeds which opened to their ambition and
avarice, neither the length nor danger of the
navigation intimidated them. Cautious as Ser-
dinand was, and averse to every thing new or
adventurous, he teems to have catched the
fame spirit with his fnbje&s. Under its in-
fluence, preparations for a second expedition
were carried on with a rapidity unusual in
Spain, and to an extent that would be deemed
not inconsiderable in the present age. The
fleet consisted of seventeen ships, some of which
were of good burden. It had on board fifteen
hundred persons, among whom were many of
noble families, who had served in honourable
flations. The greater part of these being
deflined to remain in the country, were fur-
nifhed with every thing requisite for conquest or
settlement, with all kinds of European domestic
animals, with such feeds and plants as were molt
likely to thrive in the climate of the Weft
Indies, with utensils and instruments of every
fort, and with such artificers as might be most
useful in an infant colony k,

k Herrera, dec. i. lib.ii. c. 5. Life of Columbus, c. 4j.
VOL. I. M BUT,

BOOK II. BUT, formidable and well provided as this

I493- fleet was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not reft

The right of

ain

o the their title to the poffeffion of the newly-difco-

onfred by vered countries upon its operations alone. The

example of the Portuguese, as well as the
superstition of the age, made it necessary to
obtain from the Roman pontiff a grant of those
territories which they wished to occupy. The
Pope, as the vicar and representative of Jesus
Chrifit, was supposed to have a right of domi-
nion over all the kingdoms of the earth.
Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every
crime which disgraces humanity, filled the
papal throne at that time. As he was born
Ferdinand's fubjea, and very solicitous tp
secure the proteaion of Spain, in order to
facilitate the execution of his ambitious fc'iemes
in favour of his own family, he was extremely
willing to gratify the Spanish monarchs. By
an at of liberality which cost him nothing,
and that served to establish the jurifdicion and
pretensions of the papal fee, he granted in
full right to Ferdinand and Isabella all the
countries inhabited by Infidels, which they had
discovered, or thould discover; and, in virtue
of that power which he derived from Jesus
Christ, he conferred on the crown of Castile
vafi regions, to the poffeffion of which he him-
self was so far from having any title, that he

was

wa 'unacquainted with their situation, and BOOK 1u.
ignorant even of their exifbl-nce. As it was 1493.
necessary to prevent this grant from interfering
with that formerly made to the crown of Por-
tugal, he appointed that a line, supposed to
be drawn from pole to pole, a hundred leagues
to the westward of the Azores, lhould serve
as the limit between them; and, in the pleni-
tude of his power, betlowed all to the east of
this imaginary line upon the Portuguese, and
all to the weft of it upon the Spaniards m. Zeal
for propagating the Christian faith was the
consideration employed by Ferdinand in solicit-
ing this bull, and is mentioned by Alexander
as his chief motive for issuing it. In order
to manifest some concern for this laudable ob-
jec, several friars, under the direaion of
Father Boyl, a Catalonian monk of great repu-
tation, as apoftolical vicar, were appointed to
accompany Columbus, and to devote them-
selves to the infirudion of the natives. The
Indians whom Columbus had brought along
with him, having received some tin&ure of
Christian knowledge, were baptized with much
solemnity, the king himself, the prince his son,
and the chief persons of his court, itanding as
their godfathers. Those first fruits of the New

m Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 4. Torquemada Mon.

Ind. lib. xviii. c. 3.

World

M 2

BooK 1.; World have not been .followed by such an t-

'493. crease as pious men wished, and.-had'reafon !9

expea.

Saeo Coy. FERDJNAND and Isabella having thus ac
lumbus, quired a title, which was then deemed complete.

ly valid, to extend their discoveries, and to efla.
blifh their dominion over such a considerable
portion of the globe, nothing now retarded the
departure of the fleet. .Columbus was ex.
tremely impatient to revisit the colony which
he had left, and to pursue that career of glory
upon which he had entered. He set fail from
the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-fifth of Sep.
tember, and touching again at the island of
Gomera, he steered farther towards the south
thari in his former voyage, By holding this
course, he enjoyed more fReadily the benefit of
the regular winds, which reign within the tro.
pics, and was carried towards a large clulter of
islands, situated considerably to the east of those
which he had already discovered. On the

Not. 2. twenty-fixth day after his departure from Go.

mera, he made land ". It was one of the Cat
ribbee or Leeward islands, to which he gave the
name of Defeada, on account of the impatience
of his crew to discover some part of the New

" Oviedo ap. Rarxuf, iii. 85. B.

World,

'oDrd. After this'hevilited fucceifively Do. BOOK 1.
?inica, Marigalante, Guadalupes Antigua, San 1493.
Juan de Puerto Rico, and several other islands,
scattered in his way as he advanced towards the
borfh'-wett. ' All thelehie found to' be inhatited
-by that fierce race of people whom Guacanahari
had painted in such frightful colours. His
'defcriptions appeared not to have been exagge-
'rated. The Spaniards never attempted to land
*without meeting with futh a reception, as dif-
'covered the martial and daring spirit of the na-
'tives: and in their habitations were found re-
"lics of those horrid feasts which they had made
upon the bodies'of their enemies taken in war,

* BuT as Columbus was eager to know the state Arives t
Sos the colony which he had planted, and to sup. Nov. 22.
1ply it with the necessaries of which he supposed
it to.be in want, he made no fiay in 'any of those
. islands, and proceeded directly to Hifpani'ola °.
When he arrived off Navidad, the flation in
:.which he. had left the thirty-eight men under
the command of Arada, he- was astonished that
none of- them appeared, and' expecaed every
moment to fee them running with transports of
Sjoy to welcome their countrymen. Full of so-

0 P. Martyr, dec. p. 15. I8. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii.

c. 7. Life of Columbus, c. 46, &c ...

M 2 licitude

BOOK ." licitude about their safety, and foreboding in

'493. his mind what had befallen them, he rowed in.

itantly to land. All the natives from whom he
might have received information had fled. But
the fort which he had built was entirely demo-
lifhed, and the tattered garments, the broken
arms and utensils scattered about it, left no room
to doubt concerning the unhappy fate of the
garrison P. While the Spaniards were shedding
tears over those fad memorials of their fellow-
citizens, a brother of the cazique Guacanahari

The fate of arrived. From him Columbus received a par.
the men
whom he ticular detail of what had happened after his
left there.

departure from the island. The familiar in-
tercourfe of the Indians with the Spaniards
tended gradually to diminish the superstitious
veneration with which their first appearance had
inspired that simple people. By their own in.
discretion and ill condudt, the Spaniards speedily
effaced those favourable impressions, and soon
convinced the natives, that they had all the
wants, and weaknesses, and passions of men.
As soon as the powerful refiraint which the
presence and authority of Columbus imposed
was withdrawn, the garrison threw off all re-
gard for the officer whom he had invested with
command. Regardless of the prudent inflruc.

P Hill. de Cura de los Palacios. MS.

tions

tions which he had given them, every man be- BOOK rr.
came independent, and gratified his desires 1493.
without controul. The gold, the women, the
provisions of the natives, were all the prey of
those licentious oppressors. They roamed in
finall parties over the island, extending their
rapacity and insolence to every corner of it.
Gentle and timid as the people were, those un-
provoked injuries at length exhauffed their pa-
tience, and rouzed their courage. The cazique
of Cibao, whose country the Spaniards chiefly
infefied on account of the gold which it con-
tained, surprised and cut off several of them,
while they straggled in as perfec security as if
their conduc had been altogether inoffenfive.
He then assembled his fubjets, and surrounding
the fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards
were killed in defending it, the reft perished in
attempting to make their escape by crofling an
arm. of the sea. Guacanahari, whom all their
exa&ions had not alienated from the Spaniards,
took arms in their behalf, and, in endeavouring
to protea them, had received a wound, by
which he was still confined q.

THOUGH this account was far from removing His prudent

condud.

the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained

< P. Martyr, decad. p. 22, &c. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii.

c. 7. 9. Life of Columbus, c. 49, 50.

M 4 with

p'O o K Ir. with refpe& so the fidelity'of Guacanahart, Co,

1493. lumbus perceived so clearly that this was not a

proper junaure/ for inquiring into his condut"
with fciupulous accuracy, that he rejected the
advice of several of his officers, who urged him'
t6 seize the person of that prince, and to revenge
the death of their countrymen by attacking his
fiubjeas. He represented to them the neeity
ds securing the friendihip of some potentate of
the country, in order to facilitate the fettleme'it
which they intended, and the danger of driving
the natives to unite in some desperate attempt
agaigft them, by fuch'an ill-timed and unavail,
ing exercise of rigour. Instead of wasting his
time in punishing past wrongs; he' took precau.
tions for pretenting any future injury. With
this view, he made choice of a situation inbre
healthy and commodious than that of Navdd.
IHe traced out the plan'of a town in a large phlai
near a spacious bay, and obliging every perfoii
to put his hand to a work on which their coapn
mon safety depended, the houses and ramprts
-were soon so far advanced, b their united'la,
bour, as to afford, them thelter and fecuntry
This rising city, the first that the Europeans
founded in the New World, he niamed 'IV
bella, in hlionour of his patroness the queen d
Castile '.

r \ ,, ,.

r Life ps olumbus, c. 51. Herrer, dec. I. lib. ii. c. r

IN

.4,1 carrying on this necessary work, Colum- -Bo o0- I.
tus,had ,not: only to sustain all the hardships, 1493.

'

" ". "

- Discontent

and,to encounter .all-the .difficulies, to "which ofti s:I-
i~fant cplonies,-are exposed when they fettle in
aauncultivated country, but hle had to contend
with. what was mloreinfuperable, the laziness,
the impatience, and mutinous disposition of his
foloegrs. ,By the enervating influence of-a hota
qlimate, ,the ratural ina&ivity of the. Spaniards
fgmed to increase. Many of. them were gen-
t!emen, -naccufiomed to, the fatigue of. bodily
lIbour, and all had engaged in the enterprise
with the sanguine hopes excited by the splendid
and exaggerated. descriptions of their country-
men'who returned from the firit voyage, or by
t4.e:miftaken opinion of Columbus, that the
country which'he had discovered was either the
Cipango of Marcp Polo, or the Ophir', from
which Solomon imported those, precious corn.,
iodiities which suddenly diffufed such extraor.
dinary riches, through his kingdom. .But when,
ifitead of that golden harvest which, they
hald expeaed to reap without toil or pains, the
Spaniards saw that their profpe&-of wealth waq
remote. as well as uncertain, and that it could
not be attained but by the. flow and persevering,
eforts of industry,, the difappointmeny of thole

* P. Martyr, dec. p. 29. -i

) I. A.1r. ,i-' pyT r~?. ~~r.·'r·~:3·iIblO;Tical

BO OK IT. chimerical hopes occasioned such dejeCtion of

1493. mind as bordered on despair, and led to general

discontent. In vain did Columbus endeavour
to revive their spirits by pointing out the ferti.
lity of the foil, and exhibiting the specimens of
gold daily brought in from different parts of the
island. They had not patience to wait for the
gradual returns which the fdrmer might yield,
and the latter they despised as scanty and incon.
fiderable. The spirit of difaffecion spread,
and a conspiracy was formed, which might have
been fatal to Columbus and the colony. Hap.
pily he discovered it, and seizing the ring.
leaders, punished some of them, sent others
prisoners into Spain, whither he dispatched,
twelve of the ships which had served as tranf-
ports, with an earnest request for a reinforce-
ment of men and a large supply of provisions '

Exaes MIEANWHILE, in order to banish that idle,
at the ness which, by allowing his people leifureto
country. brood over their disappointment, nourished the

spirit of discontent, Columbus planned several
expeditons into the interior part of the country.
He sent a detachment, under the command of
Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and enterprising
officer, to visit the diftria of Cibao, which was

t IIerrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. Io, II.

said to yield the greatest quantity of gold, and BOO K .
followed him in person with the main body of 1494.
his troops. In this expedition, he displayed all
the pomp of military magnificence that he could
exhibit, in order to strike the imagination of
the natives. He marched with colours flying,
with martial music, and with a small body of
cavalry that paraded sometimes in the front and
sometimes in the rear. As those were the first
horses which appeared in the New World, they
were objecs of terror no less than of admiration
to the Indians, who having no tame animals
themselves, were unacquainted with that vast
acceflion of power, which man hath acquired
by fubjeding them to his dominion. They
supposed them to be rational creatures. They
imagined that the horse and the rider formed
one animal, with whose speed they were afto-
niihed, and whose impetuosity and fitrength they
considered as irrefifitible. But while Columbus
endeavoured to inspire the natives with a dread
of his power, he did not neglea the arts of
gaining their live and confidence. He adhered
scrupulously to the principles of integrity and
juffice in all his tranfaaions with them, and
treated them, on every occasion, not only with
humanity, but with indulgence. The diftri&
of Cibao answered the description given of it by
the natives. It was mountainous and unculti-

vated,

so-oK 1i. vated, but in every river4 and brook goldfwap

1494. gathered either in dust or in grains, some of which

were ofconfiderable size. The indians had nevei
opened any mines in search of gold, To penet
trate into the bowels of the eartli, ana to refine
the rude ore, were operations too complicate
and laborious for their talents and 'induflhty,'ari
they had no such high varue for gold as to put
their. ingenuity and invention tipon the ftrefch ih
order to obtain itu. The fma'll quantity of that
precious metal which they poffeflid, was either
picked up in the beds of the rivers, or wafled
from the mountains by the heavy rains that fall
within 'the tropics. But, froim- those indici-
tions, the Spaniards could no longer doubt that
the country contained rich freafures in its bow-
els, of which they hoped soon to be rilaftersi,
. In order to secure the command of"this va.
* luable province,. Columbus ereted a fmallfort,
to which he gave the nam6 of St.- Thminas, By
way of ridicule upon some of his incredulous
followers, who would not believe that the coun-
try produced gold, until they saw it with th'eir
own eyes, and touched it with their hands',':

U Oviedo, lib. ii. p. 90. A.
w P. Martyr, dec. p. 32.
SlHerrcra, dec. I. lib. ii. c rz2. Life of CQlumbus, c.

52.. -

c' THE account of those promising appearances BooK II.
.of wealth in the country of Cibad came very ,4e4.
seasonably to cdmfort the defponding colony, and diffe-

tion of the

which was effefted with diffreffes of various colony in.
kinds. The flock of provisions which had bee'n
brought from Europe was mofily confumeL.;
;what remained was so much corrupted by the
heat and moiflure of the climate, as to be almofl
unfit for use; the natives cultivated so small a
portion of ground, and with so little skill, that
it hardly yielded what was fufficient for their
own subsistence; the Spaniards at Isabella had
hitherto neither time nor leisure to clear the foil,
so as to reap any considerable fruits of their own
1industry. On all there accounts, they became
afraid of perishing with hunger, and were re-
duced already to a scanty allowance. At the
fame time, the diseases predominant in the tor-
rid zone, and which rage chiefly in those un-
cultivated countries, where the hand of induffry
has not opened the woods, drained the marches,
and confined the rivers within a certain chan-
pel, began to spread among them. Alarmed
at the violence and unusual symptoms of those
maladies, they exclaimed against Columbus and
his companions in the former voyage, who, by
their splendid but 'deceitful descr-iptions of Hi1-
paniola, had allured them to quit Spain for a
barbarous uncultivated land, where they must

either

BOOK II. either be cut off by famine, or die of unknown
' ' diftempers. Several of the officers and persons

of note, initead of checking, joined in those
seditious complaints. Father Boyl, the apotlo-
lical vicar, was one of the mofit turbulent and
outrageous. It required all the authority and
address of Columbus to re-eflablifh fubordina.
tion and tranquillity in the colony. Threats and
promises were alternately employed for this pur.
pose; but nothing contributed more to sooth the
malcontents than the profped of finding, in the
mines of Cibao, such a rich store of treasure as
would be a recompence for all their fufferings,
and efface the memory of former disappoint.

ments.

Columbus WHEN, by his unwearied endeavours, con.
attempts
new ditco- cord and order were so far refiored, that he could
veries,

venture to leave the island, Columbus resolved
to pursue his discoveries, that he might be able
to ascertain whether those new countries with
which he had opened a communication were
conneaed with any region of the earth already
known, or whether they were to be considered
as a separate portion of the globe hitherto unvi-
sited. He appointed his brother Don Diego,
with the assistance of a council of officers, to
govern the island in his absence; and gave the
command of a body of soldiers to Don Pedro

18 Margarita,

Margarita, with which he was to visit the diffe- BOOK II.
rent parts of the island, and endeavour to efta- Z494-
blifh the authority of the Spaniards among the
inhabitants. Having left them very particular
inftruCions with refped to their conduc, he
weighed anchor on the twenty-fourth of April,
with one ship and two finall barks under his
command. During a tedious voyage of full five
months, he had a trial of almost all the nume-
rous hardflhips to which persons of his profeflion
are exposed, without making any discovery of
importance, except the island of Jamaica. As
he ranged along the southern coast of Cuba Y, he
was entangled in a labyrinth formed by an in-
credible number of small islands, to which he
gave the name of the Queen's Garden. In this
unknown course, among rocks and shelves, he
was retarded by contrary winds, assaulted with
furious fltorms, and alarmed with the terrible
thunder and lightning which is often almost in-
ceffant between the tropics. At length his pro-
visions fell short; his crew, exhausted with fa-
tigue, as well as hunger, murmured and threat-
ened, and were ready to proceed to the most
desperate extremities against him. Beset with
danger in such various forms, he was obliged to
keep continual watch, to observe every occur-

r See NOTE XIX.

rence

ito K If. rence with his own eyee, to ilTue every order, and

149., to fupcrintend the execution of it. On no occa.

sion, was the extent of his flill and experience
as a navigator so much tried, To these the fqua.
dron owed its safety. But this unrerrtitted fatigue
of lody, and intense application of mind, over-
powering his constitution, though naturally vigo.
tous and robust, brought on a feverish disorder,
which terminated in a lethargy, that deprived
him of sense and memory, and had almost proved
fatal to his life z

sept. 27. But, bn his return to Hlifpaniola, the fdden
On his re-

,in, finds emotion of joy which he felt upon meeting vwith
atholo- his brother Bartholomew at Isabella, occasioned
belna. such a flow of spirits as contributed greatly to

his recovery. It was now thirteen years since
the two brothers, whom fimnilarity of talents
united in close friendship, had separated from
each other, and during that long period there
had been no intercourse between them. Bar.
tholomew, after finiflhing his negociation in the
court of England, had set out for Spain by the
way of France. At Paris he received an ac-
count of the extraordinary discoveries which his
brother had made in his firfl voyage, and that

* Life of Columbus., c. 54, &c. Ierrera, dec. i. lib, i.

c. 13, 14. P. Martyr, dec. r. 34, &c.

he was then preparing to embark on a second BOOK XI.
expedition. Though this naturally induced '
lhim to pursue his journey with the utmost dif-
patch, the admiral had failed for Hispaniola
before he reached Spain. .Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella received him with the refpea due to the
nearefi kinsman of a person whose merit and
services rendered him so conspicuous; and as
they knew wihat confoiation his presence would
afford to his brother, they persuaded him to
take the command of three ships, which they
had appointed to carry provisions to the colony
at Isabella c.

HE could not have arrived at any jun&ure The ndi.

ars take

when Columbus floodmore in need of a friend ams against
capable of assisting him with his counsels, or ards.
of dividing with him the cares and burden of
government. For although the provisions
now brought from Europe, afforded a tem-
porary relief to the Spaniards from the calami-
ties-of famine, the supply was not in such quan.
tity as to support them long, and the island did
not hitherto yield what was fufficient for their
sustenance. They were threatened with another
danger, still more formidable than the return
of scarcity, and which demanded more imme-

SHerrera, dec. I. lib,. ii. c. 15.

diate

VOL. I

BOOKr 1i. diate attention. No sooner did Columbus leave

3494. the island on his voyage of discovery, than the

soldiers under Margarita, as if they had been
set free from difciplinie and subordination,
scorned all restraint. Instead of conforming to
the prudent instructions of Columbus, they dif.
perfed in straggling parties over the island, lived
at discretion upon the natives, wasted their pro.
Sifions, seized their women, and treated that
inoffenfive race with all the insolence of military
oppretion a.

As long as the Indians had any prorpeft that

their fufferings might come to a period by the
voluntary departure of the invaders, they sub.
mitted in silence, and dissembled their sorrow;
but they now perceived that the yoke would be
as permanent as it was intolerable. The Spa.
niards had built a town, and surrounded it with
ramparts. They had ere&ed forts in different
places. They had enclosed and sown several
fields. It was apparent that they came not to
visit the country, but to fettle in it. Though
the number of those firangers was inconfider.
able, the slate of cultivation among this rude
people was so imperfect, and in such exat pro.
portion to their own consumption, that it was

a P. Martyr, dec. p. 47

.,

with difficulty they could afford subsistence to BOOK IT.
their new guests. Their own mode of life was 1494.
so indolent and inaclive, the warmth of the cli-
mate so enervating, the constitution of their
bodies naturally so feeble, and so unaccustomed
to the laborious exertions of industry, that
they were satisfied with a proportion of food
amazingly small. A handful of maize, or a
little of the insipid bread made of the caffada-
root, was fufficient to support men, whole
strength and spirits were not exhausted by any
vigorous efforts either of body or mind. The
Spaniards, though the most abstemious of all
the European nations, appeared to them ex-
ceflively voracious. One Spaniard consumed
as much as several Indians. This keenness of
appetite surprised them so much, and seemed
to them to be so insatiable, that they supposed
the Spaniards had left their own country, be-
cause it did not produce as much as was requi-
site to gratify their immoderate desire of food,
and had come among them in quest of nourish-
mentb. Self-prefervation prompted them to
wifl for the departure of guests who wasted so
fast their slender flock of provisions. The in-
juries which they fuffercd, added to their im-
patience for this event. They had long ex-

I Hcrrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 17.

N 3peQp d

BOOK Il. peaed that the Spaniards would retire of their

J494. own accord. They now perceived that, in

order to avert the deftruaion with which they
were threatened, either by the flow consumption
of famine, or by the violence of their oppref.
fors, it was necessary to assume courage, to at-
tack those formidable invaders with united force,
and drive them from the settlements of which
they had violently taken poffeflion.

war with SUCH were the sentiments which universally
them., prevailed among the Indians, when Columbus

returned to Isabella. Inflamed by the unpro.
voked outrages of the Spaniards, with a degsee
of rage of which their gentle natures, formed
to fuffer and submit, seemed hardly susceptible,
they waited only for a signal from their leaders
to fall upon the colony. Some of the caziques
had already surprised and cut off several fitrag.
glers. The dread of this impending danger
united the Spaniards, and re-established the
authority of Columbus, as they saw no profpea
of safety but in committing themselves to his
prudent guidance. ' It was now necessary to
have recourse to arms, the employing of which
against the Indians, Columbus had hitherto
avoided with the greatest solicitude. Unequal
as the confli& may seem, between the naked
inhabitants of the New World, armed with

clubs,

clubs, flicks hardened in the fire, wooden O^ '
swords, and arrows pointed with bones or flints; 1494.
and troops accustomed to the discipline, and pro-
vided with the instruments of deftru&ion known,
in the European art of war, the situation of the
Spaniards was far from being exempt from
danger. The vast superiority of the natives in
number, compensated many defeas. An hand-
ful of men was about to encounter a whole na-
tioh. One adverse event, or even any unforeseen
delay in determining the fate of the war, might
prove fatal to the Spaniards. Conscious that fuc-
cess depended on the vigour and rapidity of his
operations, Columbus inflantly assembled his
forces. They were reduced to a very small num-
ber. Diseases, engendered by the warmth and
humidity of the country, or occasioned by their
own licentioufnels, had raged among them with
much violence ; experience had not yet taught
them the art either of curing these, or the precau-
tions requisite for guarding against them; two-
thirds of the original adventurers were dead, and
many of those who survived were incapable of ser-
vice '. The body which took the field confifled ,494.

March 24*

only of two hundred foot, twenty horse, and
twenty large dogs; and how strange soever it
may seem, to mention the last as composing part

* Life of Columbus, c. 61.

N3 of

B o K . of a military force, they were not perhaps the

3495s least formidable and deftruaive of the whole,

when employed against naked and timid Indians.
All the caziques of the island, Guacanahari ex-
cepted, who retained an inviolable attachment
to the Spaniards, were in arms to oppose Co.
lumbus, with forces amounting, if we may be-
lieve the Spanish historians, to a hundred thou.
sand men. Instead of attempting to draw the
Spaniards into the faftneffes of the woods and
mountains, they were so imprudent as to take
their flation in the Vega Real, the most open
plain in the country. Columbus did not allow
them time to perceive their error, or to alter
their position. He attacked them during the
night, when undisciplined troops are least ca-
pable of a&ing with union and concert, and
obtained an easy and bloodless vicory. The
consternation with which the Indians were filled
by the noise and havoc made by the fire-arms,
by the impetuous force of the cavalry, and the
fierce onset of the dogs, was so great, that they
threw down their weapons, and fled without at.
tempting resistance. Many were slain; more
were taken prisoners, and reduced to servitude ;
and so- thoroughly were the reft intimida.ed,
that from that moment they abandoned themn

< See NOTE XX.

selves

selves to despair, relinquifhimi 11 thoughts of ROOK In.
contending with aggressors wh, they deemed 149s.
invincible.

COLUMBus employed several , months in A tax im-

poled upon

marching through the island, and a flubje&ing th~m.
it to the Spanish government, without meeting
with any opposition. He imposed a tribute
upon all the inhabitants above the age of four-
teen. Each person who lived in those didfrids

where gold was found, was obliged to pay quar-
terly as much gold dust as filled a hawk's bell;
from thole in other parts of the country, twenty-
five pounds of cotton were demanded. This
was the first regular taxation of the Indians, and
served as a precedent for exations still more
intolerable. Such an imposition was extremely
contrary to those maxims which Columbus had
hitherto inculcated with refpe& to the mode of
treating them. But intrigues were carrying on
in the court of Spain at this juncure, in order
to undermine his power and discredit his opera-
tions, which constrained him to depart from his
own fyfltem of administration. Several unfa-
vourable accounts of his conduct, as well as of
the countries discovered by him, had been
transmitted to Spain. MIargarita and Father
Boyl were now at court; and in order to justify
their own conduQ, or to gratify their resent-

N 4 ment,

BOOK Ir. ment, watched with malevolent attention for

s every opportunity of spreading insinuations to

his detriment. Many of the courtiers viewed
his growing reputation and power with envious
eyes. Fonseca, archdeacon of Seville, who was
intrufted with the chief direaion of Indian as.
fairs, had conceived such an unfavourable opi.
nion of Columbus, for some reason which the
contemporary writers have not mentioned, that
he listened with partiality to every inve8ive
against him. It was not easy for an unfriended
stranger, unpradifed in courtly arts, to coun.
terat the machinations of so many enemies,
Columbus saw that there was but one method
of supporting his own credit, and of silencing
ill his adversaries. He mufft produce such a
quantity of gold as would not only justify
what he had reported with refpea to the rich.
pefs of the country, but encourage Ferdinand
and Isabella to persevere in prosecuting his
plans. The necessity of obtaining it, forced
him not only to impose this heavy tax upon the
Indians, but to exad payment of it with extreme
rigour; and may be pleaded in excuse for his
deviating on this occasion from the mildness and
humanity with which he uniformly treated that
unhappy people c.

SHIerrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 17.

THS

THE labour, attention, and foresight which the BOOK Ir.
Indians were obliged to employ in procuring the

,49

tribute demanded of them, appeared the molt of thatme^.
intolerable of all evils, to men accufiomed to
pass their days in a careless, improvident indoA
lence. They were incapable of such a regular
and persevering exertion of induflry, and felt it
such a grievous reitraint upon their liberty, that
they had recourse to an expedient for obtaining
deliverance from this yoke, which demonitrates
the excess of their impatience and despair. They
formed a scheme of starving those oppressors
whom they durst not attempt to expel; and
from the opinion which they entertained with
refpeC to the voracious appetite of the Spa-
niards, they concluded the execution of it to be
very pra&icable. With this view they suspended
all the operations of agriculture; they fowed no
maize, they pulled up the roots of the manioc
or caffada which were planted, and retiring to
the mofi inaccessible parts of the mountains, left
the uncultivated plains to their enemies. This
desperate resolution produced in some degree the
effe&s which they expeaed, The Spaniards were
reduced to extreme want; but they received
such seasonable supplies of provisions from Eu-
rope, and found so many resources in their own
ingenuity and indufiry, that they fuffered no
great loss of men. The wretched Indians were

17 the

rnoo Ir. the vicims of their own ill-concerted policy. A

495. great multitude of people, shut up in the

mountainous or wooded part of the country,
without any food but the spontaneous pro.
du"tions of the earth, soon felt the utmost
distresses of famine. This brought on conta.
gious diseases; and, in the course of a few
months, more than a third part of the inhabit.
ants of the island perished, after experiencing
misery in all its various forms'.

Intigues BUT while Columbus was establishing the
rnus ,ii? foundations of the Spanish grandeur in the
the court of
sypd,. New World, his enemies laboured with un.

wearied assiduity to deprive him of the glory
and rewards, which by his services and sus.
ferings he was intitled to enjoy. The hard.
ships unavoidable in a new settlement, the cala,
mities occasioned by an unhealthy climate, the
disasters attending a voyage in unknown seas,
were all represented as the effecs of his restless
and inconsiderate ambition. His prudent atten-
tion to preserve discipline and subordination was
denominated excess of rigour; the puniflmnents
which he infliaed upon the mutinous and dif-
orderly were imputed to cruelty. These ac.
cufations gained such credit in a jealous court,

r Herrera, dec. I. lib. xi. c. I8. Life of Columbus, c. 61.

Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 93. D .Benzon Hill. Novi Orbis, lib. i.
c. 9. P. Martyr, dec. p. 48.

2 that

that a commiflioner was appointed to repair B ooK 1n.
to Hispaniola, and to infpea into the con- 49.
duct of Columbus. By the recommendation
of his enemies, Aguado, a groom of the bed-
chamber, was the person to whom this import-
ant trust was committed. But in this choice
they seem to have been more influenced by the
obsequious attachment of the man to their in-
terest, than by his capacity for the station.
Puffed up with such sudden elevation, Aguado
displayed, in the exercise of this office, all the
frivolous felf-importance, and a&ed with all
the disgusting insolence, which are natural to
little minds, when raised to unexpected dignity,
or employed in funtions to which they are not
equal. By listening with eagerness to every
accusation against Columbus, and encouraging
not only the malcontent Spaniards, but even
the Indians, to produce their grievances, real
or imaginary, he fomented the spirit of diffen-
tion in the island, without establishing any re-
gulation of public utility, or that tended to re-
dress the many wrongs, with the odium of
which he wished to load the admiral's admini-
ftration. As Columbus felt sensibly how humi-
liating his situation must be, if he should re-
main in the country while such a partial in-
fpetor observed his motions, and controuled
his jurisdiction, he took the resolution of re-

turning

BOOK II. turning to Spain, in order to lay a full account

,49s. of all his tranfaations, particularly with refpea

to the points in dispute between him and his
adversaries, before Ferdinand and Isabella, from
whose justice and discernment he expe&ted an
equal and a favourable decision. He com-
mitted the administration of affairs, during his

4s96. absence, to Don Bartholomew his brother,

with the title of Adelantado, or Lieutenant
Governor. By a choice less fortunate, and which
proved the source of many calamities to the co.
loly, he appointed Francis Roldan chief justice,
with very extensive powers r.

Returns to IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a
Spain. course different from that which he had taken

in his former voyage. He fleered almost due
east from Hispaniola, in the parallel of twenty-
two degrees of latitude; as experience had nut
yet discovered the more certain and expeditious
method of stretching to the north, in order to
fall in 'with the south-west winds. By this ill.
advised choice, which, in the infancy of navi-
gation between the New and Old Worlds, can
hardly be imputed to the admiral as a defed in
naval skill, he was exposed to infinite fatigue
and danger, in a perpetual fitruggle with the

s Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 18. lib. iii. c. 2.

trade.

trade-winds, which blow without variation from oo K rI.
the east between the tropics. Notwithstanding 1496.
the almost insuperable difficulties of such a na-
vigation, he persisted in his course with his
usual patience and firmness, but made so little
way, that he was three months without feeing
land. At length his provisions began to fail,
the crew was reduced to the scanty allowance of
fix ounces of bread a-day for each person. The
admiral fared no better than the meanest sailor.
But, even in this extreme distress, he retained
the humanity which distinguishes his character,
and refused to comply with the earnest folicita-
tions of his crew, some of whom proposed to
feed upon the Indian prisoners whom they were
carrying over, and others insisted to throw
them over-board, in order to lessen the con-
fumption of their small frock. He represented
that they were human beings, reduced by a
common calamity to the fame condition with
themselves, and intitled to (hare an equal fate.
His authority and remonfitrances dissipated those
wild ideas suggested by despair. Nor had they
time to recur, as he came soon within fight of
the coast of Spain, when all their fears and sus-
ferings ended h.

h Herrera, dec. i. lib. ill. c. I. Life of Columbus,

c. 64.

COLUMBUS

BOOK ii. COLUMBUS appeared at court with the modest

1496. but determined confidence of a man conscious

His re -

p-

non there. not only of integrity, but of having performed

great services. Ferdinand and Isabella, aihamed
of their own facility in lending too favourable
an ear to frivolous or ill-founded accusations,
received him with such distinguished marks of
refpea, as covered his enemies with shame.
Their censures and calumnies were no more
heard of at that juncture. The gold, the pearls,
the cotton, and other commodities of value
which Columbus produced, seemed fully to
refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refped to the poverty of the country. By
reducing the Indians to obedience, and impofng
a regular tax upon them, he had secured to
Spain a large accession of new fubje&s, and the
establishment of a revenue that promised to be
considerable. By the mines which he had found
out and examined, a source of wealth fill more
copious was opened. Great and unexpeted as
those advantages were, Columbus represented
them only as preludes to future acquisitions,
and as the earnest of more important discoveries,
which he still meditated, and to which those he
had already made would condua him with ease
and certainty'.

i Life of Columbus, c. 65. Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii.

c. I.

THE attentive consideration of all these cir- *

o .

cumftances made such impreflion, not only A p,9.
upon Isabella, who was flattered with the idea t more-
of being the patroness of all Columbus's enter- Iihmrnet of
prifes, but even upon Ferdinand, who having
originally expressed his disapprobation of his
schemes, was still apt to doubt of their success,
that they resolved to supply the colony in His-
paniola with every thing which could render it
a permanent eftabliflhment, and to furnish Co-
lumbus with such a fleet, that he might proceed
to search for those new countries, of whole
existence he seemed to be confident. The
measures most proper for accompliihing both
these designs were concerted with Columbus.
Discovery had been the sole objet of the first
voyage to the New World; and though, in the
second, settlement had been proposed, the pre-
cautions taken for that purpose had either been
infufficient, or were rendered ineffectual by the
mutinous spirit of the Spaniards, and the un-
foreseen calamities arising from various causes.
Now a plan was to be formed of a regular co-
lony, that might serve as a model in all future
establishments. Every particular was considered
with attention, and the whole arranged with a
scrupulous accuracy. The precise number of
adventurers who hould be pecrmitted to embark
was fixed. They were to be of di.ferent ranks

and

BOOK Ir. and profefilons; and the proportion of each was

1496. established, according to their ufefulnefs and

the wants of the colony. A suitable number of
women was to be chosen to accompany these
new settlers. As it was the first obje& to raise
provisions in a country where scarcity of food
had been the occasion of so much distress, a
considerable body of husbandmen was to be
carried over. As the Spaniards had then no
conception of deriving any benefit from those
productions of the New World which have since
yielded such large returns of wealth to Europe,
but had formed magnificent ideas, and enter.
tained sanguine hopes with refped to the riches
contained in the mines which had been disco.
vered, a band of workmen, ikilled in the various
arts employed in digging and refining the pre.
cious metals, was provided, All these emigrants
were to receive pay and subsistence for some
years, at the public expence k.

A ea in THUS far the regulations were prudent, and
it* well adapted to the end in view. But as it was

foreseen that few would engage voluntarily to
fettle in a country, whose noxious climate had
been fatal to so many of their countrymen, Co.
lumbus proposed to transport to Hispaniola

k Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 2.

faich malefadors as had been convided of BOOKI .
crimes, which, though capital, were of a less 1496.
atrocious nature; and that for the future a
certain proportion of the offenders ufiially sent
to the gallies, should be condemned to labour in
the mines which were to be opened. This ad-
vice, given without due refleIaon, was as incon-
fiderately adopted. The prisons of Spain were
drained, in order to colled members for the in-
tended colony; and the judges empowered to try
criminals, were inftruded to recruit it by their
future sentences. It is not, however, with such
materials, that the foundations 6f a society,
destined to be permanent, thould be laid. In-
duftry, sobriety, patience, and mutual confi-
fidence are ihndifpenfably requisite in an infant
settlement, where purity of morals muff contri-
bute more towards establishing order, than the
operation or authority of laws. But when such
a mixture of what is corrupt is admitted into
the original conftitutiorn of the political body,
the vices of those unsound and incurable mem-
bers will probably infea the whole, and mufi
certainly be produdive of violent and unhappy
effets. This the Spaniards fatally experienced;
and the other European nations having fuccef-
fively imitated the pradice of Spain in this par-
ticular, pernicious consequences have followed

VOL. I. O in

BOOK II. in their settlements, which can be imputed to

1496. no other caufe'.

" xecued THOUGH Columbus obtained, with great

facility and dispatch, the royal approbation of
every measure and regulation that he proposed,
his endeavours to carry them into execution
were so long retarded, as mufi have tired out
the patience of any man, less accustomed to
encounter and to surmount difficulties. Those
delays were occasioned partly by that tedious
formality and spirit of procrastination, with
which the Spaniards conduft business; and
partly by the exhaufited state of the treasury,
which was drained by the expence of celebrat.
ing the marriage of Ferdinand and Ifabella's
only son with Margaret of Aufitria, and that of
Joanna, their second daughter, with Philip
archduke of Autria m ; but must be chiefly im-
puted to the malicious arts of Columbus's
enemies. Astonished at the reception which
he met with upon his return, and overawed by
his presence, they gave way, for some time, to
a tide of favour too strong for them to oppose.
Their enmity, however, was too inveterate to

I Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 2. Touron Hist. Gener.

<e l'Amerique, i. p. 51.
m P. Martyr, epift. 168.

remain

1remain long ina&ive. They resumed their BOOK I.
operations, and by the affifrance of Fonseca, the 1496.
minister for Indian affairs, who was now pro-
moted to the bishopric of Badajos, they threw
in so many obstacles to protraa the prepara-
tions for Columbus's expedition, that a year
elapsed before he ° could procure two thips to
carry over a part of the supplies destined for
the colony, and almost two years were spent
before the small squadron was equipped of
which he himself was to take the command °.

THIS squadron conifted of fix ships only, Thi,49y.
of no great burden, and but indifferently pro- "Ugb cou.-
vided for a long or dangerous navigation.
The voyage which he now meditated was in a
course different from any he had undertaken.
As he was fully persuaded that the fertile
regions of India lay to the south-west of those
countries which he had discovered, he pro-
posed, as the most certain method of finding
out these, to stand direaly south from the
Canary or Cape de Verd islands, until he came
under the equino&ial line, and then to stretch
to the weft before the favourable wind for such
a course, which blows invariably between the
tropics. With this idea he set fail, and touched May 30o.

t Life of Columbus, c. 65.
° Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 9.

02 first

BOOK II. first at the Canary, and then at the Cape de

1498. Verd islands. From the former he difpatchcd
J"y 4 three of his ships with a supply of provisions

for the colony in Hispaniola: with the other
three, he continued his voyage towards the
south. No remarkable occurrence happened
until they arrived within five degrees of the

July 19. line. There they were becalmed, and at the

fame time the heat became so excessive, that
many of their wine casks burst, the liquor in
others soured, and their provisions corrupted .
The Spaniards, who had never ventured to far
to the south, were afraid that the ships would
take fire, and began to apprehend the reality
of what the ancients had taught concerning
the defirucive qualities of that torrid region
of the globe. They were relieved, in some
measure, from their fears by a seasonable fall
of rain. This, however, though so heavy and
unintermitting that the men could hardly keep
the deck, did not greatly mitigate the intense.
ness of the heat. The admiral, who with his
usual vigilance had in person direded every
operation, from the beginning of the voyage,
was so much exhausted by fatigue and want
of sleep, that it brought on a violent fit of the
gout, accompanied with a fever. All these

P P. Martyr, dec, p. 7o. circumn

circumstances constrained him to yield to the o o K .
importunities of his crew, and to alter his 149s.
course to the north-west, in order to reach
some of the Caribbee islands, where he might
refit, and be supplied with provisions,

O0 the firfi of Auguff, the man stationed in Discover,

the conti-

the round top surprised them with the joyful nentot A.

menca.

cry of land. They flood towards it, and dif-
covered a considerable island, which the ad,
miral called Trinidad, a name it itill retains.
It lies on the coast of Guiana, near the mouth
of the Orinoco. This, though a river only of
the third or fourth magnitude in the New"World,
far surpasses any of the streams in our hemi-
sphere. It rolls towards the ocean such a vail
body of water, and ruflies into it with such
impetuous force, that when it meets the tide,
which on that coast rises to an uncommon
height, their collision occasions a swell and
agitation of the waves no less surprising than
formidable. In this conflic, the irresistible
torrent of the river so far prevails, that it
freshens the ocean many leagues with its flood 9.
Columbus, before he could perceive the
danger, was entangled among those adverse
currents and tempestuous waves, and it was
with the utmost difficulty that he escaped

1 Gumilla Hist. de l'Orenoque, tom. i, p. 14.

0 3 through

BOOK II. through a narrow fitrait, which appeared so

49s. tremendous, that he called if La Boca del

Drago. As soon as the coniternation which
this occasioned, permitted him to reflea upon
the nature of an appearance so extraordinary,
he discerned in it a source of comfort and
hope. He jufily concluded, that such a vast
body of water as this river contained, could
not be supplied by any island, but muff flow
through a country of immense extent, and of
consequence that he was now arrived at that
continent which it had long been the objet
of his wishes to discover. Full of this idea,
he flood to the weft along the coast of those
provinces which are now known by the names
of Paria and Cumana, He landed in several
places, and had some intercourse with the
people, who resembled those of Hispaniola in
their appearance and manner of life. They
wore, as ornaments, small plates of gold, and
pearls of considerable value, which they wil.
lingly exchanged for European toys. They
seemed to possess a better understanding, and
greater courage, than the inhabitants of the
islands. The country produced four-footed
animals of several kinds, as well as a great
variety of fowls and fruits '. The admiral was

 Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 9, 1o, II. Life of Co-

luapbus, c. 66-73.

so much delighted with its beauty and fertility, BOOK II.
that with the warm enthusiasm of a discoverer, 1498.
he imagined it to be the paradise described in
Scripture, which the Almighty chose for the
residence of man, while he retained innocence
that rendered him worthy of such a habitation '.
Thus Columbus had the glory not only of dif-
covering to mankind the existence of a New
World, but made considerable progress towards
a perfea knowledge of it; and was the first
man who conduced the Spaniards to that vast
continent which has been the chief feat of their
empire, and the source of their treasures in
this quarter of the globe. The shattered con-
dition of his ships, scarcity of provisions, his
own infirmities, together with the impatience
of his crew, prevented him from pursuing his
discoveries any farther, and made it necessary
to bear away for Hispaniola. In his way
thither he discovered the islands of Cubagua
and Margarita, which afterwards became re-
markable for their pearl-fifhery. When he Aug. °o,
arrived at Hispaniola, he was wasted to an
extreme degree with fatigue and sickness; but
found the affairs of the colony in such a situation,
as afforded him no profped of enjoying that
repose of which he stood so much in need,

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 1z. Gomara, c. 84.
See NOTE XXI.

MANY

04

BOOK II. MANY revolutions had happened in that

z498. country during his absence. His brother the

State of Hid.
panioia on adelantado, in consequence of an advice which
t~eriae the admiral gave before his departure, had

removed the colony from Isabella to a more
commodious station, on the opposite fide of
the island, and laid the foundation of St. Do.
mingo ", which was long the most considerable
European town in the New World, and the
feat of the supreme courts in the Spanish domi,
nions there. As soon as the Spaniards were
established in this new settlement, the adela.
tado, that they might neither languish in in.
aaivity, nor have leisure to form new cabals,
marched into those parts of theifland which his
brother had not yet visited or reduced to obedi.
ence. As the people were unable to refiit, they
submitted every where to the tribute which he
imposed. But they soon found the burden to
be so intolerable, that, overawed as they were by
the superior power of their oppressors, they took
arms against them. Those infurreIions, how.
ever, were not formidable. A conflia with timid
and naked Indians was neither dangerous nor of
4oubtful issue,

Mutiny of BUT while the adelantado was employed

against them in the field, a mutiny, of an

U P. Martyr, dec. p. 56, afpe4

afpet far more alarming, broke out among BOOK

0 r.

the Spaniards. The ringleader of it was Francis 1498.
Roldan, whom Columbus had placed in a
station which required him to be the guardian
of order and tranquillity in the colony. A
turbulent and inconsiderate ambition precipi-
tated him into this desperate measure, so un.
becoming his rank. The arguments which he
employed to seduce his countrymen were frivo-
lous and ill-founded. He accused Columbus
and his .two brothers of arrogance and feve-
rity; he pretended that they aimed at eftabflfl-
ing an independent dominion in the country;
he taxed them with an intention of cutting off
part of the Spaniards by hunger and fatigue,
that they might more easily reduce the re-
mainder to fubjeaion; he represented it as un-
worthy of Caftilians, to remain the tame and
paflive slaves of three Genoese adventurers.
As men have always a propensity to impute
the hardships of which they feel the pressure,
to the mifcondu& of their rulers; as every
nation views with a jealous eye the power and
exaltation of foreigners, Roldan's insinuations
made a deep imprefion on his countrymen.
His charaaer and rank added weight to them.
A considerable number of the Spaniards made
choice of him as their leader, and taking arms
against the adelntado and his brother, seized

the

BooMK i. the king's magazine of provisions, and endea.

S495. voured to surprise the fort at St. Domingo,

This was preserved by the vigilance and courage
of Don Diego Columbus. The mutineers
were obliged to retire to the province of Xara,
gua, where they continued not only to disclaim
the adelantado's authority themselves, but ex-
cited the Indians to throw off the yoke w.

SUCH was the diftrafted state of the colony

when Columbus landed at St. Domingo. He
was a{tonifhed to find that the three ships which
he had dispatched from the Canaries were not
yet arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots;
and the violence of currents, they had been
carried a hundred and sixty miles to the weft
of St. Domingo, and forced to take ihelter in
a harbour of the province of Xaragua, where
Roldan and his seditious followers were can.
toned. Roldan carefully concealed from the
commanders of the ships his infurrecion against
the adelantado, and employing his utmoRf ad.
dress to gain their confidence, persuaded them
to set on shore a considerable part of the new
settlers whom they brought over, that they
might proceed by land to St. Domingo. It
required but few arguments to prevail with

SHe-rrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 5-8. Life of Columbus,

C. 74-77. Gomara, c. 23. P. Martyr, p. 78.

those

those men to espouse his cause. They were BOOK II.
the refuse of the jails of Spain, to whom idle. 14,s.
ness, licentiousness, and deeds of violence were
familiar; and they returned eagerly to a course
of life nearly resembling that to which they
had been accuffomed. The commanders of
the ships perceiving, when it was too late, their
imprudence in difembarking so many of their
men, flood away for St. Domingo, and got
safe into the port a few days after the admiral;
but their flock of provisions was so wasted
during a voyage of such long continuance, that
they brought little relief to the colony 1.

BY this juncion with a band of such bold Comporea

by the pru.

and desperate associates, Roldan became ex- dent con-

d ucdt of Co.,

tremely formidable, and no less extravagant in lumbus.
his demands. Columbus, though filled with
resentment at his ingratitude, and highly exaf-
perated by the insolence of his followers, made
no haste to take the field. He trembled at
the thoughts of kindling the flames of a civil
war, in which, whatever party prevailed, the
power and strength of both muff be so much
wasted, as might encourage the common enemy
to unite and complete their deftruaion. At
the fame time, he observed, that the prejur

a Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 12. Life of Columbus,

c. 78, 79.

dices

BoK Ii. dices and paflions which incited the rebels to

,34S. take arms, had so far infeted those who flil

adhered to him, that many of them were ad-
verse, and all cold to the service. From such
sentiments, with refpea to the public interest,
as well as from this view of his own situation,
he chose to negociate rather than to fight. By
a seasonable proclamation, offering free pardon
to such as should merit it by returning to
their duty, he made impression upon some of
the malcontents, By engaging to grant such
as -hould desire it the liberty of returning to
Spain, he allured all those unfortunate adven.
turers, who, from sickness and disappointment,
were difguffed with the country. By pro.
mifing to re-establish Roldan in his former
office, he soothed his pride ; and by complying
with most of his demands in behalf of his
followers, he satisfied their avarice. Thus,
gradually and without bloodshed, but after
many tedious negociations, he dissolved this
dangerous combination which threatened the
colony with ruin; and reffored the appear.
ance of order, regular government, and tras.
quillity r.

Y I'.rrcra, ecc, I. lib. ill, c. c. 13, 14. Life of Columbua,

c. £o, &c.

In consequence of this agreement with the BOor nI.
nmutineers, lands were allotted them in different ,4
parts of the island, and the Indians fettled in ,ft r ."

menrt e!La-

each diftria were appointed to cultivate a cer- blae.
tain portion of ground for the use of those new
masters. The performance of this work was 19.
substituted in place of the tribute formerly
imposed; and how necessary soever such a
regulation might be in a sickly and feeble
colony, it introduced among the Spaniards the
Repartimientos, or diffributions of Indians efla-
blifhed by them in all their settlements, vwhich
brought numberless calamities upon that un-
happy people, and subjeCted them to the moif
grievous oppreflion z. This was not the only
bad effec of the infurreclion in Hispaniola; it
prevented Columbus from prosecuting his dif-
coveries on the continent, as felf-prefervation
obliged him to keep near his person his brother
the adelantado, and the sailors whom he in-
tended to have employed in that service. As
soon as his affairs would permit, he sent some
of his ships to Spain with a journal of the
voyage which he had made, a description of
the new countries which he had discovered, a
chart of the coast along which he had failed,
and specimens of the gold, the pearls, and

iz lierrcra, dec, I, lib. iii. c. 4, &c,

Other

BOOK II, other curious or valuable producions which he

]499. had acquired by trafficking with the natives.

At the fame time he transmitted an account of
the infurreation in Hispaniola; he accused the
mutineers not only of having thrown the colony
into such violent convulsions as threatened its
dissolution, but of having obftru&ed every
attempt towards discovery and improvement,
.by their unprovoked rebellion against their

superiors, and proposed several regulations for
the better government of the island, as well as
the extinaion of that mutinous spirit, which,
though suppressed at present, might soon burit
out with additional rage. Roldan and his affo.
ciates did not neglea to convey to Spain, by
the fame ihips, an apology for their own cos.
du&t, together with their recriminations upon
the admiral and his brothers. Unfortunately
for the honour of Spain, and the happiness
of Columbus, the latter gained most credit in
the court of Ferdinand and' Isabella, and pro-
duced unexpeaed effets ".

The voyage BUT, previous to the relating of there, it is
of Vasco de
Gamatothe proper to take a view of some events, .vhich
raft Indies,
by the Cape merit attention, both on account of their own
of Good

ope. importance, and their connedion with the his.

a Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 14. Benzon. HifiL Nov.

Oib. lib. i. c. 2.

tory of the New World. While Columbus nooK a~
was engaged in his successive voyages to the ,y.
weft, the spirit of discovery did not languish
in Portugal, the kingdom where it first ac-
quired vigour, and became enterprising. Self-
condemnation and regret were not the only
sentiments to which the success of Columbus,
and refleaion upon their own imprudence in
rejeaing his proposals, gave rife among the
Portuguese. They excited a general emula-
tion to surpass his performances, and an ardent
desire to make some reparation to their country
for their own error. With this view, Em-
manuel, who inherited the enterprising genius
of his predecessors, persisted in their grand
scheme of opening a passage to the East In-
dies by the Cape of Good Hope; and soon
after his acceflion to the throne, equipped
a squadron for that important voyage. IIe
gave the command of it to Vasco de Gama, a
man of noble birth, poffeffed &l virtue, pru-
dence, and courage, equal to the tation. The
squadron, like all those fitted out for discovery
in the infancy of navigation, was extremely
feeble, consisting only of three vessels, of
neither burden nor force adequate to the ser-
vice. As the Europeans were at that time
little acquainted with the course of the trade-
winds and periodical monsoons which render
navigation in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in

17 the

BooK mn the sea that separates Africa from India, at

1499. some seasons easy, and as others not only dan,

gerous, but almost impradicable, the time
chosen for Gama's departure was the molt ima
proper during the whole year. He set fail

1497. from Lisbon on the ninth of July, and fland.

ing towards the south, had to struggle for four
months with contrary winds, before he could

Nov. 20. reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their

violence began to abate; and during an in.
terval of calm weather, Gama doubled that
formidable promontory, which had so long
been the boundary of navigation, and diredfed
his course towards the north-east, along the
African coast. He touched at several ports;
and after various adventures, which the Por.
tuguefe historians relate with high but just
encomiums upon his conduct and intrepidity;
he came to anchor before the city of Melinda.
Throughout all the vast countries which extend
along the coast of Africa, from the river Sene.
gal to the confines of Zanguebar, the Portu.
guefe had found a race of men rude and un.
cultivated, firangers to letters, to arts and
commerce, and differing from the inhabitants
of Europe no lIcs in their features and coma
plexion, than in their manners and institutions.
As they advanced from this, they observed, to
their inexpressible joy, that the humnan form

gradually

gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic BOOK I.
features began to predominate, marks of civi- '499.
lization appeared, letters were known, the
Mahometan religion was established, and a
commerce, far from being inconsiderable, was
carried on. At that time several vessels from
India were in the port of Melinda. Gama

now pursued his voyage with almost absolute
certainty of success, and, under the condut
of a Mahometan pilot, arrived at Calecut, upon
the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-fecond
of May one thousand four hundred and ninety-
eight. What he beheld of the wealth, the
populousness, the cultivation, the induflry and
arts of this highly civilized country, far fur-
passed any idea that he had formed, from the
imperfed accounts which the Europeans had hi-
therto received of it. But as he poffeffed nei-

ther fufficient force to attempt a settlement, nor
proper commodities with which he could carry
on commerce of any consequence, he hastened
back to Portugal, with an account of his fuc-
cess in performing a voyage the longefit, as well
as most difficult, that had ever been made since
the firit invention of navigation. He landed at
Lisbon on the fourteenth of September, one
thousand four hundred and ninety-nine, two
years two months and five days from the time he
left that port ".

a Ramufio, vol. i. 119, D.

VOL. I. P TueS,

BOOK 1i. THUS, during the course of the fifteenth

1499. century, mankind made greater progress in

exploring the state of the habitable globe, than
in all the ages which had elapsed previous to
that period. The spirit of discovery, feeble
at first and cautious, moved within a very
narrow sphere, and made its efforts with hefi-
tation and timidity. Encouraged by success,
it became adventurous, and boldly extended
its operations. In the course of its progreflion,
it continued to acquire vigour, and advanced
at length with a rapidity and force which burst
through all the limits within which ignorance
and fear had hitherto circumscribed the ativity
of the human race. Almost fifty years were
employed by the Portuguese in creeping along
the coast of Africa from Cape Non to Cape de
Verd, the latter of which lies only twelve
degrees to the south of the former. In less
than. thirty years they ventured beyond the
equinolial line into another hemisphere, and
penetrated to the fouthern.extremity of Africa,
at the diftLace of forty-nine degrees from Cape
de Verd. During the last seven years of the
century, a New World was discovered in the
weft, not inferior in extent to all the parts of
the earth with which mankind were at that
time acquainted. In the east, unknown seas
and countries were found out, and a commu.

nication,

nication, long desired, but hitherto concealed, BOOK In.
was opened between Europe and the opulent re- 1499.
gions of India. In comparison with events so
wonderful and unexpeced, all that had hitherto
been deemed great or splendid, faded away and
disappeared. Vast objeas now presented them-
selves. The huiman hiind, roused and interested
by the profpec, engaged with ardour in pursuit
of them, and exerted its aaive powers in a new
direfcion.

THIs sprit of enterj~rife, though but newly Dircoverie

r 0 carried on if)

awakened in Spain, began soon to operate ex- Spaibd.
tenfively. All the attempts towards discovery venturers.
made in that kingdom, had hitherto been car-
ried on by Columbus alone, and at the ex-
pence of the sovereign. But now private ad-
venturers, allured by the magnificent defcrip-
tions he gave of the regions which he had
visited, as well as by the specimens of their
wealth which he produced, offered to fit out
squadrons at their own risk, and to, go in quest
of new countries. The Spanish court, whose
scanty revenues were exhausted by the charge
of its expeditions to the New World, which,
though they opened alluring profpeds of future
benefit, yielded a very sparing return of prefer t
profit, was extremely willing to devolve the
burden of discovery upon its subjects. It fcized

P 2 with

BOOK UI. with joy an opportunity of rendering the ava.

1499. rice, the ingenuity, and efforts of projeCors,

instrumental in promoting designs of certain
advantage to the public, though of doubtful

Ojeda the success with refpe& to themselves. One of the
ftit of there.

first propositions of this kind was made by
Alonfo de Ojeda, a gallant and adive officer,
who had accompanied Columbus in his second
voyage. His rank and charater procured him
such credit with the merchants of Seville, that
they undertook to equip four ships, provided
he could obtain the royal licence, authorising
the voyage. The powerful patronage of the
bishop of Badajos easily secured success in a
suit so agreeable to the court. XWithout con-
fulting Columbus, or regarding the rights and
jurifdiaion which he had acquired by the capi-
tulation in one thousand four hundred and

ninety-two, Ojeda was permitted to set out for
the New World. In order to diret his course,
the bifhcp communicated to him the admiral's
journal of his last voyage, and his charts of

May. the countries which he had discovered. Ojeda

firuck out into no new path of navigation, but
adhering servilely to the route which Columbus
had taken, arrived on the coast of Paria. He
traded with the natives, and standing to the weft,
proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and ranged
along a considerable extent of coast beyond that

on which Columbus had touched. Having thus BOOK II.
ascertained the opinion of Columbus, that this 1499*
country was a part of the continent, Ojeda re-
turned by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some Oaober.
reputation as a discoverer, but with little bene-
fit to those who had raised the funds for the ex-
pedition b.

AMERIGO VESPUCCI, a Florentine gentle- Is accompa-
man, accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In Amerigo Vespucci.
what flation he served, is uncertain; but as he
was an experienced sailor, and eminently skilful
in all the sciences subservient to navigation, he
seems to have acquired such authority among
his companions, that they willingly allowed
him to have a chief share in direting their
operations during the voyage. Soon after his
return, he transmitted an account of his ad-
ventures and discoveries to one of his country-
men; and labouring with the vanity of a
traveller to magnify his own exploits, he had
the address and confidence to frame his narra-
tive, so as to make it appear that he had the
glory of having first discovered the continent
in the New World. Amerigo's account was
drawn up not only with art, but with some
elegance. It contained an amufirng history of
his voyage, and judicious observations upon

b Herrcra, dec. i. l;b. iv. c. I, 2, 3.

P 3 the

BOOK II. the natural produ&ions, the inhabitants, and

1499. the customs of the countries which he had

visited. As it was the first description of any
part of the New World' that was published, a
performance so well calculated to gratify the
passion of mankind for what is new and mar-
vellous, circulated rapidly, and was read with

From whom admiration. The country of which Amerigo
the name of
America is was supposed to be the discoverer, came gra.
Fiven to the
New world. dually to be called by his name. The caprice

of mankind, often as unaccountable as unjust,
has perpetuated this error. By the universal
consent of nations, AMERICA is the name be-
flowed on this new quarter of the globe. The
bold preteniaons of a fortunate impostor have
robbed the discoverer of the New World of a
diftindtion which belonged to him. The name
of Amerigo has supplanted that of Columbus;
and mankind may regret an a& of injustice,
which, having received the fanaon of time,
it is now too late to redrefa c.

Voyage of DURING the fame year, another voyage of
Alonfo
Nigno. discovery was undertaken. Columbus not only

introduced the spirit of naval enterprise into
Spain, but all the first adventurers who diltin-
guifhed themselves in this new career, were

c See NOTE XXII.

formed

formed by his inftruaions, and acquired in o o K IP
his voyages the skill and information which ,. 
qualified them to imitate his example. Alonfo
Nigno, who had served under the admiral in
his last expedition, fitted out a single ship, in
conjunaion with Chriffopher Guerra, a mer-
chant of Seville, and failed to the coast of Paria.
This voyage seems to have been conduaed
with greater attention to private emolument,
than to any general or national object. Nigno
and Guerra made no discoveries of any import-
ance; but they brought home such a return of
gold and pearls, as inflamed their countrymen
with the desire of engaging in similar adven-

tures d

SooN after, Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of 1,o.

January 13.

the admiral's companions in his first voyage, y',,"Yi
failed from Palos with four ships. He flood zon.
boldly towards the south, and was the first
Spaniard who ventured to cross the equinoaial
line; but he seems to have landed on no part
of the coast beyond the mouth of the Marag-
non, or river of the Amazons. All these navi-
gators adopted the erroneous theory of Colum-
bus, and believed that the countries which they
had discovered were part of the vast continent

of India .

d P. Martyr, dec. p. 87. Herrera, dec. 1. lib. i c. c.,
C Herrera, dee. I. lib. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 9g.

P 4 DuKING

BOOK II. DURING the last year of the fifteenth cen-

Tr i0oo. tury, that fertile diflri& of America, on the
etfe CirfC- confines of which Pinzon had ftdpt short, was

more fully discovered. The fuccefsful voyage
of Gama to the East Indies having encouraged
the king of Portugal to fit out a fleet so power.
ful, as not only to carry on trade, but to
attempt conquest, he gave the command of it
to Pedro Alvarez Cabral. In order to avoid
the coast of Africa, where he was certain of
meeting with variable breezes, or frequent
calms, which might retard his voyage, Cabral
flood out to sea, and kept so far to the wellt,
that, to his surprise, he found himself upon
the flore of an unknown country, in the tenth
degree beyond the line. He imagined, at first,
that it was some island in the Atlantic ocean
hitherto unobserved; but, proceeding along
its coast for several days, he was led gradually
to believe, that a country so extensive formed
a part of some great continent. This latter
opinion was well founded. The country with
which he fell in belongs to that province in
Sou:h America, now known by the name of
Brasil. He landed; and having formed a very
high idea of the fertility of the foil, and agree-
ablenefs of the climate, he took poffeflion of it
for the crown of Portugal, and dispatched a
ship to Lisbon with an account of this event,

which

which appeared to be no less important than BOOK II.
it was unexpeaed '. Columbus's discovery of soo.
the New World was the effort of an ative
genius, enlightened by science, guided by ex-
perience, and ating upon a regular plan, exe-
cuted with no less courage than perseverance.
But from this adventure of the Portuguese, it
appears that chance might have accomplilfhed
that great design which it is now the pride of
human reason to have formed and perfected.
If the sagacity of Columbus had not conduced
mankind to America, Cabral, by a fortunate
accident, might have led them, a few years
later, to the knowledge of that extensive con-
tinent g.

WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by ancsain
those fucceflive voyages, were daily acquiring columbus.
more enlarged ideas of the extent and opulence
of that quarter of the globe which Columbus
had made known to them, he himself, far from
enjoying the tranquillity and honours with
which his services mhould have been recom-
penfed, was struggling with every distress in
which the envy and malevolence of the people
under his command, or the ingratitude of the
court which he fervcd, could involve him.

f Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 7.
g Herrera, dec. I. iib. vii. c. 5.

Though

BOOK II. Though the pacification with Roldan broke

soo0. the union and weakened the force of the muti-

neers, it did not extirpate the feeds of discord
out of the island. Several of the malcontents
continued in arms, refuting to submit to the
admiral. He and his brothers were obliged
to take the field alternately, in order to check
their incursions, or to punish their crimes,
The perpetual occupation and disquiet which
this created, prevented him from giving due
attention to the dangerous machinations of his
enemies in the court of Spain. A good number
of such as were molft diffatisfied with his admi-
niflration, had embraced the opportunity of
returning to Europe with the flhips which he
dispatched from St. Domingo. The final dif-
appointment of all their hopes inflamed the
rage of these unfortunate adventurers againtf
Columbus to the utmost pitch. Their poverty
and distress, by exciting compaflion, rendered
their accusations credible, and their complaints
interesting. They teazed Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella inceffant'y with memorials, containing
the detail of their own grievances, and the
articles of their charge against Columbus.
Whenever either the king or queen appeared
in public, they surrounded them in a tumul-
tuary manner, insisting with importunate cla-
mours for payment of the arrears due to them,

and

and demanding vengeance upon the author of BOOK Ir.
their fufferings. They insulted the admiral's xsoo.
sons wherever they met them, reproaching
them as the offspring of the projeaor, whose
fatal curiosity had discovered those pernicious
regions which drained Spain of its wealth, and
would prove the grave of its people. There
avowed endeavours of the malcontents from
America to ruin Columbus, were seconded by
the secret, but more dangerous insinuations of
that party among the courtiers, which had
always thwarted his schemes, and envied his
success and credit h.

FERDINAND was disposed to liflen, not only Theirin-

fluence ora

with a willing, but with a partial ear, to thele Ferdinand

and Isabella.

accusations. Notwithilanding the flattering
accounts which Columbus had given of the
riches of America, the remittances from it
had hiherno been so scanty, that they fell far
fliort of defraying the expence of the arma-
ments fitted out. The glory of the discovery,
together with the prospect of remote commer-
cial advarntages, was all that Spain had yet re-
ceived in return for the efforts which the had
made. But time had already diminished the
first sensations of joy which the discovery of a

b Life of Columbus, c. 85.

New

BOOK ii, New World occasioned, and fame alone was

1,yo. not an objed to satisfy the cold interested mind

of Ferdinand. The nature of commerce was
then so little understood, that, where imme-
diate gain was not acquired, the hope of distant
benefit, or of flow and moderate returns,
was totally disregarded. Ferdinand considered
Spain, on this account, as having loft by the
enterprise of Columbus, and imputed it to his
mifcondua and incapacity for government, that
a country abounding in gold had yielded no.
thing of value to its conquerors. Even Ifa.
bella, who from the favourable opinion which
Ihe entertained of Columbus, had uniformly
proteaed him, was shaken at length by the
number and boldness of his accusers, and began
to fufped that a difaffetion so general must
have been occasioned by real grievances, which
called for redress. The bishop of Badajos,
with his usual animosity against Columbus,
encouraged these suspicions, and confirmed
them.

atai effeas As soon as the queen began to give way to
of this.

the torrent of calumny, a resolution fatal to
Columbus was taken. Francis de Bovadilla,
a knight of Calatrava, was appointed to repair
to Hispaniola, with full powers to enquire into
the condut of Columbus, and, if he ilhould

22 find

find the charge of mal-administration proved, BOOK II.
to supersede him, and assume the government 10oo.
of the island. It was impossible to escape con-
demnation, when this prepofferous commiflion
made it the interest of the judge to pronounce
the person whom he was sent to try, guilty.
Though Columbus had now composed all the
diffentions in the island ; though he had brought
both Spaniards and Indians to submit peace-
ably to his government; though he had made
such effeaual provision for working the mines,
and cultivating the country, as would have
secured a considerable revenue to the king, as
well as large profits to individuals, Bovadilla,
without deigning to attend to the nature or
merit of those services, discovered, from the
moment that he landed in Hispaniola, a deter-
mined purpose of treating him as a criminal.
He took poffeflion of the admiral's house in
St. Domingo, from which its maltter happened
at that time to be absent, and seized his effe&s,
as if his guilt had been already fully proved;
he rendered himself master of the fort and of
the king's stores by violence; he required all
persons to acknowledge him as supreme gover-
nor; he set at liberty the prisoners confined by
the admiral, and summoned him to appear
before his tribunal, in order to answer for his
conduct; transmitting to him, together with

the

BOOK iI. the summons, a copy of the royal mandate, by

15a0. which Columbus was enjoined to yield implicit

obedience to his commands.

Columbus COLUMBUS, though deeply affeced with the
chains to ingratitude and injustice of Ferdinand and Ifa.

bella, did not hesitate a moment about his own
conduct. He submitted to the will of his so-
vereigns with a refpeful silence, and repaired
direcly to the court of that violent and partial
judge whom they had authorised to try him.
Bovadilla, without admitting him into his pre.
fence, ordered him infiantly to be arrested,
to be loaded with chains, and hurried on

oaober. board a thip. Even under this humiliating re-

verse of fortune, the firmness of mind which
distinguishes the charader of Columbus, did
not forsake him. Conscious of his own inte-
grity, and solacing himself with refle&ing upon
the great things which he had achieved, he en-
dured this insult offered to his character, not
only with composure, but with dignity. Nor
had he the consolation of sympathy to mitigate
his fufferings. Bovadilla had already rendered
himself so extremely popular, by granting va-
rious immunities to the colony, by liberal do-
nations of Indians to all who applied for them,
and by relaxing the reins of discipline and go-
vernment, that the Spaniards, who were mofIly

adventurers,

adventurers, whom their indigence or crimes BOOK II.
had impelled to abandon their native country, 1soo.
expressed the molt indecent fatisfacion with the
disgrace and imprisonment of Columbus. They
flattered themselves, that now they should en-
joy an uncontrouled liberty, more suitable to
their disposition and former habits of life.
Among persons thus prepared to censure the
proceedings, and to asperse the charater of
Columbus, Bovadilla colleted materials for a
charge against him. All accusations, the most
improbable, as well as inconsistent, were re-
ceived. No informer, however infamous, was
rejected. The result of this inquest, no less in-
decent than partial, he transmitted to Spain.
At the fame time, he ordered Columbus, with
his two brothers, to be carried thither in fetters;
and, adding cruelty to insult, he confined them
in different ships, and excluded them from the
comfort of that friendly intercourse which might
havefoothed their common distress. But while
the Spaniards in Hispaniola viewed the arbitrary
and insolent proceedings of Bovadilla with a ge-
neral approbation, which reflecs dishonour upon
their name and country, one man still retained a
proper sense of the great actions which Colum.
bus had performed, and was touched with the
sentiments of veneration and pity due to his
rank, his age, and his merit. Alonfo de Val-

lejo,

BOOK I. lejo, the captain of the vessel on board which

150o. the admiral was confined, as soon as he was clear

of the island, approached his prisoner with great
refpeac, and offered to release him from the
fetters with which he was unjufftly loaded.
" No," replied Columbus, with a generous in-
dignation, " I wear these irons in consequence
of an order from my sovereigns. They shall
find me as obedient to this as to their other in-
juntions. By their command I have been con-
fined, and their command alone ihall set me at
liberty i."

Nov. 2. FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was ex-

Set at liber-
ty, but de- tremely ihort. As soon as Ferdinand and Ifa-
prived of all
authority. bella were informed that Columbus was brought

home a prisoner, and in chains, they perceived
at once what universal aftonithment this event
must occasion, and what an imprefiioh to their
disadvantage it must make. All Europe, they
foresaw, would be filled with indignation at this
ungenerous requital of a man who had per-
formed aaions worthy of the highest recom-
pence, and would exclaim against the injufftice
of the nation, to which he had been such an
eminent benefaaor, as well as against the in-

 Life of Columbus, c. 86. Herrera, dec. I. lib.iv. c.

8-xI. Gomara Hii. c. 23. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6.

gratitude
br

gratitude of the princes whose reign he had ren- BooK rn.
dered i!luftrious. Ashamed of their own con- 150o.
dut, and eager not only to mak;e some repara-
tion for this injury, but to efface the stain which
it might fix upon their charaaer, they instantly
i{Tied orders to set Columbus at liberty, invited Dec. 17.
him to court, and remitted money to enable
him to appear there in a manner suitable to his
rank. When he entered the royal presence, Co-
lumbus threw himself at the feet of his fove-
reigns. He remained for some time silent; the
various passions which agitated his mind sup-
prefling his power -of utterance. At length he
recovered himself, and"irndicated his conduct
in a long discourse, producing the molt satisfy-
ing proofs of his own integrity as well as good
intention, and evidence, no less clear, of the ma-
levolence of his enemies, who, not satisfied
with having ruined his fortune, laboured to de-
prive him of what alone was now left, his ho-
nour and his fame. Ferdinand received him with
decent civility, and Isabella with tenderness and
refped. They both expressed their sorrow for
*what had happened, disavowed their knowledge
of it, and joined in promising him prote&ion
and future favour. But though they instantly
degraded Bovadilla, in order to remove from
themselves any flfpicion of having authorised his
violent proccedings, they did not restore to Co-

VOL. I. Q lumbus

BOOK II. lumbus his jurifdition and privileges as viceroy

1500. of those countries which he had discovered.

Though willing to appear the avengers of Co.
lumbus's wrongs, that illiberal jealousy which
prompted them to invest Bovadilla with such
authority as put it in his power to treat the
admiral with indignity still subsisted. They were
afraid to truit a man to whom they had been to
highly indebted, and retaining him at court un-
der various pretexts, they appointed Nicholas
de Ovando, a knight of the military order of
Alcantara, governor of Hispaniola k

COLUMBUS was deeply affected with this new

injury, which came from hands that seemed to
be employed in making reparation for his past
fufferings. The sensibility with which great
minds feel every thing that implies any suspicion
of their integrity, or that wears the afpedt of an
affront, is exquisite. Columbus had experienced
both from the Spaniards ; and their ungenerous
conduct exasperated him to such a degree, that
he could no longer conceal thefentiments which
it excited, Wherever he went, he carried about
with him, as a memorial of their ingratitude,
those fetters with which he had been loaded.

k IHerrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. Io.-12. Life of Colum.

bus, c. 87.

They

They were constantly hung up in his chamber, BOOK II.
and he gave orders that when he died they ihould
be buried in his grave .

MEANWHILE, the spirit of discovery, not- -nor'of

withstanding the severe check which it received discovery.
by the ungenerous treatment of the man, who
firlt excited it in Spain, continued a&ive and
vigorous. Roderigo de Baftidas, a person of
difindion, fitted out two ships in co-partnery January.
with John de la Cosa, who having served under
the admiral in two of his voyages, was deemed
the most skilful pilot in Spain. They fleered
direAly towards the continent, arrived on the
coast of Paria, and proceeding to the weft, dif-
covered all the coast of the province now known
by the name of Tierra Firma, from Cape de
Vela to the gulf of Darien. Not long after
Ojeda, with his former associate Amerigo Ve-
fpuczi, set out upon a second voyage, and
being unacquainted with the destination of
Baftidas, huld the fame course, and touched at
the fame places. The voyage of Baftidas was
prosperous and lucrative, that of Ojeda unfor-
tunate. But both tended to increase the ardour
of discovery; for in proportion as the Spaniards
acquired a more extensive knowledge of the

1 Life of Columbus, c. 86. p. 577.

QZ2 American

BOOK ii. American continent, their idea of its opulence

15so. and fertility increased m.

ovando ap. BEFORE these adventurers returned from their
po'inted go.

.nor, ot voyages, a fleet was equipped, at the public ex-

pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new go-
vernor, to Hispaniola. His presence there was
extremely requisite, in order to flop the incon-
fiderate career of Bovadilla, whose imprudent
administration threatened the settlement with
ruin. Conscious of the violence and iniquity
of his proceedings against Columbus, he con.
tinued to make it his sole objet to gain the fa-
vour and support of his countrymen, by ac-
commodating himself to their passions and pre-
judices. With this view, he established regu.
lations, in every point the reverse of those
which Columbus deemed essential to the pro.
fperity of the colony. Instead of the severe dif.
cipline, neceflary in order to habituate the
dissolute and corrupted members of which the
society was composed to the restraints of law
and subordination, he fuffered them to enjoy
such uncontrouled licence, as encouraged the
wildest excesses. Inflead of proteaing the In.
dians, he gave a legal faniaon to the oppression
of that unhappy people. He took the exat

a Heirera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. nI.

number

number of fuchX as survived their pafl calami. BOOK ir.
ties, divided them into dillina classes, diftri- iso,.
buted them in property among his adherents,
and reduced all the people of the island to a
state of complete servitude. As the avarice of
the Spaniards was too rapacious and impatient
to try any method of acquiring wealth but that
of searching for gold, this servitude became as
grievous as it was unjust. The Indians were
driven in crowds to the mountains, and com-
pelled to work in the mines by masters, who
imposed their talks without mercy or discretion.
Labour, so difproportioned to their strength
and former habits of life, wasted that feeble race
of men with such rapid consumption, as mulf
have soon terminated in the utter extinaion of
the ancient inhabitants of the country ",

THE neceflity of applying a speedy remedy New reuia-

tlons edta-

to those disorders, hastened Ovando's departure. blifhed.
He had the command of the most refpeaable
armament hitherto fitted out for the New
World. It consisted of thirty-two -hips, on
board of which two thousand five hundred per-
sons embarked, with an intention of fettling in
the country. Upon the arrival of the new go- soz.,

Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 1I, &c. Oviedo Hist. lib.

iii. c. 6. p. 97. Benzon. Hist. lib. i. c. 12. p. 51.

Q 3 vernor

BOOK 11. vernor with this powerful reinforcement to the

iso0. colony, Bovadilla resigned his charge, and was

commanded to return instantly tod Spain, in
order to answer for his conduct. Roldan, and
the other ringleaders of the mutineers, who had
been most ative in opposing Columbus, were
required to leave the island at the fame time.
A proclamation was issued, declaring the nao
tives to be free fubjeas of Spain, of whom no
service was to be exated contrary to their own
inclination, and without paying them an ade-
quate price for their labour. With refpe& to
the Spaniards themselves, various regulations
were made, tending to suppress the licentious
spirit which had been so fatal to the colony, and
to establish that reverence for law and order on
which society is founded, and to which it is in-
debted for its increase and liability. In order
to limit the exorbitant gain which private per.
sons were supposed to make by working the
mines, an ordinance was published, dire&ing
all the gold to be brought to a public finelting-
house, and declaring one half of it to be the
property of the crown °.

rhe ade WHILE these lieps were taking for securing

o 'b

o the tranquiiity and welfare of the colony xwhich

o So!orzano Politica Indiana, lib. i. c. 12. Herrcra,

dec. i. lib. iv. c. i2,

Columbus

Columbus had planted, he himself was engaged B ooK 1.
in the unpleasant employment of soliciting the 1soz
favour of an ungrateful court, and, notwith-
standing all his merit and services, he solicited
in vain. He demanded, in terms of the ori-
ginal capitulation in one thousand four hundred
and ninety-two, to be reinfLated in his office of
viceroy over the countries which he had disco-
vered. By a ftrang'e fatality, the circumstance
which he urged in support of his claim, de-
termined a jealous monarch to reject it. The
greatness of his difcaveries, and the profpe& of
their increasing value, made Ferdinand confider
the concessions in the capitulation as extrava-
gant and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting
a fubjet with the exercise of a jurifdicion that
now appeared to be so extremely extensive, and
might grow to be no less formidable. He in-
spired Isabella with the fame suspicions; and
under various pretexts, equally frivolous and
unjust, they eluded all Columbus's requisitions
to perform that which a solemn compat bound
them to accomplish. After attending the court
of Spain for near two years, as an humble
suitor, he found it impoflible to remove Ser-
dinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and
perceived, at length, that he laboured in vain,
when he urged a claim of justice or merit with
an intereflted and unfeeling prince.

Bur

Q4

1300K If.

rnI furrns
new (chlemes
of difcovei·y. BUT even this ungenerous return did not dif.

courage him from pursuing the great objefc
which first called forth his inventive genius, and
excited him to attempt discovery. To open a
new passage to the East Indies was his original
and favourite scheme. This still engrossed his
thoughts; and either from his own observations
in his voyage to Paria, or from some obscure
hint of the natives, or from the accounts given
by Baftidas and de la Cosa, of their expedition,
he conceived an opinion that, beyond the con-
tinent of America, there was a sea which ex-
tended to the East Indies, and hoped to find
some strait or narrow neck of land, by which a
communication might be opened with it and
the part of the ocean already known. By a
very fortunate conjeature, he supposed this fitrait
or isthmus to be situated near the gulf of
Darien. Full of this idea, though he was now
of an advanced age, worn out with fatigue, and
broken with infirmities, he offered, with the
alacrity of a youthful adventurer, to undertake
a voyage which would ascertain this important
point, and perfeft the grand scheme which from
the beginning he proposed to accomplish. Se-
veral circumstances concurred in disposing Ser-.
dinand and Isabella to lend a favourable ear to
this proposal, They were glad to have thg
pretext of any honourable employment for re-

moving

moving from court a man with whose demands BOOK I.
they deemed it impolitic to comply, and whose sozy.
services it was indecent to neglea. Though
unwilling to reward Columbus, they were not
insensible of his merit, and from their experience
of his skill and condut, had reason to give
credit to his conjeaures, and to confide in his
success. To these considerations, a third must
be added of still more powerful influence. About
this time the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral,
arrived from the Indies; and, by the richness
of its cargo, gave the people of Europe a more
perfet idea, than they had hitherto been able
to form, of the opulence and fertility of the east.
The Portuguese had been more fortunate in
their discoveries than the Spaniards. They had
opened a communication with countries, where
induffry, arts, and elegance flourished; and
where commerce had been longer established,.
and carried to greater extent, than in any region
of the earth. Their first voyages thither yielded
immediate, as well as vast returns of profit, in
commodities extremely precious and in great
request. Lisbon became immediately the feat
of commerce and of wealth; while Spain had
only the expeaation of remote benefit, and of
future gain, from the western world. Nothing,
then, could be more acceptable to the Spa-
niards than Columbus's offer to condu& them

to

BOOK ii. to the east, by a route which he expeted to be

5o2.. shorter, as well as less dangerous, than that

which the Portuguese had taken. Even Ser-
dinand was roused by such a profpea, and
warmly approved of the undertaking.

His fourth BUT, interesting as the objec of this voyage
Voyage.

was to the nation, Columbus could procure
only four small barks, the largest of which did
not exceed seventy tons in burden, for per-
forming it. Accustomed to brave danger, and
to engage in arduous undertakings with inade-
quate force, he did not hesitate to accept the
command of this pitiful squadron. His brother
Bartholomew, and his second son Ferdinand,
the historian of his acdions, accompanied him.
He failed from'Cadiz on the ninth of May, and
touched, as usual, at the Canary Islands; from
thence he purposed to have flood direcly for
the continent; but his largest vessel was so
clumsy and unfit for service, as confirained him
to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of ex-
changing her for some ship of the fleet that had
carried out Ovando. When he arrived off St.

ju.e 9zg, Domingo, he found eighteen of these ships

ready loaded, and on the point of departing for
Spaili. Columbus immediately acquainted the
governor with the destination of his voyage,
and the accident which had obliged him to alter

his route. Hle requested permifion to enter BOOK n.
the harbour, not only that he might negociate Ioz.
the exchange of his ship, but that he might
take shelter during a violent hurricane, of
which he discerned the approach from various
prognoftics, which his experience and sagacity
had taught him to observe. On that account,
he advised him likewise to put off for some
days the departure of the fleet bound for Spain.
But Cvando refused his requeflt, and despised
his counsel. Under circumstances in which
humanity would have afforded refuge to a firan-
ger, Columbus was denied admittance into a
country of which he had discovered the existence
and acquired the poffeffion. His salutary warn-
ing, which merited the greatest attention, was
regarded as the dream of a visionary prophet,
who arrogantly pretended to predia an event
beyond the reach of human foresight. The
fleet set fail for Spain. Next night the hurri-
cane came on with dreadful impetuosity. Co-
lumbus, aware of the danger, took precautions
against it, and saved his little squadron. The
fleet deffined for Spain met with the fate which
the rashness and obstinacy of its commanders
deserved. Of eighteen thips two or three only
escaped. In this general wreck perifled Bova-
dilla, Roldan, and the greater part of those
who had been the most ative in persecuting

Columbus,

BO K II. Columbus, and oppressing the Indians. To.

0soz. gether with themselves, all the wealth which

they had acquired by their injustice and cruelty
was swallowed up. It exceeded in value two
hundred thousand pesos; an immense fum at
that period, and fufficient not only to have
screened them from any severe scrutiny into
their conduca, but to have secured them a gra.
cious reception in the Spanish court. Among
the flhips that escaped, one had on board all the
effe&ts of Columbus which had been recovered
from the ruins of his fortune. Hitorians,
ifruck with the exat discrimination of cha-
racters, as well as the just distribution of re-
wards and punishments, conspicuous in those
events, universally attribute them to an imme-
diate interposition of divine Providence, in
order to avenge the wrongs of an injured man,
and to punish the oppressors of an innocent
people. Upon the ignorant and superstitious
race of men, who were witnesses of this occur.
rence, it made a different impression. From
an opinion, which vulgar admiration is apt to
entertain with refpe& to persons who have di.
flinguifhed themselves by their sagacity and in-
ventions, they believed Columbus to be pof-
sessed of supernatural powers, and imagined
that he had conjured up this dreadful storm by

magical

magical art, and incantations, in order to be BOOK ir,
avenged of his enemies P. son.

COLUMBUS soon left Hispaniola, where he met j,y i4.

with fuch-an inhospitable reception, and flood vain for a

passage to

towards the continent. After a tedious and the Indian

oceda,.

dangerous voyage, he discovered Guanaia, an
island not far diflant from the coast of Hon-
duras. There he had an interview with some
inhabitants of the continent, who arrived .in a
large canoe. They appeared to be a people
more civilized, and who had made greater pro-
grefs in the knowledge of useful arts, than any
whom he had hitherto discovered. In return
to the inquiries which the Spaniards made, with
their usual eagerness, concerning the places
where the Indians got the gold which they wore
by way of ornament, they direted them to
countries situated to the weft, in which gold
was found in such profusion, that it was applied
to the most common uses. Instead of fleering
in quest of a country so inviting, which would
have conducted him along the coast of Yucatan
to the rich empire of Mexico, Columbus was so
bent upon his favourite scheme of finding out
the fitrait which he supposed to communicate
with the Indian ocean, that he bore away to the

P Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 7. 9. I-Herrera, dec. i. lib. v.

c. I, 2. Life of Columbus, c. 88.

BOOK Ir. ealf towards the gulf of Darien. In this navi.

5so2. gation he discovered all the coast of the conti-

nent, from Cape Gracias a Dios, to a harbour
which, on account of its beauty and security,
he called Porto Bello. He searched, in vain,
for the imaginary strait, through which he ex-
peaed to make his way into an unknown sea;
and though he went on shore several times, and
advanced into the country, he did not penetrate
to far as to cross the narrow isthmus which fe-
parates the gulf of Mexico from the great
southern ocean. He was so much delighted,
however, with the fertility of the country, and
conceived such an idea of its wealth, from the
specimens of gold produced by the natives, that
he resolved to leave a small colony upon the
river Pelem, in the province of Veragua, under

150o3. the command of his brother, and to return him-

self to Spain, in order to procure what was re-
quifite for rendering the eftablilhment perma-
nent. But the ungovernable spirit of the peo-
ple under his command, deprived Columbus of
the glory of planting the first colony on the conk
tinent of America. Their insolence and rapaci-
oufnefs provoked the natives to take arms, and
as there were a more hardy and warlike race of
men than the inhabitants of the islands, they
cut off part of the Spaniards, and obliged the

reft

refl to abandon a station which was found to be BOOK n.

untenable '. 1503.

TiIS repulse, the first that the Spaniards Shipwreck-

ed on the

met with from any of the American nations, coatofJa-
was not the only misfortune that befel Colum-
bus; it was followed by a succession of all the
disasters to which navigation is exposed. Fu-
rious hurricanes, with violent (torms of thun-
der and lightning, threatened his leaky vessels
with deftruaion; while his difcontentedl ctew,
exhausted with fatigue, and destitute of provi-
fions, was. unwilling or unable to execute his
commands. One of his ships perished ; he was
obliged to abandon another, as unfit for ser--
vice; and with the two which remained, he
quitted that part of the continent which in his
anguish he named the Coast of Vexaticn r, and
bore away for Hispaniola. New distresses
awaited him in this voyage. He was driven
back by a violent tempest from the coast of
Cuba, his ihips fell foul of one another, and
were so much shattered by the ihock, that with
the utmost difficulty they reached Jamaica, june z4
'where he was obliged to run them aground,
to prevent them from sinking. The measure

9 Herrera, dec. I. lib. v. c. 5, &c. Life of Colum-

bus, c. 89, &c. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9.

La Costa de los Contraftes.

17 of

BOOK n. of his calamities seemed now to be full. ie

150o3 was cast ashore upon an island at a considerable

difiance from the only settlement of the Spa-
niards in America. His fiips were ruined
beyond the possibility of being repaited. Td
convey an account of his situation to Hifpa.
niola, appeared impracicable; and without this
it was vain to expecT relief. His genius, ser-
tile in resources, and most vigorous in those
perilous extremities when feeble minds abandon
themselves to despair, discovered the only ex-
pedient which afforded any profpe& of deli-
verance. He had recourse to the hospitable
kindness of the natives, who considering the
Spaniards as beings of a superior nature, were
eager, on every occasion, to minister to their
wants. From them he obtained two of their
canoes, each formed out of the trunk of a single
tree hollowed with fire, and so mis-shapen and
aukward as hardly to merit the name of boats.
In there, which were fit only for creeping along
the coast, or crossing from one fide of a bay to
another, Mendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, a
Genoese, two gentlemen particularly attached
to Columbus, gallantly offered to set out for
Hispaniola, upon a voyage of above thirty
leagues '. This they accomplilhed in ten days,

* Oviedo, l'b. ii:. c. 9.

after surmounting incredible dangers, and en- BOOK II.
during such fatigue, that several of the Indians J
who accompanied them funk under it, and died.
The attention paid to them by the governor of
Hispaniola was neither such as their courage
merited, nor the difrefs of the persons from
whom they came required. Ovando, from a
mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of al-
lowing him to set foot in the island under
his government. This ungenerous passion
hardened his heart against every tender senti-
ment, which refleaion upon the services and
misfortunes of that great man, or compaflion
for his own fellow-citizens involved in the fame
calamities, must have excited. Mendez and
Fiefchi spent eight months in soliciting relief
for the:r commander and associates, without any
profped of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various pafions agi- His adirefs

and fuffer-

tated the mind of Columbus, and his compa- i .ps there.
nions in adversity. At first the expecation of
speedy deliverance, from the success of Men-
dez and Fiefchi's voyage, cheered the spirits of
the most defponding. After some time the
more timorous began to fufped that they had
miscarried in their daring attempt. At length, 1o4
even the molt sanguine concluded that they had
peritfhe. The ray of hope which had broke in

VoL. I. R upon

BOOK II. upcn them, made their conditionappearnowmore

;5 difinal. Despair, heightened by disappointment,

fettled in every breast. Their last resource had
failed, and nothing remained but the profpedt of
ending their miferabledays among naked savages,
far from their country and their friends. The
seamen, in a tranrport of rage, rose in open mu-
tiny, threatened the life of Columbus, whom they
reproached as the author of all their calamities,
seized ten canoes, which he had purchased from
the Indians, and defpiling his remonftrances
and entreaties, made off with them to a distant
part of the island. At the fame time the na-
tives murmured at the long residence of the
Spaniards in their country. As their indufitry
was not greater than that of their neighbours in
Hispaniola, like them they found the burden
of supporting so many strangers to be altogether
intolerable. They began to bring in provifioni
with relucance, they furnished them with a
sparing hand, and threatened to withdraw those
supplies altogether. Such a resolution must
have been quickly fatal to the Spaniards. Their
safety depended upon the good-will of the In-
dians; and unless they could revive the ad-
miration and reverence with which that simple
people had at first beheld them, deJhrucion was
unavoidable. Though the licentious proceed-
ings of the mutineers had, in a great measure,

ehaced

Tfaced those imprefl0ons which had been so fa- BooS n.
vourable to the Spaniards, the ingenuity of 7
Columbus suggested a happy artifice, that not
only restored but heightened the high opinion
which the Indians had or'ginally entertained of
them. By his skill in afftronomy he knew that
there was shortly to be a total eclipse of the
moon. He assembled all the principal persons
of the difftri around him on the day before it
happened, and, after reproaching them for their
fickleness in withdrawing their afefion and
afifilance from men whom they had lately re-
vered, he told them, that the Spaniards were
servants of the Great Spirit who dwells in
heaven, who made and governs the world; that
he, offended at their refusing to support men
who were the obje&s of his peculiar favour, was
preparing to punish this crime with exemplary
severity, and that very night the moon should
withhold her light, and appear of a bloody hue,
as a fgn of the divine wrath, and an emblem
of the vengeance ready to fall upon them. To
this marvellous predirlion some of them lifened
with the careless indifference peculiar to the
people of America; others, with the credulous
alonihment natural to barbarians. But when
the moon began gradually to be darkened, and
at length appeared of a red cole r, all wvere
ifruck with terror. They ran widh co:ifterna-

R tion

gooK II. tion to their houses, and returning infitantlyto

Columbus loaded with provisions, threw them
at his sect, co njuring him to intercede with the
Great Spirit to avert the deftruaion with which
they were threatened. Columbus, seeming to
be movcd ;y th eir entreaties, promised to com-
ply with their desire. The eclipse went off,
the moon recovered its splendour, and from
that day the Spaniards were not only furnished
profusely with provilions, but the natives, with
fuperfltitious attention, avoided every thing that
could give them offence '.

A cruel ad- Dr' ING those tranfa&ions, the mutineers
dlilGnf tO
tinjm. had made repeated attempts to pass over to

Hispaniola in the canoes which they had seized.
But, from their own mifconduc, or the vio-
Icnce of the winds and currents, their efforts
were all unfuccefsful. Enraged at this difap-
pointment, ti.ey marched towards that part of
the island where Columbus remained, threaten.
ing him with new insults and danger. While
they were advancing, an event happened, more
cruel and afliaing than any calamity which he
dreaded from them. The governor of Hifpa-
niola, whose mind was flill filled with some

t Life of Colunmbus, c. 103. Herrera, dec. i. lib, vi.

c. j, 6. BI nz::, litn. lib. i. c. I;.

dark suspicions of Columbus, sent a small bark BOOK IT.
to Jamaica, not to deliver his distressed coun- . '

Io04.

trymen, but to spy out their condition. Left
the sympathy of those whom he employed
ihould afford them relief, contrary to his in-
tention, he gave the command of this vessel
to Efcobar, an inveterate enemy of Colum-
bus, who adhering to his inftruc'ons with
malignant accuracy, caQ anchor at some dif-
tance from the island, approached the snore
in a small boat, observed the wretched plight
of the Spaniards, delivered a letter of empty
compliments to the admiral, received his an-
Twer, and departed. When the Spaniards firLi
descried the vessel ifanding towards the ifiand,
every heart exulted, as if the long expeced
hour of their deliverance had at length arrived;
but when it disappeared so suddenly, they funk
into the deepest dejecion, and all their hopes
died away. Columbus alone, though he felt
most sensibly this wanton insult which Ovanda
added to his past neglect, retained such coin-
pofure of mind, as to be able to cheer his fol-
lowers. He aflured them, that Mendez and
Fiefchi had reached Kifpaniola in safety; that
they would speedily procure fllps to carry tLem
off; but as Efcobar's vessel could ndt take them
all on board, that he had refused to go with
her, because he was determined never to aban-

R 3 dona

BOOK IIr, don the faithful companions of his distress.

1504. Soothed with the expedcation of speedy deliver.

ance, and delighted with his apparent generosity
in attending more to their preservation than to
his own safety, their spirits revived, and he re.
gained their confidence ".

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have

refited the mutineers, who were now at hand.
All his endeavours to reclaim those desperate
men had no effel but to increase their frenzy.,
Their demands became every day more extra.
vagant, and their intentions more violent and
bloody. The common safety rendered it ne.
ceifary to oppose them with open force. Co.
lumbus, who had been long affli&ed with the

May 20. gout, could not take the field. His brother,

the Adelantado, marched againaf them. They
quickly met. The mutineers rejeited with
scorn terms of accommodation, which were
once more offered them, and ruflhed on boldly
to the attack. They fell not upon an enemy
unprepared to receive them. In the first shock,
several of their most daring leaders were slain.
The Adelatando, whose firength was equal to
his courage, closed with their captain, wounded,

U Life of Colunbus, c. 1c4. Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi.

c. 17.

disarmed,

disarmed, and took him prifonerx. At fight BOOK IJ.
of this, the reft fled with a dastardly fear, fait- is14.
able to their former insolence. Soon after, they
submitted in a body to Columbus, and bound
themselves by the molt solemn oaths to obey
all his commands. Hardly was tranquillity
re-established, when the ships appeared, whole
arrival Columbus had promised with great ad-
dress, though he could foresee it with little cer-
tainty. With transports of joy, the Spaniards
quitted an island in which the unfeeling jealousy
of Ovando had fuffered them to languish above
a year, exposed to misery in all its various
forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the go- Au, ,".

.i dehel

vernor, with the mean artifice of a vulgar mind, ance, ,rr,

arr va! at

that labours to atone for insolence by servility, Hif:janica.
fawned on the man whom he envied, and had
attempted to ruin. He received Columbus
with the most tfudied refpeWt, lodged him in his
own house, and diifinguifhed him with every
mark of honour. But amidst those over-
acted demonfirations of regard, he could not
conceal the hatred and malignity latent in hlIis
heart. II: set at liberty the captain of the mu-

* Life of Columbus, c. 107. Ilerrera, dec. x. lib. xi.

tineer

BOOK II. tineers, whom Columbus had brought over in

50o4. chains, to be tried for his crimes, and threatened

such as had adhered to the admiral with pro.

ceeding to a judicial enquiry into their conduct
Columbus submitted in silence to what he could

not redress; but discovered an extreme impa-
tience to quit a country which was under the
jurifdicion of a man who had treated him, on
every occasion, with inhumanity and injustice.

septem, is. His prepalations vwrce fo'on finished, and he set

fail for Spain v-ith two flips. Disasters similar
to those which had accompanied him through
life continued to pursue him to the end of his
caieer. One of his veFcls being disabled, was
soon forced back to St. Domingo; the other,
ihattered by violent storms, failed seven hun.

Demirber. dred leagues with jury-malfs, and reached with

difficulty the port of St. Lucar .

Death of THERE he received the account of an event
IfaThella. Nov. 9. the most fatal that could have befallen him,

and which completed his misfortunes. This
was the death of his patroness queen Ifabeiia,
in whole justice, humanity, and favour, he
confided as his last resource. None now re-
mained to redress his wrongs, or to rcward

y Life of Cclurmbus, c. 108. Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi,

C. I2.

him for his services and fufferings, but Ferdi- B0O0K I°
nand, who had so long opposed and so often ,so4.
injured him. To solicit a prince thus preju-
diced against him, was an occupation no less
irksome than hopeless. In this, however, was
Columbus doomed to employ the close of his
days. As soon as his health was in some de-
gree re-established, he repaired to court; and
though he was received there with civility
barely decent, he plied Ferdinand with peti-
tion after petition, demanding the punishment
of his oppressors, and the restitution of all the
privileges bestowed upon him by the capitula-
tion of one thousand four hundred and ninety-
two. Ferdinand amused him with fair words
and unmeaning promlfes. Instead of granting
his claims, he proposed expedients in order to
elude them, and spun out the affair with such
apparent art, as plainly discovered his intention
that it thould never be terminated. The de-
clining health of Columbus flattered Ferdinand
with the hopes of being soon delivered from
an importunate suitor, and encouraged him to
persevere in this illiberal plan. Nor was he
deceived in his expectations. Disgusted with
the ingratitude of a monarch whom he had
served with such fideiity and success, exhausted
with the fatigues and hardihips whlich he had
endured, and broken with the infirmites which

tLcfe

ROOI n. these brought upon him, Columbus ended his

,Dea4 life at Valladolid on the twentieth of May one

Deal' of
co!unSus. thousand five hundred and fix, in the fifty-ninth

year of his age. Hie died with a composure of
mind suitable to the magnanimity which diftin.
guifhed his charaater, and with sentiments of
piety becoming that supreme refped for reli-
gion, which he manifested in every occurrence
of his life z.

z Lifc of Columbus, c. o108. Herrera, dec. I, libh, v.

c. 13, lt, 15-

J1 r

# BOOK III.

THE

H I STOR Y

OF

A M E I C A.

BOOK III.

W HILE Columbus was employed in his B o ok

last voyage, several events worthy of L--

notice happened in Hispaniola. The colony Stite

of the

colony in

there, the parent and nurse of all the fubfe- Hispaniola.
quent establishments of Spain in the New
World, gradually acquired the form of a re-
gular and prosperous society. The humane
solicitude of Isabella to prote& the Indians from
oppreflion, and particularly the proclamation,
by which the Spaniards were prohibited to
compel them to work, retarded, it is true, for
some time, the progress of improvement. The
natives, who considered exemption from toil as
supreme felicity, scorned every allurement and
reward by which they were invited to labour.
The Spaniards had not a fuficient number of
hands either to work the mines or to cultivate

the

B o o K the foil. Several of the first colonists, who
b - had been accufftomed to the service of the In-

1504.

dians, quitted the ifiand, when deprived of
those infitruments, without which they knew
not how to carry on any operation. Many of
the new settlers who came over with Ovando,
were seized with the diftempers peculiar to the
climate, and in a short space above a thousand
of them died. At the fame time, the exacing
one half of the produa of the mines as the
royal ihare, was found to be a demand so
exorbitant, that no adventurers would engage
to work them upon such terms. In order to
save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured

sos- to relax the rigour of the royal edi&s. He

made a new distribution of the Indians among
the Spaniards, and compelled them to labour,
for a stated time, in digging the mines, or in
cultivating the ground; but, in order to screen
himself from the imputation of having sub-
jeaed them again to servitude, he enjoined
their masters to pay them a certain fum, as the
price of their work. He reduced the royal
share of the gold found in the mines from the
half to the third part, and soon after lowered
it to a fifth, at which it long remained. Not.
Vvithftanding Ifabella's tender concern for the
good treatment of the Indians, and Ferdinand's
eagerners to improve the royal revenue, OvanJo

perfuiid

persuaded the court to approve of both these re- B o o K

gulations . 1505.

BUT the Indians, after enjoying respite from War with

the Indians.

oppression, though during a short interval, now
felt the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that
they made several attempts to vindicate their
own liberty. This the Spaniards considered as
rebellion, and took arms in order to reduce
them to fubjedion. When war is carried on
between nations whose Rfate of improvement is
in any degree similar, the means of defence
bear some proportion to those employed in
the attack; and in this equal conteff such
efforts muff be made, such talents are displayed,
and such passions roused, as exhibit mankind
to view in a situation no less Rfriking than
interesting. It is one of the noblest functions
of history, to observe and to delineate men at
a junaure when their minds are moR violently
agitated, and all their powers and passions are
called forth. Hence the operations of war,
and the struggles between contending states,
have been deemed by historians, ancient as
well as modern, a capital and important article
in the annals of human ations. But in a con-
test between naked savages, and one of the

' IIcrrera, dec. I, lib. v. c. 3.

most

B O K nloft warlike of the European nations, whete

HI.
Cv*--v science, courage, and discipline on one fide,
o505. were opposed by ignorance, timidity, and dif.

order on the other, a particulat detail of events
would be as unpleasant as uninfiructive. If
the simplicity and innocence of the Indians had
inspired the Spaniards with humanity, had soft.
ened the pride of superiority into compassion,
and had induced them to improve the inha.
bitants of the New World, instead of oppref.
sing them, some sudden acts of violence, like
the too rigorous chastisements of impatient in.
flrucors, might have been related without
horror. But, unfortunately, this consciousness
of superiority operated in a different manner.
The Spaniards were advanced so far beyond
the natives of America in improvement of every
hind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be animals
of an inferior nature, who were not intitled to
the rights and privileges of men. In peace,
they fubjeied them to servitude. In war, they
paid no regard to those laws, which, by a tacit
convention between contending nations, regu-
late hostility, and set some bounds to its rage.
They considered them not as men fightirg iri
defence of their liberty, but as Iave , who had
revolted againRf their maiters. Their caziques,
vhci tv ,2i}, were con lnei'', lilc til iLaders

of banditti, to the most cruel and ignominious B o o K
punishments; and all their fubjeas, without re- . -,--
gardingthediftinftion of ranks eftabliihed among
them, were reduced to the fame state of abjet
slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments were
hostilities carried on againit the cazique of IHi-
guey, a province at the eastern extremity of the
island. This war was occasioned by the perfi-
dy of the Spaniards, in violating a treaty which
they had made with the natives, and it was ter-
minated by hanging up the caziquc, who de-
fended his people with bravery so far superior to
that of his countrymen, as intitled him to a bet-

ter fate b

THE condu& of Ovando, in another part of 'ri ,ciuei

' tand treache.

the island, was itill more treacherous and cruel. r° u""&
The province anciently named Xaragua, which
extends from the fertile plain where Leogane
is now situated, to the western extremity of the
island, was fubje to a female cazique, named
Anacoana, highly refpe&ed by the natives.
She, from that partial fondness with which the
women of America were attached to the Euro-
peans (the cause of which shall be afterwards
explained), had always courted the friendship
of the Spaniards, and loaded them with be-

b IIerrera, dec I. lib. vi. c. 9, 10.

nefits.

B O O K nefits. But some of the adherents of Roldan

-v having fettled in her country, were so much
1Sos. exasperated at her endeavouring to restrain

their excesses, that they accused her of having
formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and to
exterminate the Spaniards. Ovando, though
he knew well how little credit was due to such
profligate men, marched, without further in-
quiry, towards Xaragua, with three hundred
foot and seventy horsemen. To prevent the
Indians from taking alarm at this hostile ap-
pearance, he gave out that his sole intention
was to visit Anacoana, to whom his country-
men had been so much indebted, in the most
refpeaful manner, and to regulate with her
the mode of levying the tribute payable to the
king of Spain. Anacoana, in order to receive
this illuifrious guest with due honour, affem.
bled the principal men in her dominions, to
the number of three hundred, and advancing
at the head of these, accompanied by a great
croud of persons of inferior rank, she welcomed
Ovando with songs and dances, according to
the mode of the country, and conduted him
to the place of her residence. There he was

feasted for some days, with all the kindness of
simple hospitality, and amused vwith the games
and fpedtacles usual among the Americans
upon occasions of mirth and fefrivitv. !Bt,

a:r:i t

ar~idft the security which this inspired, Ovando, B o0
was meditating the deftruaion of his unfufpi- ---.
cious entertainer and her fubjeats; and the 50so.
mean perfidy with which he executed this
scheme, equalled his barbarity in forming it.
Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians the
parade of an European tournament, he ad-
vanced with his troops, in battle array, towards
the house in which Anacoana and the chiefs
who attended her were assembled. The in-
fantry took poffeffion of all the avenues 'which
led to the village. The horsemen encompassed
the house. These movements were the objet
of admiration without any mixture of fear,
until, upon a signal which had been concerted,
the Spaniards suddenly drew their swords, and
ruifhed upon the Indians, defenceless, and afto-
nifhed at an a& of treachery which exceeded
the conception of undesigning men. In a
moment Anacoana was secured. All her at-
tendants were seized and bound. .Fire was
set to the house; and, without examination or
conviaion, all these unhappy persons, the most
illuifrious in their own country, were consumed
in the flames. Anacoana was reserved for a
more ignominious fate. She was carried in
chains to St. Domingo, and, after the for-
mality of a trial before Spanish judges, she
was condemned, upon the evidence of those

YoL. I. S very

BOOK very men who had betrayed her, to be publicly

S-- hanged .

1505.

Reduaion OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious
of the In-
dians, and treatment of their princes and nobles, who
its ,ftes. were objects of their highest reverence, the

people in all the provinces of Hispaniola sub-
mitted, without farther refiitance, to the Spanish
yoke. Upon the death of Isabella, all the
regulations tending to mitigate the rigour of
their 'fervitude were forgotten. The small gra-
tuity paid to them as the price of their labour
was withdrawn; and at the fame time the taflks

1506. imposed upon them were increased. Ovando,

without any refitraint, difftributed Indians among
his friends in the Island. Ferdinand, to whom
the queen had left by will one half of the
revenue arising from the settlements in the
New World, conferred grants of a similar
nature upon his courtiers, as the least expen-
five mode of rewarding their services. They
farmed out the Indians, of whom they were
rendered proprietors, to their countrymen set-
tled in Hispaniola; and that wretched people,
being compelled to labour in order to satisfy
the rapacity of both, the exactions of their

E Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 4.

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. It. Relacion de deitrayc. de las Iu-
dias, por Bart. de las Cafas, p. 8.

oppressors

Oppressors no longer knew any bounds. But, BEOK
barbarous as their policy was, and fatal to the -
inhabitants of Hispaniola, it produced, for o506.
some time, very considerable effeas. By call-
ing forth the force of a whole nation, and
exerting it in one diret&ion, the working of the
mines was carried on with amazing rapidity
and success. During several years, the gold
brought into the royal fmelting-houfes in His-
paniola amounted annually to four hundred
and sixty thousand pesos, above a hundred
thousand pounds flerling; which, if we attend
to the great change in the value of money since
the beginning of the sixteenth century to the
present times, must appear a considerable fum.
Vaar fortunes were created, of a sudden, by
some. OtKers dissipated in ostentatious pro-
fusion, what they acquired with facility.
Dazzled by both, new adventurers crouded to
America, with the most eager impatience, to
ihare in those treasures which had enriched
their countrymen; and, notwithstanding the
mortality occasioned by the unhealthiness of the
climate, the colony continued to increase d.

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wis- Progrefsof

dom and justice, not inferior to the rigour with thecolony.

dHerrera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 18, &c.

S i which

BOOK IK which he treated the Indians. He eftablified
_ equal laws, and, by executing them with im-
,sos. partiality, accustomed the people of the colony

to reverence them. He founded several new
towns in different parts of the island, and
allured inhabitants to them, by the concetfion
of various immunities. He endeavoured to
turn the attention of the Spaniards to some
branch of industry more useful than that of
searching for gold in the mines. Some flips
of the sugar-cane having been brought from
the Canary islands by way of experiment, they
were found to thrive with such increase in the
rich foil and warm climate to which they were
transplanted, that the cultivation of them soon
became an objet of commerce. Extensive
plantations were begun; fugar-works, which
the Spaniards called ingenio's, from the various
machinery employed in them, were erected, and
in a few years the manufafture of this commo-
dity was the great occupation of the inhabitants
of Hispaniola, and-the most considerable source
of their wealth .

Political THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to pro-
tis of mote the welfare of the colony, were power-
Ferdinaand. fully seconded by Ferdinand. The large re-

* Oviedo, lib. iv. c. 8.

mittances

mittances which he received from the New Bo O K

1II.

World, opened his eyes, at length, with refpe& -
to the importance of those discoveries, which s506.
he had hitherto affected to undervalue. For-
tune, and his own address, having now extri-
cated him out of those difficulties in which he
had been involved by the death of his queen, 0so7.
and by his disputes with his fon-in-law about
the government of her dominions', he had
full leisure to turn his attention to the affairs
of America. To his provident sagacity, Spain
is indebted for many of those regulations which
gradually formed that system of profound, but
jealous policy by which she governs her domi-
nions in the New World. He ere&ed a court,
diftinguilhed by the title of the Casa de Con-
tratacion, or Board of Trade, composed ofper-
sons eminent for rank and abilities, to whom
he committed the adminifiration of American
affairs. This board assembled regularly in
Seville, and was invested with a diftinc and
extensive jurifdition. He gave a regular form
to ecclesiastical government in America, by
nominating archbilhops, biihops, deans, toge-
ther with clergymen of subordinate ranks, to
take charge of the Spaniards established there,
as well as of the natives who should embrace

I Hi-l. of the Reign of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 6, &c.

BooK the Christian faith. But, notwithifanding the

III.
- obsequious devotion of the Spanish court to
5o07. the Papal See, such was Ferdinand's solicitude

to prevent any foreign power from claiming
jurifdi&ion, or acquiring influence, in his new
dominions, that he reserved to the crown of
Spain the sole right of patronage to the bene-
fices in America, and stipulated that no papal
bull or mandate should be promulgated there,
until it was previously examined and approved
of by his council. With the fame spirit of
jealousy, he prohibited any goods to be ex-
ported to America, or any person to fettle there,
without a special licence from that council .

The num- BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the
ber of the
Indians policy and welfare of the colony, a calamity
fast. es impended which threatened its dissolution. The

original inhabitants, on whose labour the Spa-
niards in Hispaniola depended for their profpe-
rity, and even their existence, wasted so fast,
that the extin&ion of the whole race seemed to
be inevitable. When Columbus discovered
Hispaniola, the number of its inhabitants was
computed to be at least a millionh. They
were now reduced to sixty thousand in the
space of fifteen years. This consumption of

g Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 19, 20.
h Ibid. dec. I. lib. x. c. I2.

the human species, no less amazing than rapid, B o oK
was the effet of several concurring causes. r
The natives of the American islands were of a 0so7.
more feeble constitution than the inhabitants
of the other hemisphere. They could neither
perform the fame work, nor endure the fame
fatigue, with men whose organs were of a more
vigorous conformation. The listless indolence
in which they delighted to pass their days, as
it was the effe&t of their debility, contributed
likewise to increase it, and render them, from
habit as well as constitution, incapable of hard
labour. The food on which they fubfifled as-
forded little nourishment, and 'they were ac-
cuftomed to take it in small quantities, not
fufficient to invigorate a languid frame, and
render it equal to the efforts of active industry.
The Spaniards, without attending to those pe-
culiarities in the constitution of the Americans,
imposed talks upon them, which, though not
greater than Europeans might have per-
formed with ease, were so disproportion-
ed to their strength, that many funk under
the fatigue, and ended their wretched days.
Others, prompted by impatience and despair,
cut short their own lives with a violent hand.
Famine, brought on by compelling such num-
bers to abandon the culture of their lands, in
order to labour in the mines, proved fatal to
many. Diseases of various kinds, some occa-

S 4 fioned

Bo 0 K fioned by the hardships to which they were ex-

II. _J posed, and others by their intercourse with the
5o07. Europeans, who communicated to them some

of their peculiar maladies, completed the defo-
lation of the island. The Spaniards being thus
deprived of the infiruments which they were ac-
cuflomed to employ, found it impoflible to ex-
tend their improvements, or even to carry on the
works which they had already begun. In order
to provide an immediate remedy for an evil so
alarming, Ovando proposed to transport the in-
habitants of the Lucayo islands to Hispaniola,
under pretence that they might be civilized with
more facility, and inftrudted to greater ad-
vantage in the Christian religion, if they were
united to the Spanish colony, and placed
under the immediate infpe&ion of the miffiona-
ries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived by this
artifice, or willing to connive at an aft of
violence which policy represented as necessary,
gave his assent to the proposal. Several vessels
were fitted out for the Lucayos, the com-
manders of which informed the natives, with
whose language they were now well acquainted,
that they came from a delicious country, in
which the departed ancestors of the Indians
resided, by whom they were sent to invite their
descendents to resort thither, to partake of the
bliss enjoyed there by happy spirits. That
simple people liflened with wonder and credu-

lity

lity; and, fond of visiting their relations and BOOK
friends in that happy region, followed the Spa- -
niards with eagerness. By this artifice, above IsoS.
forty thousand were decoyed into Hispaniola, to
ihare in the fufferings which were the lot of the
inhabitants of that island, and to mingle their
groans and tears with those of that wretched race
of men'.

THE Spaniards had, for some time, carried Newdar.

. coveries

on their operations in the mines of Hispaniola and fettle-
with such ardor as well as success, that these ments.
seemed to have engrossed their whole attention.
The spirit of discovery languished; and, fmnce
the last voyage of Columbus, no enterprize of
any moment had been undertaken. But as the
decrease of the Indians rendered it impossible
to acquire wealth in that island with the fame
rapidity as formerly, this urged some of the
more adventurous Spaniards to search for new
countries, where their avarice might be gra-
tified with more facility. Juan Ponce de Leon,
who commanded under Ovando in the eastern
diftri&t of Hispaniola, passed over to the island
of St. Juan de Puerto Rico, which Columbus
had discovered in his second voyage, and pe-
netrated into the interior part of the country.

i Herrera, dec, 4. lib. vii. c. 3. Oviedo, lib. iti. c. 6.
Gomara Hist. c. 4I.

B 0 oK As he found the foil to be fertile, and ex.

III.

<- peted, from some symptoms, as well as

jsos. from the information of the inhabitants, to dif-

cover mines of gold in the mountains, Ovando
permitted him to attempt making a settlement
in the island. This was easily effe&ed by an
officer eminent for conduc no less than for
courage. In a few years Puerto Rico was sub-
jeated to the Spanish government, the natives
were reduced to servitude; and, being treated
with the fame inconsiderate rigour as their neigh-
bours in Hispaniola, the race of original inha-
bitants, worn out with fatigue and fufferings,
was soon exterminatedk.

ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis,

in conjunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon,
one of Columbus's original companions, made
a voyage to the continent. They held the
fame course which Columbus had taken, as
far as to the island of Guanaios; but, standing
from thence to the weft,, they discovered a
new and extensive province, afterwards known
by the name of Yucatan, and proceeded a con-
fiderable way along the coast of that country'.
Though nothing memorable occurred in this

k Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 1-4. Gomara Hit..

c. 44. Relacion de B. de las Cafas, p. Io.

1 Herrera, dec. h. lib. vi. c. 17,

voyage,

voyage, it deserves notice, because it led to B 00 K
discoveries of greater importance. For the fame
reason, the voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo muff isoS.
be mentioned. By the command of Ovando, he
failed round Cuba, and first discovered, with cer-
tainty, that this country, which Columbus once
supposed to be a part of the continent, was a
large ifland".

THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the Diego Co.

lumbus

last occurrences under the adminifftration of appointed
Ovando. Ever since the death of Columbus, governor
his son Don Diego had been employed in soli- niola.
citing Ferdinand to grant him the offices of
viceroy and admiral in the New World, toge-
ther with all the other immunities and profits
which descended to him by inheritance, in con-
sequence of the original capitulation with his
father. But if these dignities and revenues
appeared so considerable to Ferdinand, that,
at the expence of being deemed unjust, as well
as ungrateful, he had wrested them from Co-
lumbus, it is not surprising that he should be
unwilling to confer them on his son. Accord-
ingly, Don Diego wasted two years in incessant
but fruitless importunity. Weary of this, he
endeavoured at length to obtain, by a legal fen-

m Herrerz, dec. I. lib. vii. c. I,

tence,

B oOK tence, what he could not procure from the
»- favour of an interested monarch. He com-

sos8. menced a suit against Ferdinand before the

council which managed Indian affairs, and that
court, with integrity which refle&s honour
upon its proceedings, decided against the king,
and sustained Don Diego's claim of the vice-
royalty, together with all the other privileges
flipulated in the capitulation. Even after this
decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a sub-
je&t in poffeffion offuch extensive rights, might
have thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego
had not taken a step which interefled very
powerful persons in the success of his claims.
The sentence of the council of the Indies gave
him a title to a rank so elevated, and a fortune
to opulent, that he found no difficulty in con-
cluding a marriage with Donna Maria, daugh-
ter of Don Ferdinand de Toledo, great com-
mendator of Leon, and brother of the duke
of Alva, a nobleman of the first rank, and
nearly related to the king. The duke and his
family espoused so warmly the cause of their
new ally, that Ferdinand could not refifit their

3so9. folicitations. He recalled Ovando, and ap-

pointed Don Diego his successor, though, even
in conferring this favour, he could not conceal
his jealousy; for he allowed him to assume
only the title of governor, not that of vice-

roy,

roy, which had been adjudged to belong to BOO K
him . -

1509.

DoN Diego quickly repaired to Hispaniola, He repaira

to Hilpa-

attended by his brother, his uncles, his wife, niolaa
whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honoured
with the title of vice-queen, and a numerous
retinue of persons of both sexes, born of good
families. He lived with a splendour and mag-
nificence hitherto unknown in the New World;
and the family of Columbus seemed now to en-
joy the honours and rewards due to his invent-
ive genius, of which he himself had been cruelly
defrauded. The colony itself required new
luflre by the accession of so many inhabitants,
of a different rank and chara6ter from most of
those who had hitherto migrated to America,
and many of the molt illuffrious families in the
Spanilh settlements are descended from the per-
sons who at that time accompanied Don Diego
Columbus*.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives

from this change of governors. Don Diego
was not only authorised by a royal edi&t to con-
tinue the repartimientos, or diltribution of In-

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 4, &cc.
o Oviedo, lib. iii. c. I.

dians,

B O O K dians, but the particular number which he might

III.

t, grant to every person, according to his rank in

a5o9. the colony, was specified. He availed himself

of that permiflion; and soon after he landed at
St. Domingo, he divided such Indians as were
fill unappropriated, among his relations and
attendants '.

Pearl THE next care of the new governor was to
£thery of
Cubagua. comply with an inftrudion which he received

from the king, about fettling a colony in Cu-
bagua, a small island which Columbus had dif-
covered in his third voyage. Though this
barren spot hardly yielded subsistence to its
wretched inhabitants, such quantities of those
oysters which produce pearls were found on its
coast, that it did not long escape the inquisitive
avarice of the Spaniards, and became a place
of considerable resort. Large fortunes were
acquired by the fishery of pearls, which was
carried on with extraordinary ardour. The
Indians, especially those from the Lucayo
islands, were compelled to dive for-them; and
this dangerous and unhealthy employment was
an additional calamity, which contributed not
a little to the extintion of that devoted race .

P Recopilacion de Leyes, lib. vi. tit. 8. 1. I, 2. Her.

rera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 1o.

I Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 9. Gomora Hist. c. 78.

7 ABOUT

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and B o'o III.

Pinzon set out, in conjunaion, upon a second
voyage. They flood direaly south, towards so509.
the equinotial line, which Pinzon had for- voyages.
merly crossed, and advanced as far as the for-
tieth degree of southern latitude. They were
astonished to find that the continent of America
stretched on their right hand, through all this
vast extent of ocean. They landed in different
places, to take poffeffion in name of their so-
vereign; but though the country appeared to
be extremely fertile and inviting, -their force
was so small, having been fitted out rather for
discovery than making settlements, that they
left no colony behind them. Their voyage
served, however, to give the Spaniards more
exalted and adequate ideas with refpet to
the dimensions of this new quarter of the
globe'.

THOUGH it was about ten years since Colum- A fettle-

bus had discovered the main land of America, mhet on,
the Spaniards had hitherto made no settlement nent at-

tempted.

in any part of it. What had been so long ne-
gleQed was now seriously attempted, and with
considerable vigour, though the plan for this
purpose was neither formed by the crown, nor
executed at the expence of the nation, but

t Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 9;

carried

BOO K carried on by the enterprising spirit of private
*- adventurers. This scheme took its rife from

50so. Alonfo de Ojeda, who had already made two

voyages as a discoverer, by which he acquired
considerable reputation, but no wealth. But
his chara&er for intrepidity and condua easily
procured him associates, who advanced the
money requisite to defray the charges of the ex-
pedition. About the fame time, Diego de Ni-
cueffa, who had acquired a large fortune in
Hifpaniola,' formed a similar design. Ferdinand
encouraged both; and though he refused to
advance the smallest fum, was extremely liberal
of titles and patents. He ere&ed two govern-
men-t on the continent, one extending from
*Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the
other from that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The
former was given to Ojeda, the latter to Ni-
cueffa. Ojeda fitted out a ihip and two brigan-
tines, with three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix
vessels, with seven hundred and eighty men.
They failed about the fame time from St. Do-
mingo for their refpeaive governments. In
order to give their title to those countries some
appearance of validity, several of the most
eminent divines and lawyers in Spain were em-
ployed to prescribe the mode in which they
ihould take poffeflion of them8. There is not

* Herrera, dec. x.lib. vii. c. 15.

in the history of mankind any thing more fin- BO K
gular or extravagant than the form which they
devised for this purpose. They inftru&ed those 5so.9
invaders, as soon as they landed on the conti-
nent, to declare to the natives the principal ar-
ticles of the Chriftain faith; to acquaint them,
in particular, with the supreme jurifdition of
the Pope over all the kingdoms of the earth ;
to inform them of the grant which this holy
pontiff had made of their country to the king
of Spain; to require them to embrace the doc-
trines of that religion which the Spaniards made
known to them ; and to submit to the sovereign
whose authority they proclaimed. If the na-
tives refused to comply with this requisition,
the terms of which must have been utterly in-
comprehensible to uninftructed Indians, then
Ojeda and Nicueffa were authorised to attack
them with fire and sword; to reduce them,
their wives and children, to a slate of servitude ;
and to compel them by force to recognize the
jurifdi&ion of the church, and the authority of
the monarch, to which they would not volun-
tarily fubjea themselves '.

As the inhabitants of the continent could not The di-

aters at-

at once yield assent to do&rines too refined for tending it.

' See NOTE XXIII.

VOL. I. their

BOOK their uncultivated understandings, and ex-

-, plained to them by interpreters imperfe&ly ac-
so09. quainted with their language ; as they did not

conceive how a foreign priest, of whom they
had never heard, could have any right to dispose
of their country, or how an unknown prince
should claim jurifdi&ion over them as his sub-
jeCts; they fiercely opposed the new invaders
of their territories. Ojeda and Nicueffa en-
deavoured to effect by force, what they could
not accomplish by persuasion. The contem-
porary writers enter into a very minute detail
in relating their tranfa&ions; but as they made
no discovery of importance, nor established any
permanent settlement, their adventures are not
intitled to any considerable place in the general
hiftory' of a period, where romantic valour,
struggling with incredible hardihips, distinguish
every effort of the Spanish arms. They found
the natives in those countries of which they went
to assume the government, to be of a chara&er
very different from that of their countrymen in
the islands. They were fierce and warlike.
Their arrows were dipped in a poison so noxious,
that every wound was followed with certain
death. In one encounter they flew above
seventy of Ojeda's followers, and the Spaniards,
for the first time, were taught to dread the in-
habitants of the 'New World. Nicueffa was

opposed

opposed by people equally resolute in defence BOOK
of their poffeffions. Nothing could soften their -
ferocity. Though the Spaniards employed so509.
every art to soothe them, and to gain their con-
fidence, they refused to hold any intercourse, or
to exchange any friendly office, with men whose
residence among them they considered as fatal
to their liberty and independence. This im- 15so.
placable enmity of the natives, though it ren-
dered an attempt to establish a settlement in their
country, extremely difficult as well as dangerous,
might have been surmounted at length by the per-
severance of the Spaniards, by the superiority of
their arms, and their skill in the art of war.
But every disaster which can be accumulated
upon the unfortunate, combined to complete
their ruin. The loss of their ships by various
accidents upon an unknown coast, the diseases
peculiar to a climate the most noxious in all
America, the want of provisions, unavoidable
in a country imperfe6tly cultivated, dissension
among themselves, and the incessant hostilities
of the natives, involved them in a succession of
calamities, the bare recital of which strikes one
with horror. Though they received two con-
fiderable reinforcements from Hispaniola, the
greater part of those who had engaged in this
unhappy expedition, perished, in less than a

T 2 year,

BOO K year, in the most extreme misery. A few who
.-.~-. survived, fettled as a feeble colony at Santa

10'o. Maria el Antigua, on the gulf of Darien, under

the command of Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,
who, in the most desperate exigencies, dif-
played such courage and condua, as first gained
the confidence of his countrymen, and marked
him out as their leader in more splendid and
fuccefsful undertakings. Nor was he the only
adventurer in this expedition who will appear
with lustre in more important scenes. Fran-
cisco Pizarro was one of Ojeda's companions,
and in this school of adversity acquired or im-
proved the talents which fitted him for the ex-
traordinary a&ions which he afterwards per-
formed. Hernan Cortes, whose name became
still more famous, had likewise engaged early
in this enterprise, which rouzed all the adive
youth of Hispaniola to arms; but the good for-
tune that accompanied him in his subsequent
adventures, interposed to save him from the
disasters to which his companions were exposed.
He was taken ill at St. Domingo before the de-
parture of the fleet, and detained there by a te-
dious indifpofition".

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. I , &c. Gomara Hilt.

c. 57, 58, 59. Benzon Hilt. lib. i. cap. 19-23. P. Mar.
tyr, decad. 122.

NOTWITH-

NOTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate issue of BooK

III.

this expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred ,
from engaging in new schemes of a similar na- ,s,.a
ture. When wealth is acquired gradually by of Cuba.
the persevering hand of industry, or accumu-
lated by the flow operations of regular com-
merce, the means employed are so proportioned
to the end attained, that there is nothing to
strike the imagination, and little to urge on the
ative powers of the mind to uncommon efforts,
But when large fortunes were created almost in-
ftantaneoufly; when gold and pearls were pro-
cured in exchange for baubles; when the coun-
tries which produced these rich commodities,
defended only by naked savages, might be
seized by the first bold invader; obje&ts so fin-
gular and alluring, roused a wonderful spirit of
enterprise among the Spaniards, who rushed
with ardour into this new path that was opened
to wealth and diftintion. While this spirit
continued warm and vigorous, every attempt
either towards discovery or conquest was ap-
plauded, and adventurers engaged in it with
emulation. ' he passion for new undertakings,
which chara&erifes the age of discovery in the
latter part of the fifteenth and beginning of the
sixteenth century, would alone have been fuffi-
cient to prevent the Spaniards from flopping
thort In their career. But circumfitances pecu-

T 3 liar

B 0 0 K liar to Hispaniola at this jun&ure, concurred
'.--.. with it in extending their navigation and con-

50so. quests. The rigorous treatment of the inha-

bitants of that island having almost extirpated
the race, many of the Spanish planters, as I
have already observed, finding it impossible to
carry on their works with the fame vigour and
profit, were obliged to look out for settlements
in some country whole people were not yet
wasted by oppression. Others, with the inconfi-
derate levity natural to men upon whom wealth
pours in with a sudden flow, had squandered,
in thoughtless prodigality, what they acquired
with ease, and were driven by necessity to em-
bark in the most desperate schemes, in order to
retrieve their affairs. From all there causes,

s11. when Don Diego Columbus proposed to con-

quer the island of Cuba, and to establish a co-
lony there, many persons of chief diftintion in
Hispaniola engaged with alacrity in the mea-
sure. He gave the command of the troops
destined for that service to Diego Velasquez,
one of his father's companions in his second
voyage, and who, having been long fettled in
Hispaniola, had acquired an ample fortune,
with such reputation for probity and prudence,
that he seemed to be well qualified for con,
ducing an expedition of importance. Three
hundred men were deemed fufficient for the

conquest

conquest of an island above seven hundred miles BooK
in length, and filled with inhabitants. But -,.
they were of the fame unwarlike charaCter with '~s1'
the people of Hispaniola. They were not only
intimidated by the appearance of their new ene-
mies, but unprepared to refifl them. For
though, from the time that the Spaniards took
poffeflion of the adjacent island, there was
reason to expe&t a descent on their territories,
none of the small communities into which Cuba
was divided, had either made any provision for
its own defence, or had formed any concert for
their common safety. The only obifruCtion
the Spaniards' met with was from Hatuey, a
cazique, who had fled from Hispaniola, and
had taken poffeffion of the eastern extremity of
Cuba. He flood upon the defensive at their first
landing, and endeavoured to drive them back
to their ships. His feeble troops, however,
were soon broken and dispersed; and he him-
self being taken prisoner, Velasquez, according
to the barbarous riaxim of the Spaniards, con-
fidered him as a slave who had taken arms against
his master, and condemned him to the flames.
When Hatuey was faltened to the flake, a Fran-
cifcan friar labouring to convert him, promised
him immediate admittance into the joys of
heaven, if he would embrace the Christian faith.
" Are there any Spaniards," says he, after

T 4 some

B o K some pause, " in that region of bliss which
- - you describe ?" " Yes," replied the monk,

!S. " but only such as are worthy and good."

"C The best of them," returned the indignant
cazique, " have neither worth nor goodness;
C I will not go to a place where I may meet with
" one of that accursed race "." This dreadful ex-
ample of vengeance struck the people of Cuba
with such terror, that they scarcely gave any
opposition to the progress of their invaders; and
Velasquez, without the loss of a man, annexed
this extensive and fertile island to the Spanish
monarchy 1.

Dircovery THE facility with which this important con-
ot Florida. quest was completed, served as an incitement to

other undertakings. Juan Ponce de Leon,
having acquired both fame and wealth by the
reduaion of Puerto Rico, was impatient to

»5'. engage in some new enterprise. He fitted out

three ships at his own expence, for a voyage of
discovery, and his reputation soon drew to-
gether a refpe&able body of followers. He
direc&ed his course towards the Lucayo islands;
and after touching at several of them, as well
is of the Bahama isles, he flood to the south-

a B, de las Cafas, p. 40.
Y Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 31, &c. Oviedo, lib.

xvii. s, 3' P' 1;9,

wet,

weft, and discovered a country hitherto un- Boo K

III.

known to the Spaniards, which he called Flo- *
rida, either because he fell in with it on Palm Is".'
Sunday, or on account of its gay and beautiful
appearance. He attempted to land in different
places, but met with such vigorous opposition
from the natives, who were fierce and warlike,
as convinced him that an increase of force was
requisite to effea a settlement. Satisfied with
having opened a communication with a new
country, of whose value and importance he
conceived very sanguine hopes, he returned to
Puerto Rico, through the channel now known
by the name of the Gulf of Florida.

IT was not merely the passion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon to
undertake this voyage; he was influenced by
one of those visionary ideas, which at that time
often mingled with the spirit of discovery, and
rendered it more active. A tradition prevailed
among the natives of Puerto Rico, that in the
isle of Bimini, one of the Lucayos, there was a
fountain of such wonderful virtue as to renew
the youth, and recal the vigour of every per-
son who bathed in its salutary waters. In hopes
of finding this grand restorative, Ponce de
Leon and his followers ranged through the
islands, searching, with fruitless solicitude and

labour,

B ooK labour, for the fountain, which was the chief

n. objct of their expedition. That a tale so fa-
s152.- bulous should gain credit among simple unin-

firuted Indians is not surprising. That it
Ihould make any impression upon an enlightened
people appears, in the present age, altogether
incredible. The fa&, however, is certain; and
the moit authentic Spanilh historians mention
this extravagant sally of their credulous country-
men. The Spaniards, at that period, were en-
gaged in a career of activity which gave a ro-
mantic turn to their imagination, and daily pre-
fented to them strange and marvellous objecs.
A New World was opened to their view. They
visited islands and continents, of whose existence
mankind in former ages had no conception.
In those delightful countries nature seemed to
assume another form ; every tree and plant and
animal was different from those of the ancient
hemisphere. They seemed to be transported
into enchanted ground; and, after the wonders
which they had seen, nothing, in the warmth
and novelty of their admiration, appeared to
them so extraordinary as to be beyond belief.
If the rapid succession of new and. striking
scenes made such impression even upoh the
found underflanding of Columbus, that he
boasted of having found the feat of Paradise, it
will not appear strange that Ponce de Leon

should

ihould dream of discovering the fountain of B K
youth ".

SooN after the expedition to Florida, a dif- Progrefsof

Balboa in

covery of much greater importance was made Darien.
in another part of America. Balboa having
been raised to the government of the small co-
lony at Santa Maria in Darien, by the volun-
tary filffrage of his associates, was so extremely
desirous to obtain from the crown a confirma-
tion of their ele&ion, that he dispatched one of
his officers to Spain, in order to solicit a royal
commission, which might invest him with a
legal title to the supreme command. Conscious,
however, that he could not expet success from
the patronage of Ferdinand's ministers, with
whom he was unconnected, or from negociating
in a court to the arts of which he was a ftran-
ger, he endeavoured to merit the dignity to
which he aspired, and aimed at performing
some signal service that would secure him the
preference to every competitor. Full of this
idea, he made frequent inroads into the adjacent
country, subdued several of the caziques, and

P. Martyr, decad. p. 202o. Enfayo Chronol. para la

Hilt. de la Florida, por D. Gab. Cardenas, p. i. Oviedo,
lib. xvi. c. I1. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. 5. Hilt. de la
Conq. de la Florida, par Garc. de la Vega, lib. i. c. 3.

collected

BOO K colleaed a considerable quantity of gold, which

III.

I^ . _j abounded more in that part of the continent

s5'"* than in the islands. In one of those excursions,

the Spaniards contended with such eagerness
about the division of some gold, that they were
at the point of proceeding to aAs of violence
against one another. A young cazique, who
was present, astonished at the high value which
they set upon a thing of which he did not dif-
cern the use, tumbled the gold out of the ba-
lance with indignation; and, turning to the
Spaniards, " Why do you quarrel (says he)
about such a trifle ? If you are so paflionately
fond of gold, as to abandon your own country,
and to diflurb the tranquillity of distant nations
for its fake, I will conduct you to a region
where the metal which seems to be the chief
objec of your admiration and desire, is so
common that the meanest utensils are formed
of it." Transported with what they heard, Bal-
boa and his companions inquired eagerly where
this happy country lay, and how they might
arrive at it. He informed them that at the
distance of fix suns, that is of fix days journey
towards the south, they thould discover ano'.er
ocean, near to which this wealthy kingdom
was situated; but if they intended to attack
that powerful Rfate, they must assemble forces

far

far superior in number and strength to those with B o o

III.

which they now appeared'.

1511.

THIs was the first information which the The

.chemes

Spaniards received concerning the great southern which he
ocean, or the opulent and extensive country forms.
known afterwards by the name of Peru. Bal-
boa- had now before him obje&s suited to his
boundless ambition, and the enterprising ar-
dour of his genius. He immediately concluded
the ocean which the cazique mentioned, to be
that for which Columbus had searched without
success in this part of America, in hopes of
opening a more dire& communication with the
East Indies; and he conjeaured that the rich
territory which had been described to him, muftt
be part of that vast and opulent region of the
earth. Elated with the idea of performing what
so great a man had attempted in vain; and
eager to accomplish a discovery which he knew
would be no less acceptable to the king than
beneficial to his country, he was impatient
until he could set out upon this enterprise, in
comparison of which all his former exploits ap-
peared inconsiderable. But previous arrange-
ment and preparation were requisite to ensure
success. He began with courting and securing

 Herrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. z. Gomara, c. 60.
P. Martyr, decad. p. 149.

B o K the friendship of the neighbouring caziques. He

III.

t- .j sent some of his officers to Hispaniola with a

s5sz. large quantity of gold, as a proof of his past

success, and an earnest of his future hopes. By a
proper distribution of this, they secured the fa-
vour of the governor, and allured volunteers into
the service. A considerable reinforcement from
that island joined him, and he thought himfelfin
a condition to attempt the discovery.

Difficulty THE isthmus of Darien is not above sixty
ofexecut- miles in breadth; but this neck of land, which
Ing it. binds together the continents of North and

South America, is strengthened by a chain of
lofty mountains stretching through its whole
extent, which render it a barrier of solidity sus-
ficient to resist the impulse of two opposite
oceans. The mountains are covered with forests
almost inaccessible. The valleys in that molit
climate, where it rains during two thirds of the
year, are marshy, and so frequently overflowed,
that the inhabitants find it necessary, in many
places, to build their houses upon trees, in
order to be elevated at some distance from the
damp foil, and the odious reptiles engendered in
the putrid waters b. Large rivers rush down
with an impetuous current from the high

b P. Martyr, decad, p. x58.

grounds.

grounds. In a region thinly inhabited by wan- B o o K

IlI.

dering savages, the hand of induftry-had done -
nothing to mitigate or correat those natural dif- Isl'Z
advantages. To march across this unexplored
country, with no other guides but Indians, whose
fidelity could be little trusted, was, on all those
accounts, the boldest enterprise on which the
Spaniards had hitherto ventured in the New
World. But the intrepidity of Balboa was such
as distinguished him among his countrymen, at a
period when every adventurer was conspicuous izs3.
for daring courage. Nor was bravery his only
merit; he was prudent in conduct, generous,
affable, and poffeffed of those popular talents
which, in the most desperate undertakings, in-
spire confidence and secure attachment. Even
after the juntion of the volunteers from Hifpa-
niola, he was able to muster only an hundred and
ninety men for his expedition. But they were
hardy veterans, inured to the climate of Ame-
rica, and ready to follow him through every dan-
ger. A thousand Indians attended them to carry
their provisions; and to complete their warlike
array, they took with them several of those fierce
dogs, which were no less formidable than de-
ftrutive to their naked enemies.

BALBOA set out upon this important expedi- Dircovers

the South

tion on the firfi of September, about the time sea.

13 that

BOO K that the periodical rains began to abate. He

III.

I proceeded by sea, and without any difficulty,

's'3 to the territories of a cazique whose friendship

he had gained; but no sooner did he begin to
advance into the interior part of the country,
than he was retarded by every obstacle, which
he had reason to apprehend, from the nature of
the territory, or the disposition of its inhabit-
ants. Some of the caziques, at his approach,
fled to the mountains with all their people, and
carried off or destroyed whatever could afford
subsistence to his troops. Others colle&ed their
fubje&s, in order to oppose his progress, and
he quickly perceived what an arduous under-
taking it was, to conduat such a body of men
through hostile nations, across swamps and ri-
vers, and woods, which had never been passed
but by straggling Indians. But by sharing in
every hardflhip with the meanest soldier, by ap-
pearing the foremost to meet every danger, by
promising confidently to his troops the enjoy-
ment of honour and riches superior to what had
been attained by the most fuccefsful of their
countrymen, he inspired them with such en-
thufiaftic resolution, that they followed him
without murmuring. When they had pene-
trated a good way into the mountains, a power-
ful cazique appeared in a narrow pass, with a
numerous body of his fubjebs, to obftru& their

5 progress.

progress. But men who had surmounted so BooK
many obstacles, despised the opposition of such
feeble enemies. They attacked them with im- Is53.
petuofity, and having dispersed them with
much ease and great slaughter, continued their
march. Though their guides had represented
the breadth of the isthmus to be only a journey
of fix days, they had already spent twenty-five
in forcing their way through the woods and
mountains. Many of them were ready to fink
under such uninterrupted fatigue in thac sultry
climate, several were taken ill of the dysentery
and other diseases frequent in that country, and
all became impatient to reach the period of their
labours and fufferings. At length the Indians
assured them, that from the top of the next moun-
tain they ihould discover the ocean which was the
object of their wilhes. When, with infinite toil,
they had climbed up the greater part of that
sleep ascent, Balboa commanded his men to halt,
and advanced alone to the summit, that he might
be the first who mould enjoy a fpetacle which
he had so long desired. As soon as he beheld
the South Sea stretching in endless profpeft be-
low him, he fell on his knees, and lifting up
his hands to Heaven, returned thanks to God,
who had condu&ed him to a discovery so bene-
ficial to his country, and so honourable to him-
self. His followers, observing his transports

VOL. I. U of

BOOK of joy, rushed forward to join in his wonder,
» - exultation, and gratitude. They held on their

15'3. course to the shore with great alacrity, when

Balboa advancing up to the middle in the waves
with his buckler and sword, took poffeffion of
that ocean in the name of the king his master,
and vowed to defend it, with these arms, againlt
all his enemies .

THAT part of the great Pacific or Southern

ocean, which Balboa first discovered, still re-
tains the name of the Gulf of St. Michael,
which he gave to it, and is situated to the east
of Panama. From several of the petty princes,
who governed in the diftrifts adjacent to that
gulf, he extorted provisions and gold by force
of arms. Others fnt them to him voluntarily.
To these acceptable presents, some of the cazi-
ques added a considerable quantity of pearls; and
he learned from them, with much satisfaction,
that pearl oysters abounded in the sea which he
had newly discovered.

He re- TOGETHER with the acquisition of this wealth,
formation which served to sooth and encourage his fol-
concerning lowers, he received accounts which confirmred
a more
opulent
country. c Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. I, &c. Gomara, c. 6z,

&c. P. Martyr, decad. p. zc2, &c.

his sanguine hopes of future and more extensive B o K
benefits from the expedition. All the people - '
on the coast of the South Sea concurred in in- 's'3.
forming him that there was a mighty and opu-
lent kingdom situated at a considerable distance
towards the south-east, the inhabitants of which
had tame animals to carry their burdens. In or-
der to give the Spaniards an idea of there, they
drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas or
sheep, afterwards found in Peru, which the Pe-
ruvians had taught to perform such services as
they described. As the Llama, in its form,
nearly resembles a camel, a beast of burden
deemed peculiar to Asia, this circumstance, in
conjun&ion with the discovery of the pearls,
another noted produ&ion of that country, tend-
ed to confirm the Spaniards in their mistaken
theory with refpea to the vicinity of the New
World to the East Indies d

BuT though the information which Balboa Obliged to

received from the people on the coast, as well retuin.
as his own conjectures and hopes, rendered him
extremely impatient to visit this unknown
country, his prudence restrained him from at-
tempting to invade it with an handful of men,

d Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. z.

exhausted

U2

B o o K exhauf ed by fatigue, and weakened by difeafes".

II.
r - He determined to lead back his followers, at
5I,3. present, to their settlement at Santa Maria in

Larien, and to return next season with a force
more adequate to such an arduous enterprize.
In order to acquire a more extensive knowledge
of the isthmus, he marched back by a different
route, which he found to be no less dangerous
and difficult than that which he had formerly
taken. But to men elated with ficcefs, and
animated with hope, nothing is infurmount-

'*4. able. Balboa returned to Santa Maria, from

which he had been absent four months, with
greater glory and more treasure than the Spa.
niards had acquired in any expedition in the
New World. None of Balboa's officers diftin-
guifhed himself more in this service than Fran-
cisco Pizarro, or assisted with greater courage
and ardour in opening a communication with
those countries, in which he was destined to aA
soon a molt illustrious part f.

edrarias BALBOA'S firit care was to fend information
appointed
governor to Spain of the important discovery which he
of Darien. had made ; and to demand a reinforcement of

e See NOTE XXIV.

f Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. 3-6. Gomara, c, 64,

p. Martyr, dec. p. 229, &c.

7 a thou-

a thousand men, in order to attempt the con-
quest of that opulent country, concerning which
he had received such inviting intelligence.
The first account of the discovery of the New
World hardly occasioned greater joy, than the
unexpected tidings, that a passage was at last
found to the great southern ocean. The com-
munication with the East Indies, by a course
to the westward of the line of demarcation,
drawn by the Pope, seemed now to be certain.
The vast wealth which flowed into Portugal
from its settlements and conquests in that
country, excited the envy and called forth the
emulation of other Rates. Ferdinand hoped
now to come in for a share in this lucrative
commerce, and in his eagerness to obtain it,
was willing to make an effort beyond what
Balboa required. But even in this exertion,
his jealous policy, as well as the fatal antipathy
of Fonseca, now Bilhop of Burgos, to every
man of merit who distinguished himself in
the New World, were conspicuous. Notwith-
standing Balboa's recent services, which marked
him out as the most proper person to finith
that great undertaking which he had begun,
Ferdinand was so ungenerous as to overlook
these, and to appoint Pedrarias Davila governor
of Darien. He gave him the command of
fifteen stout vessels, and twelve hundred fol-

U 3 diers.

B o o K diers. These were fitted out at the public ex-

IH. c- pence, with a liberality which Ferdinand had
I5,. never displayed in any former armament def-

tined for the New World; and such was the
ardour of the Spanish gentlemen to follow a
leader who was about to conduct them to a
country, where, as fame reported, they had
only' to throw their nets into the sea and draw
out gold g, that fifteen hundred embarked on
board the fleet, and if they had not been re-
strained, a much greater number would have
engaged in the ferviceh.

PEDRARIAS reached the gulf of Darien with-

out any remarkable accident, and immediately
sent some of his principal officers aihore to
inform Balboa of his arrival, with the king's
commission, to be governor of the colony. To
their affonifhment, they found Balboa, ofwhole
great exploits they had heard so much, and
of whose opulence they had formed such high
ideas, clad in a canvas jacket, and wearing
coarse hempen sandals ufcd only by the meanest
peasants, employed, together with some In-
dians, in thatching his own hut with reeds.
Even in this simple garb, which corresponded

g Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 14.
h Ibid. dec. I. lib. x. c. 6, 7. P. Martyr, dec. p. 177.

296.

so ill with the expe&ations and wishes of his new E o° K
guests, Balboa received them with dignity. The -
fame of his discoveries had drawn so many ad- '1,".
venturers from the islands, that he could now
muffer four hundred and fifty men. At the
head of those daring veterans, he was more than
a match for the forces which Pedrarias brought
with him. But though his troops murmured
loudly at the injustice of the king in superseding
their commander, and complained that ftrang-
ers would now reap the fruits of their toil
and success, Balboa submitted with implicit
obedience to the will of his sovereign, and
received Pedrarias with all the deference due to
his character'.

NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation, to which Dissention

Pedrarias owed the peaceable poffefion of his tween
government, he appointed a judicial inquiry Balboa.
to be made into Balboa's condu&t, while under
the command of Nicueffa, and imposed a con-
fiderable fine upon him, on account of the
irregularities of which he had then been guilty.
Balboa felt sensibly the mortification of being
fubjeaed to trial and to punishment in a place
where he had so lately occupied the first itation.
Pedrarias could not conceal his jealousy of his

I Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. 13, 14.

superior

U4

B ooK superior merit; so that the resentment of the

III.

---. one, and the envy of the other, gave rife to
'5'. diffentions extremely detrimental to the colony.

It was threatened with a calamity still more

July. fatal. Pedrarias had landed in Darien at a

most unlucky time of the year, about the
middle of the rainy season, in that part of the
torrid zone where the clouds pour down such
torrents as are unknown in more temperate
climatesk. The village of Santa Maria was
seated in a rich plain, environed with marfhnes
and woods. The constitution of Europeans
was unable to withstand the pestilential in-
fluence of such a situation, in a climate natu-
rally so noxious, and at a season so peculiarly
unhealthy. A' violent and deftruaive malady
carried off many of the soldiers who accompa-
nied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity of pro-
visions augmented this distress, as it rendered
it impossible to find proper refreshment for the
sick, or the necessary sustenance for the healthy'.
In the space of a month, above fix hundred
persons perished in the utmost misery. De-
jeRion and despair spread through the colony.
Many principal persons solicited their difmif-
sion, and were glad to relinquiflh all their hopes

k Richard Hilt. Naturelle de l'Air, tom. i. p. zo4.
I Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 14. P. Martyr, dec. p. 272.

of wealth, in order to escape from that perni- B 0 0

o ItI.

cious region. Pedrarias endeavoured to divert I
those who remained from brooding over their 's54*
misfortunes, by finding them employment.
With this view, he sent several detachments
into the interior parts of the country, to levy
gold among the natives, and to search for the
mines in which it was produced. Those rapa-
cious adventurers, more attentive to present
gain than to the means of facilitating their
future progress, plundered without diftinftion
wherever they marched. Regardless of the
alliances which Balboa had made with several
of the caziques, they stripped them of every
thing valuable, and treated them, as well as
their fubjets, with the utmost insolence and
cruelty. By their tyranny and exations, which
Pedrarias, either from want of authority or of
inclination, did not restrain, all the country
from the gulf of Darien to the lake of Nica-
ragua was desolated, and the Spaniards were
inconsiderately deprived of the advantages
which they might have derived from the friend-
fthip of the natives, in extending their conquests
to the South Sea. Balboa, vwho saw with con-
cern that such ill-judged proceedings retarded
the execution of his favourite scheme, sent
violent remonftrances to Spain against the im-
prudent government of Pedrarias, which had

ruined

BooK ruined a happy and flourifling colony. Pedra-

-y rias, on the other hand, accused him of having
1514+ deceived the king, by magnifying his own ex-

ploits, as well as by a false representation of the
opulence and value of the country m.

Violent FERDINAND became sensible at length of his
nproee- imprudence in superseding the most a&ive and
gaintBal- experienced officer he had in the New World,

and, by way of compensation to Balboa, ap-
pointed him Adelantado, or Lieutenant-gover-
nor of the countries upon the South Sea, with
very extensive privileges and authority. At
the fame time he enjoined Pedrarias to support
Balboa in all his operations, and to consult
with him concerning every measure which he

,s5s. himself pursued. But to effe& such a sudden

transition from. inveterate enmity to perfef
confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's power. Pe-
drarias continued to treat his rival with neg-
let& and Balboa's fortune being exhausted by
the payment of his fine, and other exa&ions
of Pedrarias, he could not make suitable pre-
parations for taking poffeffion of his new go-
vernment. At length, by the interposition
and exhortations of the bishop of Darien, they

m Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15. dec. 2. c. I, &c. Go-

mara, c. 66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. 10. Relacion de B.
de las Cafas, p. z2.

were

were brought to a reconciliation; and, in order BOO K

III.

to cement this union more firmly, Pedrarias ,
agreed to give his daughter in marriage to 's's.
Balboa. The first effe& of. their concord was, 1516.
that Balboa was permitted to make several
small incursions into the country. There he
conducted with such prudence, as added to the
reputation which he had already acquired.
Many adventurers resorted to him, and, with
the countenance and aid of Pedrarias, he began
to prepare for his expedition to the South Sea.
In order to accomplish this, it was necessary to
build vessels capable of conveying his troops to
those provinces which he purposed to invade.
After surmounting many obstacles, and endur- 1s57.
ing a variety of those hardships which were
the portion of the conquerors of America, he
at length finiihed four small brigantines. In
these, with three hundred chosen men, a force
superior to that with which Pizarro afterwards
undertook the fame expedition, he was ready
to fail towards Peru, when he received an un-
expected message from Pedrarias ". As his re-
conciliation with Balboa had never been cordial,
the progress which his fon-in-law was making
revived his ancient enmity, and added to its ran-
cour. He dreaded the prosperity and elevation

"Herrera, dec. z. lib. i. c. 3. lib. ii. c. II. 13. 2I.

BOO K of a man whom he had injured so deeply. He

III.

L - i.fufpected that success would encourage him to

s517. aim at independence upon his jurifdticion; and

so violently did the passions of hatred, fear, and
jealousy, operate upon his mind, that, in order
to gratify his vengeance, he scrupled not to
defeat an enterprise of the greatest moment to
his country. Under pretexts which were false,
but plausible, he desired Balboa to poitpone
his voyage for a short time, and to repair to
Acla, in order that he might have an inter-
view with him. Balboa, with the unfufpicious
confidence of a man conscious of no crime, in-
flantly obeyed the summons; but as soon as he
entered the place, he was arrested by order of
Pedrarias, whose impatience to satiate his re-
venge did not fuffer him to languish long in
confinement. Judges were immediately ap-
pointed to proceed to his trial. An accusation
of disloyalty to the king, and of an intention
to revolt against the governor, was preferred
against him. Sentence of death was pro-
nounced; and though the judges who passed
it, seconded by the whole colony, interceded
warmly for his pardon, Pedrarias continued
inexorable; and the Spaniards beheld, with
astonishment and sorrow, the public execution
of a man whom they universally deemed more
capable than any who had borne command in

America,

America, of forming and accomplishing great BOOK
defignso. Upon his death, the expedition
which he had planned was relinquished. Pe- a157.
drarias, notwithstanding the violence and in-
justice of his proceedings, was not only screened
from punishment by the powerful patronage
of the bishop of Burgos and other courtiers,
but continued in power. Soon after, he ob-
tained permission to remove the colony from
its unwholesome flation at Santa Maria to
Panama, on the opposite fide of the isthmus;
and though it did not gain much in point of
healthfulness by the change, the commodious
situation of this new settlement contributed
greatly to facilitate the subsequent conquests of
the Spaniards in the extensive countries situated
upon the Southern Ocean ,

DURING these tranfa&Cions in Darien, the ,sNs.

New dif-

history of which it was proper to carry on in coveries.
an uninterrupted tenour, several important
events occurred with refpe&t to the discovery,
the conquest, and government, of other pro-
vinces in the New World. Ferdinand was so
intent upon opening a communication with
the Molucca or Spice Islands by the weft, that,
in the year one thousand five hundred and

* iHerrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. zI, zz. p Ibid. lib. iv. c. 1.

fifteen,

B o o K fifteen, he fitted out two mhips at his own ex-

III. - Ipence, in order to at:empt such a voyage, and
3517. gave the command of them to Juan Diaz de

Solis, who was deemed one of the most skilful
navigators in Spain. He stood along the coast
of South America, and on the first of January
one thousand five hundred and sixteen, entered
a river which he called Janeiro, where an ex-
tensive commerce is now carried on. From
thence he proceeded to a Tpacious bay, which
he supposed to be the entrance into a strait that
communicated with the Indian ocean; but up-
on advancing farther, he found it to be the
mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vaift rivers
by which the southern continent of America is
watered. In endeavouring to make a descent
in this country, De Solis and several of his
crew were slain by the natives, who, in fight
of the ships, cut their bodies' in pieces, roasted
and devoured them. Discouraged with the
loss of their commander, and terrified at this
ihocking fpeatacle, the surviving Spaniards set
fail for Europe, without aiming at any farther
discovery q. Though this attempt proved abor-
tive, it was not without benefit. It turned
the attention of ingenious men to this course
of navigation, and prepared the way for a more

l Herrera, dec. z. lib. i. c. 7. P. Martyr, decad. p.317.

fortunate

fortunate voyage, by which, a few years pofte- B o o K
rior to this period, the great design that Ferdi- -
nand had in view was accomplished. I5I7.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus actively Stateofthe

employed in extending their discoveries and CHif,"ni
settlements in America, they still considered ala.
Hispaniola as their principal colony, and the
feat of government. Don Diego Columbus
wanted neither inclination nor abilities to have
rendered the members of this colony, who were
most immediately under 9is jurifdi&ion, profpe-
rous and happy. But he was circumscribed in
all his operations by the suspicious policy of
Ferdinand, who on every occasion, and under
pretexts the mofi frivolous, retrenched his pri-
vileges, and encouraged the treasurer, the
judges, and other subordinate officers, to coun-
teract his measures, and to dispute his autho-
rity. The most valuable prerogative which
the governor poffeffed, was that of diltributing
Indians among the Spaniards fettled in the
island. The rigorous servitude of those un-
happy men having been but little mitigated by
all the regulations in their favour, the power
of parcelling out such necessary instruments of
labour at pleasure, secured to the governor
great influence in the colony. In order to
strip him of this, Ferdinand created a new

office,

S K office, with the power of diffributing the In-
»-J--- dians, and beffowed it upon Rodrigo Albu-

*5'7. querque, a relation of Zapata, his confidential

minister. Mortified with the injustice, as well
as indignity, of this invasion upon his rights,
in a point so essential, Don Diego could no
longer remain in a place where his power and
consequence were almost annihilated. He re-
paired to Spain with the vain hopes of obtain-
ing redrefs'. Albuquerque entered upon his
office with all the rapacity of an indigent ad-
venturer, impatient to amass wealth. He
began with taking the exa&t number of Indians
in the island, and found, that from sixty thou-
sand, who, in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and eight, survived after all their iiffer-
ings, they were now reduced to fourteen thou-
sand. These he threw into separate divisions
or lots, and beffowed them upon such as were
willing to purchase them at the highest price.
By this arbitrary diffribution, several of the
natives were removed from their original habi-
tations, many were taken from their ancient
masters, and all of them fubjeaed to heavier
burdens, and to more intolerable labour, in
order to reimburse their new proprietors.
Those additional calamities completed the

' Herrera, dec. I. lib.ix. c. 5. lib. x. c. 12.

mikery,

misery, and hastened on the extintion of this Boo OK

III.

wretched and innocent race of men'.

lS17.

THE violence of these proceedings, together Contro-

with the fatal consequences which attended eferf' wth
them, not only excited complaints among such the treat-

ment of

as thought themselves aggrieved, but touched the n-
the hearts of all who retained any sentiments dians.
of humanity. From the time that Ecclefiaftics
were sent as inftrutors into America, they
perceived that the rigour with which their
countrymen treated the natives, rendered their
miniffry altogether fruitless. The mirffonaries,
in conformity to the mild spirit of that religion
which they were employed to publish, early
remonstrated against the maxims of the planters
with refpedl to the Americans, and condemned
the repartimientos, or diflributions, by which
they were given up as slaves to their con-
querors, as no less contrary to natural jufiice
and the precepts of Christianity, than to found
policy. The Dominicans, to whom the in-
ftruction of the Americans was originally com-
mitted, were most vehement in testifying against
the repartimientos. In the year one thousand
five hundred and eleven, Montefino, one of
their most eminent preachers, inveighed against

' Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. I2.

VOL. I.

B o o this pracice in the great church at St. Do-

III.
. mingo, with all the impetuosity of popular
'5'7* eloquence. Don Diego Columbus, the prin-

cipal officers of the colony, and all the laymen
who had been his hearers, complained of the
monk to his superiors; but they, instead of
condemning, applauded his dotrine, as equally
pious and seasonable. The Franciscans, in-
fluenced by the spirit of opposition and rival-
ship which subsists between the two orders,
discovered some inclination to take part with
the laity, and to espouse the defence of the
repartimientos. But as they could not with de-
cency give their avowed approbation to a system
of oppression, so repugnant to the spirit of
religion, they endeavoured to palliate what they
could not justify, -and alleged, in excuse for
the condu& of their countrymen, that it was
impossible to carry on any improvement in the
colony, unless the Spaniards poffeffed such do-
minion over the natives, that they could compel
them to labour'.

Contr'ry THE Dominicans, regardless of such political
decilions
concer.- and interested considerations, would not relax
ng this in any degree the rigour of their sentiments,

and even refused to absolve, or admit to the

t Herrera, dec. I. lib. viii. c. I. Oviedo, lib. iii.

c. 6. p. 97.

sacra-

sacraments, such of their countrymen as conti- BOOK

II.

nued to hold the natives in servitude ". Both
parties applied to the king for his decision in a ass7'
matter of such importance. Ferdinand empower-
ed a committee of his privy-council, assisted by
some of the most eminent civilians and divines in
Spain, to hear the deputies sent from Hispaniola,
in support of their refpecive opinions. After
a long difcutfion, the speculative point in con-
troverfy was determined in favour of the Do-
minicans, the Indians were declared to be a
free people, intitled to all the natural rights of
men; but, notwithstanding this decision, the
repartimientos were continued upon their ancient
footing '. As this determination admitted the
principle upon which the Dominicans founded
their opinion, they renewed their efforts to ob-
tain relief for the Indians with additional bold-
ness and zeal. At length, in order to quiet
the colony, which was alarmed by their
remonftrances and censures, Ferdinand ilrued
a decree of his privy council, declaring, that
after mature consideration of the Apostolic
Bull, and other titles by which the crown of
Castile claimed a right to its poffeffions in the isza
New World, the servitude of the Indians was
warranted both by the laws of God and of

U Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 61 p. 97.
" Herrera, dec. I. lib. viii. c. 12. lib. ix. c. 5.

X 2 man;

B o K man; that unless they were fubjeaed to the
. - dominion of the Spaniards, and compelled to

''7.' reside under their inspection, it would be im-

possible to reclaim them from idolatry, or to
inftru& them in the principles of the Christian
faith; that no farther scruple ought to be en-
tertained concerning the lawfulness of the repar-
timientos, as the king and council were willing
to take the charge of that upon their own con-
sciences; and that therefore the Dominicans,
and monks of other religious orders, ihould
abif-ain, for the future, from those inve&ives,
which, from an excess of charitable, but ill-
informed zeal, they had uttered against that
pratice r.

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree

might be fully understood, Ferdinand con-
ferred new grants of Indians upon several of
his courtiersz. But, in order that he might
not seem altogether inattentive to the rights
of humanity, he publithed an edia, in which
he endeavoured to provide for the mild treat-
ment of the Indians under the yoke to which
he fubje&ed them; he regulated the nature of
the work which they should be required to
perform, he prescribed the mode in which they

7 Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14. z See NOTE XXV.

Ihould

should be clothed and fed, and gave dire&ions B o K
with refpe& to their inftru&ion in the principles ---.-
of Christianity '. s57.

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their ex- EffeAof

perience of what was past, judged concerning there.
the future, soon perceived the inefficacy of
those provisions, and foretold, that as long as
it was the interest of individuals to treat the
Indians with rigour, no public regulations
could render their servitude mild or tolerable.
They considered it as vain to waste their own
time and strength in attempting to commu-
nicate the sublime truths of religion to men,
whose spirits were broken, and their faculties
impaired by oppression. Some of them, in
despair, requested the permission of their fupe-
riors to remove to the continent, and to pursue
the objea of their million, among such of the
natives as were not hitherto corrupted by the
example of the Spaniards, or alienated by their
cruelty from the Christian faith. Such as re-
mained in Hispaniola continued to remonstrate,
with decent firmness, againfi the servitude of the
Indians b

a Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14.
b Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14. Touron. Hilt. Gener.

de l'Amerique, tom. i. p. 232.

THE

B o oK THE violent operations of Albuquerque, the

III.
. -...' new diftiributor of Indians, revived the zeal of
atc.7 the Dominicans against the repartimientos, and
mew de las called forth an advocate for that oppressed
Cafas ap.
pears in people, who poffeffed all the courage, the
thne of talents, and aEtivity requisite in supporting
dians. such a desperate cause. This was Bartholo-

mew de las Cafas, a native of Seville, and one
of the clergymen sent out with Columbus in
his second voyage to Hispaniola, in order to
fettle in that island. He early adopted the
opinion prevalent among ecclefiaftics, with
refpe&t to the unlawfulness of reducing the
natives to servitude ; and that he might demon-
firate the sincerity of his convi6tion, he relin-
quifhed all the Indians who had fallen to his
own Ihare in the divilion of the inhabitants
among their conquerors, declaring that he ihould
ever bewail his own misfortune and guilt, in
having exercifced for a moment this impious do,
minion over his fellow-creatures . From that
time, he became the avowed patron of the In-
dians; and by his bold interpofitions in their be-
half, as well as by the refpe&t due to his abilities
and charaater, he had often the merit of setting
some bounds to the excesses of his country-

* Fr. Aug. Davila Padilla Hist. de la Fundacion de la

Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, p. 303, 304. Herrera,
dec. I. lib. x. c. 2z.

men.

men. He did not fail to remonstrate warmly Boo tK
against the proceedings of Albuquerque, and,

l -.

though he soon found that attention to his own *.15.
interest rendered this rapacious officer deaf to
admonition, he did not abandon the wretched
people whose cause he had espoused. He in-
ftantly set out for Spain, with the most sanguine
hopes of opening the eyes and softening the heart
of Ferdinand, by that striking pi&ure of the op-
pression of his new fubjeas, which he would ex-
hibit to his view'.

HE easily obtained admittance to the king, ,s,6.

whom he found in a declining state of health. Solicits
With much freedom, and no 'lefs eloquence, he in the

court of

represented to him all the fatal effecs of the re- Spain.
partimientos in the New World, boldly charging
him with the guilt of having authorised this
impious measure, which had brought misery and
deftru&ion upon a numerous and innocent race
of men, whom Providence had placed under
his protecion. Ferdinand, whose mind as well
as body was much enfeebled by his distemper,
was greatly alarmed at this charge of impiety,
which at another juncture he would have de-
fpifed. He listened with deep compunction to
the discourse of Las Cafas, and promised to

d Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. I2. Dec. z. lib. i. c. II.

Davila Padilla Hilt. p. 304.

take

X4

B o o K take into serious consideration the means of re-

III

\ dressing the evil of which he complained. But

1,5. death prevented him from executing his refolu-

tion. Charles of Austria, to whom all his
crowns devolved, resided at that time in his pa-
ternal dominions in the Low Countries. Las
Cafas, with his usual ardour, prepared imme-
diately to set out for Slanders, in order to occupy
the ear of the young monarch, when cardinal
Ximenes, who, as regent, assumed the reins of
government in Castile, commanded him to desist
from the journey, and engaged to hear his com-
plaints in person.

rThe regu- .HE accordingly weighed the matter with
lations of
cardinal attention equal to its importance; and as his
ximenes. impetuous mind delighted in schemes bold and

uncommon, he soon fixed upon a plan which
aftonilhed the ministers, trained up under the
formal and cautious administration of Ferdi-
nand. Without regarding either the rights of
Don Diego Columbus, or the regulations efta-
blifhed by the late king, he resolved to fend
three persons to America as superintendents of
all the colonies there, with authority, after
examining all circumfiances on the spot, to de-
cide finally with refpet to the point in question.
It was a matter of deliberation and delicacy
to chufe men qualified for such an important

13 . fation.

'fRation. As all the laymen fettled in America, B

o o K

or who had been consulted in the administration '--v--
'of that department, had given their opinion that s5.7'
the Spaniards could not keep poffeffion of their
newfettlements, unless they were allowed to retain
their dominion over the Indians, he saw that he
could not rely on their impartiality, and deter-
mined to commit the trust to ecclefiaftics. As
the Dominicans and Franciscans had already
espoused opposite sides in the controversy, he,
from the fame principle of impartiality, excluded
both these fraternities from the commission. He
-confined his choice to the monks of St. Je-
rome, a small, but refpe&able order in Spain.
With the assistance of their general, and in con-
cert with Las Cafas, he soon pitched upon three
persons whom he deemed equal to the charge.
To them he joined Zuazo, a private law-
yer of distinguished probity, with unbound-
ed power to regulate all judicial proceedings
in the colonies. Las Cafas was appointed to
accompany them, with the title of protetor of
*the Indians°.

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might Thele man-

at once overturn the system of government which they
cftablifhed in the New World, in four persons, eu'xed

C Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 3.

who,

B o o K who, from their humble condition in life, were

III.

cV- little intitled to possess this high authority, ap.

J5'7' peared to Zapata, and other ministers of the

late king, a measure so wild and dangerous,
that they refused to issue the dispatches necef-
fary for carrying it into execution. But Xi-
menes was not of a temper patiently to brook.
opposition to any of his schemes. He sent for
the refratory ministers, and addressed them in
such a tone, that in the utmost conifernation
they obeyed his orders'. The superintendents,
with their associate Zuazo, and Las Cafas,
failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival,
the first a& of their authority was to set at
liberty all the Indians who had been granted
to the Spanish courtiers, or to any person not
residing in America. This, together with the
information which had been received from
Spain concerning the obje& of the commission,
spread a general alarm. The colonists con-
cluded that they were to be deprived at once
of the hands with which they carried on their
labour, and that, of consequence, ruin was un-
avoidable. But the fathers of St. Jerome pro-
ceeded with such caution and prudence, as soon
diflipated all their fears. They discovered, in
every flep of their condu&, a knowledge of the

{ Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 6.

world,

world, and of affairs, which is seldom acquired B o o

III.

in ? cloiffter; and displayed a moderation as well - j
as gentleness still more rare among persons train- s517.
ed up in the solitude and aufferity of a monastic
life. Their ears were open to information
from every quarter, they compared the dif-
ferent accounts which they received, and, after
a mature consideration of the whole, they were
fully satisfied that the slate of the colony ren-
dered it impossible to adopt the plan proposed
by Las Cafas, and recommended by the Car-
dinal. -They plainly perceived that the Spa-
niards fettled in America were so few in num-
ber, that they could neither work the mines
which had been opened, nor cultivate the coun-
try; that they depended for effeCting both, upon
the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they muff instantly relinquish their conquests, or
give up all the advantages which they derived
from them; that no allurement was so power-
ful as to surmount the natural aversion of the
Indians to any laborious effort, and that no-
thing but the authority of a master could com-
pel them to work; and if they were not kept
constantly under the eye and discipline of a
superior, so great was their natural liftleffnefs
and indifference, that they would neither attend
to religious inftru&ion, nor observe those rites
of Christianity which they had been already

taught.

1 ooK taught. Upon all those accounts, the super.
- .-- ' intendents found it necessary to tolerate the

'5'7" repartimientos, and to fuffer the Indians to re-

main under fubje&tion to their Spanish masters.
They used their utmost endeavours, however, to
prevent the fatal effeats of this establishment,
and to secure to the Indians the consolation of
the best treatment compatible with a state offer-
vitude. For this purpose, they revived former
regulations, they prescribed new ones, they
negleAed no circumstance that tended to miti-
gate the rigour of the yoke; and by their
authority, their example, and their exhorta-
tions, they laboured to inspire their country-
men with sentiments of equity and gentleness
towards the unhappy people upon whose in-
duftry they depended. Zuazo, in his depart-
ment, seconded the endeavours of the fuperin-
tendents. He reformed the courts ofjufiice,
in such a manner as to render their decisions
equitable as well as expeditious, and initro-
duced various regulations which greatly im-
proved the interior police of the colony. The
fatisfation which his condut, and that of the
superintendents gave, was now universal among
the Spaniards fettled in the New World, and
all admired the boldness of Ximenes, in hav-
ing departed from the ordinary path of business
in forming his plan, as well as his sagacity, in

pitching

'pitching upon persons, whose wisdom, mode- Boo III.
ration, and disinterestedness rendered them wor- -
thy of this high trust . I517.

LAS CASAS alone was diffatisfied. The pru- Las Cafas

diffatisfied

dential considerations which influenced the with them.
superintendents, made no impression upon him.
He regarded their idea of accommodating their
condu& to the slate of the colony, as the maxim
of an unhallowed timid policy, which tole-
rated what was unjust, because it was benefi-
cial. He contended, that the Indians were
by nature free, and, as their proteaor, he re-
quired the superintendents not to bereave
them of the common privilege of humanity.
They received his most virulent remonfirances
without emotion, but adhered firmly to their
own system. The Spanish planters did not
bear with him so patiently, and were ready to
tear him in pieces for insisting in a requisition
so odious to them. Las Cafas, in order to
screen himself from their rage, found it necef-
fary to take shelter in a convent; and perceiv-
ing that all his efforts in America were fruitless,
he soon set out for Europe, with a fixed refo-
lution not to abandon the protection of a people
whom he deemed to be cruelly oppressed h

g Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ;i. c. 15. Remefal Hist. Gener.

lib. ii. c. ?4, 15, l6.

b Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 16.

IIAD

O O K HAD Ximenes retained that vigour of mind

-J with which he usually applied to business, Las

nis ego- Cafas must have met with no very gracious re-
ciations ception upon his return to Spain. But he found
with the
minilters the Cardinal languishing under a mortal diftem-
of Charles
v. per, and preparing to-refign his authority to the

young king, who was daily expeaed from the
Low Countries. Charles arrived, took posses-
sion of the government, and, by the death of
Ximenes, loft a minister, whole abilities and
integrity intitled him to dire& his affairs.
Many of the Flemish nobility had accompanied
their sovereign to Spain. From that warm
predile&ion to his countrymen, which was na-
tural at his age, he consulted them with refpeft
to all the tranfa&ions in his new kingdom, and
they, with an indiscreet eagerness, intruded
themselves into every business, and seized al-
most every department ofadminiftrationh. The
dire&ion of American affairs was an obje& too
alluring to escape their attention. Las Cafas
observed their growing influence, and though
proje&ors are usually too sanguine to conduEf
their schemes with much dexterity, he poffeffed
a bustling indefatigable a&tivity, which some-
times accomplishes its purposes with greater
success, than the most exquisite discernment
and address. He courted the Fklemifh Ministers

L Hist. of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 43.

9wth assiduity. He represented to them the ab- B oo K
furdity of all the maxims hitherto adopted with -
refpe&t to the government of America, parti- 's'r-
cularly during the administration of Ferdinand,
and pointed out the defe&s of those arrangements
which Ximenes had introduced. The memory
of Ferdinand was odious to the Flemings. The
superior virtue and abilities of Ximenes had
long been the obje& of their envy. They
fondly wished to have a plausible pretext for
condemning the measures, both of the mo-
narch and of the minister, and of refleting
some discredit on their political wisdom. The
friends of Don Diego Columbus, as well as the
Spanish courtiers, who had been diffatisfied
with the Cardinal's administration, joined Las
Cafas in censuring the scheme of sending fu-
perintendents to America. This union of so
many interests and passions was irresistible; and,
in consequence of it, the fathers of St. Jerome,
together with their associate Zuazo, were recall-
ed. Roderigo de Figueroa, a lawyer of some
eminence, was appointed chiefjudge of the island,
and received inftruaions, in compliance with
the request of Las Cafas, to examine once more,
with the utmost attention, the point in contro-
verfy between him and the people of the colony,
with respect to the treatment of the natives;
and in the mean time to do every thing in his

a power

BOOK power to alleviate their fufferings, and prevent

III. -1 the extinction of the race'.

1517.
Scheme of THIS was all that the zeal of Las Cafas could

P'tho

o procure, at that juncture, in favour of the In-

lies with dians. The impossibility of carrying on any
cegroes. improvement in America, unless the Spanish

planters could command the labour of the na-
tives, was an insuperable objection to his plan
of treating them as free subjects. In order to
provide some remedy for this, without which
he found it was in vain to mention his scheme,
Las Cafas proposed to purchase a fufficient
number of negroes from the Portuguese fettle-
ments on the coast of Africa, and to transport
them to America, in order that they might be
employed as slaves in working the mines and
cultivating the ground. One of the first ad-
vantages which the Portuguese had derived
from their discoveries in Africa, arose from the
trade in slaves. Various circumstances concurred
in reviving this odious commerce, which had
been long abolished in Europe, and which is
no less repugnant to the feelings of humanity,
than to the principles of religion. As early as
the year one thousand five hundred and three,
a few negroe slaves had been sent into the .New

i Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. x6. 19. z2. lib. iii. c.7, 8.

World.

World k. In the year one thousand five hundred Bo K
and eleven, Ferdinand permited the importa- *-»---
tion of them in greater numbers'. They were a517'
found to be a more robust and hardy race than
the natives of America. They were more ca-
pable of enduring fatigue, more patient under
servitude, and the labour of one negro was
computed to be equal to that of four Indians m
Cardinal Ximenes, however, when solicited to
encourage this commerce, peremptorily re-
jected the proposition, because he perceived the
iniquity of reducing one race of men to slavery,
while he was consulting about the means ofre-
storing liberty to another". But Las Cafas,
from the inconsistency natural to men who
hurry with headlong impetuosity towards a fa-
vourite point, was incapable of making this
diftin&tion. While he contended earnestly for.
the liberty of the people born in one quarter of
the globe, he laboured to enslave the inhabit-
ants of another region; and in the warmth of
his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke,
pronounced it to be lawful and expedient to
impose one still heavier upon the Africans.
Unfortunately for the latter, Las Cafas's plan
was adopted. Charles granted a patent to one

k Herrera, dec. I. lib. v. c. I2. ' Ibid. lib. viii.

c. 9. "' Ibid. lib. ix. c. 5. " Ibid. dec. z. lib.
ui. c. 8,

VOL. I. Y of

B o O K of his Flemish favourites, containing an exclu.

III.
- five right of importing four thousand negroes
1s17. into America. The favourite fold his patent to

some Genoese merchants for twenty-five thousand
ducats, and they were the first who brought into
a regular form that commerce for slaves between
Africa and America, which has since been car-
ried on to such an amazing extent .

as18. BUT the Genoese merchants, conduaing

Las Cafas .
proposes their operations, at first, with the rapacity of
feding monopolists, demanded such an high price for
to Hirpa- negroes, that the number imported into Hifpa-

niola made no great change upon the state of
the colony. Las Cafas, wvhofe zeal was no less
inventive than indefatigable, had recourse to
another expedient for the relief of the Indians.
He observed, that most of the persons who had
fettled hitherto in America, were sailors and fol-
diers employed in the discovery or conquest
of the country; the younger sons of noble fa,
milies, allured by the profpea of acquiring
sudden wealth; or desperate adventurers, whom
their indigence or crimes forced to abandon
their native land. Infread of such men, who
were dissolute, rapacious, and incapable of that
sober persevering industry which is requisite in

O Herrera, dec. I. llb.ii. c. 20.

forming

forming new colonies, he proposed to supply B ooK

III.

the settlements in Hispaniola and other parts of i- --.
the New World with a fufficient number of la- Is7'.
bourers and husbandmen, who should be allured
by suitable premiums to remove thither. These,
as they were accustomed to fatigue, would be
able to perform the work, to which the Indians,
from the feebleness of their constitution, were
unequal, and might soon become useful and
opulent citizens. But though Hispaniola flood
much in need of a recruit of inhabitants, having
been visited at this time with the small-pox,
which swept off almost all the natives who had
survived their long continued oppression, and
though Las Cafas had the countenance of the
Flemif ministers, this scheme was defeated by
the bishop of Burgos, who thwarted all his
projetsP.

LAs CASAS now despaired of procuring any Forms the

idea of a

relief for the Indians in those places where the new o-
Spaniards were already fettled. The evil was lony.
become so inveterate there, as not to admit of
a cure. But such discoveries were daily making
in the continent, as gave an high idea both of
its extent and populousness. In all those vas
regions there was but one feeble colony planted;
and except a small spot on the ifthmt s of Da-

P Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. z .

Y 2 rien,

oB o K rien, the natives still occupied the whole coun-

III.

L- try. This opened a new and more ample field

s517. for the humanity and zeal of Las Cafas, who

flattered himself that he might prevent a per-
nicious system from being introduced there,
though he had failed of success in his attempts
to overturn it, where it was already established.
Full of this idea, he applied for a grant of the
unoccupied country, stretching along the sea-
coast from the gulf of Paria to the western fron-
tier of that province now known by the name
of Santa Martha. He proposed to fettle there
with a colony composed of husbandmen, la-
bourers, and ecclefiaftics. He engaged, in
the space of two years, to civilize ten thousand
of the natives, and to inftrut them so thoroughly
in the arts of social life, that, from the fruits
of their industry, an annual revenue of fifteen
thousand ducats should arise to the king. In
ten years he expeted that his improvements
would be so far advanced, as to yield annually
sixty thousand ducats. He stipulated, that no
sailor or soldier should ever be permitted to
fettle in this diftria&; and that no Spaniard what-
ever thould enter it without his permission. He
even projected to clothe the people whom he
took along with him in some diftinguilhing garb,
which did not resemble the Spaniih dress, that
they might appear to the natives to be a dif-

ferent

ferent race of men from those who had brought B o oK

III.

so many calamities upon their country 9. From

_

this scheme, of which I have traced only the 's'7.
great lines, it is manifest that Las Cafas had
formed ideas concerning the method of treating
the Indians, similar to those by which the Je-
suits afterwards carried on their great opera-
tions in another part of the fame continent. He
supposed that the Europeans, by availing them-
selves of that ascendant which they poffeffed in
consequence of their superior progress in science
and improvement, might gradually form the
minds of the Americans to relish those comforts
of which they were destitute, might train them
to the arts of civil life, and render them capable
of its funtions.

BUT to the bilhop of Burgos and the council Favour-

of the Indies this projec appeared not only .ably-'-
chimerical, but dangerous in a high degree.
They deemed the faculties of the Americans to
be naturally so limited, and their indolence so
excessive, that every attempt to initruc or to
improve them would be fruitless. They con-
tended, that it would be extremely imprudent to
give the command of a country extending above
a thousand miles along the coast, to a fanciful

9 Herrera, dec. z. lib.. 4. c. z.

prefump-

Y3

BO K presumptuous enthusiast, a stranger to the af'-
-v--i kfairs of the world, and unacquainted with the

s517. arts of government. Las Cafas, far from being

discouraged with a repulse, which he had reason
to expect, had recourse once more to the Fle-
mifh favourites, who zealously patronized his
scheme, merely because it had been rejected by
the Spanish ministers. They prevailed with
their master, who had lately been raised to the
Imperial dignity, to refer the consideration of
this measure to a fele& number of his privy-
counsellors; and Las Cafas having excepted
against the members of the council of the Indies,
as partial and interested, they were all excluded.
The decision of men chosen by recommendation
of the Flemings, was perfeCtly conformable to
their sentiments. They warmly approved of Las
Cafas's plan; and gave orders for carrying it
into execution, but reftriaed the territory allot-
ted him to three hundred miles along the coast
of Cumana, allowing him, however, to extend it
as far as he pleased towards the interior part of
the country '.

A solemn THIS determination did not pass uncenfured.
tion con- Almost every person who had been in the Weft
cerning the
mode of
treating r Gomara Hilt. Gener. c. 77. Herrera, dec. z. lib. iv.
ans. c. 3. Oviedo, lib. xix. c. 5.

7 Indies

Indies exclaimed againit it, and supported their B oK
opinion so confidently, and with such plausible

v--

reasons, as made it advifeable to pause and to s517'
review the fubje& more deliberately. Charles
himself, though accustomed, at this early period
of his life, to adopt the sentiments of his mini-
fters, with such submissive deference as did nor
promise that decisive vigour of mind which di-
.ifnguifned his riper years, could not help sus-
pe&ing that the eagerness with which the Fle-
mings took part in every affair relating to Ame-
rica, flowed from some improper motive, and
began to discover an inclination to examine in
person into the state of the question concerning
the character of the Americans, and the proper
manner of treating them. An opportunity of June zo.
making this inquiry with great advantage, soon
occurred. Quevedo, the bithop of Darien,
who had accompanied Pedrarias to the conti-
nent in the year one thousand five hundred and
thirteen, happened to land at Barcelona, shere
the court then resided. It was quickly known,
that his sentiments concerning the talents and
disposition of the Indians differed from thole of
Las Cafas; and Charles naturally concluded,
that by confronting two refpe&table persons,
who, during their residence in America, had
full leisure to observe the manners of the people

Y 4 whom

BOO K whom they pretended to describe, he might be

I11.

i-.. able to discover which of them had formed his

Is*7. opinion with the greatest discernment and ac-

curacy.

A DAY for this solemn audience was ap-

pointed. The emperor appeared with extraor-
dinary pomp, and took his feat on a throne in
the great hall of the palace. His principal
courtiers attended. Don Diego Columbus,
admiral of the Indies, was summoned to be
present. The bishop of Darien was called upon
first to deliver his opinion. He, in a ihort dif-
course, lamented the fatal desolation of America,
by the extination of so many of its inhabitants;
he acknowledged that this must be imputed, in
some degree, to the excessive rigour and inconfi-
derate proceedings of the Spaniards; but de-
clared, that all the people of the New World,
whom he had seen either in the continent or in
the islands, appeared to him to be a race of
men marked out, by the inferiority of their ta-
lents, for servitude, and whom it would be im-
possible to instruct or improve, unless they were
kept under the continual infpe6tion of a master.
Las Cafas, at greater length, and with more
fervour, defended his own system. He rejeaed
with indignation the idea that any race of men

was

was born to servitude, as irreligious and inhu-

1 BOOK

mane. He asserted, that the faculties of the '-^-j
Americans were not naturally despicable, but '5'7-
unimproved; that they were capable of re-
ceiving inftrution in the principles of religion,
as well as of acquiring the industry and arts
which would qualify them for the various offices
of social life; that the mildness and timidity of
their nature rendered them so submissive and
docile, that they might be led and formed with
a gentle hand. He profeffed, that his inten-
tions in proposing the scheme now under con-
iideration were pure and disinterested; and
though, from the accomplishment of his de-
signs, inestimable benefits would result to the
crown of Castile, he never had claimed, nor
ever would receive, any recompence on that

account.

CHARLES, after hearing both, and consulting The

with his ministers, did not think himself fuffi- Las Caa
ciently informed to establish any general ar- a'proved
rangement with refpe& to the Rate of the In- s5o0.
dians; but as he had perfec confidence in the
integrity of Las Cafas, and as even the biflop
of Darien admitted his scheme to be of such
importance, that a trial thould be made of its
effeAs, he issued a patent, granting him the
diftri6t in Cumana formerly mentioned, with

full

B o o iK fall power to establish a colony there according

' to his ovwn plan '.

'517.

iis prepa- LAS CASAS pushed on the preparations for
tion for his voyage with his usual ardour. But, either
it. from his own inexperience in the conduf of

affairs, or from the secret opposition of the
Spanish nobility, who universally dreaded the
success of an institution that might rob them of
the industrious and useful hands which culti-
vated their estates, his progress in engaging
husbandmen anid labourers was extremely flow,
and he could not prevail on more than two
hundred to accompany him to Cumana.

Departs NOTHING, however, could damp his zeal.
for Ame-
rica, and *With this slender train, hardly fufficient to take
meets with
formidable poffefion of such a large territory, and altoge-
obltacles. ther unequal to any effetual attempt towards

civilizing its inhabitants, he set fail. The firit
place at which he touched was the island of
Puerto Rico. There he received an accountof a
new obstacle to the execution of his scheme, more
insuperable than any he had hitherto encounter-
ed. When he left America in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and sixteen, the Spaniards had

* Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfola An-

nales d'Aragon, 74. 97. Remifal Hilt. Gener. lib. ii.
. 19, 20.

little intercourse with any part of the continent, B o K

Ill.

except the countries adjacent to the gulf of Da- -
rien. But as every species of internal inducry s517.
began to stagnate in Hispaniola, when, by the
rapid decrease of the natives, the Spaniards
were deprived of those hands with which they
had hitherto carried on their operations, this
prompted them to try various expedients for
supplying that loss. Considerable numbers of
negroes were imported; but, on account of
their exorbitant price, many of the planters
could not afford to purchase them. In order
to procure slaves at an easier rate, some of the
Spaniards in Hispaniola fitted out vefTels to
cruize along the coast of the continent. In places
where they found themfreves inferior in strength,
traded with the natives, and gave European
toys in exchange for the plates of gold worn by
them as ornaments; but, wherever they could
surprise or overpower the Indians, they carried
them off by force, and fold them as slaves '.
In those predatory excursions, such atrocious
ats of violence and cruelty had been com-
mitted, that the Spanilh name was held in de-
teftation all over the continent. Whenever
any ships appeared, the inhabitants either fled

t Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. 3.

to

B o o K to the woods, or rushed down to the ihore in

III.

S_ arms, to repel those hated difturbers of their

's57. tranquillity. They forced some parties of the

Spaniards to retreat with precipitation; they
cut off others; and in the violence of their re-
fentment against the whole nation, they mur-
dered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal
had prompted them to fettle in the province of
Cumana ". This outrage against persons re-
vered for their fanEtity, excited such indigna-
tion among the people of Hispaniola, who,
notwithstanding all their licentious and cruel
proceedings, were poffeffed with a wonderful
zeal for religion, and a superstitious refpedt for
its ministers, that they determined to inflif
exemplary punilhment, not only upon the per-
petrators of that crime, but upon the whole
race. With this view, they gave the command
of five Ihips and three hundred men to Diego
Ocampo, with orders to lay waste the country
of Cumana with fire and sword, and to tranf-
port all the inhabitants as slaves to Hispaniola.
This armament Las Cafas found at Puerto
Rico, in its way to the continent; and as
Ocampo refused to defer his voyage, he imme-
diately perceived that it would be impossible to
attempt the execution of his pacific plan in a

" Oviedo Hist. lib. xix. c. 3.

country

country destined to be the feat of war and defo- B o o K
lation. X

1517.

IN order to provide against the effects of this xithApril.

unfortunate incident, he set fail direaly for St. Labourst
Domingo, leaving his followers cantoned out them.
among the planters in Puerto Rico. From
many concurring causes, the reception which
Las Cafas met with in Hispaniola was very un-
favourable. In his negociations for the relief
of the Indians, he had censured the condu& of
his countrymen fettled there with such honest
severity, as rendered him universally odious to
them. They considered their own ruin as the
inevitable consequence of his success. They
were now elated with hope of receiving a large
recruit of slaves from Cumana, which must be
relinquished if Las Cafas were assisted in fettling
his projected colony there. Figueroa, in con-
sequence of the inftru&ions which he had re-
ceived in Spain, had made an experiment con-
cerning the capacity of the Indians, that was
represented as decisive against the system of Las
Cafas. He colleced in Hispaniola a good num-
ber of the natives, and fettled them in two vil-
lages, leaving them at perfect liberty, and with
the uncontrolled dire&ion of their own actions.
But that people, accustomed to a mode of life

* HerrerA, dec. z. lib.ix. c. 8, 9.

extremely

B o oK extremely different from that which takes place

III. wherever civilization has made any considerable
1517. progress, were incapable of assuming new habits

at once. Dejeced with their own misfortunes
as well as those of their country, they exerted so
!:tle industry in cultivating the ground, appeared
so devoid of solicitude or foresight in providing
for their own wants, and were such strangers to
arrangement in conduaing their affairs, that the
F-'niards pronounced them incapable of being
formed to live like men in social life, and con-
fidered them as children, who flould be kept
under the perpetual tutelage of persons superior
to themfeives in wisdom and sagacity y.

Final mif- NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumitances,
of his which alienated the persons in Hispaniola to
rcheme. whom Las Cafas applied from himself and from

his meafures,he, by his ativity and perseverance,
by some concessions, and many threats, obtained
at length a small body of troops to protect him
and his colony at their first landing. But upon
his return to Puerto Rico, he found that the dif-
eases of the climate had been fatal to several of
his people ; and that others having got employ-
ment in that island, refused to follow him.
With the handful that remained, he set fail and
landed in Cumana. Ocampo had executed his

I Herrera, doc. 2. lib. x. c. 5.

com-

commifflion in that province with such bar- Bo oK
barous rage, having massacred many of the in-

,-

habitants, sent others in chains to Hispaniola, 's'7.
and forced the reft to fly for flelter to the
woods, that the people of a small colony, which
he had planted at a place which he named To-
ledo, were ready to perish for want in a defo-
lated country. There, however, Las Cafas
was obliged to fix his residence, though de-
ferted both by the troops appointed to protec
him, and by those under the command of
Ocampo, who foresaw and dreaded the calami-
ties to which he must be exposed in that
wretched station. iHe made the belt provision
in his power for the safety and subsistence of his
followers ; but as his utmost efforts availed little
towards securing either the one or the other, he
returned to Hispaniola, in order to solicit more
effe&tual aid for the preservation of men, who
from confidence in him had ventured into a post
of so much danger. Soon after his departure,
the natives, having discovered the feeble and
defenceless Rfate of the Spaniards, assembled
secretly, attacked them with the fury natural
to men exasperated by many injuries, cut off a
good number, and compelled the reft to fly in
the utmost consternation to the island of Cuba-
gua. The small colony fettled there, on ac-

count

B o OK count of the pearl fithery, catching the panic

III.

*

_ with which their countrymen had been seized,

s5'7. abandoned the island, and not a Spaniard re-

mained in any part of the continent, or adjacent
islands, from the gulf of Paria to the borders
of Darien. Astonished at such a succession of
disasters, Las Cafas was ashamed to shew his face
after this fatal termination of all his splendid
schemes. He shut himself up in the convent of
the Dominicans at St. Domingo, and soon after
afiumed the habit of that order .

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony from

Cumana happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-one, I have chosen to trace
the progress of Las Cafas's negociations from
their first rife to their final issue without inter-
ruption. His system was the obje&6 of long and
attentive discussion; and though his efforts in
behalf of the oppressed Americans, partly from
his own rashness and imprudence, and partly
from the malevolent opposition of his adver-
faries, were not attended with that success which
he promised with too sanguine confidence, great
praise is due to his humane activity, which gave

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, 4,

5. Oviedo Hill. lib. xix. c. 5. Gomara, c. 77. Davila
Padilla, lib. i. c. 97. Remifal Hilt. Gen. lib. xi. z. zz,23.

rife

rife to various regulations that were of some B o Ko
benefit to that unhappy people. I return now -
to the history of the Spanifl discoveries, as they 's7'.
occur in the order of time a.

DIEGO VELASQUEZ, who conquered Cuba in New dif.

the year one thousand five hundred and eleven, COrIe
still retained the government of that island, as the weft.
the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though
he seldom acknowledged his superior, and
aimed at rendering his own authozrity altogether
independent b. Under his prudent adminiffra-
tion, Cuba became one of the most flourishing
of the Spanish settlements. The fame of this
allured thither many persons from the other co-
lonies, in hopes of finding either some perma-
nent establishment, or some employment for
their activity. As Cuba lay to the weft of all
the islands occupied by the Spaniards, and as
the ocean, which stretches beyond it towards
that quarter, had not hitherto been explored,
these circumstances naturally invited the inha-
bitants to attempt new discoveries. An expe-
dition for this purpose, in which a&ivity and
resolution might conduct to sudden wealth, was
more suited to the genius of the age, than the

a Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c.5. p. 329.
b Ibid. lib. ii. c. 19.

VOL. I. patient

BooK patient indufrry requisite in clearing ground,

III ' and manufaAuring sugar. Instigated by this
'Sz7. spirit, several officers, who had served under

Pedrarias in Darien, entered into an association.
to undertake a voyage of discovery. They per-
fuaded Francisco Hernandez Cordova,.an opu-
lent planter in Cuba, and a man of distinguished
courage, to join with them in the adventure,
and chose him to be their commander. Velaf-
quez not only approved of the design, but as-
sifted in carrying it on. As the veterans from
Darien were extremely indigent, he and Cor-
dova advanced money for purchasing three small
vessels, and furnishing them with every thing
requisite either for traffic or for war. A hundred
and ten men embarked on board of them, and
failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of
February one thousand five hundred and seven-
teen. By the advice of their chief pilot, An-
tonio Alaminos, who had served under the first
admiral Columbus, they stood diretly weft, re-
lying on the opinion of that great navigator,
who uniformly maintained that a westerly course
would lead to the most important discoveries.

ON the twenty-firft day after their departure

from St. Jago, they saw land, which proved
to be Cape Catoche, the eastern point of that
large peninsula projeting from the continent

6 of

of America, which still retains its original BooK
name of Yucatan. As they approached the
shore, five canoes came off full of people de- ysJ.
cently clad in cotton garments; an aflonifhing
fpe&acle to the Spaniards, who had found
every other part of America poffeffed by naked
savages. Cordova endeavoured by small pre-
fents to gain the good-will of these people.
They, though amazed at the strange objects
now presented for the first time to their view,
invited the Spaniards to visit their habitations,
with an appearance of cordiality. They la;nded
accordingly, and as they advanced into the
country, they observed with new wonder some
large houses built with stone. But they soon
found that, if the people of Yucatan had made
progress in improvement beyond their country-
men, they were likewise more artful and war-
like. For though the Cazique received Cor-
dova with many tokens of friendship, he had
posted a considerable body of his fubjeats in
ambush behind a thicket, who, upon a signal
given by him, rushed out and attacked the
Spaniards with great boldness, and some degree
of martial order. At the first flight of their
arrows, fifteen of the Spaniards were wounded;
but the Indians were struck with suc!h terror
by the sudden explosion of the fire-arms, and
so surprised at the execution done by them, by

Z 2 the

B 0 K the crofs-bows, and by the other weapons of

----' their new enemies, that they fled precipitately.
5s'7. Cordova quitted a country where he had met

with such a fierce reception, carrying off two
prisoners, together with the ornaments of a
small temple, which he plundered in his re-

treat.

HE continued his course towards the welt,

without losing fight of the coast, and dn'the

Campea- sixteenth day arrived at Campeachy. There
chy. the natives received them more hospitably;

but the Spaniards were much surprised, that on
all the extensive coast along which they had
failed, and which they imagined to be a large
island, they had not observed any river'. As
their water began to fail, they advanced, in
hopes of finding a supply; and at length they
discovered the mouth of a river at Potonchan,
some leagues beyond Campeachy.

CORDOVA landed all his troops in order to

protet the sailors while employed in filling the
casks; but notwithitanding this precaution, the
natives ruihed down upon them with such fury,
and in such numbers, that forty-feven of the
Spaniards were killed upon the spot, and one

c See NOTE XXVI.

man only of the whole body escaped unhurt. B o K
Their commander, though wounded in twelve -
different places, dire&ted the retreat with pre- ,s57.
fence of mind equal to the courage with which
he had led them on in the engagement, and with
much difficulty they regained their ships. After
this fatal repulse, nothing remained but to hasten
back to Cuba with their thattered forces. In
their passage thither they fuffered the most ex-
quifite distress for want of water, that men
wounded and sickly, Ihut up in small vessels,
and exposed to the heat of the torrid zone, can
be supposed to endure. Some of them, fink-
ing under these calamities, died by the way;
Cordova, their commander, expired soon after
they landed in Cuba d

NOTWITHSTANDING the disastrous conclu- Voyage of

sion of this expedition, it contributed rather to Grijalva.
animate than to damp a spirit of enterprise
among the Spaniards. They had discovered
an extensive country, situated at no great
distance from Cuba, fertile in appearance, and
poffeffed by a people far superior in improve-
ment to any hitherto known in America.

d Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 17, 18. Hiftor. Verdadera

de la Conquifta de la Nueva Efpana por Bernal Diaz del
Castillo, cap. 1-7. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. Gomara,
c. 52. P. Martyr de Infulis nuper inventis, p. 329.

Z 3 Though

3 O K Though they had carried on little commercial
.-,--*.. intercourse with the natives, they had brought

'ss' off some ornaments of gold, not considerable

in value, but of singular fabric. These cir-
cumftances, related with the exaggeration na-
tural to men desirous of heightening the merit
of their own exploits, were more than fufficient
to excite romantic hopes and expe&tations.
Great numbers offered to engage in a new
expedition. Velasquez, solicitous to dif'in-
guifh himself by some service so meritorious
as might entitle him to claim the government
of Cuba independent of the admiral, not only
encouraged their ardour, but at his own ex-
pence fitted out four ships for the voyage.
Two hundred and forty volunteers, among
whom were several persons of rank and fortune,
embarked in this enterprise. The command
of it was given to Juan de Grijalva, a young
man of known merit and courage, with in-
firu&tions to observe attentively the nature
of the countries which he Ihould discover, to
barter for gold, and, if circumltances were in-
viting, to fettle a colony in some proper fRation.

rsi8. He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth

of April, one thousand five hundred and eighteen.

Discovers The pilot Alaminos held the fame course as in
Spain. the former voyage; but the violence of the

currents carrying the thips to the south, the

first

first land which they made was the island of B oo K
Cozumel, to the east of Yucatan. As all the '--

inhabitants fled to the woods and mountains at iay 3.
the approach of the Spaniards, they made no
long stay there, and without any remarkable
occurrence they reached Potonchan on the
opposite fide of the peninfila. The desire of
avenging their countrymen who had been slain
there, concurred with their ideas of good po-
licy, in prompting them to land, that they
might chastise the Indians of that diftric with
such exemplary rigour, as would strike terror
into all the people around them. But though
they difembarked all their troops, and carried
ashore some field pieces, the Indians fought
with fich courage, that the Spaniards gained
the viaory with difficulty, and were confirmed
in their opinion that the inhabitants of this
country would prove more formidable enemies
than any they had met with in other parts of
America. From Potonchan, they continued
their voyage towards the weft, keeping as near
as possible to the thore, and casting anchor
every evening, from dread of the dangerous
accidents to which they might be exposed in
an unknown sea. During the day, their eyes
were turned continually towards land, with a
mixture of surprise and wonder at the beauty
of the country, as well as the novelty of the

Z 4 objets

BOOK obje&s which they beheld. Many villages

III. -^ were scattered along the coast, in which they
5si8. could diftinguilh houses of stone that appeared

white and lofty at a distance. In the warmth
of their admiration, they fancied these to be
cities adorned with towers and pinacles; and
one of the soldiers happening to remark that
this country resembled Spain in its appearance,
Gr alva, with universal applause, called it New
Sp oin, the name which still distinguishes this
extensive and opulent province of the Spanilh

June 9. empire in Americae. They landed in a river
'abafcQ. which the natives called fabafco, and the fame

of their viaory at Potonchan having reached
this place, the cazique not only received them
amicably, but bestowed presents upon them
of such value, as confirmed the high ideas
which the Spaniards had formed with refpe&
to the wealth and fertility of the country. These
ideas were railed fill higher by what occurred
at the place where they next touched. This
was considerably to the weft of Tabasco, in the

Guaxaca. province since known by the name of Guaxaca.

There they were received with the refpea paid
to superior beings. The people perfumed them
as they landed with incense of gum copal, and
presented to them as offerings the choicest deli-
cacies of their country. They were extremely

e See NOTE XXVII.

fond of trading with their new vifitants, and in B oo K.
fix days the Spaniards obtained ornaments of I--j
gold, of curious workmanship, to the value of 's'8.
fifteen thousand pesos, in exchange for Euro-
pean toys of small price. The two prisoners
whom Cordova had brought from Yucatan,
had hitherto served as interpreters; but as they
did not understand the language of this country,
the Spaniards learned from the natives by
signs, that they were fubjecs of a great ma-
narch called Montezuma, whose dominion ex-
tended over that and many other provinces.
Leaving this place, with which he had so much
reason to be pleased, Grijalva continued his
course towards the weft. He landed on a finall June .9-
island, which he named the Isle of Sacrifices,
because there the Spaniards beheld, for the first
time, the horrid fpe&acle of human virnims,
which the barbarous superstition of the natives
offered to their gods. He touched at another St.Juande
small island, which he called St. Juan de Ulua. ulL'.
From this place he dispatched Pedro de Alva-
rado, one of his officers, to Velasquez, with a
full account of the important discoveries which
he had made, and with all the treasure that he
had acquired by trafficking with the natives.
After the departure of Alvarado, he himself,
with the remaining vessels, proceeded along
the coast as far as the river Panuco, the country

itiU

BOO K still appearing to be well peopled, fertile, and

c opulent.
151i.

Reasons SEVERAL of Grijalva's orfcers contended,
for not
leaving a that it was not enough to have discovered those

one delightful regions, or to have performed, at

their different landing-places, the empty cere-
mony of taking poffeffion of them for the
crown of Castile, and that their glory was in-
complete, unless they planted a colony in some
proper station, which might not only secure
the Spaniih nation a footing in the country,
but, with the reinforcements which they were
certain of receiving, might gradually subjeCt
the whole to the dominion of their sovereign.
But the squadron had now been above five
months at sea; the greatest part of their pro-
vihions was exhausted, and what remained of
their stores so much corrupted by the heat of
the climate, as to be almost unfit for use; they
had loft some men by death; others were
sickly; the country was crowded with people
who seemed to be intelligent as well as brave;
and they were under the government of one
powerful monarch, who could bring them to
aft against their invaders with united force.
To plant a colony under so many circumstances
of disadvantage, appeared a scheme too peril-

ous

ous to be attempted. Grijalva, though poffeffed B ooK

III.

both of ambition and courage, was destitute of .
the superior talents capable of forming or exe- Is5I.
cuting such a great plan. He judged it more
prudent to return to Cuba, having fulfilled the
purpose of his voyage, and accomplilhed all
that the armament which he commanded en-
abled him to perform. He returned to St. Jago
de Cuba on the twenty-fixth of Oaober, from
which he had taken his departure about fix
months before f.

THIS was the longest as well as the molt Prepara.

fuccefsful voyage which the Spaniards had tions for

another

hitherto made in the New World. They had expedition.
discovered that Yucatan was not an island as
they had supposed, but part of the great con-
tinent of America. From Potonchan they had
pursued their course for many hundred miles
along a coast formerly unexplored, stretching
at firnt towards the weft, and then turning to
the north; all the country which they had dif-
covered appeared to be no less valuable than
extensive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba,
Velasquez, transported with success so far be-
yond his most sanguine expectations, immedi-
ately dispatched a person of confidence to carry

f Herrera, dec. I . lib. iii. c. I, 2. 9, 10. Bernal Diaz,

c. 8. 17. Oviedo Hist. lib. xvii. c. 9. 20. Gomara, c. 49.

this

0 o K this important intelligence to Spain, to exhibit

> the rich productions of the countries which had

sx8s. been discovered by his means, and to solicit

such an increase of authority as might enable
and encourage him to attempt the conquest of
them. Without waiting for the return of his
messenger, or for the arrival of Grijalva, of
whom he was become to jealous or diftruftful
that he resolved no longer to employ him, he
began to prepare such a powerful armament,
as might prove equal to an enterprise of so much
danger and importance.

BUT as the expedition upon which Velasquez

was now intent, terminated in conquests of
greater moment than what the Spaniards had
hitherto achieved, and led them to the know-
ledge of a people, who, if compared with thol'e
tribes of America with whom they were hi-
therto acquainted, may be considered as highly
civilised; it is proper to pause before we pro-
ceed to the history of events extremely different
from those which we have. already related, in
order to take a view of the itate of the New
World when first discovered, and to contemplate
the policy and manners of the rude uncultivated
tribes that occupied all the parts of it with
which the Spaniards were at this time acquainted.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N OTES

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O TES

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p.9.

T YRE was situated at such a distance from the

Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea, as made it impracti-

cable to convey commodities from thence to that city
by land carriage. This induced the Phenicians to ren-
der themselves masters of Rhinocrura, or Rhinocolura, the
nearest port in the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
They landed the cargoes which they purchased in
Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at Elath, the fafeft har-
bour in the Red Sea towards the North. Thence they
were carried by lanrd to Rhinocolura, the distance not
being very considerable; and being refhipped in that
port, were transported to Tyre, and distributed over
the world. Strabon. Geogr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi.
p. 1128. Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. Hiftor. Edit. Wef-
felingi, lib. i. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. 14.

T H E Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic mo-

nument of the Carthaginian ikill in naval affairs,

and one of the most curious fragments transmitted to

us

us by antiquity. The learned and induitrious Mr.
Dodwell, in a dissertation prefixed to the Periplus of
Hanno, in the edition of the Minor Geographers pub-
lifhed at Oxford, endeavours to prove that this is a
spurious work, the composition of some Greek, who
assumed Hanno's name. But M. de Montesquieu, in
his 1'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de Bougain-
ville, in a diff ,tation publifihed, tom. xxvi. of the Me-
moires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, &c. have efta-
blifhed its authenticity by arguments which to me
appear unanswerable. Ramufio has accompanied his
translation of this curious voyage with a dissertation
tending to illustrate it. Racolte de Viaggi, vol. i.
p. 1 2. M. de Bougainville has, with great learning
and ability, treated the fame fubjed. It appears that
Hanno, according to the mode of ancient navigation,
undertook this voyage in small vessels, so confitruced,
that he could keep close in with the coast. He failed
from Gades to the island of Cerne in twelve days.
This is probably what is known to the moderns
by the name of the isle of Arguim. It became the
chief station of the Carthaginians on that coast; and
M. de Bougainville contends, that the cisterns found
there are monuments of the Carthaginian power and
ingenuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and still follow-
ing the winding of the coast, he arrived, in seventeen
days, at a promontory which he called The Weft Horn,
probably Cape Palmas. From this he advanced to
another promontory, which he named The South Horn,
and which is manifestly Cape de Tres Puntas, about
five degrees north of the line. All the circumstances
contained in the fthrt abftrad of his journal, which

is

is handed down to us, concerning the appearance and
state of the countries on the coast of Africa? are con-
firmed and illustrated by a comparison with the ac-
counts of modern navigators. Even those circum-
stances, which, from their seeming improbability, have
been produced to invalidate the credibility of his rela-
tion, tend to confirm it. I-Ie obfervcs, that in the
country to the south of Cerne, a profound silence
reigned through the day; but during the night innume-
rable fires were kindled along the banks of the rivers,
and the air refounded with the noise of pipes and
drums, and cries of joy. The fame thing, as Ramufio
observes, still takes place. The exceflive heat obliges
the negroes to take shelter in the woods, or in their
houses, during the day. As soon as the fun lets, they
tfally out, and by torch-light enjoy the pleasure of
music and dancing, in which they fpcnd the night.
Ramus. i. 113. F. In another place, he mentions the
sea as burning with torrents of fire. What occurred
to M. Adanfon, on the fame coast, may explain this.
" As foon," says he, " as the fun dipped beneath the
horizon, and night overspread the earth with darkness,
the sea lent us its friendly light. While the prow of
our vessel ploughed the foaming surges, it seemed to set
them all on fire. Thus we failed in a luminous inclofure,
which surrounded us like a large circle of rays, from
whence darted in the wake of the flhip a long stream of
light." Voy. to Senegal, p. 176. This appearance of
the sea observed by Hunter, has been mentioned as
an argument against the authenticity of the Periplus.
It is, however, a phenomenon very common in warm
climates. Capt. Cook's Second Voyage, vol. i. p. I5.
The Periplus of IHanno has been translated, and every

VoL. I. A a point

point with refpet to it has been illustrated with much
learning and ingenuity in a work published by Don
Pedr. Rodrig. Campomanes, entitled, Antiguedad
maritima de Cartago, con el Periplo de fu General
Hannon traducido e iluftrado. Mad. 1756. 40°.

NOTE III. p. i5.

SONG after the navigation of the Phenicians and of
Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the most intel-

ligent and best informed historian of antiquity, and
particularly distinguished by his attention to geographi-
cal refoarches, aiirms, that it was not known, in his
time, whether Africa was a continued continent,
fLretching to the south, or whether it was encompassed
by the sea. Polybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny the naturalist
asserts, that there can be no communication between
the southern and nothern temperate zones. Plinii Hist.
Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph. 4to. lib. ii. c. 68. If
they had given full credit to the accounts of those voy-
ages, the former could not have entertained such a
doubt, the latter could not have delivered such an opi-
nicn. Strabo mentions the voyage of Eudoxus, but
treats it as a fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. 155 ; and, ac-
cording to his account of it, no other judgment can
be formed w ith refped to it. btrabo seems not to have
known any thing with certainty concerning the form
and iLate of the southern parts of Africa. Geogr. lib.
.;vii. p. 80o. Ptolemy, the most inquisitive and
learned of all the ancient geographers, was equally un-
acquainted with any part of Africa situated a few de-
grees beyond the equinoaial line; for he supposes that
this great continent was not surrounded by the sea, but

7 that

that it ftretched,without interruption, towards the south
pole: and he so far mistakes its true figure, that he
describes the continent as becoming broader and
broader as it advanced towards the south. Ptolemsei
Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9. Brietii Parallela Geogr. veteris
et novae, p. 86.

NOTE IV. p. 23.

A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very strong

and singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients

with refped to the situation of the various parts of the
earth. When Alexander marched along the banks of
the Hydafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which fall
into the Indus, he observed that there were many cro-
codiles in those rivers, and that the country produced
beans of the fame species with those which were com-
mon in Eygpt. From these circumitances, he con-
cluded that he had discovered the source of the Nile,
and prepared a fleet to fail down the Hydafpes to
Eygpt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1020. This amaz-
ing error did not arise from any ignorance of geogra-
phy peculiar to that monarch ; for we are informed by
Strabo, that Alexander applied with particular atten-
tion in order to acquire the knowledge of this science,
and had accurate maps or descriptions of the countries
through which he marched. Lib. ii. p. 120. But,
in his age, the knowledge of the Greeks did not extend
beyond the limits of the Mediterranean.

Aaz

NOTE V. p. 24.

AS the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great

at the mouth of the river Indus, this would

render the phenomenon more formidable to the Greeks.
Varen Geogr. vol. i. p. 251.

NOTE VI. p. 28.

1T is probable that the ancients were seldom induced

to advance so far as the mouth of the Ganges, either

by motives of curiosity, or views of commercial advan-
tage. In consequence of this, their idea concerning
the position of that great river was very erroneous.
Ptolemy places that branch of the Ganges which he
distinguishes by the name of the Great Mouth, in the
hundred and forty-fixth degree of longitude from his
firit meridian in the Fortunate Islands. But its true
longitude, computed from that meridian, is now deter-
mined by astronomical observations to be only a hundred
and five degrees. A geographer so eminent must have
been betrayed into an error of this magnitude by the
imperfetion of the information which he had received
concerning those distant regions; and this affords a
firiking proof of the intercourse with them being ex-
tremely rare. With refped to the countries of India
beyond the Ganges, his intelligence was still more de-
fecive, and his errors more enormous. I thall have
occasion to observe in another place, that he has
placed the country of the Seres, or China, no less than
sixty degrees farther east Jthan its true position. M.
d'Anville, one of the most learned and intelligent of the

modern

modern geographers, has set this matter in a clear light
in two dissertations published in Mem. de l'Academ.
des Infcript. &c. tom. xxxii. p. 573. 604.

NOTE VII. p. 29.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients

were made chiefly by land; those of the moderns

are carried on chiefly by sea. The progress of con-
quest led to the former, that of commerce to the lat-
ter. It is a judicious observation of Strabo, that the
conquests of Alexander the Great made known the
East, those of the Romans opened the Weft, and those
of Mithridates king of Pontus the North. Lib. i.
p. 26. When discovery is carried on by land alone,
its progress must be flow, and its operations confined.
When it is carried on only by sea, its sphere may be
more extensive, and its advances more rapid ; but it
labours under peculiar defeas. Though it may make
known the position of different countries, and afcer-
tain their boundaries as far as there are determined by
the ocean, it leaves us in ignorance with refpeft to
their interior ifate. Above two centuries and a half
have elapsed since the Europeans failed round the
southern promontory of Africa, and have traded in
mosss of its ports; but, in a considerable part of that
great continent, they have done little more than survey
its coasts, and mark its capes and harbours. Its in-
terior regions are in a great measure unknown. The
ancients, who had a very imperfe&t knowledge of its
coasts, except where they are washed by the Mediter-
ranean or Red Sea, were accustomed to penetrate into
its inland provinces, and, if we may rely on the tefti-
mony of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, had ex-

A a 3 plored

plored many parts of it 'now altogether unknown,
Un1lfs both modes of discovery be united, the geogra-
phical knowledge of the earth must remain incomplete
and inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p. 34.

T HE notion of the ancients concerning such an ex<

ceffive degree of heat in the torrid zone, as ren-

dered it uninhabitable, and their persisting in this error
long after they began to have some commercial inter-
course with several parts of Indi- lying within the
tropics, must appear to singular and abfnrd, that it
may not be unacceptable to some of my readers to pro-
duce evidence of their holding this opinion, and to
account for the apparent inconsistence of their theory
with their experience. Cicero, who had bestowed at-
tention upon every part of philosophy known to the
ancients, seems to have believed that the torrid zone
was uninhabitable, and, of consequence, that there
could be no intercourse between the northern and
southern temperate zones. He introduces Africanus
thus addrefling the younger Scipio: " You fee this
earth encompasSed, and as it were bound in by certain
zones, of which, two, at the greatest distance from
each other, and sustaining the opposite poles of heaven,
are frozen with perpetual cold; the middle one, and
th9 lntcft of all, is burnt with the heat of the fun;
two are habitable, the people in the southern one are
antipodes to us, with whom we have no connection."
Somnium Scipionis, c. 6. G minus, a Greek philofo-
pher, contemporary with Cicero, delivers the fame
doctrine, not in a popular work, but in his Eiray~rn

Et ^aivoi@weva , a treatise purely scientific. " When we
fpeak," says he, " of the southern temperate zone,
and its inhabitants, and concerning those who are
called antipodes, it must be always understood, that
we have no certain knowledge or information concern-
ing the southern temperate zone, whether it be inha-
bited or not. But from the spherical figure of the
earth, and the course which the fun holds between the
tropics, we conclude that there is another zone,
situated to the south, which enjoys the fame degree of
temperature with the northern one which we inhabit."
Cap. xiii. p. 31. ap. Petavii Opus de Doatr. Tempor.
in quo Uranologium five Syftemata var. Au'torum.
Amft. i705. vol. iii. The opinion of Pliny the na-
turalift, with refpe1 to both these points, was the
fame : " There are five divisions of the earth, which
are called zones. All that portion which lies near to
the two opposite poles is oppressed with vehement cold,
and eternal frost. There, unblest with the afped of
milder stars, perpetual darkness reigns, or at the ut-
most a feeble light refleaed from surrounding snows.
The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the
fun, is scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery
vapour. Between these torrid and frozen distriCts lie
two other portions of the earth, which are temperate;
but, on account of the burning region interposed,
there can be no communication between them. Thus
Heaven has deprived us of three parts of the earth."
Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo delivers his opinion to the fame
effet, in terms no less explicit: " The portion of
the earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid
zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib. ii.

Aa 4 . I5..1,

p. 154. To these I might add the authority of many
other refpeaable philosophers and historians of an.
tiquity. -

IN order to explain the sense in which this docrine

was generally received, we may observe, that Parmeni-
des, as we are informed by Strabo, was the first who
divided the earth into five zones, and he extended the
limits of the zone which he supposed to be uninha-
bitable on account of heat, beyond the tropics. Ari-
ftotle, as we learn likewise from Strabo, fixed the
boundaries of the different zones in the fame manner
as they are defined by modern geographers. But the
progress of discovery having gradually demonfirated
that several regions of the earth which lay within the
tropics were not only habitable, but populous and
fertile, this induced later geographers to circumscribe
the limits of the torrid zone. It is not easy to afcer-
tain with precision the boundaries which they allotted
to it. From a passage in Strabo, who, as far as I
know, is the only author of antiquity from whom we
receive any hint concerning this fubjeat, I should con-
jeaure, that those who calculated according to the
measurement of the earth by Eratosthenes, supposed
the torrid zone to comprehend near sixteen degrees,
about eight on each fide of the equator; whereas such
as followed the computation of Pofidonius allotted
about twenty-rour degrees, or somewhat more than
twelve degrees on each fide of the equator to the torrid
zone. Strabo, lib. ii. p. 151. According to the former
opinion, about two-thirds of that portion of the earth
which8ies between the tropics was considered as habit.

able ;

able; according to the latter, about one half of it.
With this reftridion, the dotrine of the ancients
concerning the torrid zone appears less absurd; and we
can conceive the reason of their asserting this zone to be
uninhabitable, even after they had opened a communi-
cation with several places within the tropics. When
men of science spoke of the torrid zone, they confider-
ed it as it was limited by the definition of geographers
to sixteen, or at the utmost to twenty-four degrees;
and as they knew almost nothing of the countries
nearer to the equator, they might still suppose them to
be uninhabitable. In loose and popular discourse, the
name of the torrid zone continued to be given to all
that portion of the earth which lies within the tropics.
Cicero seems to have been unacquainted with those
ideas of the later geographers, and adhering to the
division of Parmenides, describes the torrid zone as
the largest of the five. Some of the ancients rejeaed
the notion concerning the intolerable heat of the torrid
zone as a popular error. This, we are told by Plu-
tarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we learn
from Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Polybius had adopt-
ed the fame opinion, lib. ii. 154. Ptolemy seems to
have paid no regard to the ancient dodrine and
opinions concerning the torrid zone.

NOTE IX. p. 60.

THE court of inquisition, which effectually checks

a spirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improve-

ment, wherever it is established, was unknown in Por-
tugal in the fifteenth century, when the people of that
.kingdom began their voyages of discovery. More than

a cen.

tury elapsed, before it was introduced by John III,

Iwihofe reign commenced A.D. 1521.

NOTE X. p. 7.

A N intlance of this is related by Hackluyt, upon

-. the authority of the Portuguese historian Garcia
de Refende. Some English merchants having resolved
to open a trade with the coast of Guinea, John II. of
Portugal dispatched ambassadors to Edward IV., in
order to lay before him the right which he had acquired
by the Pope's bull to the dominion of that country,
and to requefit of him to prohibit his fubjeas to prose-
cute their intended voyage. Edward was so much fa-
tisfied with the exclusive title of the Portuguese, that
he ifllued his orders in the terms which they desired.
"Hackluyt, Navigations, Voyages, and Traffics of the
Englif, vol. ii. part ii. p. 2.

NOTE XI. p. 85.

T HE time of Columbus's birth may be nearly

ascertained by the following circumstances. It

appears from the fragment of a letter, addressed by him
to Ferdinand and Isabella, A. D. ISoI, that he had,
at that time, being engaged forty years in a sea-faring
life. In another letter, he informs them, that he went
to sea at the age of fourteen; from those faas it fol-
lows, that he was born A. D. 1447. Life of Chriit.
Columbus, by his son Don Ferdinand. Churchill's
Clicldion of Voyages, vol, ii. p. 484, 485.

NOTE

NOTE XII. p. 94.

T HE spherical figure of the earth was known to the

ancient geographers. They invented the method,

till in use, of computi , the longitude and latitude
of difierent places. According to their dodrine, the
equator, or imaginary line which encompasses the earth,
contained three hundred and sixty degrees; these they
divided into twenty-four parts, or hours, each equal
to fifteen degrees. The country of the Seres or Sinta,
being the farthest part of India known to the ancients,
was supposed, by M\Iarinus Tyrius, the most eminent
of the ancient geographers before Ptolemy, to be sis-
teen hours, or two hundred and twenty-five degrees to
the east of the first meridian, pafling through the For-
tunate Islands. Ptolemaei Geogr. lib. i. c. Ii. If
this fuppofirion was well-founded, the country of the
Seres, or China, was only nine hours, or one hundred
and thirty-five degrees weft from the Fortunate or
Canary I.lands; and the navigation, in that diretion,
was much fliorter than by the course which the Portu-
guefe were pursuing. MI\arco Polo, in his travels, had
deferibed countries, particularly the island of Cipango
or Zipangri, supposed to be Japan, considerably to the
east of any part of Asia known to the ancients. M1ar-
cus Paulus de Region. Oriental. lib. ii. c. 70. lib.
iii. c. 2. Of course, this country, as it extended fur-
ther to the east, was still nearer to the Canary Islands.
The conclusions of Columbus, though drawn from
inaccurate observations, were just. If the fuppofi-
$ions of 1Marinus had been well founded, and if the

countries,

countries, which Marco Polo visited, had been situated
to the east of those whose longitude Marinus had afcer-
tained, the proper and nearest course to the East Indies
must have been to steer direaly weft. Herrera, dec. I.
lib. i. c. 2. A more extensive knowledge of the globe
has now discovered the great error of Marinus, in sup-
poffug China to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and
twenty-five degrees east from tile Canary Islands, and
that even Ptolemy was mistaken, when he reduced
the longitude of China to twelve hours, or one hun-
dred and eighty degrees. The longitude of the western
frontier of that vast empire is seven hours, or one
hundred and fifteen degrees from the meridian of the
Canary Islands. But Columbus followed the light
which his age afforded, and relied upon the authority
of writers, who were, at that time, regarded as the
inftrudors and guides of mankind in the science of
geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 123.

A S the Portuguese, in making their discoveries, did

not depart far from the coast of Africa, they con-

cluded that birds, whose flight they observed with
great attention, did not venture to any considerable
distance from land. In the infancy of navigation, it
was not known, that birds often frcetch their flight to
an immense distance from any thore. In failing to-
wards the Weft-Indian islands, birds are often seen at
the distance of two hundred leagues from the nearest
coait. Sloane's Nat. Hilt. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30.
Catefby saw an owl at sea, when the ship was fix
hundred leagues distant from land. Nat. Hist. of

Carolina,

Carolina, pref. p. 7. HI-ift. Naturelle de M. Buffon,
tom. xvi. p. 32. From which it appears, that this
indication of land, on which Columbus seems to have
relied with some confidence, was extremely uncertain.
This observation is confirmed by Captain Cook, the
most extensive and experienced navigator of any age or
nation. " No one yet knows (says he) to what distance
any of the oceanic birds go to lea; for my own part,
I do not believe that there is one in the whole tribe
that can be relied on in pointing out the vicinity of
land." Voyage towards the South Pole, vol. i.
P. 275.

NOTE XIV. p. 138.

IN a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Ifa-

bella, he describes one of the harbours in Cuba,

with all the enthusiastic admiration of a discoverer.--
" I discovered a river which a galley might easily
enter; the beauty of it induced me to found, and I
found from five to eight fathoms of water. Having
proceeded a considerable way up the river, every thing
invited me to fettle there. The beauty of the river,
the clearness of the water, through which I could fee
the sandy bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of dif-
ferent kinds, the tallest and finest I had seen, and an
infinite number of other large and flourishing trees,
the birds, and the verdure of the plains, are so wonder-
fully beautiful, that this country excels all others as
far as the day surpasses the night in brightness and
splendour, so that I often said, that it would be in vain
for me to attempt to give your, highnesses a full ac-

count

count of it, for neither my tongue nor my pen could
come up to the truth, and indeed I am so much amaz-
ed at the fight of such beauty, that I know not how to
describe it." Life of Columb. c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. 143,

T HE account which Columbus gives of the huma-

nity and orderly behaviour of the natives on this

occasion is very triking. " The king (says he, in a
letter to Ferdinand and Isabella) having been informed
of our misfortune, expressed great grief for our loss,
and immediately sent aboard all the people in the place
in many large canoes; we soon unloaded the ship of
every thing that was upon deck, as the king gave us
great assistance: he himself, with his brothers and
relations, took all possible care that every thing fould
be properly done both aboard and on shore. And,
from time to time, he sent some of his relations weep-
ing, to beg of me not to be dejedted, for he would
give me all that he had. I can aflire your highnefles,
that so much care would not have been taken in fecur-
ing our effeds in any part of Spain, as all our pro-
perty was put together in one place near his palace,
until the houses which he wanted to prepare for the
custody of it, were emptied. He immediately placed
a guard of armed men, who watched during the whole
night, and those on shore lamented as if they had been
much interested in our loss. The people are so affec-
tionate, so traftable, and so peaceable, that I swear to
your highnesses, that there is not a better race of men,
nOT a better country in the world. They love their

neighbour

neighbour as themselves; their conversation is the
sweetest and mildest in the world, cheerful, and al-
ways accompanied with a smile. And although it is
true that they go naked, yet your highnefles may be
assured that they have many very commendable customs;
the king is served with great itate, and his behaviour
is so decent, that it is pleasant to fee him, as it is
likewise to observe the wonderful memory which there
people have, and their desire of knowing every thing,
which leads them to inquire into its causes and es-
fects." Life of Columbus, c. 32. It is probable that
the Spaniards were indebted for this officious attention,
to the opinion which the Indians entertained of them
as a superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. I52.

EVERY monument of such a man as Columbus

is valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdi-

nand and Isabella, describing what passed on this oc-
cafion, exhibits a most striking picture of his intre-
pidity, his humanity, his prudence, his public spirit,
and courtly address. " I would have been less con-
cerned for this misfortune, had I alone been in dan-
ger, both because my life is a debt that I owe to the
Supreme Creator, and because I have at other times
been exposed to the most imminent hazard. But what
gave me infinite grief and vexation was, that after it
had pleased our Lord to give me faith to undertake
this enterprize, in which I had now been so fuccefsful,
that my opponents would have been convinced, and
the glory of your highnesses, and the extent of your
territory increased by me; it flould please the Divine

Majesty

Majesty to stop all by my death. All this would
have been more tolerable, had it not been attended
with the loss of those men whom I had carried with
me, upon promise of the greatest prosperity, who
feeing themselves in such diftrcfs, cursed not only
their coming along with me, but that fear and awe
of me, which prevented them from returning as
they often had resolved to have done. But besides
all this, my sorrow was greatly increased, by recol-
leating that I had left my two sons at school at Cor-
dova, destitute of friends, in a foreign country, when
it could not in all probability be known that I had
done such services as might induce your highnesses
to remember them. And though I comforted myself
with the faith that our Lord would not permit that,
which tended so much to the glory of his church, and
which I had brought about with so much trouble, to
remain imperfedt, yet I considered, that on account of
my fins, it was his will to deprive me of that glory,
which I might have attained in this world. While in
this confused slate, I thought on the good fortune
which accompanies your highnesses, and imagined,
that although I should perish, and the veifel be loft, it
was possible that you might somehow come to the
knowledge of my voyage, and the success with which
it was attended. For that reason I wrote upon parch-
ment with the brevity which the situation required,
that I had discovered the lands which I promised, in
how many days I had done it, and what course I had
followed. I mentioned the goodness of the country,
the chara&ter of the inhabitants, and that your high-
neffes fubjets were left in poffielion of all that I had

.5 discovered.

discovered. Having sealed this writing, I addrelfed it
to your highnesses, and promised a thousand ducats to
any person who should deliver it fca!ed, so that if any
foreigners found it, the promised reward might prevail
on them not to give the information to another. I
then caused a great calk to be brought to me, and
wrapping up the parchment in an oiled cloth, and as-
terwards in a cake of wax, I put it into the cask, and
having ftopt it well, I cast it into the sea. All the
men believed that it was some aft of devotion. Ima-
gining that this might never chance to be taken up, as
the ships approached nearer to Spain, I made another
packet like the firift, and placed it at the top of the
poop, so that if the ship funk, the cask remaining
above water might be committed to the guidance of
fortune."

NOTE XVII. p. 157.

SOME Spanish authors, with the meanness of na-

tional jealousy, have endeavoured to detracT from

the glory of Columbus, by insinuating that he was
led to the discovery of the New World, not by his
own inventive or enterprising genius, but by infor-
mation which he had received. According to their
account, a vessel having been driven from its course
by easterly winds, was carried before them far to the
weft, and landed on the coast of an unknown country,
from which it returned with difficulty; the pilot, and
three sailors, being the only persons who survived the
difftreffes which the crew fuffered, from want of pro-
visions, and fatigue in this long voyage. In a fevw days

VOL. I. Bb after

after their arrival, all the four died ; but the pilot
having been received into the house of Columbus, his
intimate friend, disclosed to him, before his death,
the secret of thge discovery which he had accidentally
made, and left him his papers containing a journal of
the voyage, which served as a guide to Columbus in
his undertaking. Gomara, as far as I know, is the
first author who published this story, Hist. c. 13.
Every circumfiance is destitute of evidence to support
it. Neither the name of the vessel nor its destination
is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one of
the sea-port towns in Andalusia, and was failing either
to the Canaries, or to Madeira ; others, that it was a
Bifcayner in its way to England ; others, a Portuguese
ship trading on the coast of Guinea. The name of
the pilot is alike unknown, as well as that of the port
in which he landed on his return. According to some,
it was in Portugal; according to others, in Madeira,
or the Azores. The year in which this voyage was
made is no less uncertain. Monfon's Nay. Traces.
Churchill. iii. 371. No mention is made of this
pilot or his discoveries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet.
Martyr, the contemporaries of Columbus. Herrera,
with his usual judgment, passes over it in silence.
Oviedo takes notice of this report, but considers it as
a tale fit only to amuse the vulgar. Hist. lib. ii. c. 2.
As Columbus held his course diretly welft from the
Canaries, and never varied it, some later authors have
supposed, that this uniformity is a proof of his being
guided by some previous information. But they do
eaot recolled the principles on which he founded all
his hopes of success, that by holding a westerly course,

he muff certainly arrive at those regions of the east
described by the ancients. His firm belief of his own
fyfiem led him to take that course, and to pursue it
without deviation.

THE Spaniards are not the only people who have

called in quefition Columbus's claim to the honour of
having discovered America. Some German authors
aferibe this honour to Martin Behaim, their country-
man. He was of the noble family of the Behaims of
Schwartzbach, citizens of the first rank in the Im-
perial town of Nuremberg. Having studied under the
celebrated John Muller, better known by the name of
Regiomontanus, he acquired such knowledge of cos-
mography, as excited a desire of exploring those regions,
the situation and qualities of which he had been ac-
cuftomed, under that able master, to investigate and de-
scribe. Under the patronage of the Duchess of Bur-
gundy he repaired to Lisbon, whither the fame of the
Portuguese discoveries invited all the adventurous fpi-
rits of the age. There, as we learn from Herman
Schedel, of whose Chronicon Mundi a German tranfla-
tion was printed at Nuremberg A. D. 1493, his merit
as a cosmographer raised him, in conjunciion with
Diego Cano, to the command of a squadron fitted out
for discovery in the year 1483. In that voyage, he is
said to have discovered the kingdom of Congo. He
fettled in the island of Fayal, one of the Azores, and
was a particular friend of Columbus. Herrera, dec. I.
lib. i. c. 2. Magellan had a terrcftrial globe made by
Behaim, on which he demonfitrated the course that he
purposed to hold in search of the communication with

B b 2 the

the South Sea, which he afterwards discovered. Gomara
Hilf. c. 19. Herrera, dec. ix. lib. ii. c. 19. In the
year 1492, Behaim visited his relations in Nuremberg,
and left with them a map drawn with his own hand,
which is still preferved' among the archives of the
family. Thus far the story of Martin Behaim seems to
be well authenticated ; but the account of his having
discovered any part of the New World appears to be
merely conjecural.

IN the firfit edition, as I had at that time hardly

any knowledge of Behaim but what I derived from a
frivolous Dissertation de vero Novi Orbis Inventore,
published at Francfort, A. D. 1714, by Jo. Frid.
Stuvenius, I was induced, by the au.thority of Herrera,
to fiuppofe that Behaim was not a native of Germany;
but from more full and accurate information, com-
municated to me by the learned Dr. John Reinold
Forster, I am now satisfied that I was mistaken. Dr.
Forifter has been likewise so good as to favour me with
a copy of Behaim's map, as published by Doppelmayer
il his Account of the Mathematicians and Artists of
Nuremberg. From this map, the imperfecTion of
cosmographical knowledge at that period is manifest,
Hardly one place is laid down in its true situation.
Nor can I discover from it any reason to suppose that
Behaim had the least knowledge of any region in Ame-
rica. lie delineates, indeed, an island to which he
gives the name of St. Brandon. This, it is imagined,
may be fomre part of Guiana, fuppofc-l at first to be an
island. He places it in thc fame latitude with the
Cape Verd illes, and I suspect it to be an imaginary

illand

island which has been admitted into some ancient
mnaps on no better authority than the legend of the
Irish St. Brandon or Brendan, whose ltory is so child-
ifhly fabulous as to be unworthy of any notice.
Girald. Cambrienfis ap. Miflingham Florilegium Sanc-
torum, p. 427.

THE pretensions of the Welsh to the discovery of

America seem not to reft on a foundation much more
solid. In the twelfth century, according to Powell,
a dispute having arisen among the sons of Owen
Guyneth, king of North-Wales, concerning the fuc-
cession to his crown, Madoc, one of their number,
weary of this contention, betook himself to sea in quest
of a more quiet settlement. He steered due weft,
leaving Ireland to the north, and arrived in an un-
known country, which appeared to him so desirable,
that he returned to Wales, and carried thither several
of his adherents and companions. This is said to
have happened about the year I170, and after that, he
and his colony were heard of no more. But it is to
be observed, that Powell, on whose testimony the au-
thenticity of this story rests, published his history
above four centuries from the date of the event which
he relates. Among a people as rude and as illiterate
as the Welsh at that period, the memory of a tranfac-
tion so remote must have been very imperfetly pre-
served, and would require to be confirmed by some
author of greater credit, and nearer to the era of Ma-
doc's voyage than Powell. Later antiquaries have
indeed appealed to the testimony of Meredith ap Rhees,

Bb 3 a Wclflh

a Welsh bard, who died A. D. 1477. But he too
lived at fuach a distance of time from the event, that he
cannot be considered as a witness of much more credit
than Powell. Besides, his verses, published by Hak-
luyt, vol. iii. p. I. convey no information, but that
Madoc, diffatisfied with his domestic situation, em.
ployed himself in searching the ocean for new poflef-
fions. But even if we admit the authenticity of
Powell's fiory, it does not follow that the unknown
country which Madoc discovered by flteering weft, in
such a course as to leave Ireland to the north, was any
part of America. The naval skill of the Welsh in the
twelfth century was hardly equal to such a voyage.
If he made any discovery at all, it is more probable
that it was Madeira, or some other of the western isles.
The affinity of the Welsh language .with some dialefts
spoken in America, has been mentioned as a circum-
stance which confirms the truth of Madoc's vdyage.
But that afinity has been observed in so few inftan-
ces, and in some of there is so obscure, or so fanciful,
that no conlclufion can be drawn from the casual re-
semblance of a small number of words. There is a
bird, which, as far as is yet known, is found only on
the coasts of South America, from Port Desire to the
Straits of Magellan. It is distinguished by the name
of Penguin. This word in the Welsh language figni-
fies White-head. Almost all the authors who favour
the pretensions of the Welsh to the discovery of Ame-
rica, mention this as an irrefragable proof of the affi-
nity of the Welsh language with that spoken in this
region of America. But Mr. Pennant, who has given
a scientific description of the Penguin, observes, that

al{

all the birds of this genus have black heads, " so that
we must rcfign every hope (adds he) founded on this
hypothesis of retrieving the Cambrian race in the New
World." Philof. Tranfaa. vol. lviii. p. 91, &c.
Bcfide this, if the Welsh, towards the close of the
twelfth century; had fettled in any part of America,
some remains of the Christian doarine and rites must
have been found among their descendants, when they
were discovered about three hundred years poffterior to
their migration; a period so (hort, that, in the course
of it, we cannot well suppose that all European ideas
and arts would be totally forgotten. Lord Lyttelton,
in his notes to the fifth book of his History of Henry II.
p. 371. has examined what Powell relates concerning
the discoveries made by Madoc, and invalidates the
truth of his flory by other arguments of great weight.

THE prctenfions of the Norwegians to the dif-

covery of America, seem to' be better founded than
those of the Germans or XWelfh. The inhabitants of
Scandinavia were remarkable in the middle ages for
the boldness and extent of their maritime excursions.
In 874, the Norwegians discovered, and planted a
colony in Iceland. In 982, they discovered Green-
land, and established settlements there. From that,
some of their navigators proceeded towards the weft,
and discovered a country more inviting than those
horrid regions with which they were acquainted. Ac-
cording to their representation, this country was sandy
on the coasts, but in the interior parts level and
covered with wood, on which account they gave it

B b 4 the

the name of Helle-land, and Mark-land, and having
afterwards found some plants of the vine which bore
grapes, they called it Win-land. The credit of this
story rcfts, as far as I know, on the authority of the
saga, or chronicle of king Olaus, composed by Snorro
Sturlonides, or SturlSfons, published by Perinfkliold at
Stockholm A. D. 1697. As Snorro was born in the
year 179, his chronicle might be compiled about two
centuries after the event which he relates. His ac-
count of the navigation and discoveries of Biorn, and
his companion Lief, is a very rude confused tale,
p. o104. Ir. 326. It is impoflible to discover from
him, what part of America it was in which the Nor-
wegians landed. According to his account of the
length of the days and nights, it muff have been as
far north as the fifty-eighth degree of latitude, on
some part of the coast of Labradore, approaching near
to the entry of Hudfon's Straits. Grapes, certainly,
are not the produ&ion of that country. Torfeus
supposes that there is an error in the text, by reatify-
ing of which, the place where the Norwegians landed
may be supposed to be situated in latitude 49°. But
neither is that the region of the vine in America.
From perusing Snorro's tale, I thould think that the
situation of Newfoundland corresponds best with that
of the country discovered by the Norwegians. Grapes,
however, are not the produaion of that barren island.
Other conjectures are mentioned by M. Mallet, In-
trod. Il'Hift. de Dannem. 175, &c. I am not fuffi-
ciently acquainted with the literature of the norrh, to
examine them, It seems manifest, that if the Nor-

wegians

wegians did discover any part of America at that
period, their attempts to plant colonies proved unfuc-
cefsful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. 159.

PETER MARTYR, ab Anglcria, a Milanese

gentleman, residing at that time in the court of

Spain, whose letters contain an account of the tranf-
adions of that period, in the order wherein they oc-
curred, describes the sentiments with which he himself
and his learned correspondents were affected, in very
striking terms. " Prza lItitia profiluiffe te, vixque a
lachrymis prme gaudio temperaffe, quando literas ad-
fpexifti meas quibus, de antipodum orbe latenti hac-
tenus, te certiorem feci, mi fuaviflime Pomponi, in-
finuafli. Ex tuis ipfe literis colligo, quid fenferis.
Senfifti autem, tantique rem fecifti, quanti virum fum-
ma dolrina infignitum decuit. Quis namque cibus
fublimibus priefari poteft ingeniis, ifto fuavior ? quod
condimentum gratius ? A me facio conjecuram.
Beari fentio spiritus meos, quando accitos alloquor
prudentes aliquos ex his qui ab ea redeunt provincia.
Implicent animos pecuniarum cumulis augendis miferi
avari, libidinibus obfcoeni; noiftras nos mentes, post-
quam Deo pleni aliqu.ndo fuerimus, contemplando,
hujufcemodi rerum notitia demulciamus." Epift. 152.
Pomponio Laeto.

NOTE XIX. p. 175.

O firmly were men of fcicnce, in that age, perfuad-

'- ed that the countries which Columbus had dif-
covered were connecaed with the East Indies, that

Bernaldes,

Bernaldes, the Cura de los Palacios, who seems to
have been no inconsiderable proficient in the knowledge
of cosmography, contends that Cuba was not an island,
but a part of the continent, and united to the domi-
nions of the Great Khan. This he delivered as his
opinion to Columbus himself, who was his guest for
some time on his return from his second voyage; and
he supports it by several arguments, mostly founded
on the authority of Sir John Mandeville, MS. penes
rte. Antonio Gallo, who was secretary to the ma-
giftracy of Geno' towards the close of the fifteenth
century, published a flort account of the navigations
and discoveries of his countryman Columbus, annexed
to his Opufcula Hiftorica de rebus populi Genuenfis;
in which he informs us, from letters of Columbus
which he himfclf had seen, that it was his opinion,
founded upon nautical observations, that one of the
islands he had discovered was distant only two hours
or thirty degrees from Cattigara, which, in the charts
of the geographers of that age, was laid down, upon
the authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii. c. 3. as the most
easterly place in Asia. From this he concluded, that
if some unknown continent did not obitrudt the na-
vigation, there must be a flort and easy access, by
holding a westerly course, to this extreme region of
the East. Muratori Scriptores Rer. Italicarum,
vol. xxii. p. 304.

NOTE

NOTE XX. p. 182.

BERNALDES, the Cura or Rector de los Palacios,

a contemporary writer, says, that five hundred of

these captives were sent to Spain, and fold publickly
in Seville as slaves ; but that, by the change of climate,
and their inability to bear the fatigue of labour, they all
died in a short time. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p. 199.

C OLUMBUS seems to have formed some very

singular opinions concerning the countries which

he had now discovered. The violent swell and agita-
tion of the waters on the coast of Trinidad led him to
conclude this to be the highest part of the terraqueous
globe, and he imagined that various circumstances
concurred in proving that the sea was here visibly
elevated, Having adopted this erroneous principle,
the apparent beauty of the country induced him to fall
in with a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. 102. that
the terrcftrial paradise was the highest land in the earth;
and he believed that he had been so fortunrnte as to
discover this happy abode. Nor ought we to think it
firange that a person of so much sagacity should be in-
fluenced by the opinion or reports of such a fabulous
author as Mandeville. Columbus and the other dif-
coverers were obliged to follow such guides as they
could find; and it appears from several passages in the
manuscript of Andr, Bernaldes, the friend of Colum-
bus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was given
to the testimony of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldes
frequently quotes him, and always with refpe&c.

NOTE

NOTE XXII. p. 214.

IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara nor Oviedo,

the most ancient Spanish historians of America, nor

Herrera, confider Ojeda, or his companion Vespucci,
as the first discoverers of the continent of America.
They uniformly ascribe this honour to Columbus.
Some have supposed that national resentment against
Vespucci, for deserting the service of Spain, and en-
tering into that of Portugal, may have prompted these
writers to conceal the actions which he performed.
But Martyr and Benzoni, both Italians, could not be
warped by the fame prejudice. Martyr was a contem-
porary author; he resided in the court of Spain, and
had the best opportunity to be exaCtly informed with
refpea to all public tranfadtions; and yet, neither in
his Decads, the first general history published of the
New World, nor in his Epistles, which contain an
account of all the remarkable events of his time, does
he ascribe to Vespucci the honour of having first dif-
covered the continent. Benzoni went as an adven-
turer to America in the year 1541, and resided there
a considerable time. He appears to have been animated
with a warm zeal for the honour of Italy, his native
country, and yet does not mention the exploits and
discoveries of Vespucci. Herrera, who compiled his
general history of America from the most authentic re-
cords, not only follows those early writers, but accuses
Vespucci of falfifying the dates of both the voy. ges
which he made to the New World, and of confound-
ing the one with the other, in order that he might ar-
rogate to himself the glory of having discovered the

continent.

continent. Her. dec. i. lib. iv. c. 2. He asserts,
that in a judicial inquiry into this matter by the royal
fiscal, it was proved by the testimony of Ojeda himself,
that he touched at Hispaniola when returning to Spain
from his first voyage; whereas Vespucci gave out that
they returned direaly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria,
and touched at Hispaniola only in their second voyage;
and that he had finished the voyage in five months;
whereas, according to Vefpucci's account, he had
employed seventeen months in performing it. Viag-
gio primo de Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag. fecundo,
p. 45. Herrera gives a more full account of this in-
quest in another part of his Decads, and to the fame
effect. Her. dec. I. lib. vii. c. 5. Columbus was in
Hispaniola when Ojeda arrived there, and had by that
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed
Ojeda's attempt to excite a new infurretion, and, of
consequence, his voyage must have been posterior to
that of the admiral. Life of Columbus, c. 84. Ac-
cording to Vefpucci's account, he set out on his firfl
voyage May Ioth, 1497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At
that time Columbus was in the court of Spain prepar-
ing for his voyage, and seems to have enjoyed a con-
fiderable degree of favour. The affairs of the Nenw
World were at this junature under the dircaion of
Antonio Torres, a friend of Columbus. It is not
probable, that at that period a commiflion would be
granted to another person, to anticipate the admiral,
by undertaking a voyage which he himfeif intended to
perform. Fonseca, who patronized Ojeda, and granted
the licence for his voyage, was not recalled to court,
and reinstated in the direction of Indian affairs, until

the

thle death of prince John, which happened September
1497, P. MIartyr, Ep. 182. several months posterior
to the time at which Vespucci pretends to have set out
upon his voyage. A life of Vespucci was published
at Florence by the Abate Bandini, A. D. 1745, 4to.
It is a work of no merit, written with little judgment,
and less candour. He contends for his countryman's
title to the discovery of the continent with all the blind
zeal of national partiality, but produces no new evi-
dence to support it. We learn from him that Vef-
pucci's account of his voyage was publified as early as
the year 15Io, and probably sooner. Vita di Am.
Vefp. p. 52. At what time the name of AMERICA
came to be first given to the New World, is not cer-
tain.

NOTE XXIII. p. 273.

T HE form employed on this occasion served as a

model to the Spaniards in all their subsequent

conquests in America. It is so extraordinary in its
nature, and gives us such an idea of the proceedings
of the Spaniards, and the principles upon which they
founded their right to the extensive dominions which
they acquired in the New World, that it well merits
the attention of the reader. " I Alonfo de Ojeda,
servant of the most high and powerful kings of Castile
and Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations, their
meflenger and captain, notify to you and declare, in
as ample form as I am capable, that God our Lord,
who is one and eternal, created the heaven and the
earth, and one man and one woman, of whom you and

we,

we, and all the men who have been or shall be in the
world, are descended. But as it has come to pass,
through the number of generations during more than
five thousand years, that they have been dispersed into
different parts of the world, and are divided into vari-
ous kingdoms and provinces, because one country was
not able to contain them, nor could they have found
in one the means of subsistence and preservation ;
therefore God our Lord gave the charge of all those
people to one man, named St. Peter, whom he confli-
tuted the lord and head of all the human race, that
all men, in whatever place they are born, or in what-
ever faith or place they are educated, might yield obe-
dience unto him. He hath fubjeaed the whole world
to his jurifdidion, and commanded him to establish
his residence in Rome, as the most proper place for
the government of the world. He likewise promifcd
and gave him power to establish his authority in every
other part of the world, and to judge and govern all
Christians, Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and all other
people, of whatever sea or faith they may be. To
him is given the name of Pope, which signifies admir-
able, great father and guardian, because he is the fa-
ther and governor of all men. Those who lived in
the time of this holy father obeyed and acknowledged
him as their lord and king, and the superior of the
universe. The fame has been observed with refped to
them who, since his time, have been chosen to the
pontificate. Thus it now continues, and will con-
tinue to the end of the world.

<" QNE

" ONE of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath

made a grant of these islands, and of the Tierra Firme
of the ocean sea, to the Catholic kings of Castile,
Don Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, of glorious me-
mory, and their successors, our fovcreigns, with all
they,, contain, as is more fully expressed in certain
deeds passed upon that occasion, which you may fee,
if you desire it. Thus his majesty is king and lord of
these islands, and of the continent, in virtue of this
donation; and, as king and lord aforesaid, most of
the islands to which his title hath been notified, have
recognized his majesty, and now yield obedience and
fubjetion to him as their lord, voluntarily and with-
out resistance; and instantly as soon as they received
information, they obeyed the religious men sent by
the king to preach to them, and to inftrua them in
our holy faith; and all these, of their own free will,
without any recompence or gratuity, became Chris-
tians, and continue to be so; and his majesty having
received them graciously under his protection, has
commanded that they thould be treated in the fame
manner as his other fubjedts and vassals. You are
bound and obliged to a& in the fame manner. There-
fore I now entreat and require you to confider atten-
tively what I have declared to you ; and that you may
more perfectly comprehend it, that you take such time
as is reasonable, in order that you may acknowledge
the Church as the superior and guide of the universe,
and likewise the holy father called the Pope, in his
own right, and his majesty by his appointment, as
king and sovereign lord of these islands, and of the
Tierra Firme; and that you consent that the aforesaid

5 holy

holy fathers ihall declare and preach to you the doc-
trines above mentioned. If you do this, you a&
well, and perform that to which you are bound and
obliged; and his majesty, and I in his name, will
receive you with love and kindness, and will leave
you, your wives and children, free and exempt from
servitude, and in the enjoyment of all you possess,
in the fame manner as the inhabitants of the islands.
Besides this, his majefity will bestow upon you many
privileges, exemptions, and rewards. But if you
will not comply, or maliciously delay to obey my
injunction, then, with the help of God, I will enter
your country by force, I will carry on war against
you with the utmost violence, I will fubjeA you to
the yoke of obedience to the church and the king, I
will take your wives and children, and will make
them slaves, and fell or dispose of them according
to his majefty's pleasure; I will seize your goods,
and do you all the mischief in my power, as rebellious
fubjeEls, who will not acknowledge or submit to
their lawful sovereign. And I protest, that all the
bloodshed and calamities which shall follow are to be
imputed to you, and not to his majesty, or to me,
or the gentlemen who serve under me; and as I have
now made this declaration and requisition unto you,
I require the notary here present to grant me a cer-
tificate of this, subscribed in proper form." Herrera,
dec. x. lib. vii. c. 14.

VOL. I. NOTE

C c

NOTE XXIV. p. 292.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, observes,

that of the hundred and ninety men whom he

took with him, there were never above eighty fit
for service at one time. So much did they fuffer
from hunger, fatigue, and sickness. Herrera, dec. i.
lib. x. c. 16. P. Mart, decad. 226.

NOTE XXV. p. 308.

SON SECA, bishop of Palencia, the principal

direaor of American affairs, had eight hundred

Indians in property; the commendator Lope de
Conchillos, his chief associate in that department,
eleven hundred; and other favourites had considerable
numbers. They sent overseers to the islands, and
hired out those slaves to the planters. Herr. dec. i.
lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p.340.

SHOUGH America is more plentifully supplied

with water than the other regions of the globe,

there is no river or stream of water in Yucatan.
This peninsula proje6ts from the continent a hundred
leagues, but, where broadest, does not extend above
twenty-five leagues. It is an extensive plain, not only
without mountains, but almost without any inequality of
ground. The inhabitants are supplied with water from

14. pits,

pits, and wherever they dig them, find it in abund-
ance. It is probable, from all those circumstances,
that this country was formerly covered by the sea.
Herrerae Defcriptio Indik Occidentalis, p. 14.
Hiftoire Naturelle, par M. de Buffon, tom. i.
P- 593-

NOTE XXVII. p. 344.i

M. CLAVIGERO censures me for having repre-

fented the Spaniards who failed with Cordova

and Grijalva, as fancying, in the warmth of their
imagination, that they saw cities on the coast of Yu-
catan adorned with towers and cupolas. I know not
what translation of my history he has consulted, (for
his quotation from it is not taken from the original,)
but I never imagined that any building ereaed by Ame-
ricans could suggest the idea of a cupola or dome, a
firuaure which their utmbft ikill in architeture was
incapable of rearing. My words are, that they fancied
the villages which they saw frorm their ships " to be
cities adorned with towers and pinacles." By pinacles
I meant some elevation above the reft of the building;
and the paflage is translated almost literally from
Herrera. Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. I. In almost all the
accounts of new countries given by the Spanish disco-
verers in that age, this warmth of admiration is con-
fpicuous; and led them to describe these new objeas in
the most splendid terms. When Cordova and his com-
panions first beheld an Indian village of greater mag-

nitude

nitude than any they had beheld in the islands, they
dignified it by the name of Grand Cairo. B. Diaz,
c. 2. From the fame cause Grijalva and his associates
thought the country along the coast of which they held
their course, entitled to the name of New Spain.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
