\

T HE

g I S T 0 R Y
HISTORY

OF
A M E R I C A.

VO L. II.

/ .;?

THE '' f

H I ST O R Y

* OF
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRIXCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, HISTORIOGRAPHrR

TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBER OF THE

LOYAL ACADEMY or HISTORY AT MADRID.
IN THREE VOLUMES,

VO L. III.
THE FIFTH EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXXVIII.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

THE
I S T ORY

O F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VI.
ROM te time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- B o o K

vi.

.i vered the great Southern Ocean, and received _
the first obscure hints concerning the opulent sche3es for

discovering

countries with which it might open a communica- Peru,
tion, the wilhes and schemes of every enterprising
person in the colonies of Darien and Panama were
turned towards the wealth of those unknown re-
gions. In an age when the spirit of adventure was
so ardent and vigorous, that large fortunes were
wafted, and the most alarming dangers braved, in
pursuit of discoveries merely possible, the faintest
ray of hope was followed with eager expectation,
and the slightest information was fuflicient to in-
spire such perfect confidence, as conducted men to
the most arduous undertakings '.

a See NOTE I.

Vol.. III. B ACcoRD-
1'

B O O K ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted

VI. AV_- out in order to explore and take pofelfion of the

Unruc3cs- countries to the east of Panama, but under the
ful for ome
time. condu&t of leaders whose talents and resources

were unequal to the attempt b. As the excursions
of those adventurers did not extend beyond the
limits of the province to which the Spaniards have
given the name of Tierra Firm&, a mountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and
extremely unhealthy, they returned with difmnal
accounts concerning the distresses to which they
had been exposed, and the unpromising aspe't of
the places which they had visited. Damped by
these tidings, the rage for discovery in that direc-
tion abated; and it became the general opinion,
that Balboa had founded visionary hopes, on the
tale of an ignorant Indian, ill understood, or cal-
culated to deceive.

Undertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama,
by Pizarro,
A^magro, on whom the circunmfances which deterred others
and, Luue. rrade so little imprcfion, that, at the very mo-

ment when all confidered Balboa's expectations of
discovering a rich country, by fleering towards
the east, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt
the execution of his scheme. The names of those
extraordinary men were rancifco Pizarro, Diego
de Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was
the natural son of a gentleman of an honourable

b Calancha Coronica, p. ioo.

family

fanily by a very low woman, and, according to B o o iK
the cruel fate which often ttcnds the offspring of
unlawful love, had been lo totally neglecRed in his '54
youth by the author of his birth, that he icems
to have destined him never to rife beyond the con-
dition of his mother. In confcqicnce of this unge-
nerous idea, he set him, when bordering on man-
hood, to keep hogs. But the alfiring mind of
young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation,
he abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as a
soldier, and, after serving ome years in Italy, en.-
barked for America, which, by opening such a
boundless range to ative talents, allured every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his am-
bitious thoughts. There Pizarro early distinguish-
ed hirnelf. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the confitution of his body was robust, he
was foremost in every danger, patient under the
greatest hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was oon confidered as a man fornmed to corn-
mand. Every operation committed to his conduct
proved successful, as, by a happy but rare con-
juncion, he united perseverance with ardour, and
was as cautious in executing, as he was bold in
forming his plans. By engaging early in aftive
life, without any resource but his own talents and
indultry, and by depending on inmfelf alone in his
firuggles to emerge from oblcurity, he acquired
such a thorough knowledge of aftairs, and of
men, that he was fitted to assume a superior part

B 2 in

B o K in conducting the former, and in governing the

w _sJ ~latter .
z5i4.

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent

as Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other a
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any of the
soldierly qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable
activity, or insurmountable constancy in enduring
the hardships inseparable from military service in
the New World. But in Almagro there virtues
were accompanied with the openness, generosity,
and candour, natural to men whose profession is
arms; in Pizarro, they were united with the ad-
dress, the craft, and the dissimulation of a politi-
cian, with the art of concealing his own pur-
poses, and with sagacity to penetrate into those of
other men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclesiastic, who

ated both as priest and schoolmaster at Panama,
and, by means which the contemporary writers
have not described, had amafled riches that in-
spired him with thoughts of riling to greater emi-

nence,

Terms of SUCH were the men destined to overturn one of
their aroci-
ation. the most extensive empires on the face of the

earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was

c -errera, dec. & 2, paflim. dec. iv. lib. vi. c. 107.
Gomara Hiit. c. 44. Zarate, lib. iv. c. 9.

.... _ _:s,.

authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama. B o ;
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in the i_.
adventure. Pizarro, the least wealthy of the 1524
three, as he could not throw to large a um as his
associates into the common stock, engaged to,take
the department of greatest fatigue and danger, and
to command in person the armament which was to
go first upon discovery. Almagro offered to con-
ducR the supplies of provisions and reinforcements
of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to negociate with
the governor, and uperintend whatever was carry-
ing on for the general interest. As the spirit of
enthufiafin uniformly accompanied that of ad-
venture in the New World, and by that strange
union both acquired an increase of force, this con-
federacy, formed by ambition and avarice, was
confirmed by the most solemn at of religion.
Luque celebrated mass, divided a consecrated host
into three, and refcrving one part to himself, gave
the other two to his associates, of which they par-
took; and thus, in name of the Prince of Peace,
ratified a contracc of which plunder and bloodshed
were the objects d.

THE attempt was begun with a force more suit- Tliirfir

ed to the humble condition of the three afociates, tmpt
than to the grcatnefs of the enterprise in which they
were engaged. Pizarro et fail from Panama with Nov. 3.
d lerrera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 13. Zarate, lib. i. c. .

B 3 a tingle
*

B ° v K a tingle vefel, of small hlrden, and a hundred

and twelve men. But in that age, so little were
the Spaniards acquainted with the peculiarities of
climate in America, that the time which Pizarro
chose for his departure was the most improper in
the whole year; the periodical winds, which were
then set in, being directly adverse to the course
52szl which he purposed to steer e. After beating about

for seventy days, with much danger and incessant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east
was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at fe-
veral places on the coast of Tierra Firme, but
found every where the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had described; the low
grounds converted into swamps by the overflowing
of rivers; the higher, covered with impervious
woods; few inhabitants, and those fierce and ho-
stile. Famine, fatigue, frequent rencounters with
the natives, and above all, the difiempers of a
moif, sultry climate, combined in wafting his

Attended slender band of followers. The undaunted refo-
wilh li ttle
iuccrs. lution of their leader continued, however, for some

time, to sustain their spirits, although no sign had
yet appeared of dilcovering those golden regions to
which he had promised to conduct them. At
length he was obliged to abandon that inhofpi-
table coafl, and retire to Chuchama, opposite to

c Herrera, dec,. ii,. ii. c. 8. Xereg, p. 179.

the

the pearl islands, where he hoped to receive a sup- B o o K
ply of proviions and troops from Panama. v.

1525.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, flood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his as-
fociate. Not finding him there, he landed his fol-
diers, who, in searching for their companions, un-
derwent the fame distresses, and were exposed to the
fame dangers, which had driven them out of the
country. Repulsed at length by the Indians in a
sharp conflit, in which their leader loft one of his
eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise were
compelled to reimbark. Chance led them to the
place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found ome
consolation in recounting to each other their ad-
ventures, and comparing their fuiferings. As Al- June 24.
magro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan,
in the province of Popayan, where both the coun-
try and inhabitants appeared with a more pro-
mifing aspec, that dawn of better fortune was sus-
ficient to determine such sanguine projectors not to
abandon their scheme, notwithfanding all that they
had flffered in prosecuting it .

ALMACRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of re- s3c.

Theyrefume
cruiting their llattered troops. But what he and the under-

taking.

Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen such an
unfavourable idea of the service, that it was with

r Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. , z1. See NOTE II.

4 difficulty
4«.

o0 0 K difficulty he could levy fourscore men g. Feeble
VI.
-v-~.j as this reinforcement was, they did not hesitate
'56 'about resuming their operations, After a long

series of disasters and disappointments, not inferior
to those which they had already experienced, part
of the armament reached the Bay of St. Matthew,
on the coast of Quito, and landing at Tacamez,
to the south of the river of Emeraulds, they beheld
a country more champaign and fertile than any
they had yet discovered in the Southern Ocean, the
natives clad in garments of woollen or cotton ifuff,
and adorned with several trinkets of gold and
silver.

BUT, notwithstanding those favourable appear-

ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report from
Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of those
who listened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst
not venture to invade a country so populous with a
handful of men enfeebled by fatigue and diseases.
They retired to the frnall island of Gallo, where
Pizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
aflbciate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement as might enable them to take
pofeffion of the opulent territories, whose exillence
seemed to be no longer doubtful h.

t Zarate, lib. i, c. .

X Xcrcz, 181. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 13.

BUT

'I

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising, B o o K

or less hardy han their leaders, having secretly _
conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings pzi^6re.
and losses to their friends at Panama, Almagro met caloe by lhr
with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de los Panama.
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the govern-
ment of that settlement. After weighing the mat-
ter with that cold ceconomical prudence which ap-
pears the first of all virtues to persons whose limit-
ed faculties are incapable of conceiving or execut-
ing great designs, he concluded an expedition, at-
tended with such certain waste of men, to be so
detrimental to an infant and feeble colony, that he
not only prohibited the raising of new levies, but
dispatched a velTel to bring home Pizarro and his
companions from the island of Gallo. Almagro
and Luque, though deeply asseted with those
measures, which they could not prevent, and durfl
not oppose, found means of communicating their
sentiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
not to relinquish an enterprise that was the founda-
tion of all their hopes, and the only means of re-
eftablilhing their reputation and fortune, which
were both on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent
with inflexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed
no incentive to persist in the scheme. He per- Perfiftsin
emptorily refuted to obey the governor of Pana- "hs dfin.
ma's orders, and employed all his address and elo-
quence in persuading his men not to abandon him.
But the incredible calamities to which they had
been exposed were still so recent in their memories,

and

,t o o K and the thoughts of revisiting their families and

A _-c- friends after a long absence, rushed with such joy
56. frito their minds, that when Pizarro drew a line

upon the sand with his sword, permitting such as
wished to return home to pass over it, only thirteen
of all the daring veterans in his service had refolu-
tion to remain with their commander .

THIS finall, but determined band, whose names

the Spanish historians record with deserved praise,
as the persons to whose persevering fortitude their
country is indebted for the molt valuable of all its
American poffclions, fixed their residence in the
island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther re-
moved from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited,
they confidered as a more secure retreat, where,
unmolested, they might wait for supplies from Pa-
nama, which they trusted that the ativity of their
associates would be able to procure. Almagio and
Luque were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and
their incessant importunity was seconded by the
general voice of the colony, which exclaimed
loudly againif the infamy of exposing brave men,
engaged in the public service, and chargeable with
no error but what flowed from an excess of zeal
and courage, to perish like the most odious cri-
minals in a desert island. Overcome by thole en-
treaties and expostulations, the governor at lafl
consented to fend a inall vessel to their relief. But

i llerrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. 2.
Xcrcz, 181. Gomara Hlil. c. lo9.

that

that he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to any o o .
new enterprise, he would not permit one landman
to embark on board of it. 1526

BY this time, Pizarro and his companions had Nardshipshe

remained five months in an island, infamous for rd.
the most unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
rica k. During all this period, their eyes were
turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from
their countrymen; but worn out at length with
fruitless expe&ations, and dispirited with suffering
hardships of which they saw no end, they, in de-
fpair, came to a resolution of committing them-
selves to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
in that detertable abode. But, on the arrival of
the vessel from Panama, they were transported with
such joy, that all their sufferings were forgotten.
Their hopes revived, and, with a rapid transition,
not unnatural among men accustomed by their
mode of life to sudden vicissitudes of fortune, high
confidence succeeding to extreme dejection, Pizarro
easily induced not only his own followers, but the
crew of the vessel from Panama, to resume his for-
mer ficheme with frefli ardour. Instead of return-
ing to Panama, they flood towards the southeast,
and more fortunate in this than in any of their past
efforts, they, on the twentieth day after their de.
parture from Gorgona, discovered the coast of
Peru, After touching at several villages on the Dircovers

Peru.
k See NOTE I.

coast

B o K coast no wife inviting, they landed at Tumbez, a
t._,_ place of ome note, about three degrees south of

6.' the line, diftirnguifhed for its stately temple, and a

palace of the Incas or sovereigns of the country '.
There the Spaniards feasted their eyes with the first
view of the opulence and civilization of the Peru-
vian empire. They beheld a country fully peopled,
and cultivated with an appearance of regular in-
duftry; the natives decently clothed, and pofeflled
of ingenuity so far furpafling the other inhabitants
of the New World, as to have the use of tame do-
meftic animals. But what chiefly attracted their
notice, was such a how of gold and silver, not
only in the ornaments of their persons and temples,
but in several vessels and utensils for common use,
formed of those precious metals, as left no room
to doubt that they abounded with profusion in
the country. Pizarro and his companions seem-
ed now to have attained to the completion of their
molt sanguine hopes, and fancied that all their
wishes and dreams of rich domains, and inexhauft-
ible treasures, would soon be realized.
,eturns to BUT with te slender force then under his con-

mai niand, Pizarro could only view the rich country of
which he hoped hereafter to obtain poffeflion. He
ranged, however, for ome time along the coalt,
m aintaining every where a peaceable intercoursE
with the natives, no less aftonifled at their new

Calancha, p. 103.

v]fitallts',

visitants, than the Spaniards were with the uniform B o 0
appearance of opulence and cltivation which they --
beheld. Having explored the country as far as
was requisite to ascertain the importance of the dif-
covery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants some
of their Llam;as or tame cattle, to which the Spa-
niards gave the name of flleep, ome veiels of gold
and silver, as well as ome specimens of their other
works of ingenuity, and two young men, whom
he proposed to initrut in the Castilian language,
that they might serve as interpreters in the expedi-
tion which he meditated. With these he arrived
at Panama, towards the close of the third year fiom
the time of his departure thence m. No adventurer
of the age suffered hardships or encountered dan-
gers which equal those to which he was exposed
during this long period. The patience with which
he endured the one, and the fortitude with which
he surmounted the other, exceed whatever is re-
corded in the history of the New World, where b
many romantic displays of those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave 12s.
of the incredible opulence of the country which he rleme«

of the afro-

had discovered, nor his bitter complaints on ac- ci^'s".
count of that unseasonable rccal of his forces, which
had put it out of his power to attempt making any

In Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3-6. dec. 4. li. ii. c. 7, 8.

Vega, 2. lib. i. c. 10-14. Zarate, lib. i. c. -. Benzo llift.
Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. i.

fettlemcnrt

o o iQ R ettlement there, could move the governor of Pax

VI.
i^V__ nama to swerve from his former purpose. He ill

contended, that the colony was not in a condition
to invade such a mighty empire, and refused to
authoriIe an expedition which he foresaw would be
so alluring that it might ruin the province in which
he presided, by an effort beyond its strength. His
coldness, however, did not in any degree abate the
ardour of the three aflociates; but they perceived
that they could not carry their scheme into execu-
tion without the countenance of superior authority,
and must solicit their sovereign to grant that per-
miflion which they could not extort from his dele-
gate. With this view, after adjusting among
themselves that Pizarro should claim the station of
governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-governor,
and Luque the dignity of bishop in the country
which they purposed to conquer, they ent Pizarro
as their agent to Spain, though their fortunes were
now so much exhausted by the repeated efforts
which they had made, that they found some diffi-
culty in borrowing the small fum requisite towards
equipping him for the voyage ".

pizarro frnt PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court, and
to Spain to .
negociate. new as the scene might be to him, lie appeared be-

fore the emperor with the unembarraffed dignity of
a man conscious of what his services merited; and
he conduc&ed his negociations with an insinuating

" Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. . Vega, 2. lib. . c. 14.

dexterity

dexterity of address, which could not have been n o 0 K
expeaed either from his education or former ha-
bits of life. His fccling description of his own sus- 5 S
fcrings, and his pompous account of the country
which he had dillovered, confirmed by the lpeci-
mnns of its producRions which he exhibited, made
ich an impreflion both on Charles and his mini-
fters, that they not only approved of the intended
expedition, but eemed to be interelted in the fuc-
cess of its leader. Presuming on thoe dipofitions
in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention to the
interest of his afociates. As the pretensions of aNea hs
Luque did not interfere with his own, he obtained
for him the ecclefiatlical dignity to which h1 afpir-
ed. For Alnagro, he claimed only the command
of the fortress which fllould be erceted at Tumbez.
To himielf he secured whatever hs boundlels am-
bition could desire. He was appointed governor, july6.
captain-general, and adelantado of all the country t'"r'em
which lie had discovered, and hoped to conquer, ",',m"d
with supreme authority, civil as well as military;
and with full right to all the privileges and emolu-
ments usually granted to adventurers in the New
World. His jurifdicEon was declared to extend
two hundred leagues along the coast to the south
of the river St. Jago; to be independent of the
governor of Panama; and he had power to nomi-
nate all the officers who were to serve under him.
In return for those concessions, which cost the court
of Spain nothing, as the enjoyment of them de-
pended upon the fucccfs of Pizarro's own efforts,

x he

B.o o K he engaged to raise two hundred and fifty men,
L~-V-J and to provide the ships, arms, and warlike stores

'358. requisite towards fubje&ling, to the crown of Castile,

the country of which the government was allotted
him.

Slender borc INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was which
he was able
to raise. Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds and cre-

dit were so low that he could hardly complete half
the number; and after obtaining his patents from
the crown, he was obliged to steal privately out of
the port of Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny
of the officers who had it in charge to examine,
whether he had fulfilled the stipulations in his con-
tra& °o. Before his departure, however, he received
some supply of money from Cortes, who having
returned to Spain about this time, was willing to
contribute his aid towards enabling an ancient com-
panion, with whose talents and courage he was well
acquainted, to begin a career of glory similar to
that which he himself had finished P.

HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by his
three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of
whom the first was born in lawful wedlock, the two
latter, like himself, were of illegitimate birth, and
by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's brother.

o Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9.
r Ibid. lib. vii. c. o.

They

They were all in the prime of life, and of fucl abi- n oo
lities and courage, as fitted them to take a diftin- .-.-j
guiffed part in his fbfequent transactions. 52'9.

ON his arrival at Panana, Pizarro found Alma- ,io.

gro o much exasperated at the manner in which he liaiion"wi'
had conducóed his negociation, that he not only A''"'i;'o
refused to a any longer in concert with a man, by
whose perfidy he had been excluded from the power
and honours to which he had ajuft claim, but la-
boured to form a new association, in order to
thwart or to rival his former confederate in his dif-
coveries. Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and
address than to susSer a rupture o fatal to all his
schemes, to become irrepa-able. By offering vo-
luntarily to relinquish the office of adelantado, and
promising to concur in fuliciting that title, with an
independent government, for Almagro, he gra-
dually mitigated the rage of an open-hearted fol-
dier, which had been violent, but was not im-
placable. Luque, highly satisfied with having
been ficcefsful in all his own pretensions, cordially
ieconded Pizarro's endeavours. A reconciliation
was effeted; and the confederacy renewed on its
original terms, that the enterprise flould be carried
on at the common expence of the aflociates, and
the profits accruing from it should be equally di-
vided among them .

q lerrcra, dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. i. c. 3.
Vega, z. lib. i. c. 1i.

Volr.. I, C l.
c

B o K EVEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts

._ -j of their interest, three small vessels, with a hun-

Theiranra- dred and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom were
m'nt. horsemen, composed the armament which they

were able to fit out. But the astonishing progress
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them
with such ideas of their own superiority, that Pi-
s5T~y. zarro did not hesitate to fail with this contemptible

force to invade a great empire. Almagro was left
at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with what
reinforcement of men he should be able to muster.
As the season for embarking was properly chosen,
and the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Pizarro completed
the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried above a
hundred leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place
of his destination, and obliged to land his troops

Lands in in the bay of St. Matthew. Without losing a mo-
Peru.

ment, he began to advance towards the south,
taking care, however, not to depart far from the
sea-shore, both that he might easily effeEt a junc-
tion with the supplies which he expeted from Pa-
nama, and secure a retreat in cafe of any disaster,
by keeping as near as possible to his hips. But
as the country in several parts on the coafs of Peru
is barren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the
Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near their
mouth, where the body of water is greatefR; and
as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na-

tives

fives when he should have studied to gain their o o K

VI.

confidence, had forced them to abandon their ha-
bitations; famine, fatigues and diseases of various 531'
kinds, brought upon him and his followers cala-
mities hardly inferior to those which they had en-
dured in their former expedition. What they now
experienced corresponded so ill with the alluring
description of the country given by Pizarro, that
many began to reproach him, and every soldier
must have become cold to the service, if, even in
this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met
with ome appearances of wealth and cultivation,
which seemed to juitify the report of their leader,
At length they reached the province of Coaque; April 4.
and, having surprised the principal settlement of
the natives, they seized there vessels and ornaments
of gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thou-
sand pesos, with other booty of such value, as dif-
pelled all their doubts, and inspired the moil de-
fponding with sanguine hopes .

PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with tlismearurs

this rich spoil, which he confidered as the firfi- a rellolc.
fruits of a land abounding with treasure, that he
infrantly dispatched one of his flips to Panama
with a large remittance to Almnagro and another
to Nicaragua with a confderable fum to ome per-
ions of influence in that province, in hopes of
alluring adventurers, by this early dilplay of the

Herrern, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. . Xtres 18z.

C 2 wealth

B o o K wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
_VJ -continued his march along the coast, and disdain-

ing to employ any means of reducing the natives
but force, he attacked them with such violence in
their scattered habitations, as compelled them
either to retire into the interior country, or to sub-
mit to his yoke. This sudden appearance of in-
vaders, whose afpeEt and manners were so strange,
and whose power seemed to be so irresistible, made
the fame dreadful impression as in other parts of
America. Pizarro hardly met with refinance until
he attacked the island of Puna in the bay of Guay-
quil. As that was better peopled than the country
through which he had passed, and its inhabitants
fiercer and less civilized than those of the conti-
nent, they defended themselves with such obflinate
valour, that Pizarro spent fix months in reducing
them to fubjeaion. From Puna he proceeded to
Tumbez, where the distempers which raged
among his men compelled him to remain for
three months .

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to reap

advantage from his attention, to spread the fame

Receives of his first fccefs at Coaque. Two different de-
continue, to tachments arrived from Nicaragua, which, though
advance. neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered as a re-

inforcement of great consequence to his feeble
band, especially as the one was under the corn-

° P. Sancho ap. Ramus. iii. p. 371, F. I-Ierrcra, dec. .

]ib. vii. c. 18. lib, ix. c. ,i Zarate, lib. ii. c, , 3. Xcrcs,
p. 18z, &c.

manl

mand of Sebastian Benalcazar, and the other of B o o K

vi.

lernando Soto, officers not inferior in merit and ---.
reputation to any who had served in America. 153-
From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, May i6.
and in an advantageous station near the mouth of
it, he eflablifhed the first Spanilh colony in Peru;
to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at
that junaure. Without ome knowledge of there,
he could not have conducted his operations with
propriety; and without a suitable attention to
them, it is impossible to account for the progress
which the Spaniards had already made, or to un-
fold the causes of their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, Strreoftie

Peruvialn

the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, enile.
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, fiom east
to wft, was much less considerable; being uni-
formly bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes,
stretching from its one extremity to the other.
Peru, like the reft of the New World, was origi-
nally possessed by small independent tribes, dif-
fering from each other in manners, and in their
forms of rude policy. All, however, were b
little civilized, that, if the traditions concerning

C 3 their

13 ol their mode of life, preserved among their descend-
- --^ ants, deserve credit, they must be clafTcd among

the mot unimproved savages of America. Stran-
gers to every species of cultivation or regular in-
dultry, without any fixed rfidence, ant unac-
quainted with those sentiments and obligations
which form the first bonds of facial union, they
are said to have roamed about naked in the forests,
with which the country was then covered, more
like wild beasts than like men. After they had
fruggled for several ages with the hardlhips and
calamities which are inevitable in such a state, and
when no circumstance seemed to indicate the ap-
proach of any uncommon effort towards improve-
ment, we are told that there appeared on the banks
of the lake Titiaca, a man and woman of majcftic
form, and clothed in decent garments. They de-
clared thenfelves to be children of the Sun, ent
by their beneficent parent, who beheld with pity
the miseries of the human race, to infruc and to
reclaim them. At their persuasion, enforced by
reverence for the divinity in whose name they were
supposed to speak, several of the difperfecl savages
united together, and receiving their commands as
heavenly injunctions, followed them to Cuzco,
where they fettled, and began to lay the founda-
tions of a city.

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for such

were the nanes of those extraordinary perlonages,
having thus collected fonie wvandering tribes,

formed

formed that social union, which, by multiplying B O K
the desires, and uniting the efforts of the human .
species, excites industry, and leads to improve- 1531,
ment. Manco Capac inftrudted the men in agri-
culture, and other useful arts. Mama Ocollo
taught the women to spin and to weave. By the
labour of the one sex, fubfitence became less pre-
carious; by that of the other, life was rendered
more comfortable. After securing the objects of
first necessity in an infant fate, by providing food,
raiment, and habitations, for the rude people of
whom he took charge, Manco Capac turned his
attention towards introducing such laws and policy
as might perpetuate their happiness. By his infti-
tutions, which shall be more particularly explained
hereafter, the various relations in private life were
established, and the duties resulting from them
prescribed with such propriety, as gradually formed
a barbarous people to decency of manners. In
public administration, the functions of persons in
authority were so precisely defined, and the fubordi-
nation of those under their jurisdiction maintained
with such a heady hand, that the society in which
he presided, soon assumed the aspect of a regular
and well-governed state.

THus, according to the Indian tradition, was

founded the empire of the Incas or Lords of Peru.
At first, its extent was small. The territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eight leagues
from Cuzco. But within its narrow precinds he

C 4 exerciscd

B o0 K exercised absolute and uncontrolled authority. His
L-v~-- successors, as their dominions extended, arrogated

' a similar jurifdition over the new fubjets which

they acquired the defpotifmn of Asia was not
more complete. The Incas were not only obeyed as
mqnarchs, but revered as divinities. Their blood
was held to be sacred, and, by prohibitinginter-
marriages with the people, was never contaminated
by mixing with that of any other race. The fami-
ly, thus separated from the reft of the nation, was
diftinguilhed by peculiarities in dress and orna-
ments, which it was unlawful for others to affun-e.
The monarch himself appeared with ensigns of roy-
alty reserved for him alone; and received from his
subjects marks of obsequious homage and relpet,
which approached almost to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs seems to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their fubjeds. It was not the rage of conquest, if
we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas, to extend their dominions,
but the desire of diffusing the blessings of civiliza-
tion, and the knowledge of the arts which they
poffffed, among the barbarous people whom they
reduced. During a fuccfflion of twelve monarchs,
it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
character t.

t Cieca de Leon, Chron. c. 44. I-Ierrera, dec. 3. lib. x.
c. 4. dec. . lib. iii. c. 17.

WH E

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of B o o K

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and '-.--
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch 5
from the founder of the state, was feated on the
throne. He is represented as a prince distinguished
not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the race,
but eminent for his martial talents. By his victo-
rious arms the kingdom of Quito was fubjeed, a
conquest of such extent and importance as almost
doubled the power of the Peruvian empire. He
was fond of residing in the capital of that valuable
province, which he had added to his dominions;
and, notwithstanding the ancient and fundamental
law of the monarchy against polluting the royal
blood by any foreign alliance, he married the
daughter of the vanquished monarch of Quito.
She bore him a son named Atahualpa, whom, on
his death at Quito, which seems to have happened
about the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-nine, he appointed his successor in that
kingdom, leaving the reft of his dominions to
Huafcar, his eldest son, by a mother of the royal
race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory
of a monarch who liad reigned with greater repu-
tation and splendour than any of his predecessors,
the deflination of Huana Capac concerning the
luccefion, appeared to repugnant to a maxim coe-
val with the empire, and founded on authority
deemed hfcrel, that it was no sooner known at
Cuzco than it excited general dilulft. Encouraged

by

B Ov KR by those sentiments of his subje&s, Huafcar re-
*-- .-; quired his brother to renounce the government of

153z.

Quito, and to acknur-ledge him as his lawful
superior. But it had been the first care of Atahualpa
to gain a large budy of troops which had accom-
panied his father to Quito. These were the flower
of the Peruvian warriors, to whose valour Huana
Capac had been indebted for all his vitories. Re-
lying on their support, Atahualpa first eluded his
brother's demand, and then marched againit him
in hostile array.

THUS the ambition of two young men, the title

of the one founded on ancient ufjge, and that of
the other aTerted by the veteran troops, involved
Peru in civil war, a calamity to which, under a
succession of virtuous princes, it had hitherto
been a franger. In such a contest the ifTue was
obvious. The force of arms triumphed over the
authority of laws. Atahualpa remained victorious,
and made a cruel use of his victory. Conscious of
the defect in his own title to the crown, he at-
tempted to exterminate the royal race, by putting
to dath all the children of the Sun descended
from Manco Capac, whom he could seize either
by force or stratagem. From a political motive,
the life of his unfortunate rival Huafcar, who had
been taken prisoner in the battle which decided
the fate of the empire, was prolonged for tome
time, that, by issuing orders in his name, the

usurper

rfurper might more easily establish his own au- B 0o1 K
thority ".

'53
WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat- Favourable

to the pr-

thew, this civil war raged between the two bro- grefs of ri-
thers in its greareft fury. Had he made any hostile
attempt in his former visit to Peru in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-feven, he muff
then have encountered the force of a powerful
slate, united under a monarch, pofleffed of capa-
city as well as courage, and unembarraffed with
any care that could divert him from opposing his
progress. But at this time, the two competitors,
though they received early accounts of the arrival
and violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so
intent upon the operations of a war, which they
deemed more interesting, that they paid no attention
to the motions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in
number to excite any great alarm, and to whose
career, it would be easy, as they imagined, to give
a check when more at leisure,

BY this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof He avals

himself of

Pizarro could have no foresight, and of which, i,, and ad-
froni his defective mode of intercourse with the
people of the country, he remained long ignorant,
he was permitted to carry on his operations un-
molested, and advanced to the centre of a great
empire before one effort of its power was exerted

, Zarate, lib. i. c. i5. Vega, . lib. ix. c. z1 and 32-
40, Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. i. . 2. lib. iii. c. 17.

to

B K to flop his career. During their progress, the Spa-

_>-" *>-niards had acquired some imperfect knowledge of

this struggle between the two contending factions.
The firfi complete information with respect to it,
.they received from messengers whom Huafcar ent
to Pizarro, in order to solicit his aid against Ata-
hualpa, whom he represented as a rebel and an
uurper . Pizarro perceived at once the import-
ance of this intelligence, and foresaw so clearly all
the advantages which might be derived from this
divided state of the kingdom, which he had in-
vaded, that, without waiting for the reinforcement
which he expected from Panama, he determined
to push forward, while inteffine discord put it out
of the power of the Peruvians to attack him with
their whole force, and while, by taking part, as
circumstances should incline him, with one of the
competitors, he might be enabled with greater
ease to crush both. Enterprising as the Spaniards
of that age were in all their operations against Ame-
ricans, and diftinguilhed as Pizarro was among his
countrymen for daring courage, we can hardly
suppose, that after having proceeded hitherto slowly,
and with much caution, he would have changed at
once his system of operation, and have ventured
upon a measure so hazardous, without some new
motive or profpec to j uftify it.
State of his As he was obliged to divide his troops, 'in

order to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sufficient

u Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3.

to

to defend a fation of equal importance as a place B o K
of retreat in cafe of any disaster, and as a port for v "
receiving any supplies which should come rom I5%.
Panama, he began his march with a very slender
and ill-accoutred train of followers. They con-
fited of fixty-two horsemen x, and a hundred and
two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were armed
with cross-bows, and three with muflets. He di-
reced his course towards Caxamalca, a small town
at the distance of twelve days march from St.
Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped with
a considerable body of troops. Before he had pro-
ceeded far, an officer dispatched by the Inca met
him with a valuable present from that prince,
accompanied with a proffer of his alliance, and
assurances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca,
Pizarro, according to the usual artifice of his coun-
trymen in America, pretended to come as the am-
baffador of a very powerful monarch, and declared
that he was now advancing with an intention to
offer Atahualpa his aid against those enemies who
disputed his title to the throne .

As the object of tle Spaniards in entering their ,lc.softhe

country was altogether incomprehensible to the conrllcg
Peruvians, they had formed various conjeclurs Iigh,.d
concerning it, without being able to decide whe-
ther they should confider their new guclls as beings
of a fupcrior nature, who had viflied them from

x Sec NOTE IV.
Y Herrcra, dec. . lib, . c3. Xcrcz, p. S.

some

J °o0 K some beneficent motive, or as formidable avengers

VI.
_--^'--- of their crimes, and enemies to their repose and
153z' liberty. The continual professions of the Spa-

niards, that they came to enlighten them with the
knowledge of truth, and lead then in the way of
happinels, favoured the former opinion ; the out-
rages which they committed, their rapaciousness
and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the lat-
ter. While in this state of uncertainty, Pizarro's
declaration of his pacific intentions so far removed
all the Inca's fears, that he determined to give him
a friendly reception. In consequence of this refo-
lution, the Spaniards were allowed to march in
tranquillity across the sandy desert between St.
Michael and Motupe, where the mos feeble es-
fort of an enemy, added to the unavoidable dif-
tresses which they suffered in pafling through that
comfortless region, must have proved fatal to
them . From Motupe they advanced towards
the mountains which encompassed the low country
of Peru, and passed through a defile so narrow and
inaccessible, that a few men might have defended
it against a numerous army. But here likewise,
from the fame inconsiderate credulity of the Inca,
the Spaniards met with no opposition, and took
quiet possession of a fort erected for the security of
that important station. As they now approached near
to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his professions
of friendfiip; and as an evidence of their lince-

zSee NOTE V.

rky,

rity, sent them presents of greater value than the B O°V K
former.

153a.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffefllon Arrive at

of a large court, on one fide of which was a house
which the Spanish historians call a palace of the
Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun, the
whole surrounded with a strong rampart or wall of
earth. When he had posed his troops in this ad-
vantageous station, he dispatched Hernando So:o,
and his brother Ferdinand, to the camp of Ata-
hualpa, which was about a league distant from the
town. He inftru&ed them to confirm ihe declara-
tion which he had formerly made of his pacific dif-
position, and to desire an interview with the Inca,
that he might explain more flly the intention of
the Spaniards in visiting his country. They were
treated with all the refpe&fill hospitality uliual
among the Peruvians in the reception of their imolt
cordial friends, and Atahualpa promised to visit the
Spanish commander next day in his quarters. The
decent deportment of the Peruvian monarch, the
order of his court, and the reverence with which his
subjects approached his person and obeyed his com-
mands, astonished thole Spaniards, who had never
met in America with any thing more dignified than
the petty cazique of a barbarous tribe. But their
eyes were still more powerfully attracted by the vast
profusion of wealth which they obfcrved in the In-
ca's camp. The rich ornaments worn by him and
his attendants, the vetlels of gold and silver in

which

B 0 K which the repast offered to them was served up, the
-_~ V-i multitude of utensils of every kind formed of those

532. precious metals, opened profpeas far exceeding

any idea of opulence that a European. of the fix-
teenth century could form.

Perfidious ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds
scheme of
Pizarro. were yet warm with admiration and desire of the

wealth which they had beheld, they gave such a
description of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.
From his own observation of American manners
during his long service in the New World, as well
as from the advantages which Cortes had derived
from seizing Montezuma, he knew of what confe-
quence it was to have the Inca in his power. For
this purpose, he formed a plan as daring as it was
perfidious. Notwithstanding the character that he
had assumed of an ambassador from a powerful mo-
narch, who courted an alliance with the Inca, and
in violation of the repeated offers which he had
made to him of his own friendf-.ip and aiftance,
he determined to avail himself of the unfufpicious
simplicity with which Atahualpa relied on his pro-
felTions, and to seize the person of the Inca during
the interview to which he had invited him. I-le
prepared for the execution of his scheme with the
fame deliberate arrangement, and with as little
compundion, as if it had refleted no disgrace
on himcilf or his country. lie divided his cavalry
into three small squadrons, under tc conmand ol'

14 Ihis

his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his B o o K
infantry were formed in one body, except twenty a
of most tried courage, whom he kept near his own '53'
person to support him in the dangerous service
which he reserved for himself; the artillery, con-
lifting of two field-pieces and the crofs-bowmen,
were placed opposite to the avenue by which Ata-
hualpa was to approach. All were commanded
to keep within the square, and not to move until
the signal for ation was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was Nov.6

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to ,Vit, by
appear with the greatest splendour and magnifi-
cence in his first interview with the strangers, the
preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march.
Even then, left the order of the proceflion should
be deranged, he moved so slowly, that the Spa-
niards became impatient, and apprehensive that
some .suspicion of their intention might be the
cause of this delay. In order to remove this, Pi-
zarro dispatched one of his officers with fresh affur-
ances of his friendly disposition. At length the
Inca approached. First of all appeared four hun-
dred men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to
clear the way before him. He himself, fitting on
a throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colours, and almost covered with plates of gold

Xerez, p. 194.
VOL. III. D and

B o° K and silver enriched with precios stones, was car-
~L---t ried on the shoulders of his priqsipal attendants.

Behind him came fe

o chief qgicrr, of his court,

carried in the fame mane . Several bands of
fingers and dancers ccompanied this cavalcade;
and the whole plain was covered with troops,
amounting to more than thirty thoufard men.

Strange ha- As the Inca drew near the Sanifhi quarters, fa-
father val- ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,
verde. - . ' ·

advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre-
viary in the other, and in a long discourse explain-
ed to him the doarine of the creation, the fall of
Adam, the incarnation, the ufferings and refur-
reifon of Jesus Christ, tle. appointment of St.
Peter as God's vicegerent o earth, the. tranfmif-
sion of his apostolic power by fuccelion. to the
popes, the donation made to. the kjng of Castile
by pope Alexqnder of al- the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace, the. Chriflian faith, to. ac-
knowledge the supreme jurifdictipn of the pope,
and to fubmic to the king. of Castile as his lwvful
Ibvereign; promising, if he complied instantly
with this requisition, that the Caflilian monarch
would protee his dominions, and permit him to
continue in the exercise of his royal authority; but
if he should impiously refue to obey this summons,
he denounced war gaiaft him in his master's name,
and threatened him with the most dreadful effects
of his vengeance.

Tins

THIs 'frange harangue, unfolding deep rnf- B o o

teries, ad alluding to tin'nown facts, of which L---
no povet of eloquence could have conveyed at Repy1ol'th
once a diftinft idea to an American, was so lamely ]nca'
translated by an unskilful interpreter, little c-
quainted with the idiom of the Spanish tongue, and
incapable of expressing himfclf with propriety in
the language of the Inca, that its general tenor
was altogether incomprehensible to Atahualpa.
Some parrs in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him with aftonilhment and indignation. His re-
ply, however, was temperate. He began with
observing, that he was lord of the dominions over
which he reigned by hereditary fucceflion; and
added, that he could not conceive how a foreign
priest hould pretend to dispose of territories which
did not belong to him that if such a preposterous
grant had been made, he, who was the rightful
poffeflor, refused to confirm it; that he had no in-
clination to renounce the religious institutions efta-
blihed: by his ancestors; nor would he forsake the
service of the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he
and his people revered, in order to worlhip the
God of the Spaniards, who was ifubje6t to death;
that with refpel. to other matters 'contained in his
discourse, as he had never heard of them before,
and did not now underfand their meaning, he de-
fired to know where tie prielf had learhed things
foextraordinary. " In this book," anfweird Val-
verde, reaching out to him his breviary. The
Inca opened it eagerly, and turning over the leaves,

D 2 lifted

B o K lifted it to his ear: " This," fays he, " is silent

'vL .------- it tells me nothing ;" and threw it with disdain to

the ground. The enraged monk, running towards
his countrymen, cried out, " To arms, Christians,
to arms; the word of God is insulted; avenge this
profanation on those impious dogs b.

Pizarro at- PIZARRO, who, during this long conference,
tacks the
Peruvians, had with difficulty restrained his soldiers, eager to

seize the rich spoils of which they had now so near
a view, immediately gave the signal of assault. At
once the martial music struck up, the cannon and
muskets began to fire, the horse allied out fiercely
to the charge, the infantry ruffled on sword in
hand. The Peruvians, astonished at the sudden-
ness of an attack which they did not expet, and
dismayed with the deftrutive effects of the fire-
arms, and the irresistible impreiflon of the cavalry,
fled with universal consternation on every fide,
without attempting either to annoy the enemy, or
to defend themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his
chosen band, advanced directly towards the Inca;
and though his nobles crowded around him with
officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while
they vied one with another in sacrificing their own
lives, that they might cover the sacred person of
their sovereign, the Spaniards oon penetrated to

arj seizes the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the
the Inca. 0

arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him

b See NOTE VI.

as a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the mo- o o K
narch increased the precipitate flight of his follow- -~.
ers. The Spaniards pursued them towards every 53'
quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting bar-
barity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives,
who never once offered to refit. The carnage did
not cease until the close of day. Above four thou-
sand Peruvians were killed. Not a ingle Spaniard
fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro himself,
whose hand was ightly hurt by one of his own
soldiers, while struggling eagerly to lay hold on the
Inca C

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru, and they were so tranlport-
ed with the value of the acquisition, as well as the
greatness of their success, that they passed the night
in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent
adventurers on such an extraordinary change of
fortune.

AT first the captive monarch could hardly be- Dejefionof

lieve a calamity which he so little expected to be th, Inca
real. But he soon felt all the misery of his fate,
and the dejection into which he funk was in pro-
portion to the height of grandeur fiom which he
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the ad-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the pof-
fellion of such a prisoner, laboured to console him

See NOTE VII.

D 3 with

B o o 1 with proffTrpons of kindness ad refpef, that or-
'*v,. responded ill with his actions. By residing among

J532. the Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovered their

ruling pafion, which, indeed, they were no-wise
solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that,

His offer of made an attempt to recover his liberty. He offer-
* ransom ed as a ransom what astonished the Spaniards, even

after all they no.y knew concerning the opulence
of his kingdom. The apartment in which he was
confined was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen
in breadth; he undertook to fill it with vessels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro cloied
eagerly with this tempting propolal, and a line was
drawn upon the walls. of the chamber, to mark the
tfipulated height to which the treasure was to rife.

ATAHUALPA, tranfpoted with having obtained

some profped of liberty, took meaflres, intantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by, fending
messengers to Cuzco, Qulito, and other places,
where gold had been amafred in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of their gods, or the
houses of the Inca, to bring wht wya reeceffary for
completing his ransom !direcly to axama,lca.
Though Atahualpa was now in the cu.tod.y of his
enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians accuf-
torned to refpea every mandate iffied by their so-
vereign, that his orders were executed with the
greatest alacrity. Soothed. with hopes of recover-
ing his liberty by this means, the fubjeds of the
Inca were afraid of endangering his life by forming

any

any ther fcherne for his relief; and though the r C K

VI.

force of the empire was flill entire, no prepara- A
tions were made, and no army assembled to avenge 1532.
their dwri Wrongs or th6oi of their monarch d. The
Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and un-
molested. Small detachments of their number The Spa-

i» ;i,,~ .*~

,,* ~ .r~ ,i~

*niards vfit

marched into remote provinces of the empire, and, different
instead of rmeeting with any opposition, were every PIOv''"'ce
Where received with marks of the most fubmifTive
respect .

INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and de- Aimniro -

fifotis as Pizarro might be to obtain ome know- eif" ,ce-
ledge of the interior state of the country, he could m
not have ventured upon any diminution of his main
body, if he had not about this time received an December.
accotint of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael
with such a reinforcement as would almost double
th' itfu'ber of his fllowers f. The arrival of this
long-expec&ed succour was not more agreeable to
the paiar'd's, than alarming to the nca. He saw
the power of his enemies encreafe; and as he knew
neither the source whence they derived their sup-
plies, nor the means by which they were conveyed
to Peru, he could not forefce to what a height the
inundation that poured in upon his dominions
might rife. While clifquieted with such apprehen- ,5r .
sions, he learned that lome Spaniards, in their way to :dath.

d Xerez, 205. c See NOTE VIII.
Xcrcz, 204. IH rrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. , 2.

1) 4 to.

B O O K to Cuzco, had visited his brother Huafcar in the

VI.
s-h ---~ place where he kept him confined, and that the

' captive prince had represented to them the justice

of his own cause, and as an inducement to espouse
it, had promised them a quantity of treasure greatly
beyond that which Atahualpa had engaged to pay
for his ransom. If the Spaniards flould liften to
this proposal, Atahualpa perceived his own de-
ftruion to be inevitable; and fufpeting that their
jnfatiable thirt for gold would tempt them to lend
a favourable-ear to it, he determined to sacrifice his
brother's life, that he might save his own; and
his orders for this purpose were executed, like all
his other commands, with scrupulous puntu-
ality .

The Spani- MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa-
ards nmake a
diviiorl of malca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded
1 toil with treasure. A great part of the stipulated

quantity was now amafled, and Atahualpa aured
the Spaniards, that the only thing which prevented
the whole from being brought in, was the remote-
ness of the provinces where it was deposited. But
such vast piles of gold presented continually to the
view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed their ava-
rice, that it was impossible any longer to refirain
their impatience to obtain polfeffion of this rich
booty. Orders were given for melting down the

g Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Gomara Hill. c. x11. Herrera,
dec. . lib, iii. c. .

whole,

whole, except some pieces of curious fabric, re- B o 0 K
served as a prefcnt for the emperor, After setting a-
apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred J533'
thousand pesos as a donative to the soldiers which
arrived with Almagro, there remained one million
five hundred and twenty-eight thousand five hun-
dred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The fe-
flival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was July z.
the day chosen for the partition of this vast fum,
and the manner of conducting it strongly marks
that strange alliance of fanaticism with avarice,
which I have more than once had occasion to point
out as a firiking feature in the character of the
conquerors of the New World. Though assem-
bled to divide the spoils of an innocent people,
procured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty, the
tranfation began with a solemn invocation of the
name of God h, as if they could have expected the
guidance of Heaven in distributing those wages of
iniquity. In this divjfion above eight thousand
pesos, at that time not inferior in effetive value
to as many pounds Sterling in the present century,
fell to the hare of each horseman, and half that
fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro himfclf, and
his officers, received dividends in proportion to the
dignity of their rank.

THERE is no example in history of such a sudden The fsea
acquisition of wealth by military service, nor was

b Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

ever

8 0 K ever-'a:fum f great divided among Co small a hum-

_ecis/"l ber of soldiers. Many of them- having received a
L513. recompence for their services far beyond their most

sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire fiom
fatigue and danger, in order to fpenid the remain-
der of their days in their native cotntry, i ease and
opulence, that they demanded their diflharge with
clamorous importunity. Pizarro, sensible that from
such men he ould expect neither enterprise in ac-
tion n)r fortitude in suffering, and persuaded that
wherever they wertt, the display of their riches
would allure adventurers, lets opulent but more
hardy, to his fatdard, granted their suit without
reluansce, and permitted above sixty of ther to
accompany his broher' Ferdinand, whom he sent
to Spain with an account of his success, and the
present demfined for the emperor.

The nca THE Spaniards having diviled among them the
demands
his iberty treasure anafled for the Incas ranform, he insisted
in vain with them to, fulfil their promile of setting him at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. During his long service in the New
World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of
his fellow-foldiers, which led them to confider its
inhabitants as an inferior race,. neither worthy of
the name, nor entitled to the rights, of men. In
his. conmpat with Atahualpa, he had no other ob-
jpct than to amuse his captive with such a profpet

i Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vegn, p. z. lib. i. c. 38.

of

of recovering his liberty, as might induce him to B o o K
lend all the aid of his authority towards collecting ---
the wealth of his kingdom. Having now accom- 53
plifhed this, he no longer regarded his plighted
faith; and at the very time when the credulous
prince hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had
fecrerly resolved to bereave him of life. Many
circumstances seem to have concurred in prompting
him to this action, the most criminal and atrocious
that stains the Spanish name, amidfl all the deeds
of violence committed in carrying on the conquefl:
of the New World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imita- He and the

tion of Cortes's conduct towards the Mexican mo- mutually
narch, he did not pofefis talents for carrying on jealous.
the fame artful plan of policy. Deffitute of the
temper and address requisite for gaining the confi-
dence of his prisoner, he never reaped all the ad-
vantages which might have been derived from be-
ing master of his person aud authority. Atahualpa
was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and dil-
¢ernment than Montezuma, and seems to have pe-
netrated more thoroughly into the character and
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual suspicion and
distrust accordingly took place between them. The
ftris. attention with which it was necessary to guard
a captive of fich importance, greatly increased the
fatigue of military duty. The utility of keeping
him appeared inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him

as

B o o K as an incumbrance, from which he wished to be

VI.
A -__, delivered k.

1533.

Almagro ALMAGRO and his followers had made a demand
and is fol- '
lowers d- of an equal hare in the Inca's ransom; and though
mrnand his '
lle. Pizarro had bestowed upon the private men the

large gratuity which I have mentioned, and en-
deavoured to tooth their leader by prcfents of great
value, they fill continued dissatisfied. They were
apprehensive, that as long as Atahualpa remained
a pritoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever
treasure hould be- acquired, to make up what was
wanting of the quantity stipulated for his ransom,
and under that pretext exclude them from any part
of it. They infifled eagerly on putting the Inca
to death, that all the adventurers in Peru might
thereafter be on an equal footing'

Motives PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with ac-
which in. -
duced i. coun t of forces assembling in the remote provinces
zarro to
conent. of the empire, and fufpeated Atahualpa of having

issued orders for that purpose. These fears and
suspicions were artfully increased by Philippillo,
one of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off
from Tumbez in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-feven, and whdm he employed as
an interpreter. The funEtion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with the

k Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.
I Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Vega, p. z. lib. i. c. 7. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.

captive

captivemonarch, he presumed, notwithflanding B o o K
the meanness of his birth, to raise his affetions to i-
a Coya, or descendent of the Sun, one of Atahual-
pa's wives; and feeing no profped of gratifying
that paflion during the life of the monarch, he en-
deavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards with such
accounts of the Inca's secret designs and prepara-
tions, as might awaken their jealousy, and incite
them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo la-
boured to ruin him by private machinations, that
unhappy prince inadvertently contributed to haften
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-
tached himself with peculiar affection to Ferdinand
Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who, as they were
persons of birth and education superior to the rough
adventurers with whom they served, were accuf-
tomed to behave with more decency and attention
to the captive monarch. Soothed with this refpe&t
from persons of such high rank, he delighted in
their society. But in the pretence of the governor
he was always uneasy, and overawed. This dread
soon came to be mingled with contempt. Among all
the European arts, what he admired most was that
of reading and writing; and he long deliberated
with himself, whether he should regard it as a na-
tural or acquired talent. In order to determine
this, he desired one of the soldiers, who guarded
him, to write the name of God on the nail of his

thumb,

B o 0 K thumb. This he fliewed fucceflively to several

VY.
$~- J Spaniards, aking its meaning; and to his amaze-

'531' ment, they all, without hesitation, returned the

fame answer. At length Pizarro entered; and on
presenting it to him, he bflied, and with some
confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno.
rance. From that moment, Atahualpa confidered
him as a mean, person, less inftruted than his own
soldiers; and he had not address enough to conceal
the fintiments with which this discovery inspired
him. To be the object of a barbarian's scorn, not
only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited
such resentment in his breat, as added! force to all
the: ther considerations which prompted him to
put the Inca to death m.
hlis tria. BUT in order to give sone colour of jufice to

this violent aion. and that he himself might be
exempted from standing singly responsible for the
commission of it, Pizarro resolved to try the Inca
with all the, formalities observed in the criminal
courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro,
with two assistants, were appointed judges, with
full power to acquit or to condemn; an attorney-
general was named to carry on the prosecution in
the king's name; counsellors were chosen to as-
sis:, the prisoner in his defence; and clerks were
ordained ro record the proceedings of court. Be-
fore this frange tribunal, a charge was exhibited

Ilemrera, dec, 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. ii. lib, i. c. 38.

still

flill, re anrpaiing. It confifled of various ar- B o o
ticles; that Atauhialpa, though a bastard, had dif- .-
possessed the rightfu} owner of the throne, and I53.
usurped the regal power; that he had put his bro-
ther and lawful foyere.ign to death; that he was
an idolater, and had nor only permitted, but
commanded the offering of human sacrifices; that
he had a great number of concubines; that since
his imprisonment he had wafted and embezzled the
royal treatures, which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fubjeds to
take arms againit the Spaniards. On there heads
of accusation, some of which are so ludicrous,
others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pizarro, in
making them the foundation of a serious proce-
dure, is not less surprising than his injufiice, did
this strange court go on to try the sovereign of a
great empire, over whom it had no jurifdition.
With refpet to each of the articles, witnefes were
examined; but as they delivered their evidence in.
their native tongue, Philippillo had it in his power
to give their words whatever turn best fuired his
nalevolent intentions. To judges predetermined
n their opinion, this evidence appeared sufficient.
They pronounced Atahualpa guilty, and con- He is con-
emned him to be burnt alive. Friar Valverde demned,
rofituted the authority of his sacred funEtion to
onfirm this fcntence, and by his ignature war-
anted it to bejuft. Afloni(hed at his fate, Ata-
ualpa endeavoured to avert it by tears, by pro-
ifes, and by entreaties, that he might be fnt to

13 Spain,

B o O K Spain, where a monarch would be the arbiter of

V1. a----_ his lot. But pity never touched the unfeeling heart

1533' of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led inflantly

to execution; and, what added to the bitterness
of his last moments, the fanie monk who had just
ratified his doom, offered to coriole, and attempted
to convert him. The most powerful argument
Valverde employed to prevail with him to embrace
the Christian faith, was a promise of mitigation in
his punishment. The dread of a cruel death ex-
torted from the trembling vi&tim a desire of receiv-
ing baptism. The ceremony was performed ; and

,nd execut- Atahualpa, instead of being burnt, was firangled at
ed.

the Rake ".

Severarspa- HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation,
tet aganPfl even among the profligate adventurers which it

sent forth to conquer and desolate the New World,
there were persons who retained some tinture of
the Castilian generosity and honour. Though, be-
fore the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had
set out for Spain, and Soto was ent on a separate
command at.a distance from Caxamalca, this odious
tranfation was not carried on without censure
and opposition. Several officers, and among those
some of the greatest reputation and most respectable
families in the service, not only remonstrated, but
protested against this measure of their general, as

Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 7. Xeres, p. 233. Vega, p. 1l.

lib. i. c. 36, 37. Goinara Hill. c. 1 17. Herrera, dec. 5.
lib .

iii. ,fg
4.

disgraceful

disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to every B O K
maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith, and -
an usurpation of jurifdition over an independent
monarch, to which they had no title. But their
laudable endeavours were vain. Numbers, and the
opinion of such as held every thing to be lawful
which they deemed advantageous, prevailed. Hi-s.
tory, however, records even the unsuccessful exer-
tions of virtue with applause; and the Spanish writ-
ers, in relating events where the valour of their na-
tion is more conspicuous than its humanity, have
not failed to preserve the names of those who made
this laudable effort to ave their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated such a crime .

ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro inveRled Difsolutin

' - of gove-n-
one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping .-"neenndor

0 der in Pru.

that a young man without experience might prove
a more passive instrument in his hands, than an
ambitious monarch, who had been accustomed to
independent command. The people of Cuzco,
and the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco
Capac, a brother of Huafcar, as Inca P. But
neither poffcffed the authority which belonged to a
sovereign of Peru. The violent convulsions into
which the empire had been thrown, firfi by the
civil war between the two brothers, and then by
the invasion of the Spaniards, had not only de-

o Vega, p. x . lib. i. c. 37. Xercs, i. 23S. I-lrrcra,
dec. 5. Jib. iii. c. .

P Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 7.

Vo.. III. E ranged

B O K ranged the order of the Peruvian government, but
L-v_--i almost dissolved its frame. When they beheld

1533. their monarch a captive in the power of strangers,

and at last suffering an ignominious death, the
people in several provinces, as if they had been
jet free from every restraint of law and decency,
broke out into the most licentious excesses . So
many descendents of the Sun, after being treated
with the utnoft indignity, had been cut off by
Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the (late
diminished with their number, but the accustomed
reverence for that sacred race sensibly decreased.
In consequence of this state of things, ambitious
men in different parts of the empire apired to in-
dependent authority, and usurped juriidiction to
which they had no title. The general who com-
manded for Atahualpa in Quito, seized the brother
and children of his master, put them to a cruel
death, and disclaiming any connection with either
Inca, endeavoured to etablilh a separate kingdom
for himself r

Pizarro ad- THE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit
cvnZe to of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour of go-

vernment relaxing among the Peruvians. They
confidered those. disorders as lymptoms of a state
hastening towards its dissolution. Pizarro no longer
hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had
received such coniderable reinforcementz, that c

q Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. lib. iii. c. 5.
'Zarate, lib. ii. c. S. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 3, 4.

could

could'venture, with little danger, to penetrate so B o K
far into the interior part of the country. The
account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca
operated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his
brother Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers
to whom he had given their discharge after the
partition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their
astonished countrymen, than fame spread the ac-
count with such exaggeration through all the
Spanih settlements on the South Sea, that the
governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua,
could hardly restrain the people under their jurif-
dictioh, from abandoning their poffTefions, and
crowding to that inexhaustible source of wealth
which feerned to be opened in Peru'. In spite of
every check and regulation, such numbers reflrted
thither, that Pizarro began his march at the head
of five hundred men, after leaving a considerable
garrison in St. Michael, under the command of
Benalcazar. The Peruvians had aflrmbled bome
large bodies of troops to oppose his progress.
Several fierce encounters happened. But they
terminated like all the actions in America ; a few
Spaniards were killed or wounded; the natives
were put to flight with incredible slaughter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, nd took
quiet poffcfFion of that capital. The riches found

G omara Iill. c. z12. Vegn, p. i. lib. ii. c. . Her.
rera, dec. 5. li''. iii. c. 5.

E 2 there,

Bn o K there, even after all that the natives. had carried off

Vil A.-- and concealed, either from a fuperftiious venera-
I533- tion for the ornaments of their temples, or out of

hatred to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in
value what had been received as Atahualpa's ran-
fpm. But as the Spaniards were now accustomed
to the wealth of the country, and it came to be
parcelled out among a greater number of adven-
turers, this dividend did not excite the fame fur-
prise either from novelty, or the largeness of the
fum that fell to the hare of each individual '.

DURING the march to Cuzco, that son of Ata-

hualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died ; and
as the Spaniards substituted no person in his place,
the title of Manco Capac seems to have been uni-
verfally recognized ".

oito con- WHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed,
Senalaza. Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able and

enterprising officer, was aflamed of remaining in-
a&ive, and impatient to have his name diftin-
guifhed among the discoverers and conquerors of
the New World. The seasonable arrival of'a fresh
body of recruits from Panama and Nicaragua, put
it in his power to gratify this passion. Leaving a
sufficient force to protect the infant settlement en-
trulted to his care, he placed himself at the head
of the reft, and set out to attempt the reduction of

Sec NOTE IX. I-Icrrera, dec.5. lib. v. c.z.

Qu to,

Quito, where, according to the report of the B6 o t
natives, Atahualpa had left the greatest part of
his treasure. Notwithstanding the distance of 533
that city from S. Michael, the difficulty of march-
ing through a mountainous country covered with
woods, and the frequent and fierce attacks of the
best troops in Peru, co,-ilanded by a fiilful
leader, the valour, good conduct, and perseverance
of Benalcazar furmounred every obstacle, and he
entered Quito with his victorious troops. But
they met with a cruel mortification there. The
natives, now acquainted, to their sorrow, with the
predominant passion of their invaders, and know-
ing how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpedt of which had prompted them
to undertake this arduous expedition, and had
supported them under all the dangers and hard-
flips wherewith they had to struggle in catrying
it on x.

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader Alvarado's

who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame ePdLi.
of its riches attralted a more powerful enemiy.
Pedro de Alvarado, who had diflinguifhed liimn
self so eminently in the conquest of Mexico, hav-
ing obtained the government of Guatimala as a
recompence for his valour, oon became dilgufted
with a life of uniform tlanquillity, and longed t

X Zarate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 9. Her-
rera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. Ii, 12. lib. v. c. 2, 3. lib. vi. c. 3.

E 3 be

B o o K be again engaged in the bustle of military service.

v__- The glory and wealth acquired by the conquerors
1533. of Peru heightened this parfion, and gave it a de-

termined direcion. Believing, or pretending to
believe, that the kingdom of Quito did not lie
within the limits of the province allotted to Pi-
zarro, he resolved to invade it. The high reputa-
tion of the corrmander allured volunteers from
every quarter. He embarked with five hundred
men, of whom above two hundred were of such
diftinEtion as to serve on horfcback. He landed at
Puerto Viejo, and without sufficient knowledge of
the country, or proper guides to conduct him,
attempted to march directly to Q.ito, by follow-
ing the course of the river Guayquil, and crossing
the ridge of the Andes towards its head. But in
this route, one of the most impracticable in all
America, his troops endured such fatigue in forcing
their way through forests and marfles on the
low grounds, and fufired so much from exceflive
cold when they began to acend the mountains,
that before they reached the plain of Quito, a fifth
part of the men and half of their hores died, and
.ihe reft were lb much dilpiritcd and worn out, as
to be almost unfit for service . There they met
with a body, not of Indians but of Spaniards,
drawn up in hollile array against them. Pizarro
having received an account of Alvaracdo's arma-
ment, had detached Almngro with ftme troops to

Y Sec NOTE X.

oplole

oppofc this formidable invader of his jurifdiion ; B o K
and thele were joined by Benalcazar and his viEto- J-v-
rious party. Alvarado, though surprised at the '53;'
light.of enemies whom he did not expect, advanced
boldly to the charge. But, by the interposition of
some moderate men in each party, an amicable
accommodation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their' conquests to em-
brue their hands in the blood of their countrymen,
was postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged to
return to his government, upon Almagro's paying
him a hundred thousand pesos to defray the expence
of his armament. Molt of his followers remained
in the country ; and an expedition, which threat-
ened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed
to augment its ftrcngt-h z.

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in 1;,4.
Spain. The immense quantities of gold and silver confl-rcd e

Pi?;iio and

which he imported , filled the kingdom with no Alinago.
less aftoniflment than they had excited in Panama
and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was received
by the emperor with the attention due to the
bearer of a prelent so rich, as to exceed any idea
which the Spaniards had formed concerning the
value of their acquisitions in America, even after
they had been ten years matters of Mexico. In

z Zarte, lib. ii. c. lo-13. Vrga, p. . lib. ii c. , z.

9,&c. Goniara ilt. c. 1:6, &c. Rcniclal lilt. Guaiimnal.
lib. iii. c. O. Ilerrcra, dec. 5. lib, vi. c. , 2. 7, J'

c
Se N O TE XI.

E 4 rccompcnce

B 0 0 K recompence of his brother's services, his authority

vi.
-v- ~ was confirmed with new powers and privileges,
'534 and the addition of seventy leagues, extending

along the coast, to the southward of the territory
granted in his former patent. Almagro received
the honours which he had so long dcfired. The
title of Adelantado, or governor, was conferred
upon him, with' jurifldition over two hundred
leagues of country, stretching beyond the southern
limits of the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdi-
nand himlelf did not go unrewarded. He was ad-
mitted into the military order of St. Jago, a dif.
tinaion always acceptable to a Spanish gentleman,
and soon set out on his return to Peru, accompa
nied by many persons of higher rank than had yet
served in that country b.

dleginnngOf SOME account of his negociations reached Peru
hetwn 'i. before he arrived there himself. Almagro no
2arro and ·
AImagro. sooner learned that he had obtained the royal grant

of an independent government, than, pretending
that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas,
lay within its boundaries, he attempted to render
himself master of that important station. Juan
and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppoSe him.
Each of the contending parties was supported by
powerful adherents, and the dilpute was on the
point of being terminated by the sword, when
Francis Pizarro arrived in the capital. , The recon-

' Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 19. Her-
rcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 3. c

ciliacion

ciliation between him and Almagro had never been B o oK
cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in engrofling ----
to himself all the honours and emoluments, which 534
ought to have been divided with his associate, was
always present in both their thoughts. The former,
conscious of his own perfidy, did not expect for-
givenefs; the latter, feeling that he had been de-
ceived, was impatient to be avehged ; and though
avarice and ambition had induced them not only
to difemble their sentiments, 'but even to at in
concert while in pursuit of wealth and power, no
sooner did they obtain pofTefion of these, than the
fame paflions which had formed this temporary
union, gave rife to jealousy and discord. To each
of them was attached a small band of interelted
dependents, who, with the malicious art peculiar
to such men, heightened their suspicions, and mag-
nified every appearance of offence. But with all
those feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus
afliduoufly cherished, each was so thoroughly ac-
quainted with the abilities and courage of his rival,
that they equally dreaded the consequences of an
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firmness
which he manifefled in his expotulations with
Almagro and his partizans, averted that evil for
the present. A hew reconciliation took place; the
chief article of which was, that Almagro flould
attempt the conquest of Chili; and if he did not
find in that province an ellablilhment adequate to
his merit ad expectations, Pizarro, by way of in-

demnnification,

B 0 0 K demnification, should yield up to him a part of

Peru. This new agreement, though confirmed with
Junse . the fame sacred folemnities as their first contract,

was observed with as little fidelity c.
Reilations SOON after lhe concluded this important tranf-

ation, Pizarro marched back to the countries on
the sea-coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval of
tranquillity, undillurbed by any enemy, either
Spaniih or Indian, he applied himself with that
perIcvering ardour, which dlitinguifhes his cha-
radLer, to introduce a form of regular government
into th: excenfive provinces fubje6 to his autho-
rity. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any diquii:ion concerning the principles
of civil policy, and little accustomed by his former
habits of life to attend to its arrangements, his
natural sagacity upplied the want both of fciencc
and experience. He distributed the country into
various liftrits; he appointed proper magistrates
to preside in each; and established regulations con-
cerning the adminiflration ofjutice, the collecion
of the royal revenue, the working of the mines,
anrd the t reatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
but well calculated to promote the public profpe-
rily. But tihoull,, for the present, he adapted his
plan to the i;fall lititl of his colony, his aspiring
nlind iooucd frwardl to its future grandeur. I-1c

/ .:rtl, lib. ii. c 13. \'eg, p. . lib. ii . c . 19. nzo,
lib. iii. c. 6. lcircir;, dec. 5 lib. vii. c. 8.

confilecrcd

confilered himself as laying the foundation of a B o o K
great empire, and deliberated long, and with much ---
solicitude, in what place he should fix the feat of Foundation

of Lima.

government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the
Incas, was situated in a corner of the empire, above
four hundred miles from the lea, and much farther
from Quito, a province of whose value he had
formed an high idea. No other settlement of the
Peruvians was so considerable as to merit the name
of a town, or to allure the Spaniards to fix their
residence in it. But, in marching through the
country, Pizarro had been struck with the beauty
and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one of the
most extensive and belt cultivated in Peru. There,
on the banks of a small river, of the fame name
with the vale which it waters and enriches, at the
distance of fix miles from Callao, the most com-
modious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded
a city whhll he deftinecl to be the capital of his
government. He gave it the name of Ciudad dc 1s1'.

January i.

los Reyes, either from the circuimftance of having
laid the first stone, at that season when the church
celebrates the ftflival of the Three Kings, or, as
is more probable, in honour of Juana and Charles,
the sovereigns of Castile. This name it ill retains
among the Spaniards, in all legal and formal
deeds; but it is better known to foreigners by that
of Lima, a corruption of the ancient appellation of
the valley in which it is fituatecl. Under his in-
fpedion, the buildings advanced with such rapi-
dity, that it oon assumed the form of a city, which,

by

B o o by a magnificent palace that he eret'ed for himself,

and by the stately houses built by several of his
535' officers, gave, even in its infancy, some indication

of its -fublequent grandeur d.

AImarro i- Ix consequence of what had been agreed with
vadcs clli. Pizarro, Almag-o began his march towards Chili;

and as he possesed in an eminent degree the virtues
most admired by oldiers, boundless liberality and
fearless courage, his standard was followed by five
hundred and eventy men, the greatest body of
Europeans that had hitherto bcen assembled in
Peru. From impatience to finish the expedition,
or from that contempt of hardship and danger
acquired by all the Spaniards who had served
long in America, Almagro, instead of advancing
along the level country on the coast, choe to
march across the mountains by a route that was
shorter indeed, but almost impracticable. In this
attempt his troops were exposed to every calamity
which men can susser, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigour of the climate in those elevated
regions of the torrid zone, where the degree of
cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the
survivors, when they descended into the fertile
plains of Chili, had new difficulties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different from
the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,

d Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. Iz. lib. vii. c. . Calancho
Coronica, lib. i. c. 37. Barnucvo, Lima fundata, ii. 94.

and

and in their bodily constitution, as well as vigour B o K
of spirit, nearly resembling the warlike tribes in -
North America. Though filled with wonder at 535
the first appearance of the Spaniards, and frill
more aflonifhed at the operations of their cavalry
and the effe6s of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon
recovered so far from their furprize, as not only to
defend themselves with obstinacy, but to attack
their new enemies with more determined fierceness
than any American nation had hitherto discovered.
The Spaniards, however, continued to penetrate
into the country, and colleted ome considerable
quantities of gold; but were so far from thinking
of making any settlement amidf- such formidable
neighbours, that, in spite of all the experience and
valour of their leader, the final issue of the expedi-
tion still remained extremely dubious, when they
were recalled from it by an unexpe&ed revolution
in Peru . The causes of this important event I
ihall endeavour to trace to their source.

So many adventurers had .flocked to Peru An infur-

from every Spanifl colony in America, and all tle ,ru.
with such high expectations of accumulating inde- n"'"'
pendent fortunes at once, that, to men poficied
with notions tb extravagant, any mention of ac-
quiring wealth gradually, and by schemes of pa-
tient industry, would have been not only a dif-

e Zarate, lib. iii. c. . Gomara IIfl. c. 131. Vega, p. 2.

lib. ii. c. 20. Ovalle Hill. de Chile, lib. iv. c. 15, &c.
Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 9. lib. x. c. i, &c.

appoint-

B o°0 K appointment, but an infuit. In order to find

w-J --- occupation for men who could not with safety
'535. be allowed to remain inative, Pizarro encouraged

tome of the most diftinguifled officers who had
lately joined him, to invade different provinces of
the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed for this
purpose; and about the rime that Almagro set out
for Chili, they marched into remote diftrits of
ts rife the country. No sooner did Manco Capac, the

Inca, observe the inconsiderate security of the Spa-
niards in thus dispersing their troops, and that only
a handful of soldiers remained in Cuzco, under
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than he thought that
the happy period was at length come for vindicat-
ing his own rights, for avenging the wrongs of his
country, and extirpating its oppressors. Though
ftriEtlv watched by the Spaniards, who allowed
him to reside in the palace of his ancestors at
Cuzco, he found means of communicating his
scheme to the persons who were to be entrulted
with the execution of it. Among people ac-
customed to revere their sovereign as a divinity,
every hint of his will carries the authority of a
command; and they themselves were now con-
vinced, by the daily increase in the number of
their invaders, that the fond hopes which they
had long entertained of their voluntary departure
were altogether vain. All perceived that a vi-
gorous effort of the whole nation was requisite to
expel them, and the preparations for it were car-

ried

ried on with the secrecy and silence peculiar to B o o t
Americans.

j535.

AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca andpogrefs.

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per- 15;6.
nmifion froln him to attend a great fUctival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capi-
tal. Under pretext of that folemn;ty, the great
men of the empire were aflembled. As soon as
the Inca joined them, the standard of war was
erected; and in a short time all the fighting men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely
on the settlements allotted them, were maflicred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelefly
through a country which.,eemed to be tamely sub-
miflive to their dominion, were cut off to a man.
An army amounting (if we may believe the Spa-
nifh writers) to two hundred thouiland men, at-
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothcrs endca-
voured to defend with only one hundred and
seventy Spaniards. Another formidable body in-
vested Lima, and kept the governor cloflly fhu
trp. 1There was no longer any communication be-
tween the two cities; the numerous forces of the
Peruvians fpreadng over the country, intercepted
every messenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and
L ima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the wuort concerning

5 tlhe

B o o K the other, and imagined that they themselves were
,i-.--- the only persons who had survived the general ex-

1536.

tinction of the Spanilh name in Peru d.

Siege of IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded
cuzcO' in person, that the Peruvians made their chief

effort. During nine months they carried on the
siege with incessant ardour, and in various forms;
and though they displayed not the fame undaunted
ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they conducted
some of their operations in a manner which disco-
vered greater sagacity, and a genius more fufcep-
tible of improvement in the military art. They
not only observed the advantages which the Spa-
niards derived from their discipline and their wea-
pons, but they endeavoured to imitate the former,
and turn the latter against them. They armed a
considerable body of their bravest warriors with
the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which they
had taken from the Spanish soldiers whom they
had cut off in different parts of the country. These
they endeavoured to marshal in that regular com-
pact order, to which experience had taught them
that the Spaniards were indebted for their irre-
fiftible force in ation. Some appeared in the field
with Spanish muskets, and had acquired skill and
resolution enough to ue them. A few of the
boldef-, among wlom was the Inca himself, were

d Vega, p. i1. lib. ii. c. 28. Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 3. Cieca

de Leon, c. 82. Gomara Iill. c. 135. Herrera, dec. 5.
lib. viii. c. .

14s mounted

mounted on the hor'se which they had taken, and B o 0 K
advanced briskly to the charge like Spanish cava- -- _
liers, with their lances in the reft. It was more by
their numbers, however, than by those imperfect
essays to imitate European arts and to employ Eu-
ropeah arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the Spa-
niards '. In spite of the valour, heightened by
despair, with which the three brothers defended
Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered pofeffibn of one
half of his capital; iand in their various efforts to
drive him out of it, the Spaniards loft Juan Pizar-
ro, the best beloved of all the brothers, together
with some other persons of note. Worn out with
the fatigue of incessant duty, distressed with want
of provisions, and despairing of being able any
longer to resist an enemy whose numbers daily in-
creased, the soldiers became impatient to abandon
Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their country-
men, if any of them yet 'survived', r of forcing
their way to the sea, and finding ome means of
escaping from a country which had been so fatal to
the Spanish name . While they were brooding
over those desponding thoughts, which their officers
laboured in vain to dispel, Almagro appeared fud-
denly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco. v

THE accounts transmitted to Almagro concern- Arrival of

ing the general insurrection of the Peruvians, were

e See NOTE XII.
f Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 4'

VOL. III. F such

B 0 K such as would have induced him, without hefita

c m tion, to . relinquish the conquest of Chili, and

and motives haften to the aid of his countrymen. But in.this
of his con-
dua. resolution he was confirmed by a motive lefs.gene-

rous, but more interesting. By the fame messen-
ger who brought him intelligence of the Inca's
revolt, he received the royal patent creating him
governor of Chili, and defining the limits of his
jurifdiEtion. Upon confidering the tenor of it, he
deemed it manifest beyond contradition, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his govern-
ment, and he was equally.folicitous to:prevent the
Peruvians from recovering possession of their capi-
tal, and to wrest it out of the hands of the Pizarros.
From impatience to accomplish both, he ventured
to return by a new route ; and in marching through
the sandy plains, on the.coaft, he fuffercd,..from
heat and drought, calamities of a new pecies,
hardly inferior to those in, which he had been in-
volved by cold and famine on the summits. of the
Andes.

I537. His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment.
tiinsP.ra The Spaniards and Peruvians,fixed their eyes upon

him with equal solicitude. .The former, as he
did not study to conceal his pretensions, were at a
loss whether to Welcome' him as a deliverer, or to
take precautions against him as an enemy. The
latter, knowing the points in contest between him
and his countrymen, flattered themselves that they
had more to hope than to dread from his opera-

tions.

tions. Almagro himself, unacquainted with the B o o K
detail of the events which had happened in his
absence, and solicitous to learn the precise posture 1537.
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and iith great circumfpeetion. Various negocia-
tions with both parties were set on foot. The
Inca condueted them on his part-with much ad-
dress. A first he endeavoured to gain the friend-
ship of Almagro; and after many fruitless over-
tures, despairing of any cordial union with a Spa-
niard, he attacked him by surprise with a nume-
rous body of chosen troops. But the Spanish difci-
pline and valour maintained their wonted fuperiori-
ty. The Peruvians were repulsed with such flaugh-
ter, that a great part of their army dispersed, and
Almagro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco without
interruption.

THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make Takes po

head against the Peruvians, directed all their at- cuzco.
tention towards their new enemy, and took mea-
fures to obftrut his entry into the capital. Pru
dence, however, refrained both parties for some
time from turning their arms against one another,
while surrounded by common enemies, who would
rejoice in the mutual slaughter. Different schemes
of accommodation were proposed. Each endea-
voured to deceive the other, or to corrupt his
followers. The generous, open, affable temper of
Almagro gained many adherents of the Pizarros,
who were disgusted with their harfi domineering

F 2 manners,

B o K manners. Encouraged by this defection, he ad-

_-ri * vanced. towards the city by night, surprised the

centinels, or was admitted by them, and inveiting
the house' where the two brothers resided, compel-
led them, after an obstinate defence, to surrender
at discretion. Almagro's claim ofjurifdi6tion over
Cuzco was universally acknowledged, and a form
of administration established in his name g.

Civil war, Two or three persons only were killed in this
Cers of Al- first a of civil hostility; but it was soon followed
nagro,' by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro having

dispersed the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received tome considerable reinforcements from
Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred
men, under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado,
to march to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his bro-
thers, if they and their garrison were not already
cut o' by the Peruvians. This body, which, at
that period of the Spanilh power in America, must
be deemed a considerable force, advanced near to
the capital before they knew that they had any
enemy more formidable than Indians to encounter.
It was with aftoniflhment that they beheld their
countrymen posted on the banks of the river Aban-
cay to oppose their progress. Almnagro, however,
wifled rather to gain than to conquer them, and
by bribes and promises endeavoured to seduce their

g Zarate, lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. i1. lib. ii. c. 29. 31.
Gomara Hill. c. 134. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. -5.

leader.

leader. The fidelity of Alvarado remained un- B o o K
shaken; but his talents for war were not equal to V
his virtue. Almagro anused him with various 1537'
movements, of which he did not comprehend the
meaning, while a large - detachment of chosen July :.
soldiers palsed the river by night, fell upon his
camp by surprise, broke his troops before they had
time to form, and took him prisoner, together
with his principal officers h.

BY the sudden rout of this body, the contest but does not

between the two rivals must have been decided, adPntag.
if Almagro had known as well how to improve as
how to gain a vi&ory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
officer of great abilities, who having served under
the constable Bourbon, when he led the Imperial
army to Rome, had been accustomed to bold and
decisive measures, advised him instantly to issue
orders for putting to death Ferdinand and Gon-
zalo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons
whom he could not hope to gain, and to march
diretly with his vi&orious troops to Lima, be-
fore the governor had time to prepare for his de-
fence. But Almagro~ though he discerned at once
the utility of the counsel, and though he had cou-
rage to have carried it into execution, suffered him-
self to be influenced by sentiments unlike those of a
soldier of fortune grown old in service, and by

h Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gom. Hid.. c. 138. Vega, p. ii.
lib, ii. c. 33, 34. Herrera, ec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

F 3 scruples

B OvK scruples which suited not the chief of a party who
L _-LvmJ had drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings of hu-

J537' manity refrained him from (hedding the blood of

his opponents; and the dread of being deemed a
rebel, deterred him from entering a province
which the king had allotted to another. Though
he knew that arms muff terminate the dispute be-
tween him and Pizarro, and resolved not to shun
that mode of decision, yet, with a timid delicacy
preposterous at such a junture, he was so solicitous
that his rival hould be confidered as the aggressor,
that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait
his approachi.
pifirefs of PIZARRO was still unacquainted with all the in-

iz teresting events which had happened near Cuzco.

Accounts of Almagro's return, of the loss of the
capital, of the death of one brother, of thelimpri-
fonment of the other two, and of the defeat of
Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a
tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed spirit
which had continued firm and erect under the
rudest shocks of adversity. But the necessity of
attending to his own safety, as well as the desire
of revenge, preserved him from finking under it.
He took measures for both with his wonted saga-

Hi artful city. As he had the command of the fea-coatt,
condu&. and expected considerable supplies both of men

and military stores, it was no less his interest to

Ilerrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. X1, .

gain

.gain time, and to avoid action, than it was that of o o :
Almagro to precipitate operations, and bring the a._
contest to a speedy issue. He had recourse to arts ,517.
which he had formerly practised with success, and
Almagro was again weak enough to susser himself
to, be amused with a profped of terminating their
differences by. ome amicable accommodation. By
varying his overtures, and shifting his ground as
often as it suited his purpose, ometimes eeming
to yield every thing which his rival could desire,
and then retracing all that he had granted, Pizarro
dexterously protradted the negociation to such a
length, that. though every day was precious to
Almagro, several months elapsed without coming
to any final agreement. While the attention of
Almagro, and of the officers with whom he con-
fulted, was occupied in detecting and eluding the
fraudulent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo
Pizarro and Alvarado found means to corrupt the
soldiers to whose custody they were committed,
and not only made their escape themselves, but
persuaded sixty of the men who formerly guarded
them to accompany their flight k. Fortune having
thus delivered one of his brothers, the governor
scrupled not at one at of perfidy more to procure
the release of the other. He proposed, that every
point in controversy between Almagro and himself
should be fubinitted to the decision of their fove-
reign; that until his award was known, each
should retain undisturbed poffeflion of whatever

l' Zarte, lib. iii. c. 8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.

F 4 part

B 9 K part of the country he now occupied;, that Ferdi-
t.. ~-, nand Pizarro hould be set at liberty, and return

1537 instantly to Spain, together with the officers, whom

Alm.agro purposed to. fend thither to represent the
juflice of his claims. Obvious as the design of
Pizarro was in those propositions, and familiar as
his artifices might now have been to his opponent,
Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infatua-
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an
agreement on these terms .

ws prepa. THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered
waor for his liberty, the governor, no longer fettered in his

operations. by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw fs every disguise which his concern for it
had obliged him to assume, The treaty was for-
gotrt; paciic and conciliating measures were no
more mentioned; it was in the field, he openly
declared, and not in the cabinet; by arms, and
not by negociation, that it mulf now be deter-
mined who should be maRSer of Peru, The rapi-
dity of his preparations suited such a decisive refo.
lution. Seyven hundred men were oon ready to
march towards Cuzco. The command of
these was given to his two brothers, in whom
he could perfecly confide for the execution
of his mofl violent schemes, as they were urged
on, not only by the enmity flowing from the
rivallhip between their family and Almagro, but

t Herrera, dec, 6. lib, iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iii c. 9.
Gomar it ill. c, 140. Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. 35.

inimated

animated with the desire of vengeance, excited by B o o K
recolle&ion of their own recent disgrace and sus- L-
ferings. After an unsuccessful attempt to cross 153
the mountains in the diret road between Lima
and Cuzco, they marched towards the south along
the coast as far as Nafca, and then turning to the
left, penetrated through the defiles in that branch
of the Aide which lay between them and the
capital. Almagro, instead- of hearkening to some
of his officers, who advised him to attempt the de-
fence of those difficult passes, waited the approach
of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons
seem to have induced him to take this resolution.
His followers amounted hardly to five hundred,
and he was afraid of weakening such a feeble
body, by fending any detachment towards the
mountains. His cavalry far exceeded that of the
adverse party, both in number and discipline, and
it was only in an open country that he could avail
hinfelf of that advantage.

THE Pizarros advanced without any obflrution, His army

but what arose from the nature of the desert and cuz,' o
horrid regions through which they marched. As
soon as they reached the plain, both faEtions were
equally impatient to bring this long-protrated con-
test to an issue. Though countrymen and friends,
the subje&s of the fame sovereign, and each with
the royal standard displayed; and though they be-
held the mountains that surrounded the plain in
which they were drawn up, covered with a vast

multitude

B K multitude of Indians, assembled to enjoy the spec.

VI.
I _-V--' tacle of their mutual carnage, and prepared to at-

tack whatever party remained master of the field;
so fell and implacable was the rancour which had
taken poifeffion of every breast, that not one pa-
cific counsel, not a ingle overture towards accom-
modation proceeded from either fide. Unfortu-
nately for Almagro, he was so worn out with the
fatigues of service, to which his advanced age was
unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he could
not exert his wonted activity; and he was obliged
to commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez,
who, though an officer of great merit, did not
poffcfs the fame ascendant either over the spirit or
affections of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accultomed to follow and revere,

April 6. THE confliEt was fierce, and maintained by each
Al'nagro dIfcated, party with equal courage. On the fide of Alma-

gro, were more veteran soldiers, and a larger pro-
portion of cavalry; but these were counterbalanced
by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, and by two
companies of well-difciplined musketeers, which,
on receiving an account of the insurrection of the
Indians, the emperor had sent from Spain m. As
the use of fire-arms was not frequent among the
adventurers in America ", hastily equipped for
Icrvice, at their own expence, this finall band of
{ilXicrs, regularly trained and armed, was a no.

" l crrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 8.

z ara:e, lib. iii. c. 8.

velty

velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day. B o0 K
Wherever it advanced, the weight of a heavy and --
well-fuftained fire bore down horse and foot before 's3S.
it; and Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally
and animate his troops, having received a dangerous
wound, the rout became general. The barbarity
of the conquerors stained the glory which they ac-
quired by this complete victory. The violence of
civil.rage hurried on some to laughter their coun-
trymen with indiscriminate cruelty; the meanness
of private revenge instigated others to single out
individuals as the objects of their vengeancc. Or-
gognez and several officers of distinction were maf-
sacred in cold blood; above a hundred and forty
soldiers fell in the field; a large proportion, where
the number of combatants were few, and the heat
of the contest soon over. Almagro, though o
feeble that he could not bear the motion of a
horse, had insisted on being carried on a litter to an
eminence which overlooked the field of battle.
From thence, in the utrnoft agitation of mind, he
viewed the various movements of bth parties, and
at laif beheld the total defeat of his own troops,
with all the passionate indignation of a veteran
leader long accustomed to victory. He endea- and taken.
voured to lave himself by flight, but was taken
prisoner, and guarded with the itriaeft vigilance °.

o Zarate, lib. iii. c. II, 12. Vega, p. ir. lib. ii. c. 36-
38. Herrera, dec. 6, lib, iii. c. o-12. lib, iv. c. 1-6.

Tr-He

D o0 K THE Indians, inflead of executing the resolution

_-v=-J- which they had formed, retired quietly after the
538.' battle was over; and in the history of the New

World, there is not a more striking instance of the
wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had ac-
quired over its inhabitants, than that after-feeing
one of the contending parties ruined and dispersed,
and the other weakened and fatigued, they had
not courage to fall upon their enemies, when for-
tune presented an opportunity of attacking them
with iuch advantage P.

New expe- CUZco was pillaged by the victorlous troops, who
ditioans. found there a considerable booty, consisting partly

of the gleanings of the Indian treasures, and partly
of the wealth amassed by their antagonists from
the poils of Peru and Chili. But so far did this,
and whatever the bounty of their leader could add
to it, fall below the high ideas of the recompence
which they conceived to Be due to their merit, that
Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratify such extra-
vagant expe6tations, had recourse to the lame ex-
pedient which his brother had employed on a fimi-
lar occasion, and endeavoured to find occupation
for this turbulent assuming spirit, in order to pre-
vent it fror breaking out into open mutiny. With
this view, he encouraged his most acive officers to
attempt the discovery and reduaion of various
provinces which had not hitherto submitted to the

P Zarate, lib. iii. c. . . ega, p. xI. lib. ii. c. 38.

Spaniards.

Spaniards. To every standard erected by the B o K
leaders who undertook any of those new expedi- x
tions, volunteers resorted with the ardour and hope 1538.
peculiar to the age. Several of Almagro's soldiers
joined them, and thus Pizarro had the satisfaction
of being delivered both from the importunity of
his discontented friends, and the dread of his an-
cient enemies g.

ALMACRO himself remained for several months Alagro

in custody, under all the anguish of fufpence. For Lt'd,
although his doom was determined by the Pizarros
from the moment that he fell into their hands,
prudence constrained them to defer gratifying their
vengeance, until the soldiers who had served under
him, as well as several of their own followers in
whom they could not perfeEtly confide, had left
Cuzce. As oon as they set out upon their differ-
ent expeditions, Almagro was impeached of trea-
son, formally tried, and condemned to die. The condemned,
sentence astonished him, and though he had often
braved death with undaunted spirit in the field, its
approach under this ignominious form appalled
him so much, that he had. recourse to abject sup-
plications, unworthy of his former fame. He be-
Jought the Pizarros to remember the ancient friend-
ship between their brother and him, and how much
he had contributed to the prosperity of their fa-
mily he reminded them of the humanity with

q Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Gomara llit. c. . Herrera,
dec. 6. lib. i. c. 7.

which,

B 0 0 K which, in oppofiion to the repeated remonstrances

VI. 7T-, .' of his on mos attached friends, he had spared

their lives when he had them in his power; he
conjured them to pity his age and infirmities, and
to susser him to pals the wretched remainder of his
days in bewailing his crimes, and in making:'his
peace..with Heaven. The itreaties, fays a Spa-
nifh historian, of a man so much beloved, touched
many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears from
many a stern eye.- But the brothers 'remained i-
flexible. As soon as Almagro knew his fate't be
inevitable, -he met it with the dignity and 'fortitude
eandtut t of a veteran. He was firangled in prifon,'and as-

terwards publicly beheaded. He fffered in the
feventy-fitth year of his age, and left one fon,by
an Indian woman of Panama, whom, though-'at
tliat time a prisoner in Lima, he named as successor
to his government, pursuant to a power which the
emperor had granted himr.

151q9 As, during the civil dissentions in Peru, all in-

Delibera
tions of the tercourfe with Spain was suspended, the detail of
court of
Spain con- the extraordinary tranlaiflons there did not soon
cerning the
state C reach the court. Unfortunately for the victorious

f. action, the first intelligence was brought thither
by Ibme of Almagro's officers, who left the coun-
try upon the ruin of their cause; and they related
what had happened, with every circumstance un-

r Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Gomara Hilt. c. 141. Vega, p. I.
lib. ii. c. 39. Hcrricr, dlec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9. lib. v. c. i.

favourable

favourable to Pizarro and his brothers. Their B K
ambition, their breach of the most solemn engage- _--.
ments, their violence and cruelty, were painted 1539'
with all the malignity and exaggeration of party
hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who arrived oon as-
ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary fplen-
dor, endeavoured to efface the impression which
their accusations had made, and to justify his bro-
ther and himself by representing Almagro as the
aggressor. The emperor and his ministers, though
they could not pronounce which of the contending
factions was mod criminal, clearly. discerned the
fatal tendency of their dissentions. It was obvious,
that while the leaders, entrusted with the conduct
of two .infant colonies, employed the arms which
should have been turned against the common ene-
my, in destroying one another, all attention to the
public good. muf' cease, and there was reason to
dread that the. Indians might improve the advan-
tage which the disunion of the Spaniards presented
to them, and extirpate both .the vicors and van-
quifhed. But the evil was more apparent than the
remedy. Where the information which had been
received was so defective and suspicious, and the
scene of action so remote, it was almost impoflible
to chalk out the line of concdui that ought to be
followed; and before any plan lihat (hould be ap-
proved of in Spain could be carriel into execution,
the situation of the parties, and the circumstances
of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effes extremely pernicious.

NOTHIING
.1

Bo 0 K NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a per.
a,-__j son to Peru, vefled with extenive and discretionary
Vaca d power, who, after viewing deliberately the poflure
Caltro sent r r * * *
thither with of affairs with his own eyes, and enquiring upon
powers. the spot into the condut of the different leaders,

hould be authorised to establish the government
in that form which he deemed most conducive to
the interest of the parent state, and the welfare of
the colony. The man felefted for this important
charge was Chriloval Vaca de Castro, a judge in
the court of royal audience at Valladolid; and his
abilities, integrity, and firmness, justified the hoice.
His instructions, though ample, were not such as
to fetter him in his operations. According to the
different aspet of affairs, he had power to take
upon him different characters. If he found the
governor still alive, he was to assume only the title
of judge, to maintain the appearance of ating in
concert with him, and to guard against giving any
just cause of offence to a man who had merited so
highly of his country. But if Pizarro were dead,
he was entrusted with a commiflion that he might
then produce, by which he was appointed his fuc-
ceffor in the government of Peru. This attention
to Pizarro, however, seems to have flowed rather from
dread of his power, than from any approbation of his
measures; for at the very time that the court seemed
lb solicitous not to irritate him, his brother Ferdi-
nand was arrested at Madrid, and confined to a pri-
son, where he remained above twenty years'.

8 Gomara Hil. c. 142. Vega, p. 1I. lib. ii. c. 40. Hcr-
rcra, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. o, II. lib. x. c. .

II WHILE

WHILE 'Vaca de CaRfro was preparing for his B K

VI.

voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru. -
The governor, confidering himself, upon the death piza4o di-
of Almagro, as the unrivalled possessor of that vast among his
empire, proceeded to parcel out its territories f'llow'r"
among the conquerors; and ad this division been
made with any degree of impartiality, the extent
of country which he had to bellow, was sufficient to
have gratified his friends, and to have gained his
enemies. But Pizarro conducted this tranfation,
not with the equity and candour of a judge atten-
tive to discover and to reward merit, but with the
illiberal spirit of a party leader. Large diftri6s,
in parts of the country most cultivated and popu-
lous, were set apart as his own property, or grant-
ed to his brothers, his adherents and favourites.
To others, lots les valuable and inviting were as-
signed. The followers of Almagro, amongst whom
were many of the original adventurers to whose va-
lour and perfevcrance Pizarro was indebted for his
success, were totally excluded from any portion in
those lands, towards the acquisition of which they
had contributed so largely. As the vanity of every
individual et an immoderate value upon his on
services, and the idea of each concerning the re-
compence due to them role gradually to a more
exorbitant height in proportion as their conqucel;
extended, all who were dilippointed in tihc'ir cx-
pectations exclaimed loudly againl tlih ri)aci!u|l
ness and partiality of the go':crnor. The );rtillns

VOL. III. G of

B 0 0 K of Almagro murmured in secret, and meditated

VI.
-v .. revenge t
1540.

Progress of RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in South
thpanirm America had been since Pizarro landed in Peru,

their avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied.
The officers, to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated into
several new provinces, and though some of them
were exposed to great hrdfhips in the cold and
barren regions of the Andes, and others fuffrred
distress not inferior amidIt the woods and marshes
of the plains, they made discoveries and conquests
which not only extended their knowledge of the
country, but added considerably to the territories
of Spain in the New World. Pedro de Valdivia
reaffumed Almagro's scheme of invading Chili,
and notwithstanding the fortitude of the natives in
defending their poflilions, made such progress in
the conquest of the country, that he founded the
city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the efta.
bliihment of' the Spanilli dominion in that pro-

lRemaIl<ahle vince". But of all the enterprizes undertaken
expecthtion
of G1'iioz about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro wa;

izarro the most remarkable. The governor, who seemes

to have resolved that no perlbn in Peru hould pol'
fess any Iation of ditiingluiihed eminence or autho-

' Vega, p. i. lib. iii. c. 2. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. viii.
C. 5.

" Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 13. Ovallc, lib. ii. c. , &c.

rit)

rity but those of his own family, had deprived Be- B oO K
nalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his corn-
mand in that kingdom, and appointed his brother '540
Gonzalo to take the government of it. He in-
ftrueedl him to attempt the dilcovcry and conquef
of the country to the c.lil of the Andes, which,
according to the inrormation of th:. Indians,
abounded with cinnamon and other valuable lPices.
Gonzalo, not infer ior to ny of his brothers in
courage, and no Ires a,mbitious of acquiring dif-
tinction, eage;ly cnr.iSgcd in this d(,iiclc lervice.
He let out from Q:ito at the ead of three hun-
dred and sorry fuJldirs, near one half of whom
were horfcmen, with iour thouland Indians to
carry their provisions. In forcing their way
through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excels of cold anl fatigue, to neither of
which they were accultomed, prove'd fatal to the
greater part of their wretched attendants. 'lle tir ,ali,
Spaniards, though more robufl, andt inured to a
variety of clinates, flulTiled( contidcrably, and loft
omie men; but when they dicLndcd into the low
country their diirels iicreafel. I)u!inW two
months it rained inceliantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their clothts .
The vafl plaiins upon whii h they were now entering,
either altoether w\itl,)Ut inli.l.i.rs, or occuL)icd
by the rudest and leall: indliilfrious tribes in the

x Z, rte, lib. iv. c. Z.

G 2 New

B 0 K New World, yielded little subsistence. They could

VI.
-- not advance a ftep but as they cut a road through
1540' woods, or made it through marshes. Such incef-

sant toil, and continual scarcity of food, seem more
than sufficient to have exhausted and dispirited any
troops. But the fortitude and perseverance of
Spaniards in the sixteenth century were infuper-
able. Allured by frequent but false accounts of
rich countries before them, they persisted in ftrug-
gling on, until they reached the banks of the Coca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whose waters
pour into the. Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they built
a bark, which they expected would prove of great
utility, in conveying them over rivers, in procur-
ing provisions, and in exploring the country.
This was manned with fifty soldiers, under the
command of Francis Orellana, the officer next in
rank to Pizarro. The fiream carried them down
with such rapidity, that they were oon far a-head
of their countrymen, who followed lowly and with
difficulty by land.

Deserted by AT this distance from his commander, Orellani,
Oi diana.

a young man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy
himself independent, and transported with the pre-
dominant pafion of the age, he formed the fchemc
of diftinguinliing himself as a discoverer, by fol-
lowing the course of the Maragnon, until it joined
the ocean, and by surveying the vast regions

throughl

through which it flows. This scheme of Orel- B o K
lana's was as bold as it was treacherous. For, if i_
he be chargeable with the guilt of having violated 1540.
his duty to his commander, and with having aban-
doned his fellow-foldiers in a pathless desert, where
they had hardly any hopes of success, or even of
fafetv, but what were founded on the service which
they expected from the bark; his crime is, in onle
measure, balanced by the glory of having ventured
upon a navigation of near two thousand leagues,
through unknown nations, in a vessel hastily con-
ftruCed, with green timber, and by very unskilful
hands, without provisions, without a cornpafs, or
a pilot. But his courage and alacrity supplied
every defect. Committing himself fearlessly to the Sails down

the Marag.

guidance of the stream, the Napo bore him along non.
to the south, until he reached the great channel of
the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coast,
he held on his course in that direation. H-e made
frequent descents on both fides of the river, ome-
times seizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce savages feated on its banks; and sometimes
procuring a supply of food by a f-iendly intercourse
with more gentle tribes. After a long series of
dangers, which he encountered with amazing for-
titude, and of distresses which he supported with
no less magnanimity, he reached the ocean Y, where
new perils awaited him. Thele he likewise fur-
mounted, and got safe to the Spanifil settlement in

See NOTE X,

G 3 the

B o o0 the island Cubagua; from thence he failed to Spain.

VI. ----- Tlhe vanity natural to travellers who visit regions
,540.

unknown to the reft of mankind, and the art of an
adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an extraor-
dinary proportion of the marvellous in the narra-
tive of his voyage. He pretended to have disco-
vered nations o rich, that the roofs of their
teni)les were covered with plates of old ; and de-
fcribed a republic of women so warlike and power-
ful, as to have extended their dominion over a con-
fiderable tract of the fertile plains which he had
visited. Extravagant as thole tales were, they gave
rile to an oinion, that a region abounding with
gold, diftinguiifhed by the name of El Dorado, and
a community of Amazons, wre to be found in
this part of the New World ; and luch is the pro-
penfity of mankind to believe what is wonderful
that it has been slowly and with difficulty that rea-
son arid observation have exploded those fables.
The voyage, however, even when stripped of every
romantic cmbellifhinent, defelrvs to be recoi-(ld,
not only as one of the muit inmcmorable occurirenckc
in that adventurous age, but a the sir-s evenr
which led to any certain knowledge of the inm-
necni' regions that stretch calftward fiom tle An-ecs
to the ocean Y.

y Zarate, lib. iv. c. 4. Gornara Hill. c. 85. ega, p. 11.

lib. iii. c. 4. licirera, dec. 6. lib. ix. c. --5. Rodriguez El
MVaraglon y Ainazonas, lib. i. c. 3.

No

No words can describe the consternation of Pi- B13 0 K

zarro, when he did not find the bark at the con-
fluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had in'rt4of
ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would not iZa"r'
allow himlelf to fulpet that a man, whom he had
intrusted with such an important command, could
be so base and tb unfeeling, as to 'dl'ert him at
such a juncture. But imputing his absence from
the place of rendezvous to lome unknovn accident,
he advanced above fifty leagues alJng the banks
of the Maragnon, expecting every moment to fee
the bark appear with a supply of provisions. At 1541.
length he came up with an officer whom Orellana
had left to perish in the delfrt, because he had the
courage to remonltrate against his perfidy. From
him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime, and
his followers perceived at once their own dperate
situation, when deprived of their only reifurce.
The spirit of the stoutest hearted veteran funk with-
in him, and all demanded to be led back inltantly.
Pizarro, though he affLimed an appearance of tran-
quillity, did not oppose their inclination. But lie
was now twelve hundrel miles from Quito; and in
that long march the Spaniards encountered hard-
ships greater than tho!e which they had endured in
their progress outward, without the alluring hopes
which then soothed and animated them under their
sufferings. Hunger compelled them to feed on
roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and horses,
to devour the mos loathfiole reptiles, and even to

G 4 gnaw

B O OK 1
gnaw the leather of their saddles and fword-belts.

-' Four thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten
]541' Spaniards, perilhed in this wild disastrous expedi-

tion, which continued near two years; and as fifty
men were aboard the bark with Orellana, only
fourscore got back to Quito. These were naked
like savages, and so emaciated with famine, or
worn out with fatigue, that they had more the ap.
pearance of fpe&res than of men .
Nunber of BUT, infcad of returning to' enjoy the repose

ents in which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering
Peru. Quito, received accounts of a fatal event that

threatened calamities more dreadful to him than
those through which he had passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of
his conquells which has been mentioned, the ad-
herents of Almagro, confidering themselves as pro-
fcribed by the party in power, no longer enter-
tained any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in despair resorted to Lima, where
the houle of young Almagro was always open to
them, and the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was ipent in affording them fubfiflence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
lad served under the elder Almagro devoted
Iimelf to his interetfs, was quickly transferred to

Zarate, lib, .

i .

c. 2-5. ega, p. 1i. lib. iii. c. 3, 4, 5

14. Herrcra, dec. 6. lib. viii. c , . i,

8 .

ib .

i . 2-5. dec.
7, lib. iii. c. x1. 'izar. Vanorcz illulir, 349, &c.

his son, who was now grown up to the age of B o o K
manhood, and poffefled all the qualities which
captivate the affections of soldiers. Of a graceful Confider

young Al-

appearance, dexterous at all martial exercises, bold, maglo as
open, generous, he seemed to be formed for com-
mand; and as his father, conscious of his own
inferiority, from the total want of education, had
been extremely attentive to have him inftrufled in
every science becoming a gentleman; the accom-
pliflments which he had acquired heightened the
respect of his followers, as they gave him diffintion
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a point of
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor was afflcdion for Al-
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their own distresses. Many of them, defritute
of common neceffariesa, and weary of loitering
away life, a burden to their chief, or to such of
their afociates as had saved ome remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed im-
patiently for an occasion to exert their activity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of all their milery.
Their frequent cabals did not pass unobfcrved; conrpire
and the governor was warned to be on his guard i'orl
againil mnen who meditated ome delperate deed, Za"'
and had resolution to execute it. But either from

aSee NOTE XIV.

the

B o 0 c the native intrepidity of his mind, or from con-

-v ~tempt of persons whose poverty seemed to render
'54' their machinations of little consequence, he dif-

regarded the admonitions of his friends. " Be in
no pain," said he carelelsly, " about my life; it
is perfectly safe, as long as every man in Peru
knows that I can in a moment cut off any head
which, dares to harbour a thought againit it." This
security gave the Almagrians full leilure to digest
and ripen every part of their scheme; and Juan de
I-lerrada, an officer of great abilities, who had tle
charge of Almagro's education, took the direc-
tion of their consultations, with all the zeal which
this connection inipircd, and with all the authority
which the acendant that he was known to have
over the nidi ofl is pupil gave hiin,
fnd kii: ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid-

d:'"ay, the lalbon of tranquillity and repore in all
illtrv climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
of the nmoli determined conspirators, allied out or
Almagro's houl'( in complete armour; and craw-
ing their l\vords, as they advanced hafily towards
the governor's palace, cried our, " Long live the
king, but let the tyrant die !" Their allbciates,
warned of their motions by a ignal, were in arms
at cliferent (lti;,ns ready to luport them. Though
Pizarro was ufiially fulrounded by flch a nume-
rotus train of ttcldanlts as litred the magnilicence
of the mull opulent lLIu)jLe of tlle ale in whicl he
lived, yet as he vwas jut rifCn from table, and moill:

of

of his domestics had retired to their own apart- B 0 KI
ments, the conspirators pafled through the two L
outer courts of the palace unobserved. They were ,54s'
at the bottom of the ftaircae, before a page in
waiting could give the alarm to his master, who
was converting with a few friends in a large hall.
The governor, whose Iteady mind no form of dan-
ger could appal, starting up, called for arms, and
commanded Francisco de Chaves to make falf the
door. But that officr, who did not retain so much
presence of mind as to obey this prudent order,
running to the top of the stair-case, wildly afkled
the conspirators what they meant, and whither
they were going? Instead of anfivering, they flab-
bed him to the heart, and burfi into tie hall.
Some of the persons who were there threw them-
selves from the windows ; oihers attempted to fly;
and a few drawing their swords, follo.ved their
leader into an inner apartment. The conlf)irators,
animatedl with having the ojc of their vngeance
now in view, ruined forward after them. P'izarro,
with no other arl-. than his :vord and buckler;
defended the entry, ;;ani i;; puite I' hllis I1l'-
brother Alcantara, and his little knot of friends,
he maintained the uinqual contell with intrepidity
worthy of his pall exploits, andl with the vigour (o:
a youthful con)batant. " Cou rage," cried hl:,
"companions, we are yet enow to make tihof:
traitors repent of their aui alirv." Bt the armour
of the conl}irators prote(cd them, while every
thruit they made took effc-f. Alcant::;la 1'i cldeaci

lit

B o K at his brother's feet; his other defenders were

vi.
.-Do mortally wounded. The governor, so weary that

L54' he could hardly wield his word, and no longer

able to parry the many weapons furiously aimed at
him, received a deadly thrust full in his throat,
funk .o the ground, and expired.

Almagro As soon as he was slain, the assassins ran out
acknow-
ledgedas his into the streets, and waving their bloody swords,
fu;e'llr. , °

proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two
hundred of their associates having joined them,
they conduIcd young Almagro in solemn pro-
ceflion through the city, and afetmbling the magi-
firates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge him as lawful fuccefior to his father
in his government. The palace of Pizarro, toge-
ther wikh the houses of several of his adherents,
were piilaged by the soldiers, who had the satis-
faction at once of being avenged on their enemies,
and of enriching themselves by the spoils of thote
through whose hands all the wealth of Peru had
pallc. h.

:;c l- I'ieTF boldness and success of the conspiracy, as
ot difoi, well as the name and popular qualities of Alma-

gro, drew many lol(iicrs to his Itandard. Every
ndlvcnturer of defperatc fortune, all who were
difiltis sicd with Pizarro, and from the rapacioul-

1, ;Zrate, lil). iv. c. 6-8. Comara Ijill. . 144, 145.
Rv',, p. I . li iii c. 5-7. Icrrera, eicc, . lib. ,. c 4.--

ness of his government in the latter years of his B ° o K
life, the number of malcontents was confilerable, -
declared without hesitation in favour of Almagro,
and he was soon at the head of eight hundred of
the most gallant veterans in Peru. As his youth
and inexperience di!qualified him from taking the
command of them himlelf, he appointed Herrada
to a as general. But though Almagro speedily
collected such a respeCtable force, the acquieecence
in his government was far from being general.
Pizarro had left many friends to whom his memory
was dear; the barbarous affafination of a man to
whom his country was so highly indebted, filled
every impartial person with horror. The ignomi-
nious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful
title on which he tounded his pretensions, led
others to confider him as an uftLrper. The officers
who commanded in some provinces refused to re-
cognize his authority, until it was confirmed by
the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal standard was erctced, and preparations
made to revenge the Imurder of their ancient
leader.

Those feeds of discord, whlich could not have Anivi,, or

lain long dormantr, acij qired rreat vigour aidc a li- \ca
vity, when te arrival of' Vaca de Caillro was
known. Aficr a Ion.; and cijillrous voyage, lhe
w;as driven by llrcis oi weather into a inMAl har-
bour in tle province of i'opiylan; and l)roceedling
flom thence yli, lanl, alicr a journcy no lcls tedious

than

C o o K than difficult, he reached Qito. In his way he

VI.

t_ received accounts of Pizarro's death, and of thl
whol5i4mes events which followed upon it. He immediately
the tine of produced the royal commnifion appointing him
governor, r

governor of Peru, with the fame privileges and
authority; and his jurircliction was acknowledged
without hesitation by Benalcazar, Adelantado, or
lieutenant-general for tile emperor in Popayan,
and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the absence -of
Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the troops
left in Qtuito. Vaca de Castro not only a:iumed
the supreme authority, but shewed that he poll
fefled the talents which the exercise of it at that
juncure required. By his influence andl address he
soon affenmbled such a body of troops, as not only
set him above ail fear of being exposcd to any in-
fult from the adverse party, but enabled him to
advance from (Qiito with the dignity that became
his characer. By dispatching perlbns of confi-
dence to the cliferent ettlements in Peru, with a
formal notilication of his arrival and of his co!n-
mifion, he communicated to his countrymen the
royal plealure with refpca to the government t
the country. By private eniillries, he excited
such officers as had dilcovered their disapprobation
of Almagro's proccedings, to mani'lit tiheir cltst
to their sovereign by Itpporting the pcrlon honour-
cd with his colmmi;lion. 'hole mealurcs were pro-
dclulive olf g;rcat Ieflcts. L:ncouragcd by the np-
proach of the new governor, or prepared by s
machinations, the loyal were confirmed in their

principle.,

principles, and avowed them with greater bold- B o K
nels; the timid ventured to declare their senti- v
ments; the neutral and wavering, finding it ne- i4
ceffary to chufe a fide, began to lean to that which
now appeared to be the laf.lt, as well as the moll
jutc.

AL1MAGRO obfCrved the rapid progress of this C,)n(,i, of

spirit of dil'afec'tion to his cauiC, and in order to n `
give an effeaual check to it before the arrival of
Vaca de Catro, he lIt out at the head of his troops 54z.
for Cuzco, where the molt confiderale body of
opponents had erected the royal fta: dard, under
the command of Pedro Alvarez H-olguin. Duiing
his march thither, HFerrada, the flfiul guide ot
his youth and of his couniii'l, died ; and froni that
time his mealures were c:Jif}i. uaus for thi-ir vio-
lence, but concerted with little lalgacity, and exe-
cuted with no address. t-lolguin, who, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de-
scending towards the coast at tlievery time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco, deceived his
unexperienced adverIliry by a very inmlple strata-
enm, avoided an engagement, andl es cccd a junc-
tion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who had
),'en the firll to declare aslainlt sAlm;.;Bro

as an
u!urper.

Soon after, Vaca dc Cafro entered their c;lr;:lI prri. .;
with the troops which he brought Irolm Qwiro, c,:;i..

Bcnzon, lib. iii. c o. Z. .i:itg', lib.iv. c, 1l. G; .innl,
c. 1,6, 1... Ici! :.. , dec. . ll). x. c. , , 3. , cC.

li' :A

B 0 0 K and ere&ing the royal itandard before his own

A_->~.^ tent, he declared, that as governor, lie would dil-
S41. charge in person all the functions of general of

their combined forces. Though formed by the
tenour of his past life to the habits of a sedentary
and pacific profeflion, he at once assumed the acti-
vity and discovercd the decision of an officer long
accustomed to command. Knowing his strength to
be now far superior to that of the enemy, he was
impatient to terminate the contest by a battle.
Nor did the followers of Almagro, who had no
hopes of obtaining a pardon for a crime so atro-
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that
Sept. 6. mode of decision. They met at Chupaz, about two

hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with all
the fierce animosity inspired by the violence of
civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the
eagerness of revenge, and the lafl efforts of despair.

Defeats Al- ViEtory, after remaining long doubtful, declared
mla'gr. at last for Vaca de Caffro. The superior number

of his troops, his own intrepidity, and the martial
talents of lirancifco de Carvajal, a veteran officer
formed under the great captain in the wars of
Italy, and who on that lay laid the foundation of
his future fame in Peru, triumphed over the
bravery of his opponents, though led on by youn
Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy of a better
caule, and deserving another fate. The carnao,
was great in proportion to the number of the com-
batants. Many of the vanquished, eecially luc!h
as were conscious that they might be charged with

17 being

being accessory to the afaffination of Pizarro, rush- B o o K
ing on the swords of the enemy, chose to fall like ;
soldiers, rather than wait an ignominious doom. '54'.
Of fourteen hundred men, the total amount of com-
batants on both fides, five hundred lay dead on
the field, and the number of the wounded was frill
greater d.

IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de Severity of

his pruotcd*

Catro, both in the council and in the field, fur- ing,.
prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were still more
aftoniflied at his conduct after the victory. As he
was by nature a rigid dilpenfer of justice, and per-
fuaded that it required examples of extraordinary
severity to restrain the licentious spirit of soldiers
lo far removed from the feat of government, he
proceeded directly to try his priConers as rebels.
Forty were condemned to futfer the death of trai-
tors, others were banished fiom Peru. Their
leader, who made his escape from the battle, be-
ing betrayed by omen of his officers, was publicly
beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name of
Almagro, and the. spirit of the party, was ex-
tint e.

DuRING those violent convulsions in Peru, the Conrulta.

rlons ol thet
emperor and his ministers were intently employed erperor

concet nrin
his domi-
d Zarate, lih. iv. c. 1z-19. Gornara, c. 148. Vega, "nons in

Annri;a.

p. i . lib. iii. c. --18. Herrcra, dec. 7. lib. i. c. , z, 3.
lib. iii. c. --11.

Zarate, lil. iv. c. zl. Gomiara, c. 15o. Iecrrera, dec. 7.
lib. iii. c 12. lib. vl. c. i.

VOL. III. II ia

B O O K in preparing regulations, by which they hoped not
-- _-" only to re-establish tranquillity there, but to intro-

duce a more perfect system of internal policy into
all their settlements i the New World. It is ma-
nifeft from all the events recorded in the history f
America, that rapid and extensive as the Spanish
conquests there had been, they were not carried
on by any regular exertion of the national force,
but by the occasional efforts of private adventurers.
After fitting out a few of the firit armaments for
discovering new regions, the court of Spain, duiing
the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V.,
the former the most intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the mos ambitious, was encumbered
with filch a multiplicity of schemes, and involved
in war with so many nations of Europe, that it had
not leisure to attend to distant and lels interesting
objeaCs. The care of prosecuting discovery, or of
attempting conquest, was abandoned to individuals;
and with such ardour did men push forward in
this new career, on which novelty, the spirit of
adventure, avarice, ambition, and the hope of
meriting heaven, prompted them with combined
influence to enter, that in less than half a century
almost the whole of that extensive empire which
Spain now poffeles in the New World, was ilb-
jeeed to its dominion. As the Spanish court con-
tributed nothing towards the various expeditions
undertaken in America, it was not entitled to claim
much from their success. The sovereignty of the
conquered provinces, with the fifth of the gold

and

and silver, was reserved for the crown; every B O O K
thing else was seized by the affociares in each ex-
pedition as their own right. The plunder of the 1542,
countries which they invaded served to indem-
nify them for what they had expended in equip-
ping themselves for the service, and the con-
quered territory was divided among them, accord-
ing to rules which custom had introduced, as
permanent eftablifiments which their successful
valour merited. In the infancy of those settlements,
when their extent as well as their value were un-
known, many irregularities escaped observation,
and it was found necefary to connive at many ex-
ceiles. The conquered people were pillaged with
deftrustive rapacity, and their country parcelled
out among its new matters in exorbitant flares, far
exceeding the highest recompence due to their
services. The rude conquerors of America, in-
capable of forming their establishments upon any
general or extcnfive plan of policy, attentive only
to private interest, unwilling to forego precnt gain
from the profpe& of remote or public benefit, seem
to have had no objeEt but to amass sudden wealth,
without regarding what might be the consequences
of the means by which they acquired it. But
when time at length discovered to the Spanish
court the inportance of its American pofeions,
the necefity of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
praCtices, prevalent among military adventurer;,

1 '2. it

B o0 K it was found requisite to substitute the institutions

of regular government.
1542.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the islands, and employed themfclves in
searching for gold and lilver with the fame incon-
fiderate eagerness. Similar effects followed. The
natives employed in this labour by mailers, who in
imposing tasks had no regard either to what they
felt or to what they were able to perform, pined
away and perished so fast, that there was reaoln to
apprehend thit Spain, infread of pofefng coun-
tries peopled to such a degree as to be fulceptible
of progressive improvement, would oon remain
proprietor only of a vast uninhabited defcrt.

THE emperor and his ministers were so enfible

of this, and so flicitou; to prevent the extinction
of the Indian race, which threatened to render their
acquisitions of no value, that from time to time
various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for fccuring to that unhappy people more
gentle and equitable treatmnrt. But the dillance
of America from the feat of empire, the feeblcncis
of government in the new colonies, the avarice and
audacity of soldiers unaccullomcd to reftiaint, pre-
vented these alutary regulations fron operating
with any cuniderable influence. The evil conti-

nueil

nued to grow, and at this time the emperor found o o K
an interval of leisure from the affairs of Europe to --_-
take it into attentive consideration. He consulted 'rh41 etron,

with wlonl

not only with his miniflers and the members of the he advises.
council of the Indies, but called upon several
persons who had resided long in the New World, to
aid them with the result of their experience and
observation. Fortunately for the people of Ame-
rica, among there was Bartholomew de las Casas,
who happened to be then at Madrid on a miClion
from a Chapter of his order at Chiapa f. Though,
since the miScarriage of his former chemes for the
relief of the Indians, he had continued finut up in
his cloister, or occupied in religious functions, his
zeal in behalf of the former objets of his pity
was so far from abating, that, from an increased
knowledge of their sufferings, its ardour had aug-
mented. He seized eagerly this opportunity of
reviving his favourite maxims concerning the
treatment of the Indians. With the moving elo-
quence natural to a man on whose mind the
scenes which he had beheld had made a deep
impression, he described the irreparable waste of
the human species in the New World, the Indian
race almost totally swept away in the islands in
less than fifty years, and lhaCening to extinction on
the continent with the fame rapid decay. With
the decisive tone of one ltrongly prepoflcfeed with
the truth of his own syst-em, he imputed all this

f Rcrnef1 -lifl. de Chiapa, p. 146.

H 3 tO

BV K to a single cause, to the exaEcions and cruelty of

VI.
O-i _J his countrymen, and contended that nothing could

prevent the depopulation of America, but the de-
claring of its natives to be freemen, and treating
them as fubjeEs, not as slaves. Nor did he con-
fide for the success of this proposal in the powers
of his oratory alone. In order to enforce them, he
composed his famous treatise concerning the de-
ftrution of America , in which he relates, with
many horrid circumstances, but with apparent
marks of exaggerated description, the devastation
of every province which had been visited by the
Spaniards.

is folici. THE emperor was deeply affliced with the re-

tude to in-
troduce a cital of so many actions shocking to humanity.
general re-
formation of But as his views extended far beyond those of Las
governmnt. Casas, he perceived that relieving the Indians from

oppreflion was but one ftep towards rendering his
possessions in the New World a valuable acquifi-
tion, and would be of little avail, unless he could
Circumscribe the power and usurpations of his own
fubjets there. The conquerors of America, how-
ever great their merit had been towards their coun-
try, were mostly persons of such mean birth, and of
such an abjecl rank in society, as gave no diftinc-
tion in the eye of a monarch. The exorbitant
wealth with which ome of them returned, gave
pmbrage to an age not accuflomed to fee men in

g Rcmefa, p. 19z. 199.

infcri::

inferior condition elevated above their level, and B o o K

VI.

riling to emulate or to surpass the ancient nobility v
in splendour. The territories which their leaders 54
had appropriated to themselves were of such enor-
mous extenth, that if the country flould ever be
improved in proportion to the fertility of the foil,
they muff grow too wealthy and too powerful for
fubjets. It appeared to Charles, that this abuse
required a remedy no less than the other, and that
the regulations concerning both muff be enforced
by a mode of government more vigorous than had
yet been introduced into America.

WITH this view he framed a body of laws, New reSu-

latons for

containing many salutary appointments with re- tipurufr.
spect to the constitution and powers of the supreme
council of the Indies; concerning the tation and
jurisdiction of the royal audiences in different parts
of America; the administration of justice; the
order of government, both ecclesiastical and civil.
These were approved of by all ranks of men. But
together with them were issued the following regu-
lations, which excited universal alarm, and occa-
sioned the most violent convulsions: " That as the
repartimientos or fliares of land seized by several
persons appeared to be excessive, the royal
audiences are empowered to reduce them to a
moderate extent: That upon the death of any
conqueror or planter, the lands and Indians granted

h See NOTE XV.

II 4 to

B 0o K to him ihall not descend to his widow or children,

VI.
t.---.. but return to the crown: That the Indians hall

5 henceforth be exempted from personal service, and

shall not be compelled to carry the baggage of
travellers, to labour in the mines, or to dive in
the pearl fisheries: That the stated tribute due by
them to their superior shall be ascertained, and
they flall be paid as servants for any work they
voluntarily perform : That all persons who are or
have been in public offices, all eccleiaflics of every
denomination, all hospitals and monasteries, shall be
deprived of the lands and Indians allotted to
them, and these be annexed to the crown: That
evory person in Peru, who had any crirninal con-
cern in the contefis between Pizarro and Almagro,
should forfeit his lands and Indians '."

rFi mini. ALL the Spanifi miniflers who had hitherto
sters ienlon-
tfrateagailt been entrufied with the direEtion of American

affairs, and who were best acquainted with the tate
of the country, remonfrated againfi those regula-
tions as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
represented, that the number of Spaniards who
had hitherto emigrated to the New World was o
extremely finall, that nothing could be expected
from any ell-ort of theirs towards improving the
vast regions over which they were fcattcre ; that
the success of every fchmle for this purpose must

ITerrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 5. Fcrpandez Ilit. lib. i.
c, 1, Z.

depend

depend upon the ministry and service of the In- n o o

vi.

dians, whose native indolence and aversion to la- ---
bour, no profped of benefit or promise of reward 541.
could surmount; that the moment the right of im-
posing a task, and exacting the performance of it,
was taken from their matters, every work of
industry must cease, and all the sources from
which wealth begun to pour in upon Spain mufF
be ftopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all
times of his own opinions, and so much impressed
at present with the view of the disorders which
reigned in America, that he was willing to ha-
zard the application even of a dangerous remedy,
perfifled in his resolution of publihfing the laws.
That they might be carried into execution with
greater vigour and authority, he authoriled Fran-
cisco Tello de Sandoval to repair to Mexico as
Vifitador or fuperintendant of that country, and to
co-operate with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy,
in enforcing them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez A vicro
Vela to be governor of Pelru, with the title of sP', p.U
Viceroy; and in order to trcngthen his admini-
llration, he eftablihed a court of royal audience s43.
in Lima, in which four lawyers of eminence were
to preside as judges .

Tr-E viceroy and fuperintendant failed at the Effr,, *

sale time; and an account of the laws which they ',"en ' ew
were to enforce reached America before them. SI''p"'

k Zarate, li:. iii. 24. Gomara, c. 151. Vegi, p. z.
lib. iii, c. 20.

The

B K The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed as

VI.

-_.-' - the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited grant
1543 of liberty to the Indians affected every Spaniard in

America without diftinftion, and there was hardly
one who might not on some pretext be included
under the other regulations, and susser by them.
But the colony in New Spain had now been so
long accustomed to the restraints of law and autho-
rity under the steady and prudent administration
of Mendoza, that how much soever the spirit of
the new statutes was detested and dreaded, no at-
tempt was made to obftruft the publication of
them by any a of violence unbecoming fubjets.
The magistrates and principal inhabitants, how-
ever,, presented dutiful addrefTes to the viceroy
and superintendent, representing the fatal confe-
quences of enforcing them. Happily for them,
Mendoza, by long residence in the country, was
so thoroughly acquainted with its state, that he
knew what was for its interest as well as what it
could bear; and Sandoval, though new in office,
displayed a degree of moderation seldom possessed
by persons jufi entering upon the exercise of
power. They engaged to suspend, for some time,
the execution of what was offensive in the new
laws, and not only consented that a deputation of
citizens should be sent to Europe to lay before the
emperor the apprehensions of his fubjedts in New
Spain with refpe to their tendency and effeCts,
but they concurred with them in supporting their
sentiments. Charles, moved by the opinion ol

meIcn

men whose abilities and integrity entitled them to B o o K
decide concerning what fell immediately under I
their own view, granted such a relaxation of the
rigour of the laws as re-established the colony in its
former tranquillity '.

IN Peru the storm gathered with an afpeft frill in Peru.

more fierce and threatening, and was not so soon
dispelled. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
much inferior to those who had fubjeeted Mexico
to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the
infpeaion of the parent state, and intoxicated with
the sudden acquisition of wvealth, carried on all
their operations with greater lic nce and irregula-
rity than any body of adventurers in the New
World. Amidst the general subversion of law
and order, occasioned by two successive civil wars,
when each individual was at liberty to decide for
himself, without any guide but his own interest or
paflions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
of subordination. To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the introduction of regular government,
the power of a viceroy, and the authority of a re-
fpedable court of judicature, would of themfclves
have appeared fo-midable restraints, to which they
would have submitted with reluctance. But they re-
volted with indignation againfl the idea of comply-
ing with laws, by which they were to be firipped at

i Fernandez Hilt. lib. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vega, p. 11. lib. iii.

C. 21, zz. -Ierrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, 15.
Toruem, Mon. Ind i. v

i .
. 13.

once

B °0 K once of all they had earned so hardly during many

A-_---. years of service and suffering. As the account of
1543. the new laws spread fucceffvely through the dif-

ferent fettlemcnts, the inhabitants ran together,
the women in tears, and the men exclaiming
againfl the injustice and ingratitude of their fove-
reign in depriving them, unheard and unconvicted,
of their poffclions. " Is this," cried they, " the
recompence due to persons, who, without public
aid, at their own expence, and by their own va-
lour, have fubjecRed to the crown of Castile terri-
tories of such vast extent and opulence ? Are there
the rewards betlowed for having endured unpara-
lelled distress, for having encountered every fpe-
cies of danger in the lervice of their country ?
WIhofe merit is so great, whose conduct has been
lo irreproachable, that he may not be condemned
by ome penal clause in regulations, conceived in
terms as loose and comprehensive, as if it had
been intended that all flhould be entangled in their
snare? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held
some public office, and all, without distinction,
have been constrained to take an ative part in the
contest between the two rival chiefs. Were the
former to be robbed of their property because they
had clone their duty ? Were the latter to be pu-
nified on account of what they could not avoid ?
Shall the conquerors of this great empire, inflead
of receiving marks of diflinction, be deprived of
the natural consolation of providing for their wi-
dows and children, and leave them to depend for

fubfiftcnce

subsistence on the scanty supply they can extort n o K

vi.

from unfeeling courtiers m ? We are not able now, _
continued they, to explore unknown regions in 154'.
quest of more secure settlements; our conftitu-
tions, debilitated with age, and our bodies cover-
ed with wounds, are no longer fit for ative ser-
vice; but still we poffels vigour sufficient to aferc
ourjuft rights, and we will not tamely uffer them
to be wrested from us ."

BY discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe- An infur-

mence, and listened to with universal apprcbation, ,1ofldn re-
their palfions were inflamed to such a pitch, that '1,e -
they were prepared for the most violent measures; t to
and began to hold conlultations in different places,
how they might oppole the entrance of the viceroy
and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws.' From this,
however, they were diverted by the address of
Vaca de Caltro, who flattered them with hopes,
that, as Ibon as the viceroy and judges fliould ar-
rive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and
remonltrances, they would concur with them in
endeavouring to procure tome mitigation in the
rigour of laws which had been framed without due
.tccntion either to the state of the country, or to
the lIcitiments of the people. A greater degree of
accommodation to there, and even Ibme conccllions

"l IIcrcra, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, IS.
" Goinara, c. 152. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 0o, rt.
Ve'ci, p. It, lib. iii c. 20. 22. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

on

B o o K on the part of government, were now become re-

VI.
_^-.--v ' quifite to compoe the present ferment, and to

543- soothe the coloniets into fubmifion, by inspiring

them with confidence in their superiors. But with.
out profound discernment, conciliating manners,
and flexibility of temper, fulch a plan could not be

The spirit carried on. The viceroy poffcifed none of these.
of difaffec-
tion, - Of all the qualities that fit men for high command,
creased by
the viceroy. he was endowed only with integrity -and courage;

the former harsh and uncomplying, the latter bor-
dering so frequently on rashness or obstinacy, that
in his situation they were defects rather than vir-
March 4. tues. From the moment that he landed at Tum-

bez, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidered him-
seif merely as an executive officer, without any dif-
cretionary power; and, regardless of whatever he
observed or heard concerning the state of the
country, he adhered to the letter of the regulations
with unrelenting rigour. In all the towns through
which he passed, the natives were declared to be
free, every person in public office was deprived of
his lands and servants; and as an example of obe-
dience to others, he would not susser a single In-
dian to be employed in carrying his own baggage
in his march towards Lima. Amazement and
consternation went before him as he approached;
and so little solicitous was he to prevent these fiom
augmenting, that, on entering the capital, he
openly avowed that he came to obey the orders
of his sovereign, not to dispense with his laws.
This harlh declaration was accompanied with what

rendered

rendered it ill more intolerable, haughtiness in o o K
deportment, a tone of arrogance and decision in ---
difcourle, and an insolence of office grievous to 543
men little accustomed to hold civil authority in
high refpeEt. Every attempt to procure a fs-
pension or mitigation of the new laws, the viceroy
confidered as flowing from a spirit of difafieEtion
that tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank
were confined, and ome put to death, without
any form of trial. Vaca le Castro was arrested,
and notwithstanding the dignity of his former
rank, and his merit in having prevented a general
infurreftion in the colony, he was loaded with
chains, and shut up in the common jail o.

BUT however general the indignation was against The mal-

contents
such proceedings, it is probable the hand ofautho- chufeGon

zalo Pzarro
rity would have been strong enough to suppress it, to e theil

leader.

or to prevent its burftling out with open violence,
if the malcontents had not been provided with a
leader of credit and eminence to unite and to di-
ret their efforts. From the time that the purport
of the new regulations was known in Peru, every
Spaniard there turned his eyes towards Gonzalo
Pizarro, as the only person able to avert the ruin
with which they threatened the colony. From all
quarters, letters and addresses were sent to him,
conjuring him to stand forth as their common pro-
tetor, and offering to support him in the attempt

° Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, 24, 25. Gomara, c. 153-15;.
Vega, p. . lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 6--o.

1 5 with

O K with their lives and fortunes. Gonzalo, though
vi.

-^_, inferior in talents to his other brothers, was equally
1543. ambitious, and of courage no less daring. The

behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his bro-
thers and himself, dwelt continually on his mind,
Ferdinand a fate prisoner in Europe, the children
of the governor in custody of the viceroy, and ent
aboard his fleet, himlelf reduced to the condition
of a private citizen in a country, for the discovery
and conquest of which Spain was indebted to his
family. These thoughts prompted him to feel for
vengeance, and to assert the rights of his family,
of which he now confidered himself as the guar-
dian and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily
surmount that veneration for his Sovereign which
seems to be interwoven in his frame, the idea of
marching in arms against the royal fandard filled
him with horror. HIe hesitated long, and was ill
unresolved, when the violence of the viceroy, the
universal call of his countrymen, and the certainty
of becoming soon a victim himself to the severity of
the new laws, moved him to quit his residence at
Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and re-
ceived him with tianfl)rcts of joy as the deliverer
of the colony. In the fervour of their zeal, they
elected him procurator-general of the Spanish n;-
lion in Peri, to solicit the repeal of the late regu-
lations. They,empowered him to lay their re-
monltrances before the royal audience in Limi,
and upon pretext of danger fom the Indiansl,

10 authoilnl

,uthorifed him to march thither in arms. Under B o o K
fancion of this nomination Pizarro took poffefion - -
of the royal treasure, appointed officers, levied 5
soldiers, seized a large train of artillery which
Vaca de Catro had deposited in Guamanga, and
set out for Lima, as if lie had been advancing
against a public enemy. Difaffeecion laving now
aflumed a regular form, and being united under
a chief of such diftinguifled name, many persons
of note resorted to his fandard; and a confider-
able part of the troops, raised by the viceroy to
oppose his progress, deserted to him in a body °.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution ad Diflfsetons

happened there, which encouraged him to proceed y"' tia;cu
with almost certainty of success. The violence of acudirtc,
the viceroy's administration was not more formi-
dable to the Spaniards of Peru than his overbear-
ing haughtiness was odious to his aociates, the
judges of the royal audience. During their
voyage from Spain, some symptoms of cold-
ness between the viceroy and them began to
appear p. But as soon as they entered upon the
exercise of their refpeaive offices, both parties
were so much exasperated by frequent contcfts,
arising fiom interference of jurifdifion, and con-
trariety of opinion, that their mutual dilguft soon

Zarate, lib, v. c. i. Gomara, c. 56, 157. Vega, p. 11

lib i. . 4-12. Fernandez, lib. i. . 12-17. e-rrera,
dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 18, &c. lib. viii. c. -5.

P Gomara, c. 171.
VoL. III. I grew

B o 0 K grew into open enmity, The judges thwarted the

I-.-._t viceroy in every measure, set at liberty prisoners
3544 whom he had confined, jufified the malcontents,

and applauded their remonitrances. At a time
when both departments of government should have
united against the approaching enemy, they were
contending with each other for superiority. The

The viceroy judges at length prevailed.. The viceroy, univer-
imprisoned,
imept. is, rally odious, and abandoned even by his own

guards, was seized in his palace, and carried to a
desert island on the coast, to be kept there until
he could be sent home to Spain.
Views of

fizarro, THE judges, in consequence of this, having

assumed the supreme direction of affairs into their
own hands, iued a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and ent a mef-
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to difiifs his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or
twenty attendants. They could hardly expect that
a man so daring and ambitious would tamely com-
ply with this requisition. It was made, probably,
with no such intention, but only to throw a de-
cent veil over their own conduEt; for Cepeda, the
president of the court of audience, a pragmatical
and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret
correspondence with Pizarro, and had already
formed the plan, which he afterwards executed,
of devoting himself to his service. The imprison-

ment

nent of the viceroy, the usurpation of the judges, B o o K
together with the universal confusion and anarchy Y.
consequent upon events so singular and unexpeced, 1544'
opened new and vast profpeds to Pizarro. He
now beheld the supreme power within his reach.
Nor did he want courage to pufl on towards the
object which fortune presented to his view. Car-
vajal, the prompter of his resolutions, and guide
of all his actions, had long fixed his eye upon it
as the only end at which Pizarro ought to aim.
Instead of the inferior funcion of procurator for
the Spanish settlements in Peru, he openly de-
manded to be governor and captain-general of the
whole province, and required the court of audi-
ence to grant him a commission to that effec. At
the head of twelve hundred men, within a mile of
Lima, where there was neither leader nor army to
oppose him, such a request carried with it the au-
thority of a command. But the judges, either
from unwillingness to relinquish power, or from
a desire of preserving some attention to appear-
ances, hesitated, or seemed to hesitate, about com-
plying with whatJle demanded. Carvajal, impatient He afrumer

the govern-

of delay, and impetuous in all his operations, march- nt.
ed into the city by night, seized leveral officers of
diftination obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them
without the formality of a trial. Next morning the
court of audience iued a connmifiion in the empe-
ror's name, appointing Pizarro governor ofPeru, with
full powers, civil as well as military, and he entered

1 2 the

B °0 K the town that day with extraordinary pomp, to take

VI.
I*-_ --^ possession of his new dignity .

1544.

0oa. z. BUT amidst the disorder and turbulence which

The viceroy
recovers his accompanied this total dissolution of the frame
liberty.

ibry. of government, the minds of men, et loose from

the ordinary restraints of law and authority, aed
with such capricious irregularity, that events no
less extraordinary than unexpected followed in a
rapid fuccefflon. Pizarro had scarcely begun to
exercise the new powers with which he was in-
vested, when he beheld formidable enemies rife up
to oppole him. The viceroy having been put on
board a vessel by the judges of the audience, in
order that he might be carried to Spain under
custody of Juan Alvarez, one of their own num-
ber; as soon as they were out at ea, Alvarez,
either touched with remorse or moved by fear, kneel-
ed down to his prisoner, declaring him from that
moment to be free, and that he himself, and every
person in the fllip, would obey him as the legal
representative of their sovereign. Nugnez Vela
ordered the pilot of the vessel to shape his course
towards Tumbez, and as loon as he landed there,
ere6ted the royal itandard, and resumed his func-
tions of viceroy, Several persons of note, to whor
the contagion of the ifditious spirit which reigned
at Cuzco and Lima had not reached, instantly

1 Zarate, lib. v. c. 8-o. Vega, p. 1I. lib. iv. c. 13-

iq. Gooara, c. t59-163. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 18-25.
'Herrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 1o-20.

avowed

avowed their resolution to support his authority r. B o o K
The violence of Pizarro's government, who ob- -
served every individual with the jealousy natural to 1544'
ufirpers, and who punilhed every appearance of
disaffection with unforgiving severity, soon aug-
mented the number of the viceroy's adherents, as it
forced some leading men in the colony to fly to him
for refuge. While he was gathering Iuch trength
at Tumbez, that his forces began to assume the ap-
pearance of what was confidered as an army in
America, Diego Centeno, a bold and active offi-
cer, exasperated by the cruelty and oppression of
Pizarro's lieutenant.governor in the province of
Charcas, formed a conspiracy against his life, cut
him off, and declared for the viceroy .

PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear- ,,t545

' i

rs Pizarro

ances of hostility in the opposite extremes of the marches
empire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to
assert the authority to which he had attained, with
the spirit and conduft of an officer accustomed to
command, and marched directly against the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as most
formidable. As he was master of the public re-
venues in Peru, and most of the military men were
attached to his family, his troops were so nume-
rous, that the viceroy, unable to face them, re-

Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. 165. Fernandez, lib. i.
p. 23. HIrrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 15.

' Zarate, lib. v. c. 18. Gomara, c. 169. Herrera, dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. z7.

I 3 treated

s o0 K treated towards Quito. Pizarro followed him;

VI.
aL- and in that long march, through a wild moun-

545. tainous country, suffered hardships and encoun-

tered difficulties, which no troops but those ac-
customed to serve in America could have endured
or surmounted". The viceroy had scarcely reached
Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's forces ap-
peared, led by Carvajal, who, though near four-
score, was as hardy and aive as any young fol-
dier under his command. Nugnez Vela instantly
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and with
a rapidity more resembling a flight than a retreat,
marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro
continued to pursue; but finding it impossible to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From thence
he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who
was growing formidable in the fourhern provinces
of the empire, and he himself remained there to
make head against the viceroy ".

The viceroy BY his own aivity, and the aliftance of Be-
dkfeatcd.

nalcazar, Nugnez Vela soon assembled four hun-
dred men in Ppayan. As he retained, amidst all
his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and the
fame high sense of his own dignity, he rejeCted with
disdain the advice of ome of his followers, who
urged him to make overtures of accommodation

a See NQTE XVI.
X Zarate, lib.v. c. 5, 16-24. Gomara, c. 167. Vega,

p, l. lib. iv. c. 25-z8. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 3. 10.
[Ierrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 16. 20-27.

P?

to Pizarro, declaring that it was only by the sword n o o K
that a contest with rebels could be decided. With L-
this intention he marched back to Quito. Pizarro, 1546"
relying on the superior number, and flill more on
the discipline and valour of his troops, advanced
resolutely to meet him. The battle was fierce and January gs.
bloody, both parties fighting like men who knew
that the poffeflion of a great empire, the fate of
their leaders, and their own future fortune, de-
pended upon the issue of that day. But Pizarro's
veterans pulhed forward with such regular and
well-directed force, that they soon began to make
impression on their enemies. The viceroy, by ex.
traordinary exertions, in which the abilities of a
commander and the courage of a soldier were
equally displayed, held victory for ome time in
fufpence. At length he fell, pierced with many and lain.
wounds; and the rout of his followers became
general. They were hotly pursued. His head
was cut off, and placed on the public gibbet in
Quito, which Pizarro entered in triumph. The
troops assembled by Centeno were dispersed oon
after by Carvajal, and he himself compelled to fly
to the mountains, where he remained for several
months concealed in a cave. Every person in
Peru, from the frontiers of Popayan to those of
Chili, submitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, un.
der Pedro de Hinojofa, he had not only the unri-
valled command of the South-Sea, but had taken
poffeflion of Panama, and placed a garrison in
Nombre de Dios, on the opposite fide of the

I 4 iflhmus,

B o o K isthmus, which rendered him master of the only

VIo
v~ . avenue of communication between Spain and Peru,
1546. that was used at that period Y.

Pizarro ad. AFTER this decisive victory, Pizarro and his
vied to aC-
fume tie followers remained for some time at Quito, and
lovereignly
of l'er. during the first transports of their exultation, they

ran into every excess of licentious indulgence, with
the riotous fpiric usual among low adventureis
upon exraordinary success. But amidst this dilf
fipation, their chief and his confidents were obliged
to turn their thoughts fometines to what was fc-
rious, and deliberated wiih much olicitude con-
cerning the part that he ought now to take. Car-
vajal, no less bold and decisive in counsel than in
the field, had from the begining warned Pizarro,
that in the career on whichl he was entering, it was
vain to think of holding a middle course lthac he
mull either boldly aim at ail, or attempt notling.
Sion the time that Pizarro obtained ponfeffion of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater earneflnefs. Upon receiving
an account of the vitory at Quito, he remonstrated
with him in a tone till nmore peremptory. " You
have uflurpcd (laid he, in a letter written to Pizarro
on that occasion) the fuprenic power in this coun-
try, in contempt of the emperor's commilEion to

Y Varate, lib. v. c. 31, 32. Colnara, c. 170. Vega, p. .

lib. iv. c. 33, 34. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 51-54. Herrcra,
dec. 7. lib. x. c . 12 19-2z. dec, 8. lib. i, c. 1-3. Benzq,
lib, iii. c. iz;

the

the viceroy. You have marched, in hostile array, B o o c
against the royal fiandard; you have attacked the S6-'--i
representative of your sovereign in the field, have
defeated him, and cut off his head. Think not
that ever a monarch will forgive such insults on his
dignity, or that any reconciliation with him can be
cordial or sincere. Depend no longer on the pre-
carious favour of another. Assume yourself the
sovereignty over a country, to the dominion of
which your family has a title founded on the rights
both of discovery and conquet. It is in your
power to attach every Spaniard in Peru of any
consequence inviolably to your interest by liberal
grants of lands and of Indians, or by infituting
ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honour
similar to those which are courted with so much
eagerness in Europe. By establishing orders of
knighthood, with privileges and diftintions re-
fembling those in Spain, you may beflow a grati-
fication upon the officers in your service, suited to
the ideas of military men. Nor is it to your coun-
trymen only that you ought to attend; endeavour
to gain the natives. By marrying the Coya, or
daughter of the Sun next in succession to the crown,
you will induce the Indians, out of veneration for
the blood of their antient princes, to unite with
the Spaniards in support of your authority. Thus,
at the head of the antient inhabitants of Peru, as
well as of the new settlers there, you may set at
defiance the power of Spain, and repel with ease
any feeble force which it can fend at such a dif-

tapce."

0o o K tance." Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pi.

- -zarro's confidential counsellor, warmly seconded
46.' Carvajal's exhortations, and employed whatever

learning he possessed in demonstrating, that all the
founders of great monarchies had been raised to
pre-eminence, not by the antiquity of their lineage,
or the validity of their rights, but by their own
aspiring valour and personal merit .

Bot chutes PIZARRO listened attentively to both, and could
to negotiate
withe the not conceal the satisfaction with which he contem-
court of
Spain. plated the objet that they presented to his view,

But happily for the tranquillity of the world, few
.men possess that superior strength of mind, and
extent of abilities, which are capable of forming
and executing such daring schemes, as cannot be
accomplished without overturning the etablifhed
order of society, and violating those maxims of
duty which men are accustomed to hold sacred.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed
his ambition within more narrow limits. Initead
of aspiring at independent power, he confined his
views to the obtaining from the court of Spain a
confirmation of the authority which he now pof-
sessed and for that purpose, he ent an officer of
diftintifon thither, to give such a representation of
his conduct, and of the state of the country, as
might induce the emperor and his ministers, either

'Vega, p. ii. lib. iv. c. 40. Fernandez, lib.. i. c. 34.
lib. ii. c . 9. I- er'era, dec. S. lib, ii. c. to.

f7 from

from inclination or from necessity, to continue him B o o K
in his present station. i

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refpe& to Confulta-

tions of the

the part which he should take, consultations were Spanifhmi-
held in Spain, with no less solicitude, concerning the
measures which ought to be pursued in order to re-
establish the emperor's authority in Peru. Though
unacquainted with the last excesses of outrage to
which the malcontents had proceeded in that coun-
try, the court had received an account of the infur-
refion against the viceroy, of his imprisonment, and
the usurpation of the government by Pizarro. A
revolution so alarming called for an immediate inter.
position of the emperor's abilities and authority.
But as he was fully occupied at that time in Ger-
many, in conducting the war against the famous
league of Smalkalde, one of the most interesting and
arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of providing
a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved upon
his son Philip, and the counsellors whom Charles
had appointed to alift him in the government of
Spain during his absence. At first view, the ac-
tions of Pizarro and his adherents appeared so re-
pugnant to the duty of fubjeds towards their so-
vereign, that the greater part of the ministers in-
sifted on declaring them inRfantly to be guilty of
rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them with
exemplary rigour. But when the fervour of their
zeal and indignation began to abate, innumerable
obftaclcs to the execution of this measure presented

themielvtr.

B 0 0 K thenmfelves. The veteran bands of infantry, the

-_ strength and glory of the Spanish armies, were

then employed in Germany. Spain, exhaufled of
men and money by a long series of wars, in which
he had been involved by the restless ambition ot
two fucceflive monarchs, could not easily equip an
armament offufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To
transport any refpet6able body of troops to a
country o remote as Peru, appeared almost im.
pofiible. While Pizarro continued mafier of the
South-Sea, the direct route by Nombre de Dios
and Parama was impracticable. An attempt to
march to Quito by land through the new kingdom
of Granada, and the province of Popayan, acrols
regions of vafl extent, desolate, unhealthy, or in-
habited by fierce and holtile tribes, would be at-
.tended with unsurmountable danger and hardships
The paflage to the South-Sea by the Straits ot
Magellan was to tedious, so uncertain, and o
little known in that age, that no confidence could
be placed in any effort carried on in a course of
navigation so remote and precarious. Nothing
then remained but to relinquish the system which
the ardour of their loyalty had sirss fuggefled, and
to attempt by lenient measures what could not be
cffeced by force. It was manifest, from Pizarro's
solicitude to represent his conduct in a favourable
light to the emperor, that, notwithltanding the
excefTcs of which he had been guilty, he tfill re.
tained sentiments of veneration for his sovereign.
J3y a proper application to there, together with

fomc

some such concefions as should discover a spirit of B K
moderation and forbearance in government, there i--
was fRill room to hope that he might be yet reclaimed, '54'
or the ideas of loyalty natural to Spaniards might so
far revive among his followers, that they would no
longer lend their aid to uphold his usurped authority.

THE success, however, of this negociation, no Cafca ap-

pointed to
less delicate than it was important, depended en- repar to

P':u as r-

tirely on the abilities and address of the person to lident.
whom it hould be committed. After weighing
with much attention the comparative merit of va-
rious persons, the Spanifl miniiters fixed with
unanimity of choice upon Pedro de la Gafca, a
priest in no higher station than that of counfcllor to
the Inquisition. Though in no public office, he
had been occasionally employed by government in
affairs of trust and consequence, and had condut-
ed them with no less i(ill than success; displaying
a gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied with
much firmness; probity, superior to any feeling of
private interest; and a cautious circumfpe6tion in
concerting measures, followed by such vigour in
executing them, as is rarely found'in alliance with
the other. These qualities marked him out for the
function to which he was destined. I'he emlperor,
to whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly ap-
proved of the choice, and communicated it to hlim
in a letter, containing xprelfions of good-will and
confidence, no lets honourable to the prince who
wrote, than to the fulbjeLL who received it. G.fla,

nov wLll-

B o° K hotwithftanding his advanced age and feeble confti.
s j.a tution, and though, from the apprehensions natural
1+46. to a man, who, during the course of his life, had

never been out of his own ountry, he dreaded the
effects of a long Voyage, and of an unhealthy
climate a, did not hefitare a moment about corn.
is modera- plying with the will of his sovereign. But as a

proof that it was from this principle alone he aed,
he refused, a bishopric which was offered to him,
in order that he might appear in Peru with a more
dignified character; he would accept of no higher
title than that of president of the court of audience
in Lima; and declared that he would receive no
lalary on account of his discharging the duties of
that office. All he required was, that the expence
of supporting his family should be defrayed by the
public, and as he was to go like a minister of
peace with his gown and breviary, and without
any retinue but a few domestics, this would not
load the revenue with any enormous burden b.

The powerg BUT while he discovered such disinterested mo-
cornmitted
to im, deration with refpet to whatever related personally

to himself, he demanded his official powers in a
very different tone. He insisted, as he was to be
employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourse to

" Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 17.
b Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara,c. 174. Fernandez, lib. ii.

c. 14-16. Vega, p. I l ib. v. c. . Herrera, dec. 8. lib. i.
c. 4, &c.

his

his sovereign for new inffrutions on every emer- B o o K

VI.

gence; and as the whole success of his nego- _
ciations muff depend upon the confidence which 546
the people with whom he had to treat could place
in the extent of his powers, that he ought to be
invested with unlimited authority; that his jurif-
diftion must reach to all persons and to all causes;
that he muff be empowered to pardon, to punish,
or to reward, as circumstances and the'behaviour
of different men might require; that, in cafe of
refitance from the malcontents, he might be au-
thorifed to reduce them to obedience by force of
arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to call
for assistance from the governors of all the Spanish
settlements in America. These powers, though
manifestly conducive to the great objects of his
milfion, appeared to the Spanish ministers to be
inalienable prerogatives of royalty, which ought
not to be delegated to a fubjecr, and they refused
to grant them. But the emperor's views were
more enlarged. As from the nature of his employ-
ment, Gafca must be entrusted with discretionary
power in several points, and all his efforts might
prove ineffectual if he was circumscribed in any
one particular, Charles scrupled not to invest him
with authority to the full extent that he demanded.
Highly satisfied with this fresh proof of his master's
confidence, Gafca hastened his departure, and,
without either money or troops, set out to quell a May 6.
formidable rebellion .

£ Fernandez, lib. ii, c. 6-J.

ON

B O K ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found

VI.
Av -l Hernan Mexia, an officer of note, polled there,

546.

july 7. by order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of
at Panama. men, to oppose the landing of any hofRile forces.

But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
train so little formidable, and with a title of no
such dignity as to excite terror, that he was re-
ceived with much refpeEt. From Nombre de Dios
he advanced to Panama, and met with a similar
reception from I-inojofa, whom Pizarro had en-
trusted with the government of that town, and the
command of his fleet stationed there. In both
places he held the fame language, declaring that
he was sent by their sovereign as a messenger of
peace, not as a minister of vengeance; that he
came to redress all their grievances, to revoke the
laws which had excited alarm, to pardon paR
offences, and to re-establish order and jurfice in the
government of Peru. His mild deportment, the
simplicity of his manners, the fanEity of his profcf-
sion, and a winning appearance of candour, gained
credit to his declarations. The veneration due to a
person clothed with legal authority, and ating in
virtue of a royal commission, began to revive among
men acculltomed for ome time to nothing more
refpetable than an uiirpedjurifdiction. Hinojoll,
Mexia, and several other officers of diftinaion, to
each of whom Gafca applied leparately, were gained
over to his interest, and waited only for some d-
cent occasion of declaring openly in his favour d

Fcrnandcz, lib. ii. . 21, &C. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6,
Comarn, c. 175. Vcga, p. I1. ib. v. c. 3.

JI T11s

THIS the violence of Pizarro soon afforded them. B o O K

As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival at Panama, ,-
though he received, at the fame time, an account Violent6pro-
of the nature of his comnmifion, and was informed 's, of
of his offers not only to render every Spaniard in Peru
easy concerning what was pafr, by an at of general
oblivion; but secure with refpet to the future,
by repealing the obnoxious laws ; instead of accept-
ing with gratitude his sovereign's gracious con-
ceflions, he was so much exasperated on finding
that he was not to be continued in his flation as
governor of the country, that he inflantly resolved
to oppose the president's entry into Peru, and to
prevent his exercising any jurifdition there. To
this desperate resolution he added' another highly
preposterous. He ent a new deputation to Spain
tojuftify this conduct, and to insist, in name of all
the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of the
government to himself during life, as the only
means of preserving tranquillity there. The per-
sons entrusted with this strange commifion, inti-
mated the intention of Pizarro to the president, and
required him, in his name, to depart from Panama
and return to Spain. They carried likewile fecrec
instructions to -linojofa, directing him to offer
Gafca a present of fifty thousand pesos, if lie would
comply voluntarily with what was demanded of
him; and if he should continue obstinate, to cut
him off either by allnitination or poison .

Zarate, lib. vi. c, 8. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 33, 34.
-Herrera, dec. S. lib. ii. c. 9, Io.

VOL. III. K MANY

B o0 K MANY circumstances concurred in pushing on

a__ Pizarro to those wild measures. Having been

Gafa4 gains once accustomed to supreme command, he could
his fleet

not bear the thoughts of descending to a private
flation. Conscious of his own demerit, he fufpe(-
ed that the emperor studied only to deceive him,
and would never pardon the outrages which he had
committed. His chief confidents, no less guilty,
entertained the fame apprehenlions. The approach
of Gafca without any military force excited no
terror. There were now above fix thousand Spa.
niards fettled in Peru f; and at the head of thdel
he doubted not to maintain his own independence,
if the court of Spain flould refule to grant what
he required. But he knew not that a pirit of de-
fecion had already begun to spread among tholc
whom he trusted most. Iinojofa, amazed at Pi-
zarrb's precipitate resolution of setting himself in
opposition to the emperor's commission, and dif
daining to be his instrument in perpetrating the
odious crimes pointed out in his flcret inftrutions,
publicly recognized the title of the president to
the supreme authority in Peru. The officers under
his command did the fame. Such was the con-
tagious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been sent from Peru;
and at the tinme when Pizarro expected to hear
either of Gaica's return to Spain, or of his death,
he received an account of his being master of the
fleet, of l'anamil, and of the troops stationed there.

r lrrera, dec. 3. lib. iii, c. I.

IRRITATED

IRRITATED almof to madness by events o B o o K

unexpected, he openly prepared for war; and in -- J
order to give some colour ofjuftice to his arms, he Pjzar4e
appointed the court of audience in Lima to pro- ar"
ceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of
having seized his hips, seduced his officers, and
prevented his deputies from proceeding in their
voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though ating as a
judge in virtue of the royal commillion, did not
scruple to prostitute the dignity of his funtion by
finding Gafca guilty of treason, and condemning
him to death on that account . Wild, and even
ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it imposed on
the low illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was
filled, by the semblance of a legal sanction war-
ranting Pizarro to carry on hostilities againfi a con-
vieted traitor. Soldiers accordingly resorted from
every quarter to his flandard, and he was oon at
the head of a thousand men, the best equipped
that had ever taken the field in Peru.

GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force muff Preparations

be employed in order to accomplish the purpose of o Gaca.
his minion, was no lelt assiduous in collecing
troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
settlements on the continent; and with such fuc-
cess, that he was oon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet, with a considerable body of

e Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 55. Vega, p. 11. lib. v. c. 7.
IHerrera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

K 2 soldiers,

B K soldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance

VI.

i _-
. -- excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did not

A^4ri. attempt for ome time to make any descent, they

did more effectual service, by setting ashore in dif-
ferent places persons who dispersed copies of the
as of general indemnity, and the revocation of
the late edics ; and who made known every where
the pacific intentions, as well as mild temper, of
the president. The effect of spreading this in-
formation was wonderful. All who were diffatif-
fled with Pizarro's violent administration, all who
retained any sentiments of fidelity to their fove-
reign, began to fmeditate revolt. Some openly
deserted a cause which they now deemed to be n-

Infurreoicn just. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he lay
o Cenceno,

concealed, assembled about fifty of his former ad-
herents, and with this feeble half-armed band ad-
vanced bldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in
the night-time, in which he displayed no less mili-
tary kill than valour, he rendered himself master
of that capital, though defended by a garrison ;
five hundred men. Most of these having ranedl
themlelves under his banners, he had oon th
command of a refpeEable body of troops h.
3gainfl PIZARRO, though astonished at beholding one

zn1 enemy approaching by ea, and another by land,

at a time when he trusted to the union of all 'erul
in his favour, was of a Ipirit more undaunted, and

1' Zaratc, lib. vi. c. 13-16. Gomara, c. 180, 181. Ser
nandez, lib.ii. c. 28, 64, &c.

mor,

more accustomed to the vicissitudes of fortune, B 0 0 oK
than to be difconcered or appalled. As the dan- ---
ger from Centeno's operations was the noft urgent,
he instantly set out to oppolf him. Having pro-
vided horses for all his soldiers, he marched with
amazing rapidiry. But every morning he found
his force diminilhed, by numbers who had left him
during the night; and though he became fulpi-
cious to excels, and punished without mercy all
whom he fpicted, the rage of deferion was too
violent to be checked. Before he got within fight
of the enemy at Huarina, near the lake Titiaca,
he could not muiter more than four hundred fol-
diers. But these he justly confidered as men of
tried attachment, on whom he might depend.
They were indeed the boldeRt and most desperate
of his followers, conscious like himself of crimes
for which they could hardly expect forgiveness,
and without any hope but in the success of their
arms. With there he did not hesitate to attack oaoberzo,
Centeno's troops, though double to his own in
number. The royalists did not decline the com-
bat. It was the most obfinate and blocdy that had
hitherto been fought in Peru. At length the intre- and defeats
pid valour of Pizarro, and the superiority of Car-
vajal's military talents, triumphed over numbers,
and obtained a complete victory. The booty was
immenfi c, and the treatment of the vanquished
cruel. By this lignal success the reputation of

See NOTE XVII.

KC 3 Pizarro

B K Pizarro was re-established, and being now deemed

VI.
A _-«»j invincible in the field, his army increased daily in
4547. k

number k

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the splendid
victory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Lima,
when the citizens, weary of his opprclfive domi-
nion, erected the royal standard, and Aldana, with
a detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took pof-

Gara lands session of the town. About the fame time',
at Peru.

Gafca landed at Tumbez with five hundred
men. Encouraged by his pretence, every fettle-
ment in the low country declared for the king,
The situation of the two parties was now perfcEtly
reversed; Cuzco and the adjacent provinces were
possessed by Pizarro; all the reft of the empire,
from Quito southward, acknowledged the jurif-
diction of the President. As his numbers augmented
fast, Gafca advanced into the interior part of the
country. His behaviour frill continued to be gentle
aid unassuming; he expressed on every occasion,
his ardent wilh of terminating the contest without
bloodlhed. More solicitous to reclaim than to
punish, he upbraided no man for past offences, but
received them as a father receives penitent children
returning to a sense of their duty, Tllough desirous

k Zarate, lib. vii. c. z, 3. Gomara, c. 181. Vega,.p. Ii.

lib. v. c. 18, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 79, Herrera, cc. .
lib. iv. c. i, 2.

Zarate, lib. vi. c. 17.

p.

of peace, he did not flacken his preparations for B 0o K
war. He appointed the general rendezvous of his -
troops in the fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road '547'
to Cuzco mn. There he remained for ome months, Advances

towacld

not only that he might have time to make another cuzco.
attempt towards an accommodation with Pizarro,
but that he might train his new soldiers to the ule
of arms, and accustom them to the discipline of
a camp, before he led them against a body of vic-
torious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with the
success which had hitherto accompanied his arms,
and elated with having again near a thousand
men under his command, refused to liften to any
terms, although Cepeda, together with several of
his officers, and even Carvajal himself", gave it as
their advice to close with the president's offer of a
general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws . Gafca having tried in vain every
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the blood
of his countrymen, began to move towards Cuzco° Dec. z9g
at the head of sixteen hundred men.

PIZARRO, confident of viatory, fiffered the Botl parties

royalists to pass all the rivers which lie between batpie.
Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and to 154s.
advance within four leagues of that capital, flat-
tering himself that a defeat in such a situation as

m Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Fcrnandez, lib. ii . . 77 .
u See N OTE XVIII.

Zarate, lib. vii, c. 6. Vega, p. . lib. v. c. 27.

K 4 rendered

o o K rendered a retreat impracticable would at once
VI.
vJl terminate the war. He then marched out to meet
154s. the enemy, and Carvajal chore his ground, and
April 9. made the disposition of the troops with the discern-

ing eye, and profound knowledge in the art of war,
conspicuous in all his operations. As the two
armies moved forwards slowly to the charge, the
appearance of each was singular. In that of Pi-
zarro, composed of men enriched with the spoils
of the mufi opulent country in America, every
officer, and alnoft all the private men were clothed
in fluffs of Jilk, or brocade, embroidered with
gold and silver; and their horfcs, their arms, their
standards, were adorned with all the pride of
military pomp P. That of Gafca, though not so
splendid, exhibited what was no less rliking. He
himielf, accompanied by the archbishop of Lima,
the bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a great num-
ber of ecclefiafics, marching along the lines, bless-
ing the men, and encouraging them to a resolute
discharge of their duty.

Pizarro de. WHEN both were just ready to engage, Cepeda
roodps, hiet spurs to his horse, galloped off, and surrendered

himilf to the preident. Garcilaflo de la Vega,
and other officers of note, followed his example.
The revolt of persons in such high rank struck
all with amazement. The mutual confidence on
which the union and strength of armies depend,

P Zarate, lib, vi, c. II.

ceased

ceased at once. Distrust and consternation spread B O O K
from rank to rank. Some silently flipped away, v
others threw down their arms, the greatcft number 's-s.
went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
Iome leaders, employed authority, threats, and
entreatics, to fop them, but in vain. In lets
tlin half an hour, a body of men, which might
have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire,
was totally dilperfed. Pizarro, seIing all irretriev-
ably loft, cried out in amazement to a fw officers
wiho still faithfully adhered to him, " What remains
for us to do ?" " Let us rulb, replied one of
them, upon the enemy's firmell battalion, and die
like Romans." Dejected with such a reverie of
lortune, he had not spirit to follow this soldierly
counsel, and with a tameness disgraceful to his
former fame, he surrendered to one of Gafca's taken,
officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to escape, was
overtaken and seized.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless victory, did not and put to

slain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a
finall number of the molt distinguished or noto-
rious offenders, were punished capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. He
submited to his fate with a compoied dignity, and
tcemed desirous to atone by repentance for the
crimes which he had committed. The end of Car-
vajalwas suitable to his life. On his trial he offer-
ed no defence. When the sentence adjudging him
to be hanged was pronounced, he careldsly re-

jlicl(d,

B o K plied, " One can die but once." During the in.

VI.
L^_L terval between the sentence and execution, he dif.
1548. covered no sign either of remorse for the pall, or

of solicitude about the future; scoffing at all who
visited him, in his usual sarcastic vein of mirth,
with the fame quickness of repartee and gross plea.
fantry as at any other period of his life. Cepeda,
more criminal than either, ought to have hared
the fame fate; but the merit of having deserted
his associates at such a critical moment, and with
such decisive effeEt, saved him from immediate
punishment. He was sent, however, as a prisoner
to Spain, and died in confinement .

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

historians have given of the civil dissentions that
raged in Peru, with little interruption, during ten
years, many circumfrances occur so firiking, and
which indicate such an uncommon state of manners,
as to merit particular attention.

No merce- TI-OUGH the Spaniards who firfl invaded Peru
nary soldiers
in the civil were of the lowest order in society, and the greater
wars of
Peru. part of those who afterwards joined them were per-

sons of desperate fortune, yet in all the bodies of
troops brought into the field by the different lead-
ers who contended for superiority, not one min

q Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6, 7, 8. Gomara, c. 185, iS6.

Vega, p. . lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 86, &c,
IIerrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &c.

i6 ld

ated as a hired soldier, that follows his standard B o O K
for pay. Every adventurer in Peru confidered _
himfelfas a conqueror, entitled, by his services, to 1548'
an establishment in that country which had been
acquired by his valour. In the contests between
the rival chiefs, each chose his fide as he was di-
reaed by his own judgment or affections. He
joined his commander as a companion of his for-
tune, and disdained to degrade himself by receiving
the wages of a mercenary, It was to their sword,
not to pre-eminence in office, or nobility of birth,
that most of the leaders whom they followed were
indebted for their elevation; and each of their
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open a
way for himself to the possession of power and
wealth .

BUT though the troops in Peru served without Armies im-

any regular pay, they were raised at immense ex- pensive
pence. Among men accustomed to divide the
spoils of an opulent country, the desire of obtain-
ing wealth acquired incredible force. The ardour
of pursuit augmented in proportion to the hope of
success. Where all were intent on the fame object,
and under the dominion of the fame passion, there
was but one mode of gaining men, or of securing
their attachment. Officers of name and influence,
betides the promise of future establishments, re-
ceived in hand large gratuities from the chief with

r Vega, p. ii. lib. iv. c. 38. 41.

whom

t. o K; whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro, in order

J--_ toraife a thousand men, advanced five hundred
54t8. thousand pesos . Gafca expended in levying the

troops which he led against Pizarro nine hundred
thousand pefost. The distribution of propety,
bestowed as the reward of services, was still more

and im- exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompence of his
renfe re-
wards to in- perfidy and address, in persuading the court of
dividuals.

royal audience to give the fantion of its authority
to the usurped jurifdidion of Pizarro, received a
grant of lands which yielded an annual income of
a hundred and fifty thousand pesos . Hinojofa,
who, by his early defection from Pizarro, and fur-
render of the fleet to Gafca, decided the fate of
Peru, obtained a diftriEt of country affording two
hundred thousand pesos of yearly value . While
such rewards were dealt out to the principal offi.
cers, with more than royal munificence, propor-
tional shares were conferred upon those of inferior
rank.

Their pro- SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its
furon and
luxury. natural effects. It gave birth to new wants, and

new desires. Veterans, long accustomed to hard-
ship and toil, acquired of a sudden a taste for pro-
fuse and inconsiderate dissipation, and indulged in
all the excesss of military licentioufne-s. The

" Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 5+.
1 Zarate, lib. vii. c. io. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
U Gomara, c. 164. x Vega, p. . lib. vi. c. 3.

riot

riot of low debauchery occupied ome; a relish for B o o K
expensive luxuries spread among othersy. The 5 _
meanest soldier in Peru would have thought him- 54
self degraded by. marching on foot; and at a time
vwhen the prices of horses in that country were ex-
orbitant, each insisted on being furnished with one
before he would take the field. But though less
patient under the fatigue and hardships of service,
they were ready to face danger and death with as
much intrepidity as ever; and animated by the
hope of new rewards, they never failed, on the
day of battle, to display all their ancient va-
lour.

TOGETHER with their courage, they retained Ferocity
all the ferocity by which they were originally dif- their con-

tefis we'e

tinguifhed. Civil discord never raged with a more arried on;
fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To
all the paflions which usually envenom contests
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagernels to
'fcize the valuable forfeitures expeced upon the
death of every opponent, shut the door againit
mercy. To be wcalthy, was of itfclf sufficient to
expose a man to accusation, or to subject him to
punishment. On the slightest suspicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without earching for
any pretext to justify his cruelty, cut off many

r IHerrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 3. dec. . lib, viii. c. o.

more.

B 0 0 K more. The number of those who suffered by the

VI.
--i hand of the executioner, was not much inferior to

s548. what fell in the field z, and the greater part was

condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

and want THE violence with which the contending parties
of faith treated their opponents was not accompanied with

its usual attendants, attachment and fidelity to
those with whom they ated. The ties of honour
which ought to be held sacred among soldiers, and
the principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly
in the Spanish character as in that of any nation,
seem to have been equally forgotten. Even regard
for decency, and the sense of hame, were totally
lofb. During their diffenlions, there was hardly
a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party
which he had originally espoused, betray the afTo-
ciates with whom he had united, and violate the
engagements under which he had come. The vice-
roy Nugnez Vela was ruined by the treachery of
Cepeda and the other judges of the royal audience,
who were bound by the duties of their function to
have supported his authority. The chief advilcrs
and companions of Gonzalo Pizarro's revolt, were
the first to forsake him, and fibmit to his ene-
mies. His fleet was given up to Gafca, by the
man whom he had ingled out among his officers
to entrust with that important command. On the

Z See NOTE XX.

dlay

day that was to decide his fate, an army of vete- Bn 0 K
rans, in fight of the enemy, threw down their arms -
without striking a blow, and deferred a leader who 4
had often conduEted them to victory. Instances
of such general and avowed contempt of the prin-
ciples and obligations which attach man to man,
and bind them together in social union, rarely oc-
cur in history. It is only where men are far re-
moved from the feat of government, where the
restraints of law and order are little felt, where the
profpec of gain is unbounded, and where immense
wealth may cover the crimes by which it is ac-
quired, that we can find any parallel to the levity,
the rapaciousness, the perfidy and corruption pre-
valent among the Spaniards in Peru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in crcade

vises e-
every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and ployment

for his fol-

tranquillity seemed to be perfetly re-eftabliflhed. diers.
But two very interesting objects still remained to
occupy the president's attention. The one was to
find immediately such employment for a multitude
of turbulent and daring adventurers with which
the country was filled, as might prevent them
from exciting new commotions. The other, to
bestow proper gratifications upon thole to whose
loyalty and valour he had been indebted for his fuc-
cess. The former of there was in ome measure ac-
complifhed, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to
prosecute the conquest of Chili; and by empowering
I)iego Centeno to undertake the discovery of the

valt

B o o K valt regions bordering on the river De la Plata,

VI.
te^i- The reputation of those leaders, together with ti:e

1548. hopes of acquiring wealth, and of riling to conic

quence in ome unexplored country, alluring many
of the most indigent and desperate soldiers to follow
their standards, drained off no inconsiderable por.
tion of that mutinous spirit which Gafca dreaded.

His ivi- THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty,
sion ot the
country and to be adjufled with a more attentive and deli.
among his
followers. cate hand. The repartimientos, or allotments or

lands and Indians which fell to be distributed, in
consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for.
mer poffelfors, exceeded two millions of Pebos ci
yearly rent a. Gafca, when now absolute maftcr
of this immense property, retained the fame diin.
terested sentiments which he had originally pro.
fefed, and refused to reserve the smallest portion
of it for himself. But the number of claimants
was great; and whilst the vanity or avarice of
every individual fixed the value of his own services,
and estimated the recompence which he though!
due to him, the pretensions of each were so extra-
vagant, that it was impotfible to satisfy all. Galid
listened to them one by one, with the most paticni
attention; and that he might have leisure to weigh
the comparative merit of their several claims witih
accuracy, he retired, with the archbiflop of Linia
.and a tingle secretary, to a village twelve leagues

, g Vcga, p. . lib. vi. c. i.

14 fiol

froin Cuzco. There he pent several days in allot- B O O K
ting to each a district of lands and number of In-
dians, in proportion to his idea of their past ser- 54.
vices and future importance. But that he might
get beyond the reach of the fierce storm of clamour
and rage, which he forcfaw would burst out on the
publication of his decree, notwithstanding the im-
partial equity with which he had framed it, he set
out for Lima, leaving the intrument of partition
fealed up, with orders not to open it for some days
after his departure.

THE indignatior excited by publishing the de- TAeig 4.

cree of partition was not les than Gafca had ex- tent itocca-
peted. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, shame,
rage, and all the other passions which most vehe-
mently agitate the minds of men when both their
honour and their interef are deeply asseted, con-
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out with
all the fury of military insolence. Calumny~
threats, and curses, were poured out openly upon
the president. He was accused of ingratitude, of
partiality, and of injustice. Among soldiers
prompt to ation, such seditious discourse would
have been oon followed by deeds no less violent,
and they already began to turn their eyes towards
some discontented leaders~ expeting them to stand
forth in redress of their wrongs. By Ibme vigorous
interpositions of government, a timely check was
given to this mutinous spirit, and the danger

XVOL. III. L of

B o o K of another civil war was averted for the pre.

VI.

..-w... sent b.

r149. GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame was

Re-efta-
blifhes or- suppressed rather than extinguilhed, laboured with
der and go-
vernment, the utmoR assiduity to soothe the malcontents, by

bestowing large gratuities on ome, by promising
repartimientos, when they fell vacant, to others, and
by caressing and flatteing all. But that the pub.
lic security might reft on a foundation more stable
than their good affection, he endeavoured to
strengthen the hands of his successors in office, by
re-establishing the regular administration of juflice
in every part of the empire. He introduced order
and simplicity into the mode of collecting the royal
revenue. He issued regulations concerning the
treatment of the Indians, well calculated to protec
them from oppression, and to provide for their in-
fruaion in the principles of religion, without de.
priving the Spaniards of the benefit accruing from
1550. their labour. Having now accomplished every

objet of his million, Gafca, longing to return
again to a private station, committed the govern-
ment of Peru to the court of audience, and set out

Fch ,. for Spain. As, during the anarchy and turbulence
fodr pain.t of the four last years, there had been no remittance

made of the royal revenue, he carried with him

b Zaratc, lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara, c. IR7. Vega, p. .

lib. vii. c. , &c. Fernandez, p. . lib. i. c. x, &c. i-errcra,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &c.

thirteen

thirteen hundred thousand pefus of public money, B o o K
which the ceconomy and order of his adminiftra- .----
tion enabled him to save, after paying all the ex-
pences of the war.

HE was received in his native country with uni- His recep

tion there.

versal admiration of his abilities, and of his virtue.
Both were, indeed, highly conspicuous. Without
army, or fleet, or public funds; with a train so
simple, that only three thousand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping him c, he set out to oppose
a formidable rebellion. By his address and talents
he supplied all those defects, and seemed to create
infiruments for executing his designs. He ac-
quired such a naval force, as gave him the com-
mand of the ea. He raised a body of men able
to cope with the veteran bands which gave law to
Peru. He vanquished their leader, on whose arms
vi&tory had hitherto attended, and in place of
anarchy and usurpation, he eftabliled the govern-
ment of laws, and the authority of the rightful so-
vereign. But the praise beflowed on his abilities
was exceeded by that which his virtue merited.
After reflling in a country where wealth presented
allurements which had reduced every perlbn who
had hitherto possessed power there, he returned
from that trying Rfation with integrity not only
untainted but unluifpecud. After diftriburing
among his countrymen pofefTions of greater ex-

' Fernandez, ib. ii. c, 1l.

L 2 tenc

B 0 0 K tent and value than had ever been in the dirpofal of

a subject in any age or nation, he himself remained
1550 in his original state of poverty; and at the very

time, when he brought such a large recruit to the
royal treasury, he was obliged to apply by petition
for a fmaJl rum to discharge some petty debts
which he had contracted during the course of his
service d. Charles was not insensible to such difin-
terested merit. Gafca was received by him with
the most diftinguilhing maiks of esteem, and be-
ing promoted to the bilhoi ' of Palencia, he
passed the remainder of his days in the tranquillity
of retirement, refpeed by his country, honoured
by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

NOTWITHSTANDING all Gafca's wife regulations,

the tranquillity of Peru was not of long continu-
ance. In a country, where the authority of go-
vernment had been almoEf forgotten during the long
prevalence of anarchy and mil-rule, where there
were disappointed leaders ripe for revolt, and fedi-
tious soldiers ready to follow them, it was not dif-
ficult to raise combustion. Several successive in-
firrections deilated tihe country for some years.
But as thole, though fierce, were only transient
itorms, excited rather by the ambition and turbu-
lence of particular men, than by general or public
motives, the detail of them is not the object of this
hiilory. These conolluions in Peru, like every

{' MS. pcne:, e.

tiling

thing of extreme violence either in the natural or B K
political body, were not of long duration, and by _
carrying off the corrupted humours which had 55'
given rife to the disorders, they contributed in the
end to strengthen the society which at first they
threatened to destroy. During their fierce con-
tests, several of the first invaders of Peru, and many
of those licentious adventurers whom the fame
of their success had allured thither, fell by each
other's hands. Each of the parties, as they alter-
nately prevailed in the struggle, cleared the coun-
try of a greater number, by executing, proscribing,
or banishing their opponents. Men leds enter-
prifing, lets desperate, and more acculomed to
move in the path of fober and peaceable industry,
fettled in Peru; and the royal authority was gra-
dually established as firmly there as in the other
Spanish colonies.

LT 3

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THE
H IS T O RY

F
A M E R I C A.

BOO K VII.
A S the conquest of the two great empires of B o K

Mexico and Peru forms the most splendid i

and interelting period in the hiflory of America, a
view of their political institutions, and a defcrip.
tion of their national manners, will exhibit the
human species to the contemplation of intelli-
gent observers in a very singular stage of its pro-
grefs .

WHEN compared with other parts of the New Mexicoand
World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as polledthan

other parts

polished itates. Instead of frmall, independent, or f'AnLlca.
hostile tribes, struggling for fubfitence amidt
woods and marfhcs, strangers to iduftry and arts,
unacquainted with subordination, and almost with-
out the appearance of regular government, we find

See NOTE XX.

L 4 countries

B 0 K countries of great extent fubjeEted to the d(minion

of one sovereign, the inhabitants collcted toge-
ther in cities, the wisdom and foresight of ru-
lers employed in providing for the maintenance and
security of the people, the empire of laws in ome
meaiure efablilhed, the authority of religion re-
cognized, many of the arts essential to lile
brought to some degree of maturity, and the
dawn of such as are ornamental beginning to
appear.

Theirinfe- BUT if the comparison be made with the people
p'iOrity to
he nations of the ancient continent, the inferiority of Ame-
of'the anci-
nt conti- rica in improvement will be conspicuous, and nei-
lFe ther the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be entitled

to rank, with those nations which merit the name of
civilized. The people of both the great empires
in America, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the useful metals,
and the progress which they had made in extending
their dominion over the animal creation was in-
considerable. The Mexicans had gone no farther
than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a species of
fnall dogs, and rabbits b. By this feeble essay of
ingenuity, the means of fubfitlence were rendered
somewhat more plentiful and ecure, than when
men depend solely on hunting; btlt they had no
idea of attempting to subdue the more robust ani-
r.als, or of deriving any aid from their ministry in

b -errers, dec. . lib. vii. . 12.

carrying

rarrying on works of labour. The Peruvians seem n o oK
to have nrgleCted the inferior animals, and had vi,
not rendered any of them domestic except the
duck; but they were more fortunate in taming
the Llana, an animal peculiar to their country,
of a form which bears rome referrblance to a deer,
and ome to a camel, and of a size ftmewhat lar-
ger than a theep. Under the protection of man,
this fpecics multiplied greatly. Its wool furnished
the Peruvians with clothing, its flesh with food.
It was even employed as a beast of burden, and
carried a moderate load with much patience and
dociliy c. It was never used for draught; and the
breed being confined to the mountainous country,
its service, if we may judge by incidents which
occur in the early Spanih writers, was not very
extensive among the Peruvians in their original
Rate.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed

towards ci\ilization, the discovery of the useful
metals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
animal creation, have been marked as (leps of ca-
pital importance in their progress. In our conti-
nent, long after men had attained both, society
continued in that Itate which is denominated bar-
barous. Even with all that command over nature
which these confer, many ages lapse, before in-
dlutry becomes fb regular as to render fubfiflence

yega, p. . lib. viii. c. 6. Zarate, lib. i.c. 14.

secure,

B o o K secure, before the arts which supply the wants and

i furnish the accommodations of life are brought to

any considerable degree of perfection, and before
any idea is conceived of various inffitutions requisite
in a well-ordered society. The Mexicans and Pe.
ruvians, without knowledge of the useful metals, or
the aid of domestic animals, laboured under difad.
vantages which muff have greatly retarded their pro.
grefs, and in their highelt state of improvement their
power was so limited, and their operations so feeble,
that they can hardly be confidered as having ad-
vanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

Viewofthe AFTER this general observation concerning the
inflituti ns
2ndmnners most singular and distinguishing circumstance in
of each.

the state of both the great empires in America, I
shall endeavour to give such a view of the conti-
tution and interior police of each, as may enable us
to ascertain their place in the political scale, to allot
them their proper station between the rude tribes in
the New World, and the polished states of the an-
cient, and to determine how far they had risen
above the former, as well as how much they fell be-
low the latter.

Imperfa MExico was first fubjeted to the Spanish crown.
onfernaing But our acquaintance with its laws and manners
lCeicO. is not, from that circumstance, more complete.

What I have remarked concerning the defective
and inaccurate information on which we must rely
with refpc to the condition and customs of the

savage

savage tribes in America, may be applied likewise B o o K
to our knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes, --
and the rapacious adventurers who accompanied
him, had not leisure or capacity to enrich either
civil or natural history with new observations. They
undertook their expedition in quest of one objet,
and seemed hardly to have turned their eyes to-
wards any other. Or, if during ome short inter-
val of tranquillity, when the occupations of war
ceased, and the ardour of plunder was suspended,
the institutions and manners of the people whom
they had invaded drew their attention, the inquiries
of illiterate soldiers were conducted with so little
sagacity and precision, that the accounts given by
them of the policy and order efrablifhed in the
Mexican monarchy are superficial, confused, and in-
explicable. It is rather from incidents which they
relate occasionally, than from their own deductions
and remarks, that we are enabled to form some idea
of the genius and manners of that people. The
obscurity in which the ignorance of its conquerors
involved the annals of Mexico, was augmented by
the superstition of those who succeeded them. As
the memory of past events was prefcrved among the
Mexicans by figures painted on kemns, on cotton
cloth, on a kind of pasteboard, or on the bark of
trees, the early missionaries, unable to comprehend
their meaning, and Itruck with their uncouth forms,
conceived them to be monuments of idolatry which
ought to be destroyed, in order to facilitate the con-
vcrfion of the Indians. In obedience to an edit

J4 iifuied

B O O K iffaed by Juan de Zummaraga, aFrancifcan' monk,

.-v-J the first bishop of Mexico, as 'rmny records of the

ancient Mexican tory as could be colle&ed were
committed to the flames. In consequence of this
fanatical zeal of the monks who first visited New
Spain (which their successors oon began to la-
ment), whatever knowledge of remote events such
rude monuments contained was almost entirely loft,
and no information remained concerning the an-
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but
what was derived fiom tradition, or from some frag-
ments of their historical paintings that escaped the
barbarous refi'arches of Zummarga d. From the
experience of all nations it is manifest, that the me-
mory of past tranlaCtions can neither be long pre-
served, nor be rranfmitted with any fidelity, by
tradition. The Mexican paintings, which are lup-
posed to have served as annals of their empire, are
few in number, and of ambiguous meaning. Thus,
amidst the uncertainty of the former, and the ob-
fcurity of the latter, we must glean what intelligence
can be colleded from the scanty materials scattered
in the Spanish writers*.

ACCORDING

d Acofta, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquem. Proem. lib. ii. lib. iii.
c. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

* In the first edition, I obServed that in consequence of the

deftrution of the ancient Mexican paintings,occafioned by the
zeal of Zummaraga, whatever knowledge they might have
conveyed was entirely loft. Every candid reader mutl have
perceived that the expreflion was inaccurate; as in a few

line;

ACCORDING to the account of the Mexicans B o o K
themselves, their empire was not of long duration.

Origin of the
Their country, as they relate, was originally pof- lexican

', , , . . . ,: monarchy.
selfed, rather than peopled, by Imall independent

tribes,

lines afterwards I mention ome ancient paintings to be fill
extant. M. Clavigero, not fatibfied with laying hold of this
inaccuracy, which I corrected in the ubfequent editions, la-
bours to render it more glaring, by the manner in which he
quotes the remaining part of the sentence. He reprehends
with great asperity the account which I give of the canty
materials for writing the ancient hiltory of Mexico. Vol. I.
Account of Writers, p. x.vi. V. 1I. 3 o. My words, how-
ever, are almoRf the fame wth those of Torquemada, who
seems to have been better acquainted with the ancient monu-
ments of the Mexicans than any Spanifi author whose works
I have seen. Lib. xiv. c. 6. M. Clavigero himself gives a
description of the dellruction of ancient paintings in almost
the fame terms I have used; and mentions, as an additional
reason of there being so frnall a number of ancient paintings
known to the Spaniards, that the natives have become so
solicitous to preserve and conceal them, that it is " difficult,
" if not impossible, to make them part with one of them."
Vol. I. 407. II. 194. No point can be more af-ertained
than that few of the Mexican historical paintings have been
preserved. Though several Spaniards have carried on in-
quiries into the antiquities of the Mexican empire, no en-
gravings from Mexican paintings have been communicated
to the public, except tholb by l'urdas, Cemelli Carreri, and
Lorenzana. It affords me bome satisfaction, that in the
course of my researches, I have discovered two collctlions of
Mcxian paintings which were unknown to former inquirers.
The cut wl.ich I publifned is an exact copy of the original,
ind gives no highl idea of thL' rogt e's which the Mcxicas lihad
iln;e in the art of p: in t :. I c.inno; coij(:tiL re w.vl't could
;'dilic M . Clavig-rc to c ; .;:it,: diffati'. 'c':: vwi:h

for

B OO K tribes, whose mode of life and manners refernbled

vi'.
CLoc thfe of the rudet savages which we have de,

fcribed. But about a period corresponding to the
beginning of the tenth century in the Christian
era, several tribes moved in successive migrations
from unknown regions towards the north and
north-west, and fettled in different provinces of
Anahuac, the ancient name of New Spain. These,
more civilized than the original inhabitants, began
to form them to the arts of social life. At length,
towards the commencement of the thirteenth cen.
tury, the Mexicans, a people more polished than
any of the former, advanced from the border of
the Californian gulf, and took possession of the

for having published it without the fame colours it has in the
original painting. p. xxix. He might have recollected, that
neither Purchas, nor Gemelli Carreri, nor Lorenzana, thought
it necessary to colour the prints which they have published,
and they have never been censured on that account. He may
refi assured, that though the colours in the paintings in the
imperial Library are remarkably bright, they are laid on
without art, and without " any of that regard to light and
" hade, or the rules of perfpedive," which M. Clavigero
requires. V. II. 378. If the public express any desire to have
the seven paintings ill in my poireflion engraved, I am
ready to communicate them. The print published by Ge-
melli Carreri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans when they
travelled towards the lake on which they built the capital of
their empire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 481, is the mots fininled
monument of art brought from the New World, and yet a very
flight infpelion of it will satisfy every one, that the ani.dls
of a nation conveyed in this manner mull be very meagre and
imperfet.

pl.,ins

plains adjacent to a great lake near the centre of B o o K
the country. After residing there about fifty years, L--
they founded a town, since distinguished by the
name of Mexico, which from humble beginnings
soon grew to be the most considerable city in the
New World. The Mexicans, long after they were
established in their new pofiefeions, continued, like
other martial tribes in America, unacquainted with
regal dominion, and were governed in peace, and
conducted in war, by such as were entitled to pre-
eminence by their wisdom or their valour. But
among them, as in other states whose power and
territories become extensive, the supreme autho-
rity centered at last in a tingle person; and when
the Spaniards under Cortes invaded the country,
Montezuma was the ninth monarch in order who
had swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary
right, but by election.

SUCH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans con- Very recent.

cerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very fiort. From
the first migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the establishment of monarchical government, not
above a hundred and thirty-years, according to
one account', or a hundred and ninety-leven, ac-
cording to another computation , had elaipfed. If,

Acoft. Hit. lib. vii. c. 8, &c. r Purclas Pilgr. iii.
p. o6b, &c.

Oil

B o o K on one hand, we suppose the Mexican state to

VII.
_..... have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub.

sifted. during such a length of time as the Spanilh
accounts of its civilization would naturally lead
to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, amorg
a people who possessed the art of recording events
by pictures, and who confidered it as an efftnti:i
part of their nationil education, to teach their
children to repeat the historical songs which cele.
brated the exploits of their ancestors g, the know,
ledge of pafi transactions hould be so slender and
limited. If, on the other hand, we adopt their
own system with refpecE to the antiquities of their
nation, it is no less difficult to account either for
that improved state of society, or for the extensive
dominion to which their empire had attained, when
first visited by the Spaniards. The infancy of na-
tions is so long, and, even when every circumstance
is favourable to their progress, they advance so
slowly towards any maturity of strength or policy,
that the recent origin of the Mexicans seems to be a
strong presumption of ome exaggeration, in the
splendid descriptions which have been given of their
government and manners.

Facts which BUT it is not by theory or conjectures that his-
prove their
progreft in tory decides with regard to the state or charater of
lviiization.

nations. It produces fatls as the foundation ot
every judgment which it ventures to pronounce. In

g Herrera, dec, 3. lib. ii. c. 18.

1 colleElin;g

collecing those which must regulate our opinion B K
in the present inquiry, some occur that suggest an A
idea of considerable progress in civilization in the
Mexican empire, and others which seem to indi-
cate that it had advanced but little beyond the fa-
vage tribes around it. Both hlall be exhibited to
the view of the reader, that, from comparing them,
he may determine on Which fide the evidence pre-
ponderates.

IN the Mexican empire, the right of private pro- Tie ight of

property

perty was perfectly understood, and eftablilhed in flhiy eIta.
its full extent. Among several savage tribes, we
have seen, that the idea of a title to the separate and
sxclufive poffeffionof any object was hardly known;
and that among all, it was extremely limited and
ill.defined.. But in Mexico, where agriculture and
industry had made some progress, the distinction be-
tween property in land and property in goods had
taken place. Both might be transferred from one
person to another by tale or barter; both might
descend by inheritance. Every person who could
be denominated a freeman had property in land.
This, however, they held by various tenures. Some
possessed it in full right, and it descended to their
heirs. The title of others to their lands was de-
rived from the office or dignity which they enjoyed;
and when deprived of the latter, they loft poflef-
sion of the former. Both these modes of occupy-
ing land were deemed noble, and peculiar to citi-
zens of the highest class. The tenure, by whicl

VOL. III. M the

B 0 0 K the great body of the people held their property,

A--..'- was very different. In every diftric a certain quan.

tity of land was measured out in proportion to the
number of families. This was cultivated by the
joint labour of the whole; its produce was depo.
fited in a common storehouse, and divided among
them according to their refpedive exigencies. The
members of the Calpullee, or associations, could not
alienate their share of the common estate; it was
an indivisible permanent property, destined for the
support of their familiesh. In consequence of this
distribution of the territory of the ftate,everyman had
an interest in its welfare, and the happiness of the
individual was conneEted with the public security.

:,he number ANOTHER striking circumstance, which diftin.
.,nd great-
ness oftheir guifhes the Mexican empire from those nations in

America we have already described, is the num-
ber and greatness of its cities. While society con-
tinues in a rude state, the wants of men are so
few, and they sand so little in need of mutual as-
fiftance, that their inducements to crowd together
are extremely feeble. Their induflry at the fame
time is ob imperfect, that it cannot lecure fubfilt-
ence for any considerable number of families kf-t
tled in one spot. They live dispersed, at this pe-
riod, from choice as well as from necessity, or at
the utmost assemble in small hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or on

' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. YI. 'Torquem. Mon. Ind.
li). xiv. c. 7. Corica, MS.

the border of some plain left open by nature, or B o o K
cleared by their own labour. The Spaniards, ac- ,
cuftoned to this mode of habitation among all the
savage tribes with which they were then acquaint-
ed, were astonished, on entering New Spain, to find
the natives residing in towns of such extent as re-
fembled those of Europe. In the first fervour of
their admiration, they compared Zempoalla, though
a town only of the econd or third size, to the ci-
ties of greatest note in their own country. When,
afterwards, they visited in fuccefionTlafcala, Cho-
lula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itself, their
amazement increased so much, that it led them to
convey ideas of their magnitude and populoulf
ness bordering on what is incredible. Even when
there is leisure for observation, and no interest thar.
leads to deceive, conjetural estimates of the num-
ber of people in cities are extremely loose, and
usually much exaggerated. It is not surprising,
then, that Cortez and his companions, little ac-
customed to such computations, and powerfully
tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merit of
their own discoveries and conquests, hould have
been betrayed into this common error, and have
raised their descriptions considerably above truth.
For this reason, torme considerable abatement ought
to be made from their calculation of the number
of inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may
fix the frandard of their population much lower
than they have clone; but itill they will appear
to be cities of such consequence, as are not to be

M 2 found

B V0 K found but among people who have made ome
t_-.--' considerable progress in the arts of social life ,

Mexico, the capital of the empire, seems to have
contained sixty thousand inhabitants.

Tiie epara- TE eparation of profeflions among the'Mexi.
tion of pro- r0
fetions, cans is a ymptorn of improvement no less remark-

able. Arts, in the early ages of society, are so few
and so simple, that each man is sufficiently master
of them all, to gratify every demand of his own
limited defres. The savage can form his bow,
point his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his ca-
noe, without calling in the aid of any hand more
skilful than his own. Time muff have augmented
the wants of men and ripened their ingenuity, be.
fore the productions of art became so complicated
in their truEture, or so curious in their fabric, that
a particular course of education was requisite to-
wards forming the artificer to expertness in con-
trivance and workmanship. In proportion as re-
finement spreads, the diftinaion of professions in-
creates, and they branch out into more numerous
and minute ubdivifions. Among the Mexicans,
this separation of the arts necessary in life had taken
place to a considerable extent. The functions of
the mason, the weaver, the goldsmith, the painter,
and of several other crafts, were carried on by dif-
ferent persons. Each was regularly instructed in
his callingy To it alone his industry was confined;
and by aiduous application to one object, together

See NOTE XXI.

with

with the persevering patience peculiar to Ameri- B o o K
cans, their artizans attained to a degree of neatness .A
and perfecion in work, far beyond what could have
been expected from the rude tools which they em-
ployed. Their various productions were brought
into commerce; and by the exchange of them in
the stated markets held in the cities, not only were
their mutual wants supplied k, in such orderly in-
tercourfe as characterizes an improved sfate of so-
ciety, but their induitry was daily rendered perse-
vering and inventive.

THE diftintion of ranks established in the Mexi- The ditinc-

tion of

can empire is the next circumstance that merits at- ranks.
tention. In surveying the savage tribes of Ame-
rica, we observed, that consciousness of equality,
and impatience of flubordination, are sentiments na-
tural to man in the infancy of civil life. During
peace, the authority of a superior is hardly felt
among them, and even in war it is but little ac-
knowledged. Strangers to the idea of property,
the difference in condition resulting from the in-
equality of it is unknown. Birth or titles confer
no pre eminence; it is only by personal merit and
accomplishments that distinction can be acquired.
The form of society was very different among the
Mexicans. The great body of the people was in a
tnoft humiliating state. A considerable number,

k Cortes Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 239, &c. Gom. Cron. c.

79. Torquem. lib. xiii. c. 34. Herrera, dec. . ib. vii. c.
1;, &;,

M 3 knowvn

B o o K known by the name of Mayeques, nearly resembling
·ma VI. .

_ in condition those peasants who, under various de.

nominations, were confidered, during the preva.
lence of the feudal system, as instruments of labour
attached to the foil. The Mayeques could not change
their place of residence without permission of the
superior on whom they depended. They were
conveyed, together with the lands on which they
were ettled, from one proprietor to another; and
were bound to cultivate the ground, and to per-
form several kinds of servile work '. Others were
reduced to the lowerl form of lubjedion, that of do.
rneftic servitude, and felt the utmost rigour of that
wretched state. Their condition was held to be so
vile, and their lives deemed to be of so little value,
that a person who killed one of those saves was
not ubjected to any punifhmentm. Even those
confidered as freemen were treated by their haughty
lords as beings of an inferior species. The nobles,
pofieffed of ample territories, were divided into
various classes, to each of which peculiar titles of
honour belonged. Some of thele titles, like their
lands, descended from father to son in perpetual
lucceffion. Others were annexed to particular of-
sices, or conferred during life as marks of perfbnal
distinction ". The monarch, exalted above all, en-
joyed extensive power, and supreme dignity. Thus

1 Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. Corita, MS.
" Herrera, dec. 3. lib.iv. c. 7.

I-lerrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Corita, MS.

the

the diftintion of ranks was completely established, B
in a line of regular subordination, reaching from A
the highest to the lowest member of the commu-
nity. Each of there knew what he could claim, and
what he owed. The people, who were not allowed
to wear a dress of the fame fashion, or to dwell in
houses of a form similar to those of the nobles, ac-
costed them with the mot submissive reverence. In
the presence of their sovereign, they durst not lift
their eyes from the ground, or look him in the
face°. The nobles themselves, when admitted to
an audience of their sovereign, entered bare-footed,
in mean garments, and, as his slaves, paid him ho-
mage approaching to adoration. This refpec due
from inferiors to those above them in rank, was
efablifhed with such ceremonious accuracy, that it
incorporated with the language, and influenced its
genius and idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded
in expreflions of reverence and courtely. The file
and appellations, used in the intercourse between
equals, would have been so unbecoming in the
mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accosted a
perlbn in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult r.
It is only in ocieties, which time and the institution
of regular government have moulded into form,
that we find such an orderly arrangement of men
into different ranks, and tich nice attention paid to
their various rights.

0 IIerrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14,
P Sec NOT E XSX1.

M 4 TH

B o0 K THE spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized

k-^j and bended to subordination, was prepared for sub.

Their politi-
calconritu- mitting to monarchical government. But the de-
tion.

scriptions of their policy and laws, by the Spa-
niards who overturned them, are so inaccurate and
contradictory, that it is difficult to delineate the
form of their constitution with any precision. Some.
times they represent the monarchs of Mexico as
absolute, deciding according to their pleasure,
with respect to every operation of the state. On
other occasions, we discover the traces of efta-
blifhed cuffoms and laws, framed in order to cir-
cumfcribe the power of the crown, and we meet
with rights and privileges of the nobles which teem
to be opposed as barriers against its encroachments.
This appearance of inconsistency has arisen from
inattention to the innovations of Montezuma upon
the Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition sub-
verted the original system of government, and in-
troduced a pure despotism. He disregarded the
ancient laws, violated the privileges held most
sacred, and reduced his subjects of every order to
the level of slaves r. The chiefs, or nobles of the
first rank, submitted to the yoke with such reluc-
tance, that, from impatience to shake it off, and
hope of recovering their rights, many of them
courted the protection of Corte, and joined a so-
reign power against their domestic oppressor'. It

' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14. Torquem. lib. ii. c. 69.
Ilerrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. to, . Torquem. lib. iv. c. 9.

lis

is not then under the dominion of Montezuma, but B o o
under the government of his predecessors, that we v
can discover what was the original form and genius
of Mexican policy. From the foundation of the
monarchy to the eletion of Montezuma, it seems
to have subsisted with little variation. That body
of citizens, which may be distinguished by the
name of nobility, formed the chief and most re-
fpecable order in the state. They were of various
ranks, as has already been obterved, and their
honours were acquired and transmitted in different
manners. Their number seems to have been great.
According to an author accustomed to examine
with attention what he relates, there were in the
Miexican empire thirty of this order, each of whoril
had in his territories about a hundred thotifand
people, and subordinate to these, there. were about
three thousand nobles of a lower class '. The ter-
ritories belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco nd
Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to those of
the Mexican monarch . Each of there poefied
complete territorial jurifdition, and levied taxes
from their own vassals. But all followed the ftan-
dard of Mexico in war, serving with a number of
men in proportion to their domain, and most of
them paid tribute to its monarch as their superior
lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican con-
ftitution, an image of feudal policy in its nluQf

IIerrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. Iz.
" Toquem. lib. ii. c. 57. Corita, MS.

rigid

0 0o K rigid form rifes to view, and we discern its three
m«yv..-s distinguishing charafteriftics, a nobility possessing

almost independent authority, a people depressed
into the lowest itate of fubje&tion, and a king en-
trusted with the executive power of the state. Its
spirit and principles seem to have operated in the
New World in the fame manner, as in the ancient.
The jurifdiLtion of the crown was extremely limit-
ed. All real and effective authority was retained
by the Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the
lhadow of it only left to the king. Jealous to ex-
cess of their own rights, they guarded with molt
vigilant anxiety against the encroachments of their
sovereigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,
it was provided that the king should not determine
concerning any point of general importance, with-
out the approbation of a council composed of the
prime nobility x. Unless he obtained their consent
he could not engage the nation in war, nor could
he dispose of the most considerable branch of the
public revenue at pleasure; it was appropriated to
certain purposes from which it could not be di-
verted by the regal authority alone Y. In order to e-
cure full effect to those constitutional restraints, the
Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to de-
scend by inheritance, but disposed of it by election.
The right of election seems to have been originally

x Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 6.
Corita, MS.

Y Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib, iv. c. 17.

vclUeI

vefled in the whole body of nobility, but was after- B o , K:
wards committed to fix eletors, of whom the '-
Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were always two.
From respect for the family of their monarchs, the
choice fell generally upon ome person sprung
from it. But as the aiviry and valour of their
prince were of greater moment to a people perpe-
tually engaged in war, than a itrit adherence to
the order of birth, collaterals of mature age or of
diRinguifled merit were often preferred to those
who were nearer the throne in direct descent z. To
this maxim in their policy, the Mexicans appear
to be indebted for such a fuccefflon of able and
warlike princes, as raised their empire in a hort
period to that extraordinary height of power,
which it had attained when Cortes landed in New
Spain.

WHILE the jurifdition of the Mexican mo- Power and

splendour of

narchs continued to be limited, it is probable that ieir mo-
it was exercised with little otentation. But as
their authority became more extensive, the fplen-
dour of their government augmented. It was in
this last state that the Spaniards beheld it; and
itruck with the appearance of Montezuma's court,
they describe its pomp at great length, and with
much admiration. The number of his attendants,
the order, the silence, and the reverence with

z Acofla, lib. vi, c. 24. -Icrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 13.
Corita, MS.

which

i 6

° K Which they served him; the vft extent of his royal
i,» minanfion, the variety of its apartments allotted to

different offiCets, and the ostentation with which
his grandeur was displayed, whenever he permitted
flis fubje&ts to behold him, seem to resemble tne
magnificence of the ancient monarchies in Asia,
rather than the simplicity of the infant states in the
New World.

Order of BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty
their go-
Vrnment. that the Mexican potentates exhibited their power,

they manifetted it more beneficially in the order
and regularity with which they conducted the in-
ternal administration and police of their dominions.
Complete jurifdicion, civil as well as criminal,
over its own immediate vafTals, was vested in the
crown. Judges were appointed for each depart-
ment, and if we may rely on the account which
the Spanish writers give of the maxims and laws
upon which they founded their decisions with re-
fpet to the distribution of property and the punith-
ment of crimes, justice was adminiftred in the
Mexican empire, with a degree of order and equity
resembling what takes place in ocieties highly
Civilized.

prov;ion TETIR attention in providing for the support of
Pfor the (,P- government was not le's sagacious. Taxes were
port of it.

laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of induffry,
and upon commodities of every kind exposed to
sale in the public markets. These duties were

considerable,

considerable, but not arbitrary or unequal. They n o o
were imposed according to established rules, ---
and each knew what share of the common burden
he had to bear. As the use of money was unknown,
all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
the natural productions of all the different pro-
vinces in the empire, but every pecies of manufac-
ture, and every work of ingenuity and art, were
collected in the public ftore-houles. From those the
emperor supplied his numerous train of attendants
in peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with clothes, and ornaments. People of inferior
condition, neither poefling land nor engaged in
commerce, were bound to the performance of va-
rious services. By their fated labour the crown.
lands were cultivated, public works were carried
on, and the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built and kept in repair a.

THE improved fRate of government among the Theirpolisc,

Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points effen-
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but in
several regulations of inferior consequence with re-
fpe& to police. The infltirution which I have' al-
ready mentioned, of public couriers, fRationed at
proper intervals, to convey intelligence from one
part of the empire to the other, was a refinement
in police not introduced into any kingdom of Eu-

a Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16, 17.
See NOT XXIII.

rope

B OVI K rope at that period. The firuture of the capital
>-r-s . city in a lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways

of great length, which served as avenues to it from
different quarters, erected in the water, with no
less ingenuity than labour, seems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied to
the truture of the aqueducts, or conduits, by
which they conveyed a stream of fresh water, from
a considerable difance, into the city, along one
of the causeways b. The appointment of a num-
ber of persons to clean the streets, to light them by
fires kindled in different places, and to patrole as
watchmen during the nights, discovers a degree
of attention which even polished nations are late in.
acquiring.
Their arts. THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts, is

confidered as the most decisive proof of their fupe-
rior refinement. Cortes, and the early Spanifi au-
thors, describe this with rapture, and maintain,
that the molt celebrated European artists could
not surpass or even equal them in ingenuity and
neatness of workmanship. They represented men,
animals, and other objeEts, by such a disposition
of various coloured feathers, as is said to have pro-
duced all the effects of light and shade, and to have
imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their

See NOTE XXIV.
i I-crrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. . Torribio, M.

ornaments

ornaments of gold and fllver have been described B o ° K
to be of a fabric no less curious. But in forming
any idea, from general descriptions, concerning the
state of arts among nations imperfeAly polished,
we are extremely ready to err. In examining the
works of people whole advances in improvement
are nearly the fame with our own, we view them
with a critical, and often with a jealous eye.
Whereas, when conscious of our own superiority,
we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
we are aflonifhed at works executed by them un-
der such manifest disadvantages, and, in the warmth
of our admiration, are apt to represent them as
productions more finished than they really are. To
the influence of this illusion, without supposing
any intention to deceive, we may impute the
exaggeration of some Spanith authors, in their ac-
counts of the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from con-

fidering such specimens of their arts as are still pre-
served, that we must decide concerning their de-
gree of merit. As the ship in which Cortes sent
to Charles V. the most curious producions of the
Mexican artisans, which were colleced by the
Spaniards when they first pillaged the empire, was
taken by a French corsair , the remains of their
ingenuity are less numerous than those of the Pe-
ruvians. Whether any of their works with sea-

' Relac. de Cort. Ramus. iii. 294, F.

thers,

B °v l K thers, in imitaton of painting, be still extant in

'~ Spain, I have not learned; but many of their or.

naments in gold and silver, as well as various
utensils employed in common life, are deposited in
the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial
productions, lately opened by the king of Spain;
.and I am informed by persons on whofC judgment
and tafle I can rely, that there hoafted efforts of
their art are uncouth representations of common ob-
jeets, or very coarse images of the human and some
other forms, destitute of grace and propriety'.
The juftlnefs of these oblfrvations is confirmed by
infpeating the wooden prints or copper-plates of
their paintings, which have been published by va.
rious authors. In them every figure of men, of
quadrupeds, or birds, as well as every reprefenta.
tion of inanimated nature, is extremely rude and
aukwrd*. The hardest Egyptian itile, stiff and

imperfect

See NOTE XXV.

* As a specimen of the spirit and flile in which M. Clavigero

mnakes his flriacures upon my Hillory of America, I fiall publif
his remarks upon this pfl'ge. " Thus far Robertson ; to
' whom we anfwcr, firlt, That there is no reason to bliee
'' that those rude works were real!y Mexican; fecoildly,
*That ncither do we know whether those persons in whole

judgment lie coi idcs, may be prSon fit to merit our faith,
because we have observed that Robertson trults frequently
' to the tellimony of Gage, Corrcal, Ibagnez, and other

such authors, who are entirely undefcrving of credit.-

( Thirdly, It i more probable that the arms of copper, bc-
* lic\ d by there intelligent judges to be ccrtainy.Oriental,

are really Mcican." Vol. II, 391,- henn an author,

' 17 lut

imperfect as it was, is more elegant. The scrawls B O 0 K
of children delineate objects almost as accurately. c-

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may
be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,

a very

not entirely destitute of integrity or discernment, and who has
some solicitude about his own chara&er, asserts that he re-
ceived his information concerning any particular point from
persons " on whose judgment and tate he can rely ;" a very
lender degree of candour, one lhould think, might induce
the reader to believe that he does not endeavour to impose
upon the public by an appeal to testimony altogether unworthy
of credit. My information concerning the Mexican works of
art deposited in the King of Spain's cabinet, was received
from the late Lord Grantham, ambassador extraordinary from
the court of London to that of Madrid, and from Mr. Arch-
deacon Waddilove, chaplain to the embassy; and it was upon
their authority that I pronounced the coat of armour, men-
tioned in the note, to be of Oriental fabrick. As they
were both at Madrid in their public characer, when the first
edition of the History of America was publilhed, I thought
it improper at that time to mention their names. Did their
deciion concerning a matter of tafe, or their testimony con-
cerning a point of fa&, fland in need of confirmation, I might
produce the evidence of an intelligent traveller, who, in de-
kcribing the royal cabinet of Madrid, takes notice that it con-
tains " specimens of Mexican and Peruvian utensils, ases,
" &c. in earthen-ware, wretched both in taste and execution."
Dillon's Travels through Spain, p. 77. As Gage composed
his Survey of New Spain with all the zeal and acrimony of a
new convert, I have paid little regard to his testimony with
refpct to points relating to religion. But as he resided in
'several provinces in New Spain, which travellers seldom visit,
and as he fems to have observed their manners and laws
with an intelligent eye, I have availed myself of his infor-
VOL. 11. N mation

B o o K a very different flation belongs to them, when

VII.
_- ,,_ confidered as the records of their country, as hifto-

rical monuments of its policy and tranfaaions;
and they become curious as well as interesting ob-
jeEts of attention. The noblest and most beneficial
invention of which human ingenuity can boatI, is
that of writing. But the first essays of this art,
which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfection fowly, and by a
gradual progression. When the warrior, eager
for fame, wished to transmit some knowledge of
his exploits to succeeding ages; when the grati-
tude of a people to their Ibvereign prompted them
to hand down an account of his beneficent deeds
to posterity; the first method of accomplishing
this, that seems to have occurred to them, was to
delineate, in the best manner they could, figures
representing the action of which they were folici-
tous to prererve the memory. Of this, which has
very properly been called piflure-writing f, we find
traces among ome of the most savage tribes of
America. When a leader returns from the field,

matipn with refpec to matters where religious opinion could
have little influence. Correal I have seldom quoted, and
never rifted upon his evidence alone. The tlation in which
lbagnez was employed in America, as well as the credit given
to his veracity by printing his Rcgno Jcfuitico among the
large collection of documents published (as I believe by au-
thority) at Madrid, A. D. 1767, justifies me for appealing to
his authority.

f Divine Lcgat. of Mores, iii. 73.

he

he strips a tree of its bark, and with red paint B oO K
scratches upon it tome uncouth figures, which re- -
present the order of his march, the number of his
followers, the enemy whom he attacked, the scalps
and captives which he brought home. To thole
simple annals he trusts for renown, and soothes
himself with hope that by their means he fhail re-
ceive praise from the warriors of future times g.

COMPARED with those aukward efays of their

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans
may be confidered as works of composition and de-
sign. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording tranfaetions, than
that of delineating the objects which they wished
to represent. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex series of events in progressive order, and de-
scribe, by a proper diipofition of figures, the oc-
currences of a king's reign from his accession to
his death; the progress of an infant's education
from its birth until it attained to the years of ma-
turity; the different recompences and marks of
diftintion conferred upon warriors, in proportion
to the exploits which they had performed. Some
lingular specimens of this piaure-writing have
been preserved, which are justly confidered as the
most curious monuments of art brought from the
New World. The most valuable of these was
publifled by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is di-

Sir W. Johnson Philof. Tranfa&. vol. xiii. p. 143. Mem.
!e la lontan. ii, 191. .afitau, Mcurs de Sauv. ii. 43.

N 2 vided

Bo o K vided into three parts. The first contains the

VII.
A_-... history of the Mexican empire under its ten mo.

narchs. The second is a tribute-roll, representing
what each conquered town paid into the royal
treasury. The third is a code of their institutions,
domefic, political, and military. Another fpeci-
men of Mexican painting has been published in
thirty-two plates, by the present archbiihop of
Toledo. To both are annexed a full explanation
of what the figures were intended to represent,
which was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians
well acquainted with their own arts. The style of
painting in all these is the fame. They represent
things, not words. They exhibit images to the
eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may,
therefore, be confidered as the earliest and most
imperfect essay of men in their progress towards
discovering the art of writing. The defe&s in
this mode of recording tranfaations mufl have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from
its nature, a very tedious operation; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any society, its annals must have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Besides this, no objets could
,be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions
of the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as
picture-writing could not convey an idea of there,
it must have been a very imperfel art. The ne.
ceffity of improving it must have rouzed and fliarp,
ened invention, and the human mind holding tht
fame courle in the New World as in the Old

migh

might have advanced by the fame successive steps, o o lK
firt, from an atual picture to the plain hierogly- m-
phic; next, to the allegorical symbol; then to the
arbitrary character; until, at length, an alphabet.
of letters was discovered, capable of expressing all
the various combinations of found employed in
speech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we, ac-
cordingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
among them. Upon an attentive infpetion of the
plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
tome approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,
where ome principal part or circumstance in the
fubje& is made to stand for the whole. In the an-
nals of their kings, publilhed by Purchas, the
towns conquered by each are uniformly represented
in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a
house; but in order to point out the particular
towns which submitted to their victorious arms,
peculiar emblems, sometimes natural objeas, and
sometimes artificial figures, re employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbishop of To-
ledo, the house, which was properly the picture of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. The Mexicans eem
even to have made some advances beyond this,
towards the use of the more figurative and fanciful
hieroglyphic. In order to describe a monarch,
who had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
llbdued. But it is only in one intance, the no-

N 3 tation

B o o K tation of numbers, that'we discern any attempt to
,_g...- Lexhibit ideas which had no corporeal form. The

Mexican painters had invented artificial marks, or
signs of convention, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be
paId into the royal trealury. The figure of a
circlereprefented unit, and in small numbers, the
computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were exprefied by a peculiar mark, and
they had such as denoted all integral numbers,
from twenty to eight thousand. The fort dura-
tion of their empire prevented the Mexicans from
advancing farther in that long course which con-
t.:irs men from the labour of delineating real ob-
ic'ts, to the simplicity and ease of alphabetic
w\iting. Their records, notwithstanding ome dawn
of Iluch ideas as might have led to a more prfc
ftylc, can be confidered as little more than a Ipecies
of picture-writing, so far improved as to mark thir
iiperiority over the savage tribes of America; but
t;ill so defecive, as to prove that they had not pro.
ceeded far beyond the first stage in that progres
which muff be completed before any people can be
ranked among polished nations d

Their mode THEIR mode of computing time may be coini-
of comput-
'ng tim. klc;red as a more decisive evidence of their progrcls

in improvemcnt. They divided their year into
eighteen months, each consisting of twenty days,

d See NOTE XXVI.

amounting

amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But B o r,
as they observed that the course of the fun was not :
completed in that time, they added five days to
the year. Theie, which were properly intercalary
clays, they termed fupernmerary or waste; and as
they did not belong to any month, no work was
done, and no sacred rite performed on them; they
were devoted wholly to festivity and paflime c. This
near approach to philosophical accuracy is a re-
markable proof that the Mexicans had bestowed some
attention upon inquiries and speculations, to which
men in a very rude state never turn their thoughts *.

SUCH are the inofl striking particulars in the FaRs indl-

0 r eating a

manners and policy of the Mexicans, which ex- rfallpro-
hibit them to view as a people considerably refined. vilization.
But from other circumstances, one is apt to suspect
that their characEer, and many of their institutions,
did not diner greatly from tofe of the other inha-
bitants of America.

LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexi- Their wars

continual

cans were incefTintly engaged in war, and the mo- and feroci-
tives which prompted them to hostility seem to
have been the fame. They fought, in order to

c Acofta, lib. vi. c. z.
* The Mexican mode of computing time, and every other

particular relating to their chronology, have been confider-
ably elucidated by M. Clavigero, Vol. . 288; Vol. II. 225,
&c. The obfcrvations and theories of the Mexicans concern-
ing those fubjecls discover a greater progress in speculative
cicnce than wve find among any people in the New World.

N 4 gratify

B OO K gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of

VIL
i.t,,mw their enemies. In battle they were chiefly intent

on taking prisoners, and it was by the number of
there that they estimated the glory of viEtory. No
captive was ever ransomed or spared. All were
sacrificed without mercy, and their flelh devoured
with the fame barbarous joy as among the fiercelt
savages. On some occasions it rose to even wilder
excefTes. Their principal warriors covered them.
selves with the skins of the unhappy victims, and
danced about the streets, boasting of their own va.
lour, and exulting over their enemies . Even in
their civil institutions we discover traces of that
barbarous disposition which their system of war
inspired. The four chief counsellors of the em-
pire were distinguished by titles, which could
have been assumed only by a people who de-
lighted in blood g. This ferocity of character pre.
vailed among all the nations of New Spain,
The Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan, and
other states at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted
equally in war, and treated their prisoners with the
fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind combine
in social union, and live under the influence of
equal laws and regular policy, their manners sos-
ten, sentiments of humanity arile, and the rights
of the species come to be understood. The fierce-
ness of war abates, and even while engaged in
hoitility, men remember what they owe one to

F Herrern, dec. 3. lib. ii. c 15. 5Gom. Cron. . 217.
s Sec NOTE XXVII.

another,

another. The savage fights to destroy, the citizen B o ;
to conquer. The former neither pities nor spares, I_
the latter has acquired sensibility which tempers
his rage. To this sensibility the Mexicans seem
to have been perfet strangers, and among them
war was carried on with so much of its original
barbarity, that we cannot but fufpet their degree
of civilization to have been very imperfet.

THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than Their fune,

those of the most savage tribes. On the death of
any distinguished personage, especially of the Em-
peror, a certain number of his attendants were
chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate victims were put so death without
mercy, and buried in the fame tomb h

THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive Their agri-

than that of the roving tribes who trusted chiefly sa im-
to their bow for food, it seems not to have sup-
plied them with such subsistence as men require
when engaged in efforts of ative industry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been struck with any
superiority of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their observation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give

I H-errera, dec. 3, lib. ii. c. 18. Gom. Cron. c. 202.

1 firmness

°0v K firnnefs to the conflitution. Such a remark could
1-_V- hardly have been made with refpecE to any people

furnished plentifully with the necessaries of life.
The difficulty which Cortes found in procuring
subsistence for his fmnall body of soldiers, who
were often constrained to live on the spontaneous
productions of the earth, seems to confirm the
remark of the Spanish writers, and gives no high
idea of the state of cultivation in the Mexican
empire'.

A farther A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain
proof of this.

appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican
women gave fuck to their children for several
years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their husbands k. This precaution against a
burdensome increase of progeny, though necessary,
as I have already observed, among savages, who,
from the hardships of their condition, and the pre-
carioufnefs of their subsistence, find it impoTible
to rear a numerous family, can hardly be fuppoled
to have continued among a people who lived at
ease and in abundance.

Doubts con- THE vail extent of the Mexican empire, which
ccrning the
extent of the has been confidered, and with justice, as the mofl

CI decisive proof of a considerable progress in regu-

i Relat. ap Ramus. iii. 306, A. IIerrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv.
c. 17. dec . . lib. vi. c. 16.

Gori, Cron, c. zo8. Ilerrcra, dec. 3. lib.iv. c, 6,

lar

lar government and police, is one of those fats in B o o K
the history of the New World which seems to have L_
been admitted without due examination or fuffi-
cient evidence. The Spanish historians, in order
to magnify the valour of their countrymen, are
accustomed to represent the dominion of Monte-
zuma as stretching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the Northern to the Southern Ocean.
But a great part of the mountainous country was
pocffffed by the Oomies, a fierce uncivilized
pople, who feern to have been the residue of the
origiial inhabitants. The provinces towards the
:::,h and weft of Mexico were occupied by the
it,::emccas, and other tribes of hunters. None
ct the recognized the Mexican monarch as their
lj :lior. Even in the interior and more level
country, there were several cities and provinces
which had never submitted to the Mexican yoke.
Tlalcala, though only twenty-one leagues from the
capital of the empire, was an independent and ho-
flile republic. Cholula, though still nearer, had
been subjected only a short time before the arrival
of the Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the distance of
thirty leagues from Mexico, fcems to have been
a separate slate, governed by its own laws'.
Mechoacan, the frontier of which extended within
forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom,
remarkable for its implacable enmity to the Mexi-

; errera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 15. 21. B. Diaz, c. 3io.

can

B O O K can name"n. By these hostile powers the Mexican

-v<_ empire was circumscribed on every quarter, and the

high ideas which we are apt to form of it from the
description of the Spanish historians, hould be con.
fiderably moderated.

Litle in- IN confcquence of this independence of several
tercout e
among is fates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire,
several p)rO1*
Vics. there was not any considerable intercourse between

its various provinces. Even in the interior coun.
try, not tar distant from the capital, there seem to
have been no roads to facilitate the communication
of one iltrid with another; and when the Spa.
niards first attempted to penetrate into it, they had
to open their way through forests and marhes".
Cortes, in his adventurous march from Mexico to
Honduras in 1525, met with obftruions, and en.
dured hardships, little inferior to those with which
he must have itruggled in the molt uncivilized
regions of America. In tome places he could
hardly force a passage through impervious woods,
and plains overflowed with water. In others he
found so little cultivation, that his troops were fre-
quently in danger of perishing by famine. Such
fats correspond ill with the pompous defcriptiol
which the Spanish writers give of Mexican police
and indutry, and convey an idea of a country
pearly fimillr to that possessed by the Indian tribes

m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 10.
' B. Diaz, c. 166. c. 76.

in North America. Here and there a trading or a B o o K

V1.

war path, as they are called in North America, led .
from one settlement to another °, but generally there
appeared no sign of any established communica-
tion, few marks of industry, and fewer monuments
of art.

A PROOF of this imperfec6ion in their commer- Fartherproof

cial intercourse no less striking, is their want of
money, or some universal standard by which to efti-
mate the value of commodities. The discovery of
this is among the steps of greatest consequence in
the progress of nations. Until it has been made,
all their tranfaaions must be so aukward, so ope-
rose, and so limited, that we may boldly pronounce
that they have advanced but a little way in their
career. The invention of such a commercial
standard is of such high antiquity in our hemi-
sphere, and rites so far beyond the ara of authentic
history, as to appear almost coeval with the exiit-
ence of society. The precious metals seem to have
been early employed for this purpose, and from
their permanent value, their divisibility, and many
other qualities, they are better adapted to serve as
a common standard than any other lubftance of
which nature has given us the command. But in
the New World, where there metals abound most,
this ule of them was not known. The exigencies
of rude tribes, or of monarchies imperfectly civi-
lized, did not call for it. All their commercial in-

Ilerrera, dec, 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

tercourfe

B O K tercourfe was carried on by barter, and their igno;
v'-_-_ rance of any common tfandard by which to facili.

tate that exchange of commodities which contri-
butes so much towards the comfort of life, may be
justly mentioned as an evidence of the infant state
of their policy. But even in the New World the
inconvenience of wanting some general instrument
of commerce began to be felt, and some efforts
were made towards supplying that defe&. The
Mexicans, among whom the number and greatness
of their cities gave rife to a more extended com-
merce than in any part of America, had begun to
employ a common standard of value, which ren-
dered smaller tranfations much more easy. As
chocolate was the favourite drink of persons in
every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao,
of which it is composed, were of such universal
consumption, that, in their stated markets, these
were willingly received in return for commodities
of small price. Thus they came to be confidered
as the instrument of commerce, and the value of
what one wished to dispose of, was estimated by the
number of nuts of the cacao, which he. might ex-
pect in exchange for it. This eems to be the t-
moit length which the Americans had advanced to-
wards the discovery of any expedient for supplying
the use of money. And if the want of it is to be
held, one one hand, as a proof of their barbarity,
this expedient for supplying that want, should be
admitted, on the other, as an evidence no less satis-
fying, of some progress which the Mexicans had

mIade

made in refinement and civilization, beyond the fa- B o o K
vage tribes around them. _V_

IN such a rude state were many of the Mexican Doubts con-

provinces when. first visited by their conquerors. atonfthtlir
Even their cities, extensive and populous as they
were, seem more fit to be the habitation of men
just emerging from barbarity, than the residence
of a polished people. The description of Tlafcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low flraggling huts, scattered about ir-
regularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prietor, built with turf and stone and thatched
with reeds, without any light but what they re-
ceived by a door, so low that it could not be en-
tered upright P. In Mexico, though, from the
peculiarity of its situation, the dilpofition of the
houses was more orderly, the ftru"ture of the
greater part was equally mean. Nor does the fa-
bric of their temples, and other public edifices, ap- Temples,
pear to have been such as entitled them to the
high praises bestowed upon them by many Spanish
authors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
fcure and inaccurate descriptions, the great temple
of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, which
has been reprel:nted as a magnificent building,
raised to fich a height, that the ascent to it was by
a flair-cafe of a hundred and fourteen feps, was a
solid mars. of earth of a square form, faced partly

P Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vi c. 12.

with

B 0 0 K with stone. Its base on each fide extended ninety

VIT.
~<»»e feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced in

height, it terminated in a quadrangle of about
thirty feet, where were placed a flrine of the deity
and two altars on which the vidims were facri.
siced 9. All the other celebrated temples of New
Spain exa6tly resembled that of Mexico r. Such
ftru&ures convey no high idea of progress in art
and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive that
a form more rude and simple could have occurred
to a nation in its first efforts towards erecting any
great work.

ard other GREATER kill and ingenuity were displayed,
ublic

ding. if we may believe the Spanish historians, in the

houses of the emperor and in those of the principal
nobility. There, some elegance of design was vi-
fible, and a commodious arrangement of the apart-
ments was attended to. But if buildings corre-
fponding to such descriptions had ever existed in
the Mexican cities, it is probable that some re-
mains of them would still be visible. From the
manner in which Cortes conducted the siege of
Mexico, we can indeed easily account for the to.
tal deftruaion of whatever had any appearance of
splendor in that capital. But as only two cen-
turies and a half have elapsed since the conquest of
New Spain, it seems altogether incredible that in
a period so short, every vestige of this boasted le.

i Herrcra, dcc. 2. lib. vii. c. 7.
'Sec NOTE XXVIiI.

g:incc

gance and grandeur should have disappeared; and o o K
that in the other cities. particularly in those which .-
did not susser by the destructive hand of the con-
querors, there are any ruins, which can be con-
fidered as monuments of their ancient magnifi-
cence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling-houfes. Such as are deflined
for holding the council of the tribe, and in which
all assemble on occasions of public festivity, may
be called stately edifices, when compared with the
reft. As among the Mexicans the diitintion of
ranks was eablilhed, and property was unequally
divided, the number of distinguished ftruures in
their towns would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to
have been either so solid or magnificent as to merit
the pompous epithets which some Spanish authors
employ in describing them. It is probable that,
though more ornamented, and built on a larger
icale, they were ereEted with the fame flight mate-
rials which the Indians employed in their common
buildings', and Time, in a space much less than
two hundred and fifty years, may have swept away
all remains of them t

FROM this enumeration of fa&s, it seems, upon
the whole, to be evident, that the tate of society in

' See NOTE XXIX. ' Se NOTE XXX.
OL. III. 0 Mexico

B o o K Mexico was considerably advanced beyond that of

VII.
t -,_J the savage tribes which we have delineated. But it

is no less manifest, that with respect to many parti.
culars, the Spanish accounts of their progress ap.
pear to be highlyembellifhed. There is not a more
frequent or a more fertile source of deception in de.
scribing the manners and arts of savage nations, or.
of such as are imperfectly civilized, than that of ap.
plying to them the names and phrases appropriated
to the institutions and refinements of- polilhed life,
When the leader of a fiall tribe, or the head of
a rude community, is dignified with the name of
king or emperor, the place of his residence can
receive no other name but that of his palace; and
whatever his attendants may be, they muff be called
his court. Under such appellations they acquire,
in our etimation, an importance and dignity which
does not belong to them. The illusion spreads,
and giving a false colour to every part of the nar-
rative, the imagination is so much carried away
with the resemblance, that it becomes difficulto
discern objects as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they first touched on the Mexican coafl,
were so much fruck with the appearance of attain-
ments in policy and in the arts of life, far superior
to those of the rude tribes with which they were
hitherto acquainted, that they fancied they had
at length dilcovered a civilized people in the New
World. This comparibon between the people of
Mexico and their uncultivated neighbours, they ap-
pear to have kept conft:altly in view, and oblerving

\\viih

with admiration many things which marked the pre- B 0 K
eminence of the former, they employ in describing - -
their imperfect policy and infant arts, such terms
as are applicable to the institutions of men far be-
yond them in improvement. Both these circum-
Itances concur in detracting from the credit due to
the descriptions of Mexican manners by the early
Spanish writers. By drawing a parallel between
them and those of people o much less civilized,
they raised their own ideas too high. By their mode
of describing them, they conveyed ideas to others
no less exalted above truth. Later writers have
adopted the style of the original historians, and im-
proved upon it. The colours with which De Solis
delineates the character and describes the aions of
Montezuma, the splendour of his court, the laws
and policy of his empire, are the fame that he mult
have employed in exhibiting to view the monarch
and institutions of an highly poliffed people.

*BUT though we may admit, that the warm ima-
gination of the Spanish writers has added some
embellifllnment to their descriptions, this will not
jullify the decisive and peremptory tone, with
which several authors pronounce all tlheir accounts
of the Mexican power, policy and laws, to be the
fictions of men wilo wished to deceive, or who de-
lighted in the marvellous. There are few lnftorical
ft'it, that can be alce-tained by evidence more un-
xceptioniablc, than may be produced in iuppoit
fl the material articles, in the dcicription of the

0 2 Mexican

-B 0 'K Mexican conftittition and manners. Eye witnesses
.Av- relate what they had beheld, men who had resided

among the Mexicans, both before and after the
conquefl, describe institutions and customs which
were familiar to them, persons of such different
profeflions that objects must have presented them.
selves to their view under every various afpeft;
soldiers, priess, and lawyers, all concur in their
testimony. Had Cortes ventured to impoe upon
his sovereign, by exhibiting to him a piCture of
imaginary manners, there wanted not enemies and
rivals who we're qualified to detect his deceit, and
who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But ac-
cording to the jut remark of an author, whose in.
genuity has illufrated, and whose eloquence has
adorned, the history of America ", this supposition
is in tfelf as improbable, as the attempt would
have been audacious. Who among the destroyers
of this great empire was so enlightened by science,
or so attentive to the progress and operations of
men in social life, as to frame a fictitious system of
policy so well combined and so consistent, as that
which they delineate, in their accounts of the
Mexican government ? Where could they have
borrowed the idea of many institutions in legifi-
tion and police, to which, at that period, there
was nothing parallel in the nations with whi.h they
were acquainted ? There was not, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, a regular eftablifnmein

' M. 'Abbi Raynal Hit. philof. & polit. &c. iii. 127.

of

of posts for conveying intelligence to the sovereign B 0 °'
of any kingdom in Europe. The fame observation '.
will apply to what the Spaniards relate, with re-
sped to the ftru&ure of the city of Mexico, 'the
regulations concerning its police, and various laws
eRablilhed for the administration of jullice, or fe-
curing the happiness of the community, Whoever
is accustomed to contemplate the progress of na-
tions, will often, at very early ftages'of it, discover
a premature and .unexpeced dawn of those ideas,
which give rile to inftirotions that are the pride
and ornanent of its most advanced period. Even
in a slate as imperfectly polished as the M'exicarf
empire, the happy genius of ome sagacious ob-
erver,.excited or aided by circumfances unknown
to us, may have introduced institutions which are
seldom found but in societies highly refined. But
it is almost impossible that the illiterate conquerors
of the New World should have formed in any one
instance a conception of customs and laws, beyond
the standard of improvement in their own age
and country. Or if Cortes had been capable of
this, what inducement had those by whom he was
superseded to continue the deception ? Why should
Corita, or Motolinea, or Acofta, have amused their
sovereign or their fellow citizens with a tale purely
fabulous ?

In one particular, however, the guides whom Religionot
we must follow have represented the Mexicans to cans,
be more barbarous, perhaps, than they really were.

0 3 Their

B O K Their religious tenets, and the rites of their wor.

Vii. _-_-. fj ihip, are described by them as wild and cruel in

an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no
considerable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any superior power are ob.
fcure, and his sacred rites few as well as finiple,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a rngular
system, with its complete train of pielts, temples,
victims, and festivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the state of the Mexicans was very dif-
ferent from that of the ruder American tribes,
But from the extravagance of their religious no.
tions, or the barbarity of their rites, no concluon
can be drawn with certainty concerning the degree
of their civilization. For nations, long after their
ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to refine,
adhere to systems of superstition founded on t':r
crude conceptions of early ages. From the gcn;
of the Mexican religion we may, however, io:m
a most just conclusion with relpec to its ili::ce
upon the characl r of the people. The .apcr of
fuperfltiion in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious,
It* divinities were clothed with terror, and de-
lighted in vengeance. They were exhibited to the
people under etertable forms, which created hor.
ror, The figures of serpents, of tygers, anld o
other destructive animals, decorated their temples,
Fear was the only principle that inspircd their vo-
taries. Fafls, mortifications, and penances, all i-
gid, and many of them excruciating to an cx-
treme degree, were the means employed to appexls

tile

the wrath of their gods, and the Mexicans never B o K
approached their altars without sprinkling them ^
with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of
all offerings, human ficrifices were deemed the
imoft acceptable. This religious belief, mingling
with the implacable spir.t of vengeance, and adding
new force to irt every captive taken in war was
brought to the temple, wa devoted as a victim to
the deity, and acrificed with rites no lels solemn
than cruel . The heart and head were the portion
consecrated to the gods; the warrior, by whose
prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried off
the body to fealt upon it with his friends. Under
the impreflion of ideas so dreary and terrible,'and
accustomed daily to scenes of bloodshed rendered
awful by religion, the heart of man must harden,
and be fleeled to every sentiment of humanity.
The spirit o the Mexicans was accordingly un-
feeling, and the genius of their religion so far
counterbalanced the influence of policy and arts,
that notwithstanding their progress in both, their
manners, instead of oftening, became more fierce.
To what circumltances it was owing that super-
ftiion assumed such a dreadful torm among the
Mexicans, we have not sufficient knowledge of their
history to determine. But its influence is vilible,
and produced an effet that is singular in the hlilory
of the human species. The manners of the people

x Cort. Relat. ap. Ramu. iii. 240, &c. B. Diaz, c. 8z.

Acol:l, li. v. c. 13, &c. 1Ierrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. . 15, &c.
Gornara Cron. c. 80, &c. See N 0'1' XXXI.

4 ia

B 0 0 K in the New World who had made the greatef pro.

-v-' grelf in the arts of policy, were the molt ferocious,

and the barbarity of tome of their customs exceeded
even those of the savage fiate.

Petefons THE empire of Peru boasts of an higher anti-
tfiq an- quity than that of Mexico. According to the tra.

ditionary accounts collected by the Spaniards, it
had subsisted four hundred years, under twelve luc-
ccffive monarchs. But the knowledge of their
ancient tfory, which the Peruvians could commu-
nicate to their conquerors, must have been both
uncertain. imperfect and uncertain z. Like the other Ame-

rican nations, they were totally unacquainted with
the art of writing, and destitute of the only means
by which the memory of paif tranfations can be
prefcrved with any degree of accuracy. Even
among people to whom the use of letters is known,
the sera where the authenticity of history com-
mences, is much posterior to the intioduction of
writing. That noble invention continued every
where, to be long fublervient to the common buli-
ness and wants of life, before it was employed in re.
cording events, with a vizw of conveying intorma-
tion from one age to another. But in no country
did ever tradition alone carry down historical know-
ledge, in any full continued stream, during a period
of half the length that the non.archy of Peru is said
to have subsisted.

I See NOTE XXXII,

Tllr

THE ,uipos, or knots on cords of different co- B o o K
lours, which are celebrated by authors fond of the L-.-

Deleis in
marvellous, as if they had been regular annals of their records

by

W it O,.

the empire, imperfectly supplied the place of writ-
ing. According to the obscure dfcription of them
by Acofta ', which Garcilaffo de la Vega has adopted
with little variation and no improvement, the qui-
pos seem to have been a device for rendering cal-
culation more expeditious and accurate. By the
various colours different objects were denoted, and
by each knot a dilRinc number. Thus an account
was taken, and a kind of register kept, of the inha-
bitants in each province, or of the several produc-
tions colleed there for public use. But as by
these knots, however varied or combined, no moral
or abitraft idea, no operation or quality of the
mind could be represented, they contributed little
towards prefcrving the memory of ancient events
and institutions. By the Mexican paintings and
symbols, rude as they were, more knowledge
of remote tranfassions seems to have been con-
veyed, than the Peruvians could derive from their
boafled quipos. Had the latter been even of more
extensive use, and better adapted to supply the place
of written records, they perished so generally, to-
gether with other monuments of Peruvian inge-
nuity, in the wreck occasioned by the Spanish con-
queit, and the civil wars subsequent to it, that no
acceflion of light or knowledge comes from them.
All the zeal of Garcilafib de la Vega, for the ho-

a Hilt. lib. vi. c. 8.

nour

B 0 O K nour of that race of monarchs from whom he de.
^-^-^ scended, all the industry of his researches, and the

superior advantages with which he carried them on,
opened no source of information unknown to the
Spanilh authors who wrote before him. In his Ro:al
Ciommentaries, he confines himlclf to illullrate what
they had related concerning the antiquities and in-
ftitutions of Peru ; and his illu!lrations, like their
accounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary
tales current among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de.

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private character of the
early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft- upon no-
thing in their flory, as authentic, but a few fats, lo
interwoven in the lyrtem of their religion and po-
licy, as preserved the memory of them from being
loft; and upon the description of such customs and
inilitutions as continued in force at the time of the
conquest, and fell under the immediate observation
of the Spaniards. By attending carefully to there,
and endeavouring to separate them from what ap.
pears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I
have laboured to form an idea of the Peruvian go-
vernment and manners.

origin of THE people of Peru, as I have already ob-
policy. served , had not advanced beyond the rudcll

b Lib. i. c. 1o. c Book vi. p. 21, &c.

form

form of avage life, when Manco Capac, and his o o K
consort Mama Ocollo, appeared to instruct and
civilize them. Who there extraordinary per-
foliages were, whether they imported their system
of legislation and knowledge of arts from some
country more improved, or, if natives of Peru,
how they acquired ideas so far fulerior to those of
the people whom they addrefldl, are circum-
stances with refpeit to which the Peruvian tra-
dition* conveys no information. Manco Capac
and his consort, taking advantage of the pro-
penfitv in the Peruvians to fuprflicion, and par-
ticularly of their veneration for the Sun, pretended
to be children of that glorious luminary, and
to deliver their instructions in his name and au-
thority. The multitude listened and believed.
What reformation in policy, and manners the
Peruvians ascribe to those fotndels of their
empire, and how, fiom the precepts of the
Inca and his consort, their ancestors gradually
acquired ome knowledge of thote arts, and
fbmc relish for that industry, which render sub-
fiftence secure and life comfortable, hath been
formerly related. Those blessings were originally
confined within narrow precincts; but, in procels
of time, the successors of Manco Capac extended
their dominion over all the regions tnait fretch
to the weft of the Andes from Chili to Quito,
cftablifhing in every province their peculiar policy
and Jrligious inflitutions,

TH E

B 0o K, THE most finrTgur i4d, ftrikig'circuimftance in

t.',_ the Pr.uyia

. yutnmen4tii i the.inflsence of teli.
-- .'" ( gion -vpn. 'sr .eius aqA4 .Jay. -: R^eigiousijdeas

ma. such a fetb[e ipreiffir 'on '.th, mind of a
savage, that their effct ,upon' his I'elrimenrs and,
mannersis; hardly pereptible. Among tic '.exi.
cans,. religion, reduced into a regular t-ilcm, and
holding a considerable place in their public infti-
tutions, operatel; with conlpOicuotls efficacy in
forming, the peculiar character of that people,,
But in Peru, the whole iyftem of, civil policy was.
founded on religion. The Inca appeared.nrt only
as a legillator, but a the messenger of Heaven.
His precepts were received noc merely as-the in-
junEtions of a superior, but as the mandates of the
Deity. His-race was held to be sacred; and in
order to prelerve it diftint, witlrout being polulted
by any mixture of less nobl# blood,, the sons of
Manco Capac married. their 'ov-n fiters, and no
person was ever adinittreadtftte throne who cduld
not claim it by such a pure defccnt. To those
Children of the Sun, for that was the appellation
bestowed upon all the offspring of the first Inca,
the people looked up with the reverence due to
beings of a fulperior order. They were deemed to
be under the immed:iate protection of the deity
from whom they issued, and by him every order
of tle reigning Inca wyas supposed to be dic-
t'ted.

14 .FROM

'IFROM those ideas' two consequences resulted. B 0 o K
The authority'of the Inca was unlimited- and abfo-
lute, in the moft-extenfive meaning of the words. ralable
*Whienever te decrees"b'a pince:are onfidered as the
she cbommarids of'the Divinity, :iris not onl- an at
of rebellionl, but of impiety, to difpfiti.-e--oroppofe
'his will. 'Obedience becomes a duty of. religionr;' Thl aho-

r0 ,lute power

and as'it would be profane to controul a monarch ot t:E l.ca.
under the guidance of Heaven, and presumptuous
to advise him, nothing remains but t fibmit with
implick refpef6. This munf neceffE;-ily be the es-
se6t'os every government eftabli ;, on pretenions
of' ntecoiirfe with superior p::wers. Such accord-
ingly was the'Blind fibmiiiion which the Peruvians
yielded to'their fovreigns. The persons of highest
rank and greatest power: i 'their" dominions ac-
knowledged them to-be of' a mbre exalred natur'e;
and in testimony of 'sis,' when admitted into their
presence, they entereiilt/r-a- bGuidei ipon their
shoulders, as an embefiqFhtir frvirude, and
willingness to bear whatever the fnc'was pleased
to inpofe. Among their fubjets, force was not
requisite to second their commands. Every officer
entrusted with the execution of them was revered,
and, according to the'account of anintelligent ob-
server of Peruvian manners ', might proceed alone
from one extremity of the empire to another without
meeting oppplition; for, on producing a fringe friom
the royal Borla, an ornainmnr of th hhad peculiar to

d Zarate, lib. i. c. 13.

the

B VI K the reigning Inca, the lives and fortunes of the
--v-_ people were at his disposal.

All crimes ANOTHER consequence of establishing govern-
capitally. ment in Peru on the foundation of religion was,

that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were not confidered as transgressions of human laws,
but as insults offered to the Deity, Each, without
any diffinstion between such as were flight and
such as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and
could be expiated only by the blood of the offender,
Consonantly to the fame ideas, punifhtnent follow-
ed the trespass with inevitable certainty, because
an offence against Heaven was deemed such an
high enormity as could not be pardoned e. Among
a people of corrupted morals, maxims of jurif-
prudence so evere and unrelenting, by rendering
men ferocious and detperate, would be more apt
to multiply crimes than to restrain them. But the
Peruvians, of simple manners and unuflpicious
faith, were held in such awe by this rigid dilci-
pline, that the number of offenders was extremely
fmnall. Veneration for monarchs, enlightened and
directed, as they believed, by the divinity whom
they adored, prompted them to their duty; the
dread of punihmnent, which they were taught o
confider as unavoida;ble vengeance infliEed by of-
fended Heaven, withheld theln from evil.

c Vcga, lib. i. c. 6.

TIIE

THE system of superstition on which the Incas B o 0 K
ingrafted their pretenlions to such high authority, hc----

' 5d Mi genius

was of a genius very different from that eftblifhed ot t,," ,,.;
among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned the.
veneration of his followers entirely towards natural
objecs. The Sun, as the great source of lihrt, of
joy, and fertility in the creation, attracted their
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as co-
operating with him, were entitled to secondary ho-
nours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore tome superior
power, takes this direction, and is employed in
contemplating the order and beneficence hat really
exitt in nature, the spirit of superstition is mild.
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
and the fears of men, are supposed to preside in
nature, 'and become the ol.jes of worship, fu-
perftition always assumes a more tCvere and atro-
cious form. Of the latter we have an example
among the Mexicans, of the former among the
people of Peru. The Peruvirns had not, in-
deed, made such progress in oirvtion or in-
quiry, as to have attained julc conceptions of the
DIeity; nor was there in their languiage any pro-
per name or appellation of the Supreme Power,
which intimated, that they had formed any idea of
him as the Creator and Governor of the \Vorld .
But by direing their veneration to that glorious
luminary, which, by its univcrll and vivifying
energy, is the belt emblem of divine beneficence,

f Acolla, lib, v, c. 3.

thie

o o K the rites and observances which they deemed ac.
v-_l ceptable to him were innocent and humane. They

offered to the Sun a part of those productions
which his genial warmth had called forth from the
bosom of the earth, and reared to maturity. They
sacrificed, as an oblation of gratitude, some of the
animals who were indebted to his influence for
nourishment. They presented to him choice fpe-
cimens of those works of ingenuity which his light
had guided the hand of man in forming. But the
Incas never stained his altars with human blood,
nor could they conceive that their beneficent father
the Sun would be delighted with such horrid vic-
tims g. Thus the Peruvians, unacquainted with
those barbarous rites which extinguish sensibility,
and suppress the feelings of nature at the fight of
human sufferings, were formed, by the spirit of
the superstition which they had adopted, to a na-
tional characer, more gentle than that of any
people in America.

Its influence THE influence of this superstition operated in the
licyVi p fame manner upon their civil institutions, and tended

to correct in them whatever was adverse to gentlenels
of character. The dominion of the Incas, though
the most absolute of all despotisms, was mitigated
by its alliance with religion. The mind was not
humbled and depretfed by the idea of a forced
fubjeaion to the will of a superior; obedience,

c Sec NOTE XXXIII.

paid

paid to one who was believed to be clothed with B K
divine authority, was willingly yielded, and im- ---
plied no degradation. The sovereign, conscious
that the submissive reverence of his people flowed
from their belief of his heavenly descent, was con-
tinually reminded of a diflindion which prompted
him to imitate that beneficent power which he
was supposed to represent. In consequence of those
impressions, there hardly occurs in the traditional
history of Peru, any instance of rebellion againfl
the reigning prince, and, among twelve fucceifive
monarchs, there was not one tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, were anidon their

military

carried on with a spirit very different from that of ryetem.
other American nations. They fought not, like
savages, to destroy and exterminate; or, like the
Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities with
human sacrifices. They conquered, in order to
reclaim and civilize the vanquished, and to diffuse
the knowledge of their own institutions and arts.
Prisoners seem not to have been exposed to the in-
fults and tortures, which were their lot in every
other part of the New World. The Incas took
the people whom they subdued under their pro-
tetion, and admitted them to a participation of
all the advantages enjoyed by their original sub-
jeEts. This practice, so repugnant to American
ferocity, and resembling the humanity of the mol:
polished nations, must be ascribed, like other pe-
culiarities which we have observed in the Peruvian

Vol. III. P manners,

B 0 0 K manners,. to the genius of their religion. The

r --, Incas, confidering the homage paid to any other ob-

jec than to the heavenly powers which they adored
as impious, were fond of gaining proselytes to their
favourite system. The idols of every conquered
province were carried in triumph to the great
temple at Cuzcoh, and placed there as trophies
of the superior power of the divinity who was the
protector of the empire. The people were treated
with lenity, and inftruted in the religious tenets
of their new maftersi, that the conqueror might
have the glory of having added to the number of
the votaries of his father the Sun.

Peculiar THE state of property in Peru was no less fin.
slate of pro-
perty. gular than that of religion, and contributed, like-

wife,. towards giving a mild turn of character to
the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three shares. One was confe-
crated to the Sun, and the product of it was ap-
plied to the ere&ion of temples, and furnishing
what was requisite towards celebrating the public
rites of religion. The second belonged to the
Inca, and was set apart as the provision made by
the community for the support of government.
The third and largest share was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. No person, however, or community,
had a right of exclusive property in the portion fct

h Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. 4. Vega, lib. v . 2c.
Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 8.

apart

apart for their use. They pofTeFed it only for a B o 6 K
year, at the expiration of which a new division was A _
made, in proportion to the rank, the number, and
exigencies of each family. All those lands were cul-
tivated by the joint industry of the community.
The people, summoned by a proper officer, repaired
in a body to the fields, and performed their com-
mon talk, while ongs and musical instruments
cheered them to their labour k. By this singular Ieas of
distribution of territory, as well as by the mode of
cultivating it, the idea of a common interest, and
of mutual subserviency, was continually inculcated.
Each individual felt his connection with those
around him, and knew that he depended on their
friendly aid for what increase he was to reap. A
state thus constituted may be confidered as one
great family, in which the union of the members
was so complete, and the exchange of good offices
so perceptible, as to create stronger attachment,
and to bind man to man in closer intercourse, than
subsisted under any form of society established in
America. From this resulted gentle manners, and
mild virtues unknown in the savage state, and with
which the Mexicans were little acquainted.

BUT, though the inflitutions of the Incas were Inequality

so framed as to strengthen the bonds of affetliqn
among their fubjets, there was great inequality in
their condition. The diftinEtion of ranks was fully

I-Ierrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. 5.

P 2 eflablifhed

B K established in Peru. A great body of the inhabi.
. _-y--u.J tants, under the denomination of 3fanaconas, were

held in a ate of servitude. Their garb and
houses were of a form different from those of free-
men. Like the g'amemes of Mexico, they were
employed in carrying burdens, and in performing
every other work of drudgery '. Next. to them in
rank, were such of the people as were free, but
diftinguilhed by no official or hereditary honours.
Above them were raised, those whom the Spaniards
call Orejcnes, from the ornaments worn in their
ears. They formed what may be denominated
the order of nobles, and in peace as well as war
held every office of power or trust m. At the head
of all were the children of the Sun, who, by their
high descent, and peculiar privileges, were as much
exalted above the Orejones, as these were elevated
above the people.
Satecfarts. SUCH a form of society, from the union of its

members, as well as from the diftintion in their
ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts.
But the Spaniards having been acquainted with the
improved state of various arts in Mexico, several
years before they discovered Peru, were not so
much struck with what they observed in the latter
country, and describe the appearances of ingenuity
there with less warmth of admiration. The Peru

I-Tcrrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8.
I-lcrrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. .

vians,

vians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond the B o o K
Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life, and in -
such as have some title to the name of elegant.

IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necef- Improved

state of agri-

fity in social life, was more extensive, and carried culture.
on with greater skill than in any part of America.
The Spaniards, in their progress through the coun-
try, were so fully supplied with provisions of every
kind, that in the relation of their adventures we
meet with few of those dismal scenes of distress oc-
cafioned by famine, in which the conquerors of
Mexico were so often involved. The quantity of
foil under cultivation was not left to the discretion
of individuals, but regulated by public authority
in proportion to the exigencies of the community.
Even the calamity of an unfruitful season was but
little felt, for the produc of the lands consecrated
to the Sun, as well as those set apart for the
Incas, being deposited in the Tambos, or public
florehoufes, it remained there as a stated provision
for times of scarcity . As the extent of cultiva-
tion was determined with such provident attention
to the demands of the fate, the invention and in-
duftry of the Peruvians were called forth to ex-
traordinary exertions, by certain defects peculiar
to their climate and foil. All the vai: rivers that
flow from the Andes ake their course eastward to
the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered only by ome

" Zarate, lih. i. c. 14. Vega, lib. i. c. 8.

1' :; streams

B o o K fireams which rulh down from the mountains like

VII.

. torrents. A great part of the low country is sandy

and barren, and never refreshed with rain. In
order to render such an unpromising region fertile,
the ingenuity of the Peruvians had recourse to va-
rious expedients. By means of artificial canals
conduted, with much patience and considerable
art, from the torrents that poured across their
country, they conveyed a regular supply of moi-
flure to their fields °. They enriched the foil by
manuring it with the dung of sea-fowls, of which
they found an inexhaustible flore on all the ifands
scattered along their coaftsP. In describing the
customs of any nation thoroughly civilized, such
practices would hardly draw attention, or be men-
tioned as in any degree remarkable; but in the
history of the improvident race of men in the New
World, they are entitled to notice as singular proofs
of industry and of art. The use of the plough,
indeedt was unknown to the Peruvians. 'lhey
turned up the earth with a kind of mattock of hard
wood q. Nor was this labour deemed so degrad-
ing as to be devolved wholly upon the women.
Both sexes joined in performing this necessary
work. Even the children of the Sun set an ex-
ample of industry, by cultivating a field near Cuzco
with their own hands, and they dignified this func-

o Zarate, lib. i. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. , & 24.
P Acolta, lib. iv. c. 37. Vega, lib. . c. 3. See NOT E
XXXIV.

9 Zarate, lib. i. c. 8.

tion,

tion, by denominating it their triumph over the B o o K
earth r

THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob- Their build.

vious, likewise, in the construction of their houses igs'
and public buildings. In the extensive plains
which itretch along the Pacific Ocean, where the
sky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,
their houfcs were very properly of a fabric extreme-
ly flight. But in the higher regions, where rain
falls, where the vicissitude of seasons is known,
and their rigour felt, houses were construEed with
greater solidity. They were generally of a square
form, the walls about eight feet high, built with
bricks hardened in the fun, without any. windows,
and the door low and strait. Simple as these itruc-
tures were, and rude as the materials may seem
to be, of which they were formed, they were so
durable, that many of them still subsist in different
parts of Peru, long after every monument that might
have conveyed to us any idea of the domestic state
of the other American nations has vanished from
the face of the earth. But it was in the temples
consecrated to the Sun, and in the buildings de-
flined for the residence of their monarchs, that the
Peruvians displayed the utmost extent of their art
and contrivance. The descriptions of them by
such of the Spanish writers as had an opportunity
of contemplating them, while, in rome measure,

' Vega, lib. v. c. 2.

P 4 entire,

B 0 0 entire, might have appeared highly exaggerated,

VII.
-v. if the ruins which still remain, did not vouch the

truth of their relations. These ruins of sacred or
royal buildings are found in every province of the
empire, and by their frequency demonstrate that
they are monuments of a powerful people, who mutt
have subsisted, during a period of ome extent, in
a state of no inconsiderable improvement. They
appear to have been edifices various in their di-
menfions. Some of a moderate size, many of im-
mense extent, all remarkable for solidity, and re-
fembling each other in the itile of architecture.
The temple of Pachacamac, together with a pa-
lace of the Inca, and a fortress, were so connected
together as to form one great ftruaure, above half
a league in circuit. In this prodigious pile, the
fame singular tafle in building is conspicuous, as
in other works of the Peruvians. As they were
unacquainted with the use of the pulley, and other
mechanical powers, and could not elevate the large
itones and bricks which they employed in building
to any considerable height, the walls of this edi-
fice, in which they seem to have made their great-
eft effort towards magnificence, did not rife above
twelve feet from the grond. Though they had
not discovered the use of mortar or of any other
cement in building, the bricks or tones were join.
ed with so much nicety, that the ic;ims can hardly
be discerned . The apartments, as far as the di-1

i; )tlV'ANec NOT XV.

TKz IAN Nil tribution
I^IAc~iV

tribution of them can be traced in the ruins, were B O O K
ill-difpofed, and afforded little accommodation. ,_-
There was not a ingle window in any part of the
building; and as no light could enter but by the
door, all the apartments of largest dimension mult
either have been perfectly dark, or illuminated by
some other means. But with all thee, and many
other imperfections that might be mentioned in
their art of building, the works of the Peruvians
which fill remain, must be confidered as ftupen-
dous efforts of a people unacquainted with the use
of iron, and convey to us an high idea of the
power posiessd by their ancient monarchs.

THESE, however, were not the noblest or molt rads,pubL

useful works of the Incas. The two great roads
from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter-
rupted stretch above fifteen hundred miles, are en-
titled to still higher praise. The one was condu&-
ed through the interior and mountainous country,
the other through the plains on the sea-coast.
From the language of admiration in which tome
of the early writers express their astonishment when
they first viewed those roads, and from the more
pompous descriptions of later writers, who labour
to support some favourite theory concerning Ame-
rica, one might be led to compare this work of
the Incas to the famous military ways which re-
main as monuments of the Roman power: But in
a country where there was no tame animal exccpt
the Llama, which was never used for draught, and

but

B o O K but little as a beast of burden, where the high
_----' roads were seldom trod by any but a human foot,

no great degree of labour or art was requisite in
forming them. The Peruvian roads were only
fifteen feet in breadth , and in many places so
slightly formed, that time has effaced every veltige
of the course in which they ran. In the low
country little more seems to have been done, than
to plant trees or to fix posts at certain intervals, in
order to mark the proper route to travellers. To
open a path through the mountainous country was
a more arduous tafli. Eminences were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and for the preservation of
the road it was fenced with a bank of turf. At
proper difftances, Tambos, or storehouses, were
erected for the accommodation of the Inca and his
attendants, in their progress through his domi-
nions. From the manner in which the road was
originally formed in this higher and more imper-
vious region, it has proved more durable; and
though, from the inattention of the Spaniards to
every object but that of working their mines, no-
thing has been done towards keeping it in repair,
its course may still be traced ". Such was the ce-
lebrated road of tire Incas; and even from this de.
scription, divefled of every circumflance of mani-
fell exaggeration, or of I;fpicious aspet, it mult

Cieca, c. 60.
Xcerez, p. 189. 191. Zarate, lib, i. c. 13 14. Vega,

lib.ix. c. 13. Bogiucr Vo)age, p. ioj. Ulloa Entrctenemcicn-
tos, p. 365.

be

be confidered as, a striking proof of an extraordi- B o
nary progress in improvement and policy. To the --
savage tribes of America, the idea of facilitating
communication with places at a distance had never
occurred. To the Mexicans it was hardly known.
Even in the most civilized countries of Europe, men
had advanced far in refinement, before it became a
regular object of national police to form such roads
as render intercourse commodious. It was a capital
object of Roman policy to open a communication
with all the provinces of their extensive empire, by
means of thole roads which are jutly confidered as
one of the noblest monuments both of their wis-
dom and their power. But during the long reign
of barbarism, the Roman roads were neglected or
destroyed; and at the time when the Spaniards en-
tered Peru, no kingdom in Europe could boast of
any work of public utility that could be compared
with the great roads formed by the Incas.

THE formation of those roads introduced an- and bridges.

other improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the reft of America. In its course from south
to north, the road of the Incas was interfeted by
all the torrents which roll from the Andes towards
the Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their
course, as well as from the frequency and violence
,of their inundation, these were unnavigable. Some
expedient, however, was to be found for passing
them. The Peruvians, from their unacquaintanre
with the use of arches, and their inability to work in

wood,

B o0 K wood, could'not conftru& bridges either of stone
,-, .oj3 or timber. But necessity, the parent of invention,

suggested a device which supplied that defe&. They
formed cables of great strength, by twitting to.
gether some of the pliable withs or offiers, with which
their country abounds; fix of there cables they
stretched across the itream parallel to one another,
and made them fast on each fide. These they
bound firmly together by interweaving smaller ropes
so close, as to form a compat piece of net-work,
which being covered with branches of trees and
earth, they passed along it with tolerable security .
Proper persons were appointed to attend at each
bridge, to keep it in repair, and to assist passengers .
In the level country, where the rivers became deep
and broad and still, they are passed in Balzas, or
floats; in the conftrucion, as well as navigation
of which, the ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to
be far superior to that of any people in America.
These had advanced no farther in naval Wkill than
the use of the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians ven-
tured to raise a malt, and spread a fail, by means of
which their balzas not only went nimbly before the
wind, but could veer and tack with great celerity z.

Mode orre- NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians
ore. confined solely to objes of essential utility. They

x See NOTE XXXVI.
Y Sanchoap. Ram. iii. 376, B. Zarate, lib. i. c. 14. Vega,
lib. iii. c. 7, 8. Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

: Ulloa Voy. i. 167, &c.

Iiad

had made some progress in arts, which may be B o K
called elegant. They poffefled the precious metals
in greater abundance than any people of America.
They obtained gold in the fame manner with the
Mexicans, by searching in the channels of rivers, or
walhing the earth in which particles of it were con-
tained. But in order to procure silver, they ex-
erted no inconsiderable degree of kill and inven-
tion. They had not, indeed, attained the art of
finking a haft into the bowels of the earth, and
penetrating to the riches concealed there; but they
hollowed deep caverns on the banks of rivers and
the fides of mountains, and emptied such veins as
did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. In other
places, where the vein lay near the surface, they
dug pits to such a depth, that the person who
worked below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in baskets a. They had discovered the art of
smelting and refining this, either by the simple
application of fire, or where the ore was more
Itubborn, and impregnated with foreign sub-
stances, by placing it in small ovens or furnaces, on
high grounds, so artificially conftrutced, that the
draught of air performed the function of a bel-
lows, an engine with which they were totally unac-
quainted. By this simple device, the purer ores
were smelted with facility, and the quantity of fil-
ver in Peru was so considerable, that many of the
titenfils employed in the functions of common life

Ramufio, iii. 414, A.

were

B o O K were made of it b. Several of those vessels and

VII.
<_i trinkets are said to have merited no small degree of

estimation, on account of the neatness of the work.
manship, as well as the intrinsic value of the ma.
terials. But as the conquerors of America were
well acquainted with the latter, but had liarcely
any conception of the former, molt of the silver vef-
fels and trinkets were melted down, and rated ac.
cording to the weight and fineness of the metal in
the division of the spoil.

Works of IN other works of mere curiosity or ornament,
elegance.

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many
specimens of those have been dug out of the Gua.
cas, or mounds of earth, with which the Peruvians
covered the bodies of the dead. Among these are
mirrors of various dimensions, of hard ihining stones
highly pblifhed; vessels of earthen ware of different
forms; hatchets, and other instruments, ome de.
ftined for war, and others for labour. Some were
of flint, ome of copper, hardened to such a degree
by an unknown process, as to supply the place of
iron on several occasions. Had the use of those
tools formed of copper been general, the progress
of the Peruvians in the arts might have been such,
as to emulate that of more cultivated nations. But
either the metal was so rare, or the operation by
which it was hardened, so tedious, that their inftru-
ments of copper were few, and so extremely small,

b Acofta, lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Vega, p. x. lib. viii. c. 25.
Ulloa Entreten. 258.

that

that they seem to have been employed only in B o K
flighter works. But even to such a circumscribed L .i
use of this imperfect metal, the Peruvians were in-
debted for their superiority to the other people-of
America in various arts . The fame observation,
however, may be applied to them, which I for-
merly made with respect to the arts of the Mexi-
cans. From several fpecirens of Peruvian utensils
and ornaments, which are deposited in the royal ca-
binet of Madrid, and from some preserved in different
collections in other parts of Erope, I have reason
to believe that the workmanship is more to be ad-
mired on account of the rude tools with which it
was executed, than on account of its intrinsic neat-
ness and elegance; and that the Peruvians, though
the most improved of all the Americans, were not
advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

BUT notwithstanding so many particulars, which An ,mpe-

seem to indicate an high degree of improvement in ton.
Peru, other circumstances occur that suggest the
idea of a society still in the first stages of its tranfi-
tion from barbarism to civilization. In all the do-
minions of the Incas, Cuzco was the only place that No citi'sbut
had the appearance, or was entitled to the name of
a city. Every where else, the people lived mostly
in detached habitations, dispersed over the country,
or, at the utmnolt, fettled together in Imall vil-
lages d. But until men are brought to alcmble in

Ulloa Voy. tom. i. 381, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c.
Zarate, lib. i. c. 9. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 4.

lnumncrotus

B o o K numerous bodies, and incorporated in such clof0
L-^^^ union, as to enjoy frequent intercourse, and to feel

mutual dependence, they never imbibe perfelcly
the spirit, or assume the manners of social life. In
a country of immense extent, with only one city, the
progress of manners, and the improvement either
of the necessary or more refined arts, muff have
been bs flow, and carried on under such difad.
vantages, that it is more surprising the Peruvians
should have advanced so far in refinement, than
that they did not proceed farther.

Noperfe INJ consequence of this fate of imperfet union,
separation of
profeiions. the eparation of professions in Peru was not so

complete as among the Mexicans. The less closely
men associate, the more simple are their manners,
and the fewer their wants. The crafts of common
and most necessary ule in life do not, in such a
slate, become lb complex or difficult, as to render
it requisite that men fliould be trained to them by
any particular course of education. All the arts,
accordingly, which were of daily and indilpenfable
utility, were exercised by every Peruvian indilcri-
minately. None but tlie artists, employed in works
of mere curiosity or ornament, confituted a fepa-
rate order of men, or were distinguished from other
citizens *.

.irtle con- FROM the want of cities in Peru, another con-

lerclll ill-
IcCoutfe. fcqucnce followed. There was little commercial in-

Acofta, lib, i. c. 15, Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Hcrrcra,
dcc. . lib. iv. c. 4.

.17 tercour

tercourfe among the inhabitants of that great em- B o o

VII.

pire. The ativity of commerce is coeval with .--
the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in con-
fiderable numbers in one place, its operations be-
come vigorous. The citizen must depend for sub-
fiftence on the labour of those who cultivate the
ground. They, in return, must receive some equi-
valent. Thus mutual intercourse is established, and
the productions of art are regularly exchanged for
the fruits of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexi-
can empire, stated markets were held, and whatever
could supply any want or desire of man was an ob-
ject of commerce. But in Peru, from the singular
mode of dividing property, and the manner in which
the people were fettled, there was hardly any fpe-
cies of commerce carried on between different pro-
vinces f, and the community was less acquainted
with that active intercourse, which is at once a bond
of union, and an incentive to improvement.

BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was Unwarlike

the most remarkable, as well as most fatal defect in P,,'infth.
their character g. The greater part of the rude na-
tions of America opposed their invaders with un-
daunted ferocity, though with little conduct or fuc-
cess. The Mexicans maintained the firuggle in
dcfence of their liberties, with such perlevering

s Vega, lib. vi. c. 8.
E Xerez, 19o. Sancbo ap. Ram. iii. 37Z. Herrera, dec. 5.

lib. i. c. 3.
VOL. III, Q fortitude,

:- o o K fortitude, that it was with difficulty the Spaniards
-t..v triumnphed oer them. Peru was subdued at once,

and alnoft without resistance; and the most favour.
able opportunities of regaining their freedom, and
of crufling their oppressors, were loft through the
timidity of the people. Though the traditional
hiltory of the Peruvians represents all the Incas as
warlike princes, frequently at the head of armies,
which they led to victory and conquest; few fymp.
toms of ilch a martial spirit appear in any of their
operations subsequent to the' invasion of the Spa.
niards. The influence, perhaps, of those institutions
which rendered' their manners gentle, gave tleir
minds this unmanly foftnels; perhaps, the confan
serenity and mildness of the climate may have en.
ervated the vigour of their frame; perhaps, some
principle in their government, unknown to us, was
the occasion of this political debility. Whatever
may have been the cause, the fact is certain, a:?
there is not an instance in hiltory of any people lb
little advanced in refinement, to totally deftitut of
military enterprize. This character hath defccnc.i
to their posterity. The Indians of Peru are io;
more tame and deprcfed than any people of Anii;
rica. Their feeble spirits, relaxed in lifelcfs ir-
action, seem harily capable of any bold or manly
exertion.

BUT, besides thole capital defcs in the poli-

tical late of Peru, obme detached circuiiin;:,'
and fads occur in the Spanilh writers, which tlli.

CU~ vi

cover a considerable remainder of barbarity in their B o K
manners. A cruel custom, that prevailed in some of
the most savage tribes, fulbifted among the Peru-
vians. On the death of the Incas, and of other emi-
nent persons, a considerable number of their at-
tendants was put to death, and interred around their
Guacas, that they might appear in the next world
with their former dignity, and be served with the
fame refpe&t. On the death of I-luana-Capac, the
most powerful of their monarchs, above a thousand
victims were doomed to accompany him to the
tomb h. In one particular, their manners appear
to have been more barbarous than those of mol:
rude tribes. Though1 acquainted with the use of
lire in preparing maize, and other vegetables for
food ; they devoured bth flefl and fish perfectly
raw, and astonished the Spaniards, with a practice
repugnant to the ideas of all civilized people .

BUT though Mexico and Peru are the pofflions Otherdo-
of Spain in the New World, which, on account Spain in
both of their antient and present state, have at- America.
traded the greatest attention; her other dominions
there are far from being inconsiderable, either in
extent or value. The greater part of them was re-
duced to fubjecdion during the first part of the fix-
tcenth century, by private adventurers, who fitted
out their small armaments either in -lilpaniola or in

h Acola, lil'. v. c. 7.

X'rez, p. 19o. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372, C. Herrera,
drc. . lib. i. c. 3.

Q 2 Old

s o o K Old Spain; and were we to follow each leader in
i his progress, we hould discover the lame da-inr

courage, the aime persevering ardour, the fame ra.
pacious desire of wealth, and the fame capacity of
enduring and surmounting every thing in order to
attain it, which diflinguifhed the operations of tie
Spaniards in their greater American conquefls. But,
.instead of entering into a detail, which, from the
similarity of the transactions, would appear almot a

A brief fur- repetition of what has been already related, I tall
veyofthem. satisfy myself with such a view of those provinces of

the Spanish empire in America, which have not
hitherto been mentioned, as may convey to my
readers an adequate idea of its grehtnefs, fertility,
and opulence.

Such as are I BEGIN with the countries contiguous to the two
the empire great monarchies, of whose history and inflitutions I
ofMexico. have given some account, and hall then briefly de.

scribe the other diftrias of Spanish America. lhe
jurildistion of the viceroy of New Spain extends
over several provinces, which were not fubjc to
Cinaloaand the dominion of the Mexicans. The countries of

Cinaloa and Sonora, that itretch along the eat fide
of the Vermilion ea, or gulf of California, as well
as the immense kingdoms of New Navarre and
New Mexico, which bend towards the welt and
north, did not acknowledge the sovereignty of Mon.
tezuma, or his predeceflors. These regions, not in.
ferior in magnitude to all the Mexican empire, are
reduced some to a greater, others to a leis degree

ci

offubjection to the Spanish yoke. They extend B K
through the most delightful part of the temperate ---
zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
and all their producions, whether animal or vege-
table, are most perfect in their kind. They have
all a communication either with the Pacific Ocean,
or with the Gulph of Mexico, and are watered by
rivers which not only enrich them, but may become
fubfcrvient to commerce. The number of Spa-
niards fettled in those vast countries, is indeed ex-
tremely small. They may be laid to have sub-
dued, rather than to have occupied them. But if
the population in their ancient eftabliflments in
America shall continue to increase, they may gra.
dually spread over those provinces, of which, how-
ever inviting, they have not hitherto been able to
take full poffefflon.

ONE circumstance may contribute to the speedy Richmines,
population of some diftriEts. Very rich mines both
of gold and silver have been discovered in many of
the regions which I'have mentioned. Wherever
these are opened, and worked with success, a mul-
titude of people retort. In order to supply them
with the necessaries of life, cultivation mutt be in,
creased, artisans of various kinds mutt assemble,
and industry as well as wealth will be gradually dif-
ifllcd. Many examples of this have occurred in
diWerent parts of America since they fell under the
dominion of the Spaniards. Populous villages and
large towns have suddenly arisen amidst uninha-

Q 3 bited-

B O O K bited wilds and mountains; and the working of

VII.
. --v-j mines, though far from being the most proper ob.

ject towards which the attention of an infant fociely
should be turned, may become the means both o0
promoting useful ativity, and of augmenting the

A recent number of people. A recent and singular inRance
and remark-
vAhe disco- of this has happened, which, as it is but lile

known in Europe, and may be prolduitive of grec:
effects, merits attention. The Spaniards fettlei in
the provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been lonr
disturbed by the depredations of ome fierce tribes
of Indians. In, the year 765, the incursions uo
those savages became so frequent, and so deftruc-
tive, that the Spanish inhabitants, in despair, ap.
plied to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexico,
for such a body of troops as might enable them to
drive those formidable invaders from their places
of retreat in the mountains. But the treafiry of
Mexico was so much exhausted by the vast fums
drawn from it, in order to support the late war
againif Great Britain, that the viceroy could afford
them no aid. The refpet due to his virtues, ac.
complifhed what his official power could not ecft.
He prevailed with the merchants of New Spain to
advance about two hundred thousand pesos for de-
fraying the expence of the expedition. The war
was conduted by an officer of abilities; and after
being protraced for tiiee years, chiefly by the dif-
ficulty of pursuing the fugitives over mountains and
through defiles which were almost impafflble, it
terminated, in the year 1771, in the final fub;niFlion

of

of the tribes, which had been so long the objctR of o o K

VII.

terror to the two provinces. In the courle o this
service, the Spaniards marched through countries
into which they seem not to have penetrated belo.e
that time, and discovered mines of uch value, as was
astonishing even to men acquainted with the rihic-s
contained in the mountains of the New World. At
Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora, they entered
a plain of fourteen leagues in extent, in which, at
the depth of only sixteen inches, they found gold in
grains of such a size, that som.e of them weighed
nine marks, and in such quantities, that in a Ihorc
time, with a few labourers, they colle6ced a thousand
marks of gold in grains, even without taking time to
wash the earth that had been dug, vhich appeaed
to be so rich, that persons of skill computed that it
might yield what would be equal in value to a
million of pesos. Before the end of the year 1771, Probable
above two thousand persons were itt)ed in Cine- ',Its.
guilla, under the government of proper magistrates,
and the infpe&tion of several ecclefialtics. As fcve-
ral other mines, not inferior in richnels to that of
Cineguilla, have been discovered, both in Sonora
and Cinaloak, it is probable that there negleed
and thinly inhabited provinces, may soon become
as populous and valuable as any part of the Spanith
empire in America.

TIlI peninsula of California, on the other ide of California,
the Vermilioin lea, feemns to have been less known

k See NOTE XXXVII.

Q, 4 to

d o o K to the ancient Mexicans, than the provinces which
t;--__. I have mentioned. It was discovered by Cortes in

the year 1536 '. During a long period it continued
to be so little frequented, that even its form was
unknown, and in most charts it was represented as
an island, not as a peninsula m. Though the cli-
mate of this country, if we may judge from its
situation, must be very desirable; the Spaniards
have made small progress in peopling it. Towards
the close of the last century, the Jesuits, who had
great merit in exploring this neglected province,
and in civilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly
acquired a dominion over it as complete as that
which they possesed in their missions in Paraguay,
and they laboured to introduce into it. the fame po-
licy, and to govern the natives by the fame maxims.
In order to prevent the court of Spain from con-
ceiving any jealousy of their designs and operations,
they seem studiously to have depreciated the coun.
try, by representing the climate as so disagreeable
and unwholesome, and the foil as so barren, that
nothing but a zealous desire of converting the na.
tives, could have induced them to fettle there".
Several public-fpirited citizens endeavoured to un-
deceive their sovereigns, and to give them a bet.

and proba- ter view of California; but in vain. At length,
biity of its
ml1,oviing. on the expulsion of the Jesuits fiom the Spanish

dominions, the court of Madrid, as prone at that
junture to ffped the purity'of the Order's in-

I Book v. vol. ii. p. 41z.' m Se NOTE XXXVII,
" Venegas, I-ilt. of California, i. z6.

tentions

tentions, as formerly to confide in them with im- B 0 o
plicit trust, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, whose --
abilities have since raised him to the high rank of
minister for the Indies, to visit that peninsula. His
account of the country was favourable; he found
the pearl fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and
he discovered mines of gold of a very promising ap-
pearance . From its vicinity to Cinaloa and So-
nora, it is probable, that if the population of these
provinces hall increase in the manner which I have
supposed, California may, by degrees, receive from
them such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no
longer reckoned among the desolate and useless
districts of the Spanilh empire.

ON the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Honduras Yucatan

are comprehended in the government of New duras,
Spain, though anciently they can hardly be aid to
have formed a part of the Mexican empire. These
large provinces, stretching from' the Bay of Cam-
peachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, like
the other territories of Spain in the New World,
derive their value either fiom the fertility of their
foil, or the richness of their mines; but they pro-
duce in greater abundance, than any part of Ame-
rica, the logwood tree, which, in dying ome co-
lours, is so far preferable to any other material,
that the consumption of it in Europe is confider-
able, and it has become an article in commerce of
great value. During a long period, no European

P Lorenzano, 349, 350,

nation

B o K nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those pro.

VII.
-I_^J .vinces, or attempted to obtain any share in this

branch of trade. But after the conquest of Ja-
maica.-by the English, it oon appeared what a for-
midable rival was now feated in the neighbourhood of
the Spanish territories. One of the first objects
which tempted the English fettled in that island, was
the great profit arising from the logwood trade, and
the facility ofwrefting ome portion of it from the
Their de- Spaniards. So:ne adventurers from Jamaica made

cie, the firft.attempt at Cape Catoche, the fouth-ealt pro-

montory of Yucatan, and by cutting logwood there,
carried on a gainful traffic. When most of the trees
near the coat in that place were felled, they re-
moved to the illand of Trift, in the Bay of Cam-
peachy; and in later times, their principal station has
been in theBay of Honduras. The Spaniards, alarm-
ed at this encroachment, endeavoured by negocia-
tion, remonstrances, and open force, to prevent
the English from obtaining any footing on that
part of the American continent. But after flrug-
gling against it for more than a century, the dif
afters of las war extorted firom the Court of Madrid
a reluctant content to tolerate this settlement of so.
reigners in the heart of its territories P. The pain
which this humbling concelion occasioned, ccms
to have prompted the Spaniards to devise a me-
thod of rendering it of little conlequence, more cl-
fedCual than all the efforts of negociation or io

P Treaty of Pris, Art. xviii.

] :C1 ': .

lence. The logwood produced on the weft coast 1 o o K
of Yucatan, where the foil is drier, is in quality. ----.
far superior to that which grows on the marshy.
grounds where the Englnh are fcrtled. By en- and revival.
couraging the cutting of this, and permitting the
importation of it into Spiin without paying any
duty q, ch vigour has becn given to this branch
of commerce, and the logwood which the English
bring to market has funk o much in value, that
their trade to the Bay of Ionduras has gradually
declined' since it obtained a lcgal fa;ncion; and,
it is probable, will soon be finally abandoned. a
that event, Yucatan and Honduras will become
poffcffions of considerable importance to Spain.

STILL farther east than Honduras lie the two Cofla Rica

and Vera.

provinces of Costa Rica and Veragua, which like- gua.
wits belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain; but
both have been so much negle-cd by the Spaniards,
and are apparently of such finall value, that tlley
merit no particular attention.

THE molt important province depending on the chili.

vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili, The Incas had
cftablifled their dominion in some of its northern
dilirits; but in the greater part of the country,
its gallant and high lpiritcd inhabitants maintained
their independence. The Spaniir.ls, allured by
the fame of its opulence, early attempted the con-

q Real Ctduln, Campomines, iii. 1,5.
' See NOTE XXXIX.

quCef

o O K quet of it under Diego Almagro; and after his
,v- death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed the design.

Both met with fierce opposition. The former re-
linquifhed the enterprize in the manner which I
have mentioned . The latter, after having given
many displays, both of courage and military skill,
was cut off, together with a considerable body of
troops under his command. Francisco de Villagra,
Valdivia's lieutenant, by his spirited conduct,
checked the natives in their career, and saved the
remainder of the Spaniards from deftruion. By
degrees, all the champaign country along the
coast was fubjeced to the Spanish dominion. The
mountainous country is frill possessed by the Puel-
ches, Araucos, and other tribes of its original in.
habitants, formidable neighbours to the Spaniards;
with whom, during the course f two centuries,
they have been obliged to maintain almnoft perpe.
tual hostility, suspended only by a few intervals of
insecure peace.

oc its nce THAT part of Chili then, which may properly
matc aid be deemed a Spanish province, is a narrow diftrid,

extending along the coast from the desert of Ata-
camas to the island of Chiloe, above nine hundred
miles. Its cliinate is the nmoft delicious in the
New World, and is hardly equalled by that of any
reigion on the face of the earth. Though border-
ing on the Torrid Zone, it never feels the cxtre-

8 Book vi. p. 60, &c.

iity

mity of heat, being screened on the east by the B o o t
Andes, and refrelhed from the weft by cooling sea- ---
breezes. The temperature of the air is so mild
and equable, that the Spaniards give it the pre-
ference to that of the southern provinces in their
native country. The fertility of the foil corre-
fponds with the benignity of the climate, and is
wonderfully accommodated to European produc-
tions. The most valuable of these, corn, wine,
and oil, abound in Chili, as if they had been na-
tive to the country. All the fruits imported from
Europe attain to full maturity there. The animals
of our hemisphere not only mnultiply, but improve
in this delightful region. lThe horned cattle are
of larger size than those of Sain. Its breed of
horses surpasses, both in beauty and in spirit, the
fanmos Andalufian race, from which they sprung.
Nor has Nature exhausted her bounty on the fur-
face of the earth; she has stored its bowels with
riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of cop-
per, and of lead, have been ifcovered in various
parts of it.

A COUNTRY diRinguifled by so many blessings, c.ure of is

we may be apt to conclude, would arly bcoane ied ,y he
a favourite station of the Spaniards, and nmud have Sp n"'i;"d
been cultivated with peculiar predilesion and care.
Inllead of this, a great part of it remains unoccu-
pied. In all this extent of country, there are not
above eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about
three tmes that number of negroes and people of

a mixed

B 0 K a mixed race. The most fertile foil in America
<--v-^ lies uncultivated, and some of its most promising

mines remain unwrought. Strange as this negleft
of the Spaniards to avail themselves of advantages,
which teemed to court their acceptance, may ap-
pear, the causes of it can be traced. The only
intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the South
Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the
annual fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce of
thele colonies were shipped in the ports of Callao,
or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and carried from
thence across the iftbmus. All the commodities
which they received from the mother-country, were
conveyed frolt Panama to the fame harbours.
Thus both the exports and imports of Chili.pf/,ri
through the hands of merchants fettled in Peru.
These had of course a profit on each; and in both
traniactions the Chilefe felt their own fubordina-
tion; and having no direct intercourse with the
parent state, they depended upon another province
for the dilpofal of their productions, as well as for
the supply of their wants. Under such discourage-
ments, population could not increase, and industry

Prorpea of was deflitute of one chief incitement. But now
nits ive- that Spain, from motives which I shall mention

hereafter, has adopted a new system, and carries
on her commerce with the colonies in the South
Sea, by ships which go round Cape Horn, a di-
reR intercourle is opened between Chili and the
Mother-country. Th'l gold, the silver, and t:e
other commoloitics of the province will be cx-

changcd

changed in its own harbours for the manufactures B o 0 K
of Europe. Chili may fpedily riie into that im- --
portance among the Spaniih Sttlements to which
it is entitled by its natural advantages. It may
become the granary of Peru, and the other pro-
vinces along the Pacific Ocean; it may fpply.
them with wine, with cattle, with horres, with
hemp, and many other articles tor which they now
depend upon Europe. Though the new fftem
has been established only a fewv years, those effeEts
of it begin already to be observed t. If it shall be
adhered to with any steadiness for half a century,
one may venture to foretel, that population, in-
duftry, and opulence will advance in this province
with rapid progreis.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tu- Provincesof

'Tucuman

cuman and Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, and andRlode a
like it were dependent on the Vice-royalty of Peru. Plata
These regions of immense extent stretch in length
from north to south above thirteen hundred miles,
and in breadth more than a thousand. This coun- Northlern
try, which is larger than most European kingdoms, division.
naturally forms itself into two great divisions, one
on the north, and the other on the south of Rio de
la Plata. The former comprehends Paraguay, the
famous mifnions of the Jesuits, and several other
diftrids. But as disputes have long fubfilled be-
tween the courts of Spain and Portugal, concernia

Camponanes, ii. 157.

ing

Ol 0 ing its boundaries, which, it is probable, will ,',
.-YJ soon finally afcerrained, either amicably, or by te

decision of the sword, I chufe to. reserve my ac-
count of this northern division, until I enter upon
the hiflory of Portuguese America, with which
it is intimately connected; and, in relating it, I
shall be able from authentic materials, supplied
both by Spain and Portugal, to give a full and
accurate description of the operations and views of
the Jesuits, in rearing that singular fabric of po.
licy in America, which has drawn so much attcn.
tion, and has been so imperfectly understood. The
latter division of the province contains the govern.
ments of Tucuman and Buenos-Ayres, and to the1e
I hall at present confine my observations.
View of the THE Spaniards entered this part of America by

the river De la Plata; and though a succession of
cruel disasters besel them in their early attempts to
efablifh their dominion in it, they were encouraged
to persist in the design, at first by the hopes of dif.
covering mines in the interior country, and after-
wards by the necefity of occupying it, in order to
prevent any other nation from fettling there, and
penetrating by this.route into their rich poflffions
in Peru, But except at Buenos-Ayres, they have
made no settlement of any conequence in all the
vail space which I have mentioned. There are,
.indeed, scattered over it, a few places on which
they have bestowed the name of towns, and to
which they have endeavoured to add some dignity,

16 by

byerecting them into bishoprics; but they are no B K
better than paltry villages, each with two or three -
hundred inhabitants. One circumfiance, how-
ever, which was not originally foreseen, has con-
tributed to render this district, though thinly
peopled, of considerable importance. The pro-
vince of Tucuman, together with the country to
the south of the Plata, intead of being covered
with wood like other parts of America, forms one
vast open plain, almost without a tree. The foil
is a deep fertile mould, watered by many streams
descending from the Andes, and clothed in per-
petual verdure. In this rich pasturage, the horses
and cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europe
have multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds
belief. This has enabled the inhabitants not only
to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by supplying
it with cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry on
a commerce no less beneficial, by the exportation
of hides to Europe. From both, the colony has
derived great advantages. But its commodious
situation for carrying on contraband trade, has
been the chief source of its prolperity. While the
court of Madrid adhered to its ancient system, with
relpect to its communication with America, the
river De la Plata lay so much out of the courle of
Spanish navigation, that interlopers, almost with-
out any rifque of being either obfcrvcd or ob-
itruted, could pour in European manufacures in
such quantities, that they not only supplied the
wants of the colony, but were conveyed into all

VOL. III. R the

B 0 0 K the eastern diftri&s of Peru. When the Portu.
r _-_-sl guefe in Brasil extended their settlements to the

banks of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities flowed
into the Spanish territories, with flill more facility,
and in greater abundance. This illegal traffic,
however detrimental to the parent state, contri.
buted to the increase of the settlement, which had
the imediate benefit of it, and Buenos-Ayres
became gradually a populous and opulent town.
What may be the effet of the alteration lately
made in the government of this colony, the nature
of which shall be described in the subsequent Book,
cannot hitherto be known.

Other terri- ALL the other territories of Spain in the New
pains World, the islands excepted, of whose discovery

and redution I have formerly given an account,
are comprehended under two great divisions; the
former denominated the kingdom of Tierra Firm,
the provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to the
mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New King.
dom of Granada, situated in the interior country.
With a flhort view of these I shall close this part of
my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-

jeEt to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of
Darien, Darien. Though it was in this part of the con-

tinent that the Spaniards first began to plant co-

loniei.

lonies, they have made no considerable progress in B o o K
peopling it. As the country is extremely moun- v~
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part of
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains no
mines of great value, the Spaniards would pro-
bably have abandoned it altogether, if they had
not been allured to continue by the excellence of
the harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that
of Panama on the other. These have been called
the keys to the communication between the north
and south sea, between Spain and her most valuable
colonies. In consequence of this advantage, Pa-
nama has become a considerable and thriving town.
The peculiar noxioulnels of its climate has pre-
vented Porto-bcllo from increaGng in the fame pro-
portion. As the intercourse with the settlements
in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bello and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourilhed
and enriched by that commerce to which they
were indebted for their prosperity, and even their
exifence.

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha Carthigena

and anta

firetch to the eastward of he isthmus of Darien. M1atha.
The country frill continues mountainous, but its
vallies begin to expand, are well watered, and
extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjecEed this
part of America to the crown of Spain, about the
year 1532. Ic is thinly peopled, and of course ill
cultivated. It produces, however, a variety of

R 2 valuable

B 0 O K valuable drugs, and some precious stones, parti-

-.... cularly emeralds. But its chief importance is de-

rived from the harbour of Carthagena, the fafcft
and best fortified of any in the American dominions
of Spain. In a situation so favourable, commerce
soon began to sourish. As early as the year 1544,
it seems to have been a town of some note. But
when Carthagena was chosen as the port in which
the galeons should firfl begin to trade on their ar-
rival from Europe, and to which they were di-
rected to return, in order to prepare for their
voyage homeward, the commerce of its inhabitants
was so much favoured by this arrangement, that
it oon became one of the most populous, opulent,
and beautiful cities in America. There is, hvw.
ever, reason to apprehend, that it has reached its
highest point of exaltation, and that it will be b
far affected by the change in the Spanish system of
trade with America, which has withdrawn from it
the desirable visits of the galeons, as to feel at lead
a temporary decline. But the wealth now colle&ed
there, will oon find or create employment for itieif,
and may be turned with advantage into some new
channel. Its harbour is so safe, and so cnve-
niently situated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchants have been so long accuf-
tomed to convey these into all the adjacent pro-
vinces, that it is probable they will tfill retain this
branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to be a
city of great importance.

THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on B o o I
the eatt, was first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in -..

Venezuela,

the year I499"; and the Spaniards, on their
landing there, having observed some 'huts in an
Indian village built upon piles, in order to raise
them above the stagnated water which covered the
plain, were led to beltow upon it the name of
Venezuela, or Little Venice, by their usual pro-
penfity to find a refcmblance, between what they
discovered in America, and the objects which were
familiar to them in Europe. They made ome at-
tempts to fettle there, but with little success. The
final reduction of the province was accomplifed
by means very different from those to which Spain
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the New
World. The ambition of Charles V. often en-
gaged him in operations of such variety and ex-
tent, that his revenues were not sufficient to defray
the expence of carrying them into execution.
Among other expedients for supplying the deficiency
of his funds, he had borrowed large fulms from
the Velfers of Augfburgh, the most opulent
merchants at that time in Europe. By way of
retribution for there, or in hopes, perhaps, of ob-
taining a new loan, he bestowed upon them the
province of Venezuela, to be held as an hereditary
fief from the crown of Castile, on condition that
within a limited time they hould render them-
ilves masters of the country, and eflablifli a co-

u Book ii. vol. i. p. 212.

R 3 tony

B 0 0 K lony there. Under the diredion of such persons,
_. , -j it might have been expeEfed, that a settlement

would have been established on maxims very dif-
ferent from those of the Spaniards, and better cal-
culated to encourage such useful industry, as mer-
cantile proprietors might have known to be the
most certain source of prosperity and opulence.
But unfortunately they committed the execution
of their plan to some of those soldiers of fortune
with which Germany abounded in the sixteenth
century. These adventurers, impatient to amass
riches, that they might speedily abandon a station
which they oon discovered to be very uncomfort-
able, instead of planting a colony in order to cul-
tivate and improve the country, wandered from
district to diftriEt in search of mines, plundering
the natives with unfeeling rapacity, or opprefing
them by the imposition of intolerable tasks. In
the course of a few years, their avarice and exac-
tions, in comparison with which those of the Spa-
niards were moderate, desolated the province so
completely, that it could hardly afford them sub-
fiftence, and the Velfers relinquished a property
from which the inconsiderate conduct of their
agents left them no hope of ever deriving any ad-
vantage . When the wretched remainder of the
Germans deferred Venezuela, the Spaniards again
took poffeflion of it; but, notwithstanding many

Ciredo y Bagnos Hist. de Venezuela, p. , &c.

natural

natural advantages, it is one of their moist lan- B 0o oK

VIA.
guifhing and unproducive settlements. - _-

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the Caraccasand

last of the Spanish territories on this coast; but in
relating the origin and operations of the mer-
cantile company, in which an exclusive right
of trade with them has been vefled, I shall here-
after have occasion to confider their state and pro-
ductions.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an New Kinz-

dom of Ga-

inland country of great extent. This important ad- nada.
dition was made to the dominions of Spain about
the year 1536, by Sebastian de Benalcazar and
Gonzalo Ximenes de Qefada, two of the bravest
and most accomplished officers employed in the
conquest of America. The former, who com-
manded at that time in Quito, attacked it from
the south; the latter made his invasion from Santa
Martha on the north. As the original inhabitants
of this region were farther advanced in improve-
ment, than any people in America but the Mexi-
cans and Peruvians Y, they defended themselves
with great resolution and good condut. The
abilities and perseverance of Benalcazar and Que-
fada surmounted all opposition, though not with.
out encountering many dangers, and reduced the
country into the form of a Spaniflh province.

X Book iv, vol. ii. p. 139, &c.

R4 TH

0 0 K THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far ele.
_-C-j' vated above the level of the sea, that though it

approaches almost to the equator, the climate is
remarkably temperate. The fertility of its vallies
is not inferior to that of the richest diftriEts in
America, and its higher grounds yield gold and
precious stones of various kinds. It is not by
digging into the bowels of the earth that this gold
is found; it is mingled with the foil near the fur-
face, and separated from it by repeated wafling
with water. This operation is carried on wholly
by negro slaves; for though the chill subterranean
air has been discovered, by experience, to be so fatal
to them, that they cannot be employed with advan-
tage in the deep silver mines, they are more capable
of performing the other species of labour than In-
dians. As the natives in the New Kingdom of
Granada are exempt from that service, which has
wafted their race so rapidly in other parts of America,
the country is fill remarkably populous. Some
difIris yield gold with a profusion no less wonderful
than that in the vale of Cineguilla, which I have
formerly mentioned, and it is often found in large
pepitas, or grains, which manifest the abundance
in which it is produced. On a rising ground near
Pamplona, ingle labourers have collected in a
day what was equal in value to a thouland pelbs .
A late governor of Santa F brought with hinm
to Spain a lump of pure gold, eltimated to be

; Picdrahita ilt. dcl N. Reyno, p. 81. MS. penes me.

WVO tl

worth seven hundred and forty pounds sterling. B ° o K
This, which is, perhaps, the largest and finest --
specimen ever found in the New World, is now
deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid. But
without founding any calculation on what is rare
and extraordinary, the value of the gold usually
collected in this country, particularly in the pro-
vinces of Popayan and Choco, is of considerable
amount. Its towns are populous and flourishing.
The number of inhabitants in almost every part of
the country daily increases. Cultivation and in-
duftry of various kinds begin to be encouraged,
and to prosper. A coniderable trade is carried on
with Carthagena, the produce of the mines, and
other commodities, being conveyed down the great
river of St. Magdalen to that city. On another
quarter, the New Kingdom of Granada has a com-
munication with the Atlantic by the river Orinoco;
but the country which firetches along its banks
towards the east, is little known, and imperfecly
occupied by the Spaniards.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

THE
H I S TORY

F
AM E R I C A.

BOO 0 K VIII.
A FTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards B o o K

in their discoveries and conquests during v"'

View of the
more than half a century, I have conduced them policy and

trade of the

to that period when their authority was etablifhed Spnico-
over almost all the vast regions in the New World lonics.
till subjea to their dominion. The effect of their
settlements upon the countries of which they took
possession, the maxims which they adopted in
forming their new colonies, the interior ftruture
and policy of there, together with the influence of
their progreflive improvement upon the parent
slate, and upon the commercial intercourse of na-
tions, are the objects to which we now turn our
attention.

THE firfl visible consequence of the establish- Depopula-

tion of A-
ments made by the Spaniards in America, was the merica the

first effctt of
diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree ttiem.

equally

B o1° K equally astonishing and deplorable. I have already,

- on different occaions, mentioned the disastrous

influence under which the connection of the Ame-
ricans with the people of our hemisphere corn.
menced, both in the ilands, and in several parts
of the continent, and have touched upon various
causes of their rapid consumption. Wherever the
inhabitants of America had resolution to take
arms in defence of their liberty and rights, many
perished in the unequal contest, and were cut off
by their fierce invaders. But the greatest dcfola-
tion followed after the fvword was sheathed, and

ciures of the conquerors were fettled in tranquillity. It
this in the
iiands, and was in the ilands, and in those provinces of the
rome parts of
the conti- continent which stretch from the Gulf of Tri-

nlt. nidad to the confines of Mexico, that the fatal

effets of the Spanish dominion were first and most
sensibly felt. All these were occupied either by
wandering tribes of hunters, or by filch as had
made but small progress in cultivation and in-
dultry. When they were compelled by their new
masters to take up a fixed residence, and to apply
to regular labour; when tasks were imposed upon
them disproportioned to their strength, and were
exaCted with unrelenting everity, they poffeiTd
not vigour either of mind or of body to sustain this
unufuial load of oppreflion. DejeCtion and despair
drove many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine dltroyed more. In all those extensive
regions, the original race of inhabitants walled
away; in iome it was totally extinguiflicd. In

Mexico,

Mexico, where a powerful and martial people di- B o o K
ftinguifhed their opposition to the Spaniards by es- a-_-
forts of courage worthy of a better fate, great num-
bers fell in the field; and there, as well as inr Peru,
flill greater numbers perifled under the hardships
of attending the Spanilf armies in their various
expeditions and civil wars, worn out with the incef-
sant toil of carrying their baggage, provisions, and
military stores.

BUT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- In Ne

niards were so deftrutive to the people of Mexico I'u."'
and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with which
they eablifhed their new settlements. The for-
mer were temporary calamities, fatal to, individuals;
the latter was a permanent evil, which, with gra-
dual consumption, wafted the nation. When the
provinces of Mexico and Peru were divided among
the conquerors, each was eager to obtain a dil-
trict, from which he might expec an inftanta-
neous recompence for all his lirvices. Soldiers,
accustomed to the carelessness and dissipation of a
military life, had neither industry to carry on any
plan of regular cultivation, nor patience to wait
for its flow, but certain returns. Inflead of set-
tling in the vallies occupied by the natives, where
the fertility of the foil would have amply rewarded
the diligence of the planter, they chose to fix their
Rations in some of the mountainous regions, fre-
quent both in New Spain and in Per,. To search
for mines of gold and silver, was the chief objeCt

16 of

o o K of their activity. The profpets which this opens,
i_ _,- and the alluring hopes which it continually pre-

sents, correspond wonderfully with the spirit of en-
terprize and adventure that animated the firfl
emigrants to America in every part of their con-
du&. In order to push forward tofe favourite
proje&s, so many hands were wanted, that the ser.
vice of the natives became indispensably requisite.
They were accordingly compelled to abandon their
ancient habitations in the plains, and driven in
crowds to the mountains. This sudden transition
from the sultry climate of the vallies, to the chill
penetrating air peculiar to high lands in the torrid
zone; exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholfome
nourishment, and the despondency occasioned by a
species of oppression to which they were not ac-
customed, and of which they saw no end, affetecd
them nearly as much as their less industrious coun.
trymen in the iands. They funk under the united
pressure of those calamities, and melted away with
almost equal rapidity . In consequence of this,
together with the introdution of the fnall-pox, a
malady unknown in America, and extremely fatal to
the nativesa, the number of people both in New
Spain and Peru was so much reduced, that in a few
years the accounts of their ancient population ap-
peared almost incredible b.

X Torquemada, i. 613.

B. Diaz, c. 124. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 4. Ulloa
lintreten. 206.

b Torquem. 615. 642, 643. See NOTE XL.

SUCH

SUCH are the most considerable events and causes, B o o K
which, by their combined operation, contributed e_
to depopulate America. Without attending to Nultofany
these, many authors, aftoni(hed at the suddenness fpo'n'iy;f
of the desolation, have ascribed this unexampled
event to a system of policy no less profound than
atrocious. The Spaniards, as they pretend, con-
fcious of their own inability to occupy the vast
regions which they had discovered, and foreseeing
the impoflibility of maintaining their authority over
a people infinitely superior to themselves in num-
ber, in order to preserve the possession of America,
resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by con-
verting a great part of the country into a desert, en-
deavoured to secure their own dominion over it .
But nations seldom extend their views to objects so
remote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for the ho-
nour of humanity, we may observe, that no na-
tion ever deliberately formed such an execrable
scheme. The Spanish monarchs, far from aing
upon any such system of deftrution, were uniformly
solicitous for the preservation of their new fubjets.
With Isabella, zeal for propagating the christian
faith, together with the desire of communicating
the knowledge of truth, and the consolations of
religion to people destitute of spiritual light, were
more than ostensible motives for encouraging Co-
lumbus to attempt his discoveries. Upon his fuc-
cess, he endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpose,

c See NOTE XLI.

and

B o o K and manifeited the most tender concern to secure
i-v-'i not, only religious initruction, but mild treatment,

to that inoffensive race of men fubjeted to her
crown d. Her fuccceffors adopted the fame ideas;
and, on many occasions, which I have mentioned,
their authority was interposed in the most vigorous
exertions, to protec the people of America from
the oppreflion of their Spanish fubjets. Their re-
gulations for this purpose were numerous, and often
repeated. They were framed with wildom, and
dictated by humanity. After their possessions in
the New World became so extensive, as might have
excited some apprehensions of difficulty in retaining
their dominion over them, the spirit of their regu-
lations was as mild as when their settlements were
confined to the ifands alone. Their solicitude to
protect the Indians seems rather to have augmented
as their acquisitions increaed; and from ardour to
accomplish this, they enacted, and endeavoured to
enforce the execution of laws, which excited a for-
midable rebellion in one of their colonies, and spread
alarm and diffaffetion through all the reft. But
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be con-
trouled by the authority of laws. Rapacious and
daring adventurers, fat' removed from the feat of
government, little accustomed to the restraints ot
military discipline while in service, and ill lel;
disposed to refpedt the feeble jurildiction of civil
power in an infant colony, defpiled or eluded every

' See NOTE XLIL

regulation

regulation that set bounds to their exactions anrd B o K
tyranny. The parent iate, with persevering atten- v""
tion, issued edits to prevent the opprellion of the
Indians; the colonifs, regardleis of there, or trust-
ing to their distance for impunity, continued to
confider and treat them as slaves. The governors
themselves, and other officers employed in the co-
lonies, several of whom were as indigent and ra-
pacious as the adventurers over whom they presided,
were too apt to adopt their contemptuous ideas of
the conquered people; and instead of checking, en-
couraged or connived at their excefles. The defo-
lation of the New World should not then be charged
on the court of Spain, or be confidered as the effect
of any system of policy adopted there. It ought to
be imputed wholly to the indigent and often un-
principled adventurers, whose fortune it was to be
the conquerors and firt planters of America, who,
by measures no less inconsiderate than unjust, coun-
teraced the edicts of their sovereign, and have
brought disgrace upon their country.

WITH still greater injustice, have many authors for te

t of ro-,

represented the intolerating spirit of the Roman ligion,
Catholic religion, as the caule of exterminating the
Americans, and have accused the Spanifl ecclesias-
tics of animating their countrymen to the slaughter
of that innocent people, as idolators and enemies of
God. But the first miflionaries who visited Ame-
rica, though weak and illiterate, were pious men.
They early espoused the defence of the natives, and

VOL. III. S vindicated

B K vindicated their characer from the aspersions of

VIII.
u-,-.& their conquerors, who, describing them as inca-

pable of being formed to the offices of civil life,
or of comprehending the dotrines of religion, con-
tended, that they were a subordinate race of men,
on whom the hand of nature had set the mark of
servitude. From the accounts which I have given
of the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanish
miflionaries, in protecting the helpless flock com-
mitted to their charge, they appear in a light which
reflects lustre upon their function. They were mi-
nifters of peace, who endeavoured to wrefl the rod
from the hands of oppressors. To their powerful
interposition, the Americans were indebted for every
regulation tending to mitigate the rigour of their
fate. The clergy in the Spanish settlements, regu-
lar as well as secular, are frill confidered by the
Indians as their natural guardians, to whom they
have recourse under the hardships and exactions to
which they are too often exposed e.

The number BUT, notwithstanding the rapid depopulation of
dfansetilire- America, a very considerable number of the na-

tning.l tive race (till remains both in Mexico and Peru,

especially in thole parts which were not expoled
to the firfl fury of the Spanith arms, or desolated
by the first efforts of their induitry, still more rui-
nous. In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, and the
other delightful provinces of the Mexican empire,

c See NOTE XLII.

which
i

which stretch along the South-sea, the race of In B o o K
dians is frill numerous. Their settlements in some
places are so populous, as to merit the name of ci-
ties f. In the three audiences into which New Spain
isdivided, there are at least two millions of In-
dians; a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient po-
pulation, but such as still forms a body of people
fiperior in number to that of all the other inha-
bitants of this extensive country . In Peru several
diltris, particularly in the kingdom of Quito, are
occupied almost entirely by Indians. In other pro-
vinces they are mingled with the Spaniards, and in
many of their settlements are amoft the only per-
sons who praftife the mechanic arts, and fill most
of the inferior itations in society. As the inhabi-
tants both of Mexico and Peru were accustomed
to a fixed residence, and to a certain degree of
regular indufiry, less violence was requisite in
bringing them to some conformity with the Euro-
pean modes of civil life. But wherever the Spa-
niards fettled among the avage tribes of America,
their attempts to incorporate with them have been
always fruitless, and often fatal to the natives. Im-
patient of reftrainr, and disdaining labour as a mark
of servility, they either abandoned their, original
feats, and fought for independence in mountains
and forelts inaccessible to their oppressors, or pe-
rifled when reduced to a ate repugnant to their
ancient ideas and habits. In the ditrits adjacent

f See NOTE XLIV. g See NOTE XLV.

S 2 CO

B 0o K to Carthagena, to Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres,
L_--v- the deolation is more general than even in thole

parts of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spaniards
have taken most full poffeflion.

General BUT the eabIilhments of the Spaniards in the
ideas of the
policy of New \orld, though fatal to its ancient inhabi.
Spain in its
colonies. tants, were made at a period when that monarchy

was capable of forming them to best advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful state, equal to so great an un-
dertaling. Its monarchs, having extended their
prerogative far beyond the limits which once cir-
cumfcribed the regal power in every kingdom of
Europe, were hardly subjet to controul, either in
concerting or in executing their measures. In
every wide extended empire, the form of govern.
ment must be simple, and the Sovereign authority
such, that its resolutions may be taken with promp-
titude, and may pervade the whole with sufficient
force. Such was the power of the Spanish mo-
narchs, when they were ealled to deliberate concern.
ing the mode of eflablifhing their dominion over
the most remote provinces, which had ever been
fubjeectl to any European state. In this delibera-
tion, they felt themselves under no constitutional
restraint, and that, as independent matters of their
own resolves, they might iue the edicts requisite
for modelling the government of the new colonies,
by a mere act of prerogative.

TIS

THIs early interposition of the Spanish crown, in B o01 K

order to regulate the policy and trade of its co- -v
lonies, is a peculiarity which distinguishes their pofitio'nof
progress from that of the colonies of any other authiy.
European nation. When the Portuguese, the Eng-
liif, and French, took poffef/ion of the regions
in America which they now occupy, the advan-
tages which these promised to yield were so re-
mote and uncertain, that their colonies were sus-
sered to struggle through a hard infancy, almost
without guidance or protection from the parent
state. But gold and silver, the first productions of
the Spanish settlements in the New World, were
more alluring, and immediately attracted the atten-
tion of their monarchs. Though they had contri-
buted little to the discovery, and almost nothing
to the conquest of the New World, they instantly
assumed the function of its legislators; and hav-
ing acquired a species of dominion formerly un-
known, they formed a plan for exercising it, to
which nothing similar occurs in the history of hu-
man affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanish jurifpru- All power
dence with refpec to America, is to confider what vened in the
has been acquired there as veiled in the crown, crown'
rather than in the state. By the bull of Alex-
ander VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
founded its right, all the regions that had been,
or should be discovered, were beflowed as a free
gift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. They and their

S 3 successors

B o o K fucceflors were uniformly held to be the universal
. ~ proprietors of the vast territories, which the arms

of their subje&s conquered in the New World.
From them, all grants of land there flowed, and
to them they finally returned. The leaders who
conduted the various expeditions, the governors
who presided over the different colonies, the of-
ficers of jufice, and the ministers of religion, were
all appointed by their authority, and removable at
their pleasure. The people who composed infant
fttlements were intitled to no privileges inde-
pendent of the sovereign, or that served as a bar-
rier against the power of the crown. It is true,
that when towns were built, and formed into bo-
dies corporate, the citizens were permitted to elect
their own magistrates, who governed them by laws
which the community enacted. Even in the moR
defpotic-tates, this feeble spark of liberty is not ex-
tinguimfed. But in the cities of Spanish America,
this jurifdition is merely municipal, and is con-
fined to the regulation of their own interior conm-
merce and police. In whatever relates to public
government, and the general interest, the will of te
luvereign is law. No political power originates
from the people. All centers in the crown, and in
the officers of its nomination.

AI! , nc-.r WVHEN the conquests of the Spaniards in Anc-
*8s minlon' of
Sl.,in l.h- rica were completed, their monarchs, in orniiiig
j.l Io two '
i,:i:.Lyy the plan of internal policy for their new ominiu!!,

divided them into two immense governments, onel

subjet to the viceroy of New Spain, the other to B o o K
the viceroy of Peru. The jurisdiction of the for- -v-
mer extended over all the provinces belonging to
Spain in the northern division of the American
continent. Under that of the latter, was compre-
hended whatever he poffeled in South America.
This arrangement, which, from the beginning, was
attended with many inconveniencies, became in-
tolerable when the remote provinces of each vice-
royalty began to improve in industry and popu-
lation. The people complained of their subjec-
tion to a superior, whose place of residence was
so distant, or so inaccessible, as almost excluded
them from any intercourse with the feat of govern-
ment. The authority of the viceroy over diftrits
so far removed from his own eye and observation,
was unavoidably both feeble and ill dire&ted. As
aremedy for those evils, a third viceroyalty has
been established in the present century, at Santa Fe
de Bogota, the capital of the new kingdom of Gra-
nada, the jurifdition of which extends over the
whole kingdom of Tierra FirmS, and the province
of Qiito h. Those viceroys not only represent the Their
person of their overeign, but poflefs his regal pre- P""
rogatives within the precincts of their own govern-
ments, in their utmost extent. Like him, they ex-
ercife supreme authority in every department of go-
vernment, civil, military, and criminal. They have
the sole right of nominating the persons who hold

h Voy. de Ulloa, i. 3, zS.

$ 4 manny

p o o K many offices of the highest importance, and the oc.

VIII.
. _y cafional privilege of supplying those which, when

they become vacant by death, ae in the royal gift,
until the ifuccelbor appointed by the king fiall ar-
rive. The- external pomp of their government is
suited to its real dignity and power. Their courts
are formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
horse and foot guards, a household regularly efta-
blilhed, numerous attendants, and ensigns of com-
mand, displaying such magnificence, as hardly re-
rains the appearance of delegated authority i.

Pourts of
^:UdiLne. BUT as the viceroys,cannot discharge in Ferlbn

the functions of a supreme nlagiftrate in every part
of their extensive jurifdiftion, they are aided in their
government by officers and tribunals similar to
those in Spain. The conduEt of civil affairs in the
various provinces and diftrits, into which the Spa-
nifh dominions in America are divided, is corn.
rnitted to magiflrates of various orders and deno.
minations; fume appointed by the king, others by
the viceroy, but all subjed to the command-os the
latter, and amenable to his jurifldiaion. The admii-
niftration ofjuftice is velted in tribunals, known by
the name of Audiences, and formed upon the moiel
of the court of Chancery in Spain. Thele are ele-
ven in number, and difpenlejuftice to as many clil
tri's, into which the Spaninf dominions in Anie-
rica are divided . The number of judges in th

Ulloa, Voy. i. 432. Gage 61.
k Scc NOTE XLVI.

.s C0'lI'

court of Audience is various, according to the ex- B K
tent and importance of their jurisdiction. The ifa- --
tion is no less honourable than lucrative, and is
commonly filled by persons of such abilities and
merit as renders this tribunal extremely refpecable.
Both civil and criminal causes come under their
cognizance, and for each peculiar judges are set
apart. Though it is only in the most despotic go- Theirjurif-
vernments, that the overeign exercises in person dn
the formidable prerogative of administering justice
to his fubjeEts, and in absolving, or condemning,
consults no law but what is deposited in his own
breast; though, in all the monarchies of Europe,
judicial authority is committed to magiltrates, whose
decisions are regulated by known laws and efta-
blifhed forms, the Spanish viceroys have often at-
tempted to intrude themselves into the feat of jus-
tice, and with an ambition which their distance
from the controul of a superior rendered bold, have
aspired at a power which their master does not ven-
ture to assume. In order to check an usurpation
which must have annihilated justice and security in
the Spanish colonies, by fubjeting the lives and
property of all to the will of a tingle man, the vice-
roys have been prohibited, in the most explicit
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in the ju-
dicial proceedings of the courts of Audience, or
from delivering an opinion, or giving a voice with
refpet to any point litigated before them'. In

Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35, 38, 44. lib. iii. tit. iii.
!. 36, 37.o

ro me

B ' K some particular cafes, in which any question of ci.

VIII.

* r-
- Vil right is involved, even the political regulations

of the viceroy may be brought under the review
of the court of Audience, which, in those in-
stances, may be deemed an intermediate power
placed between him and the people, as a confi-
tutional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdicion.
But as legal restraints on a person who represents
the sovereign, and is clothed with his authority, are
little suited to the genius of Spanish policy; the
hesitation and relerve with which it confers this
power on the courts of Audience are remarkable.
They may advise, they may remonstrate; but, in
the event of a direct collision between their opinion
and the will of the viceroy, what he determines
must be carried into execution, and nothing re-
mains for them, but to lay the matter before the
king and the council of the Indies m. But to be
intitled to remontfrate, and inform against a per-
son, before whom all others must be silent, and
tamely submit to his decrees, is a privilege which
adds dignity to the courts of Audience. This is
farther augmented by another circumitance. Upon
the death of a viceroy, without any provision of a
successor by the king, the supreme power is vetted
in the court of Audience resident in the capital of
the viceroyalty, and the senior judge, assisted by
his brethren, exercises all the functions of the vice-

' Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 40, 41. Recop. lib. ii.
tit, xv. 1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1.34. lib. v. tit. ix. 1. i.

roy

roy while the office continues vacant". In matters B O K
which come under the cognizance of the Audi- _-
ences, in the course of their or'dinary juvifdiaion,
as courts of justice, their sentences are final in
every litigation concerning property of less value
than fix thousand pelos; but when the subjec in
dispute exceeds that fum, their decisions are sub-
je to review, and may be carried by appeal before
the royal council of the Indies .

IN this council, one of the molt considerable in Council of

the Indis.

the monarchy for dignity and power, is veiled the
supreme government of all the Spanish dominions
in America. It was first established by Ferdinand,
in the year 151 , and brought into a more perfect
form by Charles V. in the year 1524. Its jurif- Its power.
didtion extends to every department, ecclesiastical,
civil, military, and commercial. All laws and
ordinances relative to the government and police
of the colonies originate there, and must be ap-
proved of by two-thirds of the members, before
they are issued in the name of the king. All the
offices, of which the nomination is reserved to the
crown, are conferred in this council. To it each
person employed in America, "from the viceroy
downwards, is accountable. It reviews their con-
duct, rewards their lervices, and inflits the pu-
niflments due to their malversations P. Before it,
n Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 57, &c.

Recop. lib. v. tit. xiii. 1. , &c.
P Rccop. lib. ii. tit. ii. 1. , z, &c.

nB o0 K is laid whatever intelligence, either public or fe.

VIII.
-^_-1-9 cret, is received from America, and every scheme

of improving the administration, the police, or the
commerce of the colonies, is ubmitted to its con.
fideration. From the first inflitution of the coun-
cil of the Indies, it has been the constant object of
the catholic monarchs to maintain its authority,
and to make such additions from time to time,
both to its power and its splendor, as might render
it formidable to all their fubjeEts in the New
World. Whatever degree of public order and
virtue (till remains in that country, where so many
circumstances conspire to relax the former, and to
corrupt the latter, may be ascribed in a great mea-
lure to the wife regulations and vigilant infpetion
of this reipetable tribunal'.

casa de As the king. is supposed to be always present in
Contrara-

aion. his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in

the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been instituted, in order to regulate such com-
mercial affairs as required the immediate and per-
fonal infpetion of those appointed to superintend
them. This is called Cnafa de la Contratacion, or
the house of trade' and was eabliihed in Seville,
to whole port commerce with the New World was
ts func- confined, as early as the year 50I. It may be

confidered both as a board of trade, and as a court
of judicature. In the former capacity, it takes

q Solorz. de Jure Ind..lib. iv. 1. iz.

cognizance

cognizance of whatever relates to :the intercourie B O0 K
of Spain with America, it regulates what commo- _
dities hould be exported thither, and has' the in-
fpetion of such as are received in retun. It de-
cides concerning the departure of the fleets for the
Weft Indies, the freight and burden of the hips,
their equipment and dettination. In the latter
capacity, it judges with refpeft to every quef-
tion, civil, commercial, or criminal, ariling in
consequence of the tranfadions of Spain with Ame-
rica; and in both these departments, its deciGons
are exempted fiom the review of any court but that
of the council of the Indiesr.

SUCH is the great outline of that system of go-

vernment, which Spain has established in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
subordinate boards and officers employed in the
administration of justice, in collecting the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of the
country; to describe their different funEtions, and
to enquire into the mode and effect of their opera-
tions; would prove a detail no less intricate than
minute and uninteresting.

THE first object of the Spanish monarchs was to Firn ojet,

secure the produtions of the colonies to the parent ,tCivan,"
slate, by an absolute prohibition of any intercourle trade.
with foreign nations. 'lhey took poffefion of

r Recop. lib ix t.

i i. Veitia Norte de la Contratacion,
lib. i. c. I.

America

Bo o K America by right of conquefr, and, conscious nor
a-__- only of the feebleness of their infant settlements,

but aware of the difficulty in establishing their do-
minion over such vast regions, or in retaining so
many relucant nations under the yoke, they dread-
ed the intrusion of strangers; they even hunned
their infpetion, and endeavoured to keep them at
a distance from their coasts. This spirit of jea.
louly and exclusion, which at first was natural,
and perhaps necessary, augmented as their posTef-
sions in America extended, and the value of them
came to be more fully understood. In consequence
of it, a system of colonizing was introduced, to which
there had hitherto been nothing similar among man-
kind. In the ancient world, it was not uncom-
mon to fend forth colonies. But they were of two
kinds only. They were either migrations, which
served to disburden a state of its Iuperfluous sub-
jects, when they. multiplied too fast for the terri-
tory which they occupied : or they were military
detachments flationed, as garrilons, in a conquered
province. The colonies of Iome Greek republics,
and the swarms of northern barbarians which fettled
in different parts of Europe, were of the first species.
The Roman colonies were of the second. In the
former, the connexion with the mother-country
quickly ceased, and they became independent states.
In the latter, as the disjunction was not complete,

Regulations the dependence continued. In their American
for that
purpo. settlements, the Spanilh monarchs took what was

peculiar to each, and studied to unite them. By

fending

fending colonies to regions so remote, by establish- B o oK
ing in each a form of interior policy and admini-
Itration, under distinct governors, and with pecu-
liar laws, they disjoined them from the mother-
country. By retaining in their own hands the
rights of legislation, as well as that of imposing
taxes, together with the power of nominating the
persons who filled every department of executive go-
vernment, civil or military, they secured their de-
pendence upon the parent state. Happily for Spain,
the situation of her colonies was such, as rendered it
possible to reduce this new idea into practice. Al-
most all the countries which she had discovered and
occupied, lay within the tropics. The productions
of that large portion of the globe are different from
those of Europe, even in its most southern provinces.
The qualities of the climate and of the foil naturally
turn the indufiry offuch as fettle there into new chan-
nels. When the Spaniards first took possession of
their dominions in America, the precious metals
which they yielded, were the only object that attraced
their attention. Even when their efforts began to take
a better direction, they employed themselves almost
wholly in rearing such peculiar produtions of the
climate, as, from their rarity or value, were of chief
demand in the mother-country. Allured by vait
profpedts of immediate wealth, they disdained to
waste their industry on what was less lucrative, but of
superior moment. In order to render it impofible to
correca this error, and to prevent them from making
any efforts in industry which might interfere with

thole

B o o K those of the mother-country, the establishment o0
. __ several species of manufactures, and even the cul.

ture of the vine, or oliye, are prohibited in the
Spanish colonies s, under evere penalties t. They
must truf entirely to the mother-country for the
objeAs of primary necessity. Their clothes, their
furniture, their inftrunents of labour, their luxu-
xies, and even a considerable part of the provisions
which they consume, were imported from Spain.
During a great part of the sixteenth century, Spain,
pofficing an extensive commerce and flourilhing
manufacures, could supply with ease the growing
demands of her colonies, from her own stores,
The produce of their mines and plantations was
given in exchange for these. But all that the co.
lonies received, as well as all that they gave, was
conveyed in Spanish bottoms. No vessel belong-
ing to the colonies was ever permitted to carry the
commodities of America to Europe. Even the
commercial intercourse of one colony with another,
was either absolutely prohibited, or limited by
many jealous reltricEions. All that America yields
flows into the ports of Spain ; all that it confuimes
must iffne from them. No foreigner can enter its
colonies without express permiflion; no vessel of
any foreign nation is received into their harbours;
and the pains of death, with confiscation of move-
ables, are denounced against every inhabitant who

c
See NOTE XLVII.
l B. Ulloa Retab. des Manus. &c, p. 206.

pre fumes

presumes to trade with them . Thus the colonies B o oK
are kept in a state of perpetual pupillage; andgby cr
the introduction of this commercial dependence, a
refinement in policy of which Spain set the first ex-
ample to the European nations, the supremacy of
the parent state hath been maintained over remote
colonies during two centuries and a half.

SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spa- slow pro.
nifh monarchs seem to have attended in forming puiationP

r Eu-

their new settlements in America. But they could rope.
not plant with the fame rapidity that they had, de-
stroyed; and, from many concurring causes, their
progress was extremely flow, in filling up the im-
mense void which their devastations had occasioned,
As soon as the rage for discovery and adventure be-
gan to abate, the Spaniards opened their eyes to
dangers and distresses, which at first they did not
perceive, or had despised. The numerous hard-
ships with which the members of infant colonies
have to struggle, the diseases of unwholesome cli-
mates, fatal to the constitution of Europeans; the
difficulty of bringing a country, covered with forefis,
into culture; the want of hands necessary for labour
in some provinces, and the flow reward of industry,
in all, unless where the accidental discovery of mines
enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were evils
universally felt and magnified. Discouraged by
the view of these, the spirit of migration was so

u Recopil. lib, ix. tit. xxv:i. 1. . 4. 7, &c.
VOL. III. T much

. %vq K muh damped, that sixty years after the discovery
e-^-e j of;the New World, the number of Spaniards in all

its provinces is computed not to have exceeded sis-
teen thousand X.

Discouraged . Taz mode in which property was distributed in
by the ate '
of property, the Spanifl colonies, and the regulations establish-

ed with refpe& to the transmission of it, whether
by desCent or by sale, were extremely unfavourable
to population. In order to promote a rapid in-
crease of people in any new settlement, property
in land ought to be divided into small hares, and
the alienation of it should be rendered extremely
easy . But the rapaciousness of the Spanish con-
queror of the New World paid no regard to this
fundamental maxim of policy; and, as they pof-
sessed power, which enabled them to gratify the
utmost extravagance of their withes, many fCized
diftrits of great extent, and held them as enonmi-
endas. By degrees they obtained the privilege of
converting a part of there into Mayorafgos, a
species of fief, introduced into the Spaniifh system
ps feudal jrifprudencez, which can neither be
diviled nor lienated. Thius a great portion t
landed property, under this rigid form of en.
tail, is withheld from circulation, and dclccnid
from father to son unimproved, and of little
value either to the. proprietor or to the commu-
nity. In the accoumt which I have given of

x See N O.T E XLVl[. y Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. 1I
X Recop, lib. iv. it, iii. 1, 24.

the reduction of Peru, various examples occur of S 6' '
enormous tracts of country occupied by fom of s--"i
the conquerors . The excesses in other provinces
were similar, for as the value of the lands which
they acquired, was originally estimated according
to the number of Indians which lived upon them,
America was in general so thinly peopled, that
only diftrits of great extent could afford such a
number of labourers as might be employed in the
mines with any profpet ofconfiderable gain. The
pernicious effects of those radical errors in the dif-
tribution and nature of property in the Spanilh
settlements, are felt through every department of
industry, and may be confidered as one great cause
of a progress in population Io much flower than
that which has taken place in better constituted
colonies b

To this we may add, that the support of the en- and the n-

tulre of their

ormous and expensive fabric of their ecclesiastical cleianstiijl
establishment, has been a burden on the Spanish pliy'
colonies, which has greatly retarded the progress
of population and industry. The payment of
tythes is a heavy tax on industry; and if the ex-
ation of them be not regulated and circumscribed
by the wisdom of the civil magistrate, it becomes
intolerable and ruinous. But, instead of any re-
ftraint on the claims of ecclesiastics, the inconfi-
ilerate zeal of the Spanish legislators admitted them

Book vi. p. 139. b See NOTE XLIC.

T 2 ito

B 0 o K into America An their full extent, and at once i.
. u.-mJ posed on their infant colonies a burden which is in

no flight degree oppressive to society, even in its
most improved Itate. As early as the year 501,
the payment of tythes in the colonies was enjoined,
and the mode of it regulated by law. Every ar-
ticle of primary neceflity, towards which the at.
tention of new settlers muff naturally be turned, is
fLbjeted to that grievous exation c. Nor were the
demands of the clergy confined to articles of simple
and easy culture. Its more artificial and operose
-producions, such as sugar, indigo, and cochineal,
were soon declared to be tythable d; and thus the
industry of the planter was taxed in every stage of
its progress, from its rudest efiay to its highest im-
provement. To the weight of this legal impoG-
tion, the bigotry of the American Spaniards has
made many voluntary additions. From their fond
delight in the external pomp and parade of reli-
gion, and from superstitious reverence for ecclcfi-
aftics of every denomination, they have bellowed
profuse donatives on churches and monasteries, and
have unprofitably wafted a large proportion of that
wealth, which might have nourished and given vi.
gour to productive labour in growing colonies.

various or. BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of
dcrs of peo-
'Ie'i te America which the Spaniards have occupied,

that, notwithstanding all the circumstance which

c Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. 2.
Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. 3 and 4.

iave

have checked and retarded population, it has gra- B o K
dually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain _--..
with citizens of various orders. Among these, the
Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diftinguiihed
by the name of Chapetones, are the firit in rank and chapetones

the *irft.

power. From the jealous attention of the Spanifn
court to secure the dependence of the colonies on the
parent state, all departments of consequence are filled
by persons ent from Europe; and, in order to pre-
vent any of dubious fidelity from being employ-
ed, each must bring proof of a clear descent from a
family of Old Chrijtians, untainted with any mixture
of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and never disgraced
by any censure of the inquisition . In such pure
hands, power is deemed to be safely lodged, and
almost every public function, from the viceroyalty
downwards, is committed to them alone. Every
person, who by his birth, or residence in America,
may be suspected of any attachment or interest ad-
verse to the mother-country, is the object of dif-
trust to such a degree, as amounts nearly to an ex-
clufion from all offices of confidence or authority .
By this conspicuous predilection of the court, the
Chapetones are raised to such pre-eminence in
America, that they look down with disdain on every
other order of men.

TrE characer and slate of the Creoles, or de- (Croles the

Icond,

fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the

* Rccppil. lib. ix. tit. xxvi, 1. IS, 6.
'See NOTE L.

T 3 second

B. o o K second class of-fubje6ts in the Spanish colonies, have

- enabled the .Chapetones; to. acquire other advan

tages, hardly less considerable than those which
they. derive: from the partial favour of government.
Though some of the Creolian race are delcended
from the conquerors of the New World; though
others can trace up their pedigree to the noblert
families in. Spain; though many are possessd of
ample fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence of
a sultry climate, by the rigour of a jealous govern.
ment,.and by their despair of attaining that diftinc-
tion to which mankind naturally aspire, the vigour
of their minds is so entirely broken, that a great
part of them waste life in luxurious indulgencies,
mingled with an illiberal superstition still more de-
baing. Languid and unenterprifing, the 'opera-
tions of an acive extended commerce would be to
them so cumbersome and oppreflive, that in almolt
every part of America they decline engaging in it.
The interior traffic of every colony, as.well a its
trade with the neighbouring .provinces, and with
Spain itself, are carried on chiefly by the Chape-
tones g; who, as the recompence of their indufry,
amass immense wealth, while. the Creoles, funk in
sloth, are satisfied with the revenues of their pa-
ternal cftatcs.

Riv.ilhip FROM this flated competition for power and
brtween
tI1ii. wealth between those. two orders of citizens, and

B Voy. dc Ullon, i. 27. ii.' Voy. de Freiier, 227.

the various paflions excited by a rivalfhip so inte- 9 0 k
refting, their hatred is violent and implacable. On v_-
every occasion, symptoms of this aversion break
out, and the common appellations which each be-
Rtows on the other, are as contemptuous as those
which flow from the most deep-rooted national an-
tipathy h. The court of Spain, from a refinement
ofdiltruftful policy, cherishes those feeds of dif-
cordi and foments this mutual jealousy, which not
only prevents the two molt powerful clafihs of its
!ubje6ts in the New World from combining against
the parent state, but prompts each, with the molt
vigilant zeal, to observe the motions and to coun-
teraa the schemes of the other.

THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanish co- A mixed

race forms
lonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of an the third

older of

European and a negro, or of an European and citizens.
Indian, the former called Mulattoes, the latter
Meflizos. As the court of Spain, solicitous to in-
corporate its new vassals with its ancient fubjeets,
early encourged the Spaniards fettled in America
to marry the natives of that country, several alli-
ances of this kind were formed in their infant co-
lonies '. But it has been more owing to licentious
indulgence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed has

h Gage's Survey, p. 9. Frezier, 226.
i Recopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. . Hcrrera, dec. . lib. v. c. z.
Dec. 3 lib. vii. c, z.

T 4 multiplied

o o . multiplied so greatly, as to constitute a considerable
_-|i part of the population in all the Spanish fettle.

ments. The several flages of descent in this race,
and the gradual variations of shade until the Afri-
can black, or the copper colour of America,
brighten into an European complexion, are accu.
rately marked by the Spaniards, and each diftin.
guifhed by a peculiar name. Those of the firit
and second generations are confidered, and treated as
mere Indians and Negroes; but in the third descent,
the charaaeriftic hue of the former disappears;
and in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is lb
entirely effaced, that they can no longer be diftin-
guifhed from Europeans, and become entitled to
all their privileges k. It is chiefly by this mixed
race, whose frame is remarkably robust and hardy,
that the mechanic arts are carried on in the Spanifl
settlements, and other acive funEtions in society are
discharged, which the two higher classes of citizens,
from pride, or from indolence, disdain to exercise .

tegroes THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the
form the
foulth or- inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. The intro-

dution of that unhappy part of the human species
into America, together with their services and sus-
ferings there, hall be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to point out a peculiarity in their ituation tinder

t Voy. de Ulloa, i. p. 27.
I Voy. de Vlloa, i. 29. Voy. de Bouguer, p. 104. M-
Jlndez, Tfoi9s Verdaderos, i. 354.

tile

the Spanish dominion. In several of their fettle- B O o K
ments, particularly in New Spain, negroes are .-
chiefly employed in domestic service. They form
a principal part in the train of luxury, and are
cherlihed and carelhed by their superiors, to whose
vaniry and pleasures they are equally subservient.
Their dress and appearance are hardly lels plendid
than that of their masters, whose manners they imi-
tate, and whose paflions they imbibe . Elevated by
this dlltintion, they have assumed such a tone of
fupcriority over the Indians, and treat them with
such insolence and scorn, that the antipathy be-
tween the two races has become implacable.
Even in Peru, where negroes seem to be more
numerous, and are employed in field-work as well
as domestic service, they maintain their ascendant
over the Indians, and the mutual hatred of one to
the other subsists with equal violence. The laws
have industriously fomented this aversion, to which
accident gave rife, and, by mofi rigorous injunc-
tions, have endeavoured to prevent every inter-
course that might form a bond of union between
the two races. Thus, by an artful plicy, the
Spaniards derive strength from that circumstance
in population which is the weakness of other Eu-
ropean colonies, and have secured as affociarcs and
defenders, those very persons who ellcwhcre are
objets of jealousy and terror ".

R Gage, p. 6. Voy. dc Ulloa, i. 451.
n Recopil. lib. vii. tit. v. 1. 7. Ierrera, dea. 8. lib. vii.
C. 2z. Jrezicr, 244.

'I-I E

B O O K THE Indians form the lat, and the mcft de.

Villl

_ --v- prefled order of men in the country, which be.
fT'e ltdian longed to their ancestors. I have already traced
odr o i- the progress of the Spanish ideas with refpet to

the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more
early regulations, concerning a matter of so much
conlequence in the adniniftration of their new do.
minions. But since the period to which I have
brought down the hiftorv of America, the informa.
tion and experience acquired during two centuries,
have enabled the court of Spain to make such imr
provements in this part of its American fvftem, that
a short view of the present condition of the Indians
may prove both curious and interesting.

Their pre. BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in 1542,
tent condi-
tion. which have been so often mentioned, the hioh

pretensions of the conquerors of the New World,
who confidered its inhabitants as slaves, to whole
service they had acquired a full right of property,
were finally abrogated. From that period, the
Indians have been reputed freemen, and entitled
to the privileges of fubjefts. When admitted into
this rank, it was deemed just, that they thould
contribute towards the fupp:)rt and improvement
of the society which had adopted them as Inem-
ber.. But as no considerable benefit could he ex-
pected from the voluntary cubrits of men unac.
quainrtcl with regular incdufry, and avcrfe to' l.
bour, the court of Spain found it neceffairy to b

aii 1(

and secure, by proper regulations, what it thought a o O K
realonable to exact from them. With this view, e_

Tax iinlosud

an annual tax was imposed upon every male, from on th1m.
the age of eighteen to fifty, an:i at the famne time,
the nature as well as the extent of the ervices.
which they might be required o perform, were
arcertained with precision. This tribute varies n
different provinces; but if we take that paid in
New Spain as a medium, its annual amount is
nearly four hillings a head; no exorbitant ium inl
countries where, as at the source of wealth, the
value of money is extremely low . The right of
levying this tribute likewile varies. In America,
every Indian is either an immediate vassal of the
crown, or depends upon ome subjec to whom the
district in which he resides, has been granted for a
limited, time, under the denomination of an enco-
mienda. In the former cafe, about three-fourths of
the tax is paid into the royal treasury; in the lat-
ter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the holder
of the grant. When Spain firpt cook poffeflion of
America, the greater part of it was parcelled out
among its conquerors, or those who first fettled
there, and but a small portion reservcd for the
crown. As those grants which were made for two
lives only P, reverted successively ro the Ibvereign, he
had it in his power either to difftl:e his favours by

o See NOT E L. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 42. Hack-

luyt, vol. iii. p. 6 .

P Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. q8. Solorz. de Ind. Jure,
lib. ii. c. 16.

16 grants

B o0 K grants to new proprietors, or to augment his own

V111.
v-Y-.a revenue by valuable annexationsq. Of there, the

latter has been frequently chosen; the number of
Indians now depending immediately on the crown,
is much greater than in the first age after the con-
quest, and this branch of the royal revenue conti.
nues to extend.
The service THE benefit arising from the services of the In-

dians accrues either to the crown, or to the holder
of the encomienda, according to the fame rule ob-
served in the payment of tribute. Those ser-
vices, however, which can now be legally exa&t
ed, are very different from the talks originally im-
posed upon the Indians. The nature of the work
which they must perform is defined, and an equi-
table recompence is granted for their labour. The
flated services demanded of the Indians, may be
divided into two branches. They are either em-
ployed in works of primary necessity, without which
society cannot subsist comfortably, or are com-
pelled to labour in the mines, from which the
Spanish colonies derive their chief value and im-
portance. In consequence of the former, they are
obliged to assist in the culture of maize, and other
grain of necefiary consumption; in tending cattle;
in erecing edifices of public utility; in building
bridges; and in forming high roads r but they

* See NOTE LII.
v Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Solorz. de nd. Jure, il.
lib. i. c. 6, 7. 9.

cannot

cannot be constrained to labour in raising vines, B O O K
olives, and sugar-canes, or any species of culti- -
vation, which has for its objet the gratification
of luxury, or commercial profit . In consequence
of the latter, the Indians are compelled to un-
dertake the more unpleasant talk, of extrating
ore from the bowels of the earth, and of refining it
by fucceflive processes, no less unwholelome than
operof '.

THE mode of exacting both these services is the Te moit

of cxa~2ing

fame, and.is under regulations framed with a view there.
of rendering it as little oppressive as polfible to the
Indians. They are called out successively in divi-
sions, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
pelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
ber called out must not exceed the seventh part of
the inhabitants in any diftrit". In New Spain,
where the Indians are more numerous, it is fixed
at four in the hundred w. During what time the
lab.ur of those Indians, who are employed in agri-
culture, continues, I have not been able to learn x.
But in Peru, each Mita, or division, destined for
the mines, remains there fix months; and while
engaged in this service, a labourer never receives
less than two shillings a day, and often earns more
than double that fum Y. No Indian, residing at a

Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 8. Solorz. lib, i. c. 7. N°4 , &c.
See NOT E LIII. u Recop. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 2l.
w Recopil. lib. vi. 1. 22. x See NOT E LIV.
Y Ulloa Entreten, 265, 266.

greater
0

B O K greater distance than thirty miles from a mine,
-V----' is included in the Mita, or division employed in

working it ; nor are the inhabitants of the low
country exposed to certain destruction, by com-
pelling them to remove from that warm cli.
mate, to the cold elevated regions where minerals
abound a.

How go- THE Indians who live in the principal town?,
verned.

are entirely subjec to the Spanish laws and magi.
Itrates; but in their own villages, they are go-
verned by Caziques, some of whom are the de.
fcendants of their ancient lords, others are named
by the Spanish viceroys. These regulate the petty
affairs of the people under them, according to
maxims of justice, traninitted to them by tra.
dition from their ancestors. To the Indians, this
jurifdition lodged in such friendly hands, affords
1'me consolation; and so little formidable is this
dignity to their new masters, that they often allow
it to descend by hereditary right . For the fiar
ther relief of men so much exposed to oppreflion,
the Spanifl court has appointed an officer in every
diftrit, with the title of Protedtor of theJndians.
It is his function, as the name implies, to aicilt
the rights of the Indians; to appear as their de-
fender in the courts of jullice ; and, by the inter-
position of his authority, to let bounds to the en.

Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 3.

a Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1. 13. See NOT E LV.
b Solorz. doe ure Ind. lib. i. c. z6. Rccopil. lib. vi. tk. vii

croaclhmecn,

croachments and exactions of his countrymen c. A B o °V K
certain portion of the rferved fourth of the annual --v--.
tribute, is destined for the salary of the caziques
and protectors; another is applied to the main-
tenance of the clergy employed in the infirution of
the Indians . Another part seems to be appro-
priated for the benefit of the Indians themselves,
and is applied for the payment of their tribute in
years of famine, or when a particular cliftrii is as-
seced by any extraordinary local calamity '. Be-
fidrs this, provision is made by various laws, that
holFitals fliall be founded in every new settlement
for the reception of Indians . Such hospitals have
accordingly been erected, both for the indigent
and infirm, in Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico,
where the Indians are treated with tenderness and
humanity g

SUCH are the leading principles in the jurifpru-

dence and policy by which the Indians are now go-
verned in the provinces belonging to Spain. In
those regulations of the Spanish monarchs, we dif-
csver no traces of that cruel system of extermina-
tion, which they have been charged with adopting;
and if we admit, that the necefity of securing sub-
fitence for their colonies, or the advantages de-

E Solorz. lib. i. c. 17. p. zoi. Recop. lib. vi. tit. vi.
d Recop. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 30. Tit. xvi. 1. 2z-15.
c Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. i3.

Ibid. lib. i. tit. iv. 1. i, &c.
r Voy. de Ulloa, i. 4y9. 509. Churchill, iv. 96.

rived

B o o K rived from working the mines, give them a righ:

._ _
" to avail themselves of the labour of the Indians, we

mult allow, that the attention with which they re-
gulate and recompense that labour, is provident and
sagacious. In no code of laws is greater solicitud
displayed, or precautions multiplied with more pru,
dent concern for the preservation, the security, and
the happiness of the fubje&, than we discover in
the collection of the Spanish laws for the Indies,
But those later regulations, like the more early
ediCts which have been already mentioned, have
too often proved ineffecual remedies against the
evils which they were intended to prevent. In every
age, if the fame causes continue to operate, the
fame effects must follow. From the immense dil-
tance between the power entrusted with the execu-
tion of laws, and that by whose authority they are
ena.ed, the vigour even of the most absolute go-
vernment must relax, and the dread of a superior,
too remote to observe with accuracy, or to punifli
with dilpatch, must insensibly abate. Notwithiland.
ing the numerous injunctions of the Spanish no-
narchs, the Indians still susser on many occasions,
both from the avarice of individuals, and from the
exations of the magistrates, who ought to have
protected them; unreasonable tafls are imposed;
the term of their labour is prolonged beyond the
period fixed by law, and they groan under all the
insults and wrongs which are the lot of a dlcpcn
dent people h. From ome information on which I

' See NOTE LVI.

car

can depend, such oppreflion abounds more in Peru, B K
than in any other colony. But it is not general. Ac-
cording to the accounts, even of those authors who
are most disposed to exaggerate the sufferings of the
Indians, they, in several provinces, enjoy not only
cafe, but affluence; they poflefs large farms; they
are mafiers of numerous herds and flocks; and, by
the knowledge which they have acquired of Euro-
pean arts and industry, are supplied not only with
the necessaries, but with many luxuries of life '.

AFTER explaining the form of civil government Eccleiani.
in the Spanish colonies, and the state of the va- tution ofthll

colonies.

rious orders of persons fubjefl to it, the peculiarities
in their ecclesiastical conflitution merit confidera-
tion. Notwithstanding the fuperflitious veneration
with which the Spaniards are devoted to the Holy
See, the vigilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand
early prompted him to take precautions against the
introduction of the papal dominion into America.
With this view, he solicited Alexander VI. for a Refllaintsol
grant to the crown of the tythes in all the newly- the papal
0. jkiisdiciono
discovered countries k which he obtained on condi-
tion of his making provision for the religious in-
fruftion of the natives. Soon after Julius II. con-
ferred on him, and his successors, the right of pa-
tronage, and abiblute dilpofal of all eccleriaflical

Gage's Sarvey, p. 8. 90. 104. 119, &c.
k Bulla Alex. VI. A. D. I5jo, ap. Solorz. dejurelnd. ii
p. 198.

VOL. III. U benefices

B 0 K benefices there '. Both these pontiffs, unacquainted

t . with the value of what he demanded, beftoweil

those donations with an inconsiderate liberality,
which their successors have often lamented, and
wished to recal. In consequence of those grants,
the Spanish monarchs have become in effet the
heads of the American church. In them the ad-
ministration of its revenues is vested. Their no.
mination of persons to supply vacant benefices is
instantly confirmed by the pope. Thus, in all
Spanish America, authority of every species centres
in the Crown. There no collision is known be
tween spiritual and temporal jurildió&ion. 'l'i
king is the only superior, his name alone is heard
of, and no dependence upon any foreign power 1:;a
been introduced. Papal bulls cannot be admitteu
into America, nor are they of any force there, until
they have been previously examined, and approve,
of by the royal council of the Indies ; and if an,
bull should be furrepttiioufly introduced, and ci-
culated in America without obtaining that appre
bation, ecclesiastics are required not only to preven
it from taking effect, but to fIize all the copies r
it, and transmit them to the council of the Indi '.
To this limitation of the papal juriidliLuion, eqllil)
singular, whether we confider the age and nation,
which it was dlevilid, or the jealous attention wv, it
which Ferdinand, and his lucccflb!s, have fludlici

B ulla Juili, ii. 15o"l, ap olorz. de Juic I,r . ii. 50o).

'l Rlecopil. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. . and Ailiis dtl Confejo dl .;:
Inlias, clxi. ", ccop, lib. i. i i. 1. c .

*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ .5 ,,l ..,,

maintain it in full force°, Spain is indebted, in a o o K

viii

great measure, for the uniform tranquillity which i
has reigned in her American dominions.

THE hierarchy is established in America in the Formanc

endowments
fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- ofthechurci

in the Spa.

bishops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries. The nilclonire.
inferior clergy are divided into three clafles, un-
der the denomination of Cras, Dostrineros, and
Miffioneros. The first are parifh-priefts in those
parts of the country where the Spaniards have set-
tied. Tle second have the charge of such diftrits
as are inhabited by Indians fubjeted to the Spanish
government, and living under its protection. The
third are employed in inflruting and converting
those fiercer tribes, which disdain fubmifflon to the
Spanish yoke, and live in remote or inaccessible
regions, to which the Spanish arms have not pe-
netrated. So numerous are the ecclesiastics of
all those various orders, and such the profuse li-
berality with which many of them are endowed,
that the revenues of the church in America are
immense. The Romish fuperflition appears with
its utmost pomp in the New World. Churches
and convents there are magnificent, and richly
adorned; and on high festivals, the display of
gold and silver, and precious stones, is fch as ex-
ceeds the conception of an European P. An eccle-
fialtical cftablif-ment so fplenclid and expensive,

° Rccop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55. paim.
P Voy. de Ulloa, i. 4jo.

U . iS

B K is unfavourable, as has been formerly observed, to

VIA.
%_-. the progress of rising colonies; but in countries

where riches abound, and the people are so de-
lighted with parade, that religion must assume it,
in order to attrac their veneration, this propen-
fity to Ostentation has been indulged, and becomes
lels pernicious.

rPeinci'us THE early inflitution of monasteries in the Spa-
esres of
ronaic in- nifh colonies, and the incohfiderate zeal in mul-

tiplying them, have been attended with confe-
quences more fatal. In every new fcttlement, the
first objeEt is t encourage population, and to in-
cite every citizen to contribute towards augmenting
the number nd strength of the community. Du.r
ing the youth and vigour of society, while there
is room to spread, and fuiienance is procured with
facility, mankind increase with amazing rapidity,
But the Spaniards had hardly taken pocfion t,!
America, when, with a nmotl preposterous policy.
they began to erect convents, where perlbns o
both fxes were shut up, under a vow to defeat
the purpose of nature, and to counteract the fill'
of her laws. Influenced by a milguided piet',,
which acribes tranlccndent merit to a state of c!i
bacy, or allured by the prolpcct of thit liltlefs cal',
which, in sultry climates, is deemed supreme li-
city, numbers crowd into thole mansions of so!';
and fuperflition, and are loft to fociery. As non
but persons of Spaninfi cxtracL ar admritted into 1t'(
monallerics of the New Wo'url, thec evil is 1mot,

inuii : L)

sensibly felt, and every monk or nun may be con- B o o K
fidered as an active person withdrawn from civil
life. The impropriety of such foundations in any
situation where the extent of territory requires ad-
ditional hands to 'improve it, is so obvious, that
tome catholic states have expressly prohibited any
person in their colonies from taking the monastic
vows . Even the Spanifi monarchs, on ome occa-
sions, seem to have been alarmed with the spread-
ing of a spirit so adverse to the increaif and pro-
fperity of their colonies, that they have endea-
voured to check it r. But the Spaniards in Ame-
rica, more thoroughly under the influence of fu-
perftition than their countrymen in Europe, and
directed by ecclesiastics more bigotted and illiterate,
have conceived such an high opinion of monastic
fanfity, that no regulations can reflrain their zeal;
and, by the excess of their ill judged bounty, re-
ligious houses have multiplied to a degree no lels
amazing than pernicious to society '.

IN viewing the slate of colonies, where not only Cellrcflero

ccclefiafticg

the number but influence of ecclesiastics is so great, ia'n

s l,

the character of this powerful body is an objet that Amelica
merits particular attention. A considerable part
of the secular clergy in Mexico and Peru arc na-
tives of Spain. As persons long accultomed, by

q Voy. de Ulloa, ii. 124.
' llcrrcra, dec. v. lib. ix. c. , 2. Rccop. lib. 1. tit. iii.
1. I, z. it. iv. c. ii. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 23.

Sec NOTE LVII.

U 3 their

B O O K their education, to the retirement and indolence of
- -v- academic life, are more incapable of active enter-

prize, and lels disposed to firike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclesiastical adven-
turers by whom the American church is recruited,
are commonly such as, from merit or rank in life,
have little profpedt of success in their own coun-
o thefecu- try. Accordingly, the secular priests in the New

World are still less distinguished than their brethren
in Spain, for literary accomplishments of any fpe-
cies; and though, by the ample provision which
has been made for the American church, many of
its members enjoy the ease and independence which
are favourable to the cultivation of cience, the
body of secular clergy has hardly, during two
centuries and a half, produced one author whose
works convey such ueful information, or possess
such a degree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attract the attention of enlightened nations.

of the regu- But the greatet part of the ecclefiattics in the Spa-
lars.

nifh settlements are regulars. On the discovery of
America, a new field opened to the pious zeal of
the monafic orders; and, with a becoming alacrity,
they immediately ft'nr forth missionaries to labour in
it. The first attempt to inflruct and convert the
Americans, was made by monks; and, as soon
as the conquelt of any province was completed,
and its ecclesiastical eltablifhment began to aflimur
lbme form, the popes permitted the minionaries of
the four mendicant orders, as a reward for their
:crvices, to accept of parochial chlrges in :; li:a,

to

to perform all spiritual functions, and to receive B o 0 K
the tythes, and other emoluments of the benefice, --v--
without depending on the jurisdiction of the bishop
of the dioceie, or being fubje to his censures. In
consequence of this, a new career of usefulness, as
well as new obje&ts of ambition presented them-
selves. Whenever a call is made for a fresh sup-
ply of missionaries, men of the most ardent and
aspiring minds, impatient under the restraint of a
cloifler, weary of its insipid uniformity, and fa-
tigued with the irksome repetition of its frivolous
funaions, offer their service with eagernels, and
repair to the New World in quest of liberty and
diftinflion. Nor do they pursue distinction with-
out success. The highefr ecclcfiaftical honours, as
well as the most lucrative preferments in Mexico
and Peru, are often in the hands of regulars; and
it is chiefly to the monastic orders that the Ame-
ricans are indebted for any portion of science which
is cultivated among them. They are almost the
only Spanilh ecclefilatics, from whom we have
received any accounts, either of the civil or na-
tural history of the various provinces in America.
Some of them, though deeply tinged with the in-
delible superstition of their profeflion, have pub-
lilhed books which give a favourable idea of
their abilities. The natur.l and moral history
of the New World, by the Jeluit Acolfa, contains
more accurate observations, perhaps, and more
found science, than are to be found in any dc-

U 4 Iczril)tion

B o o K scription of remote countries published in the fix.
L-._---- teenth century.

Difl oute BUT the fame disgust with monastic life, to which
manners of
fomeof America is indebted for some inftruaors of worth

and abilities, filled it with others of a very differ-
ent character. The giddy, the profligate, the ava-
ricious, to whom the poverty and rigid discipline
of a convent are intolerable, confider a miion
to America as a release from mortification and
bondage. There they oon obtain some parochial
charge, and far removed, by their situation, from
the inlpeElion of their monastic lfperiors, and ex-
empt, by their character, from the jurisdiction of
their diocesan", they are hardly subjed to any
controul. According to the testimony of the molt
zealous catholics, many of the regular clergy in
the Spanith settlements are not only destitute of
the virtues becoming their profession, but regard-
less of that external decorum and refpe& for the
opinion of mankind, which preserve a semblance
of worth, where the reality is wanting. Secure
of impunity, tome regulars, in contempt of their
vow of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and
are so rapaciauflly eager in amaflng wealth, tllhc
they become the molt grievous oppreflors of the
Indians, whom it was their duty to have protedcd.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their vow

Avcndano T1ef. Indic. ii. 253,

U-

of chastity, indulge with little disguise in the most B o
dissolute licentiousness . v.- -

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for re-

dressing enormities so manifelt and so offensive.
Several persons, no less eminent for piety than dif-
cernment, have contended, that the regulars, in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to
be confined within the walls of their cloisters, and
hould no longer be permitted to encroach on the
functions of the secular clergy. Some public-
spirited magistrates, from convition of its being
necessary to deprive the regulars of a privilege be-
flowed at firfl with good intention, but of which
time and experience had discovered the pernicious
effects, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
their attempts to assert their own rights. The i61i.
prince D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Phi-
lip III. took measures so decisive and effeceual
for circumscribing the regulars within their pro-
per sphere, as struck them with general confter-
nation y. They had recourse to their usual arts.
They alarmed the fuperffitious, by representing
the proceedings of the viceroy as innovations fatal
to religion. They employed all the refinements of
intrigue, in order to gain persons in power; and
seconded by the powerful influence of the Jesuits,
who claimed and enjoyed all the privileges which
belonged to the Mendicant orders in America,

z See NOTE LVII, Y See NOTE LIX.

they

B o K they made a deep imprefflon on a bigotted prince,
._-_-. and a weak ministry. The ancient prac!cc was

tolerated. The abules which it occafioilt conti-
nued to increase, and the corruption of monks,
exempt from the restraints of difciplne, and the
inspection of any fi.perior, became a dilgrace to
religion. At last, as the veneration of the Spa-
niards for the monastic orders began to abate, and
the power of the Jesuits was on the decline, Ser-
.tlue ;, dinand VI. ventured to apply the only effecfual

remedy by issuing an edict, prohibiting Regulars
of every denomination from taking the charge of
any parifil with the cure of fouls; and declaring,
that on the demise of the present incumbents, none
but secular priests, subjed to the jurifdicqion of
their diocesans, shall be presented to vacant bene-
sices z. If this regulation is carried into execution
with steadiness in any degree proportional to the
vifdom with which it is framed, a very considerable
reformation may take place in the ecclesiastical
fRate of Spanifl America, and the secular clergy
may gradually become a rcfpetable body of men,
The deportment of many ecclesiastics, even at pre-
lenr, seems to be decent and exemplary, otherwile
we can hardly fppofe that they would be held in
such high estimation, and poftefs such a wonder-
ful ascendant over the minds of their countrymen
rhroughout all the Spanish settlements.

Real Cedula MS. penes me.

13LT

BUT whatever merit the Spanish ecclesiastics in B o0 K
America may possess, the success of their endea-

Small pro-

vours in communicating the knowledge of true re- gres in con-
ligion to the Indians, has been more imperfec Indi.ns ,
than might have been expected, either from the Ch'lt3"5,y
degree of their zeal, or from the dominion which
they had acquired over that people. For this, va-
rious reasons may be assigned. The first miflion-
aries, in their ardour to make proselytes, admitted
the people of America into the chriflian church,
without previous inftrucion in the doctrines of re-
ligion, and even before they themselves had ac-
quired such knowledge of the Indian language, as
to be able to explain to the natives the mysterics of
faith, or the precepts of duty. Refting upon a
subtle distinction in scholastic theology, between
that degree of assent which is founded on a com-
plete knowledge and conviction of duty, and that
which may be yielded when both these are imper-
feet, they adopted this strange praLtice, no less in-
consistent with the spirit of a religion which ad-
dresses itself to the understanding of men, than re-
pugnant to the dictates of reason. As soon as any
body of people, overawed by dread of the Spanish
power, moved by the example of their own chiefs,
incited by levity, or yielding from mere ignorance,
cxpreffed the slightest desire of embracing the reli-
gion of their conquerors, they were in(tantly bap-
tized. While this rage of conversion continued, a
ingile clergyman baptized in one clay above five
thoutland Mexicans, and dlid not clerfif until he was

B o0 K so exhausted by fatigue, that he was unable to lift
_rc»- his hands . In the course of a few years, after

the reduEtion of the Mexican empire, the sacra.
ment of baptjfmn was administered to more than
four millions b. Proselytes adopted with such in.
considerate haste, and who were neither inftrufed
in the nature of the tenets to which it was supposed
they had given assent, nor taught the abfurdityof
thoie which they were required to relinquish, re-
tained their veneration for their ancient fuperfti-
tions in full force, or mingled an attachment to its
doctrines and rites with that slender knowledge of
Chriltianity which they had acquired. These ien-
timents the new converts transmitted to their po'.
terity, into whose minds they have funk so deep,
that the Spanish ecclefialtics, with all their industry,
have not been able to eradicate them. The reli.
gious initiUtions of their ancestors are still remem.
bered, and held in honour by many of the Indi.
ans, both in Mexico and Peru; and whenever they
think themselves out of reach of infpe&ion by the
Spaniards, they assemble and celebrate their idola.
trous rites c

BUT this is not the molt unfurnmountable ob

fl-acle to the progress of Christianity among the In
dians. The powers of their uncultivated under.

2 P. Torribio, MS. Torquem. Mond. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6
h . l'orriiob, MS. 'orquem. lib. xvi. c. 8.
c Voy. de Ulloa, i. 141. Torqueni. lib. xv. c. 23. lib
xvi. c. ?a. G;ge, 171.

Itandin

Landings are so limited, their observations and B o0 o

V

reflecions reach so little beyond the mere objects _.y
of sense, that they eem hardly to have the capa-
city of forming abftraat ideas, and possess not lan-
guage to express them. To such men, the sublime
and spiritual dotrines of Christianity muf be, in
a great measure, incomprehensible. The nume.
rous and splendid ceremonies of the popish worship
catch the eye, please and interest them; but when
their inftrucors attempt to explain the articles of
faith, with which those external observances are con-
nected, though the Indians may liften with patience,
they so little conceive the meaning of what they
hear, that their acquiescence does not merit the name
of belief. Their indifference is still greater than their
incapacity. Attentive only to the present moment,
and ingroffed by the objecs before them, the In-
dians so seldom refect upon what is past, or take
thought for what is to come, that neither the pro-
miles, nor threats of religion, make much im-
prefflon upon them; and while their foresight
rarely extends so far as the next day, it is alrnofl
impossible to inspire them with solicitude about
the concerns of a future world. Astonished equally
at their flownels ofcomprclienfion, and at their in-
lenfibility, some of t early missionaries pro-
nounced them a race of men brutilh, as to be
incapable of underfanding the Ifirlt principles of
r'ligion. A council held at Lin;a decreed, thar,
on account of tiss incap:city, they ought to
bc excluded from lthe facranncnt of' the Lucha-

riftl'.

B o0 K rift d. Though Paul III. by his famous bull,
u-v__ issued in the year I537, declared them to be ra-

tional creatures, entitled to all the privileges of
Christians e; yet, after the lapse of two centuries,
during which they have been members of the
church, so imperfeEt are their attainments in know-
ledge, that very few possess such a portion of pi-
ritual discernment, as to be deemed worthy of be-
ing admitted to the holy communion From this
idea of their incapacity and imperfect knowledge
of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. eftablifhdl
the inquisition in America in the year 570, the
Indians were exempted from the jurifdition of
that evere tribunal , and flill continue under the
inspection of their diocesans. Even after the molt
perfel instruction, their faith is held to be iecble
and dubious; and though ome of them have been
taught the learned languages, and have gone
through the ordinary coure of academic education
with applause, their frailty is still so much suspect-
ed, that no Indian is either ordained a priest, or
received into any religious orderh.

FROM this brief firnvey, ome idea may be form-

I'lc,,dions ed of the interior state of the Spanish colonies.
^i...Ioc ,. The various produaions with which they lfpply

di Torquern. lib. xvi. c. 20.
c Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 2;. Garcia origin. 31 1.
' Voy. de Ulloa, i. 343.
g Recop. lib vi. tit. i 1. 35.
I Torquem. lib. xvii. c. 13. Sec N)OTE LX.

and

and enrich the mother-country, and the system of B o o K
commercial intercourse between them, come next t_
in order to be explained. If the dominions of
Spain in the New World had been of such mode-
race extent, as bore a due proportion to the pa-
rent ifate, the progress of her colonizing might
have been attended with the fame benefit as that
es other nations. But when, in less than half a
century, her inconsiderate rapacity had seized on
countries larger than all Europe, her inability to
fill such vast regions with a number of inhabitants
sufficient for the cultivation of them, was so obvi-
ous, as to give a wrong direction to all the efforts
of the colonists. They did not form compact fettle-
ments, where industry, circumscribed within pro-
per limits, both in its views and operations, is
conducted with that fober persevering fpirir, which
gradually converts whatever is in its poifeffion to a
proper use, and derives thence the greatest ad-
vantage. Instead of this, the Spaniards, educed
by the boundless prolpect which opened to them,
tlivided their pofifiions in America into govern-
ments of great extent. As their number was too
Imall to attempt the regular culture of the immense
provinces, which they occupied rather than peopled,
they bent their attention to a few objects, that al-
lured them with hopes of lfudden and exorbitant
gain, and turned away with contempt fromr the
humbler paths of indultry, which lead more slowly,
Lut vwiti greater certainty, to wealth and iicrIe.ci
of n.iiona l llrclgtih.

OF

B O O K OF all the methods by which riches may be ac;
L^,V quired, that of earching for the precious metals is
-Fmisthei one of the molt inviting to men, who are either

unaccustomed to the regular afliduity with which
the culture of the earth and the operations of corn.
merce must be carried on, or who are so enterprising
and rapacious as not to be satisfied with the gradual
returns of profit which they yield. Accordingly,
as soon as the several countries in America were
fubjeaed to the dominion of Spain, this was al-
mofl the only method of acquiring wealth which
occurred to the adventurers, by whom they were
conquered. Such provinces of the continent as
did not allure them to fettle, by the prospeCt of
their affording gold and silver, were totally neg-
lected. Those in which they met with a difap-
pointrnent of the sanguine expectations they had
formed, were abandoned. Even the value of the
illands, the first-fruits of their discoveries, and the
firtl objet of their attention, funk so much in theli
estimation, when the mines which had been opened
in them were exhausted, that they were deserted
by many of the planters, and left to be occupied
by more industrious possessors. All crowded
to Mexico and Peru, where the quantities of
gold and silver found among the natives, who
Itarched for them with little industry and lets
ikill, promised an unexhaufted f-orc, as the re-
compence of more intelligent and persevering
efforts.

10

DURING

DURING several years, the ardour of their re- B o o K
searches was kept up by hope, rather than success. -,-.

Dilcovery of
At length, the rich ilver mines of Potofi, in Peru, those of Po-

tofi and Sa.

were accidentally discovered in the year I545 ', cotecs.
by an Indian, as he was clambering up the moun-
tain, in purfiit efa Llama which had £trayed from
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in
New Spain, little inferior to the other in value,
were opened. From that time, successive disco-
veries have been made in both colonies, and silver
mines are now so numerous, that the working of
them, and of some few mines of gold in the pro-
vinces of Tierra Firme, and the new kingdom of
Granada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a fyltem no less
complicated than interesting. To describe the na-
ture of the various ores, the mode of extracting
them from the bowels of the earth, and to explain
the several processes by which the metals are fepa-
rated from the substances with which they are
mingled, either by the ation of fire, or the at-
tractive powers of mercury, is the province of the
natural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the
hilforian.

THE exuberant profifion with which the moun- R;ches

tains of the New World poured forth their trealurcs, 'iL Idy
aftonifled mankind, who had been accustomed hi-
therto to receive a penurious supply of thu precious

i Fernandcz, p. i. lib. xi. c. 1i.
VOL. III. X mctals,

B o K metals, from the more scanty stores contained in the

VIII.

1_1.. mines of the ancient hemisphere. According to

principles of computation, which appear to be ex-
tremely moderate, the quantity of gold and silver
that has been regularly entered in the ports of
Spain, is equal in value to four-millions sterling
annually, reckoning from the year 1492, in which
America was discovered, to the present time.
This, in two hundred and eighty-three years,
amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions.
Immense as this furn is, the Spanish writers contend,
that as much more ought to be added to it, in con-
fideration of treasure which has been extracted from
the mines, and imported fraudulently into Spain,
without paying duty to the king. By this account,
Spain has drawn from the New World a supply of
wealth, amounting at least to two thousand millions
of pounds lerling k.

Sp;iit to THE mines, which have yielded this amazing
wLvficii his
gives rife. quantity of treasure, are not worked at the expence

of the crown, or of the public. In order toencou-
rage private adventurers, the perobn who difcovcrs
and works a new vein, is entitled to the property of it.
Upon laying his claim to such a dicovery before the
governor of the province, a certain extent of land is
measured off, and a certain number of Indians allot-
ted him, under the obligation of his opening the mine

k Uztariz Theor. y Praf. tie Commcrcia, c. 3. IicrrLi,
dec. viii, lib. xi. c. 15. Sec NOTE LXI.

*V/[ 11"

Within a limited time, and of his paying the cuf- c o o K
tomary duty to the king, for what it hall produce. .,
Invited by the facility with which such grants are
obtained, and encouraged by some striking ex-
amples of fuiccefs in this line of adventure; not
only the sanguine and the bold, but the timid and
diffident enter upon it with astonishing ardour.
With vast objets always in view, fed continually
with hope, and expecting every moment that for-
tune will unveil her secret fiores, and give up the
wealth which they contain to their wishes, they deem
every other occupation insipid and uninteresting,
The charms of this pursuit, like the rage for deep
play, are so bewitching, and take such full poflffion
of the mind, as even to give a new bent to the natural
temper. Under its influence,,: the cautious become
enterprising, and the covetous profuse. Powerful
as this charm naturally is, its force is augmented by
the arts of an order of men known in Peru by the
cant name of Searchers. These are commonly per-
sons of desperate fortunes, who, availing them-
selves of ome skill in mineralogy, accompanied
with the insinuating manner, and confident pre-
tenrlons peculiar to projectors, address the wealthy
and the credulous, By plausible descriptions of
the appearances which they have discovercd of rich
veins hitherto unexplored ; by producing, when rc-
quifite, specimens of promising ore; by affirming,
with an imposing assurance, that fuccels is certain,
and that the expence mult be trifling, they flcldom
sdil to prlua:le. An aflbciarion is furmed; a finall

X ftlum

B o o K fum is advanced by each copartner; the mine i
A-, .-if opened; thefearcher is entrusted with the sole di.

reciion of every operation; unforeseen difficulties
occur; new demands of money are made; but,
amidst a fucceflion of disappointments and delays,
hope is never extinguished, and the ardour of cx.
pectation hardly abates. For it is observed, that
if any person once enter this educing path, it is
almost impossible to return; his ideas alter, he
seems to be pofefred with another spirit, visions
of imaginary wealth are continually before his
eyes, and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams of
nothing else .

Fatal efftas Suci is the, spirit that must be formed, wherever
of it.

the ative exertions of any ociety are chiefly em.
ployed in working mines of gold and silver. No
spirit is more adverse to such improvement in agri-
culture and commerce, as render a nation really
opulent. If the system of administration in the
Spanish colonies had been founded upon principles
of found policy, the power and ingenuity of the
legislature would have been exerted with as much
ardour, in rcftraining its fubjeas from such perni-
cious indultry, as is now employed in alluring
them towards it. " Projects of mining" (lays a
good judge of the political conduct of nations),
" instead of replacing the capital employed in
" them, together with the ordinary profit of llock,

Ulloa Entretcn. p. z23.

" comnmon!

, commonly absorb both capital and profit. They; B o rc
" are the proje&s, therefore, to which, of all »»
" others, a prudent lawgiver, who desired to,in-
(' crease the capital of his nation, would least

chufe to give any extraordinary encouragement,

" or to turn towards them a greater hare of that
"capital than would go to them of its own ac-
" cord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence
" which all men have in their own good fortune,
"that wherever there is the least probability of
"success, too great a share of it is apt to go to
" them of its own accord m." But in the Spanish
colonies, government is studious to cherish a spirit
which it should have laboured to depress, and, by
the fanftion of its approbation, augments that in-
considerate credulity, which has turned the aive
industry of Mexico and Peru into such an impro-
per channel. To this may be imputed the slender
progress which Spanish America has made during
two centuries and a half, either in useful manu-
factures, or in those lucrative branches of cultiva-
tion, which furnish the colonies of other nations
with their staple commodities. In comparison
with the precious metals, every bounty of nature
is so much despised, that this extravagant idea of
their value has mingled with the idiom of lan-
guage in America, and the Spaniards fettled there
denominate a country, rich, not from the fertility
,f its foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exu,

m Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c. ii. 55.

X 3 bcrance

B o K berance of its pastures, but on account of the mi-

VITI
S;L''. ~ nerals which its mountains contain. In quest of

these, they abandon the delightful plains of Peru
and Mexico, and retort to barren and uncomfort-
able regions, where they have built some of the
largest towns which they peffefs in the New World.
As the activity and enterprise of the Spaniards ori-
ginally took this direction, it is now so difficult to
bend them a different way, that although, from
various causes, the gain of working mines is much
decreaed ; the fascination continues, and almoil
every person, who takes any ative part in tile
commerce of New Spain or Peru, is still engaicd
in some adventure of this kind ".

Otlvr corn- BuT though mines are the chief object of the
modties of
the Spanish Spaniards, and the precious metals which thelei yield,
oolnieso

form the principal article in their commerce witl
America; the fertile countries which they pofliis
there, abound with other commodities of iich
value or scarcity, as to attract a considerable de-
gree of attention. Cochineal is a production al-
most peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, and i:
yields such profit, as amply rewards the labour
and care employed in rearing the curious infeds of
which this valuable drug is composid, and pre-
paring it for the market. Quinquina, or Jeliits
Bark, the noft talutary finple, perhaps, and us

cSee NOTE LXII.

P2 l!

moQt restorative virtue, that Providence, in corn- B K
passion for human infirmity, has made known unto i
man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords a
lucrative branch of commerce. The Indigo of
Guatimala is superior in quality to that of any pro-
vince in America, and cultivated to a considerable
extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to the Spa-
nilh colonies, attains to its highest state of perfec-
tion there, and from the great consumption of
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is a
valuable commodity. The Tobacco of Cuba, of
more exquisite flavour than any brought from the
New World; the sugar railed in that island, in
H-lilianiola, and in New Spain, together with
drgs of various kinds, may be mentioned among
the natural productions of America, which enrich
the Spanish commerce. To there muff be added,
an article of no inconsiderable account, the ex-
portation of hides; for which, as well as for many
of those which I have enumerated, the Spaniards
are more indebted to the wonderful fertility of the
country than to their own foresight and industry.
The domestic animals of Europe, particularly
horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World
with a rapidity which almot exceeds belief. A
few years after the Spaniards ettled there, the
herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned them by thousands'.

o Oviedo ap. Ramus. iii. ioi, B. iHackluyt, iii. G6.

X 4 Le's

B O O K Less attention being paid to them, as they con-
* V. tinued to increase, they were suffered to run wild,

and spreading over a country of boundless extent,
under a mild climate, and covered with rich pals
ture, their number became immense. They range
over the vast plains which extend from Buenos
Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of thirty or
forty thousand; and the unlucky traveller who
once falls in among them, may proceed lfveral
days before he can disentangle himself from among
the crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
seems to have no end. They are hardly les nu-
merous in New Spain, and in several other pro-
vinces: they are killed merely for the fake of' thir
hides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is lb
great, that the fiench of the carcases, which are
left in the field, would infect the air, if large
packs of wild dogs, and vast flocks of gallinazcs,
or American vultures, the nmoft voracious of all
the feathered kind, did not instantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every fleet
to Europe is very great, and is a lucrative branch
of commerce P.

ALMOST all these may be confidered as fL'plc

commodities peculiar to America, and diRteenr,
if we except tat la;i mentioned, from the pro.
dutions of the mnother-country.

P Acofia, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo Hil. of Chili. Church.

Collc('. iii. 47 fp. Ibid. v. p. 08o. 92. Lcttres Edif. xiii.
23,. Fcuillc, i. 219.

\WI'9'N

WHEN the importation into Spain of those va- n o o

V

rious articles from her colonies, first became active L
and considerable, her interior indutry and fmanu- ,,.lich spa.s
faItures were in a state so prosperous, that with hicolo'itnl.
the product of there she was able both to ptrchafc
the commodities of the New World, and to an-
fwer its growing demands. Under the reigns of
Ferdinand and Ilabella, and Charles V. Spain was
one of the mos indultrious countries in Europe.
Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk,
were so extensive, as not only to fuirnifi what was
fufficien for her own confutmption, but to afford
a surplus for exportation. When a market for
them, formerly unknown, and to which (he alone
had access, opened in America, flie had recourse
to her domestic llore, and found there an abundant
ILpply . This new employment nuft naturally
have added vivacity to the spirit of indufiry.
Nourished and invigorated by it, the manufac-
tures, the population, and wealth of Spain might
have gone on increasing in the laime proportion itll
the growtli of her colonies. Nor was the llate of
the Spanif marine at this eriod lcfs flourishing
than that of its m;inuifal'ures. In the beginning
of the fixtcenth century, Spain is said to lave
o)iTcffTd above a thonl;in merchant filips , a
number probably far superior to that of any nation
in Europe in that age. By the aid which forcign
trade and domneflic induilry give reciprocally to
s See N OT E ,XIII. r Canmpomancs, ii. 1.10.

ealch

B O O K each other in their progress, the augmentation of

VIII.

,.
- --· both muf have been rapid and extensive, and

Spain might have received the fame accession of
opulence and vigour from her acquisitions in the
New World, that other powers have derived from
their colonies there.

Why he BUT various causes prevented this. The fame
doe derive thing happens to nations as to individuals. Wealth,
tl~e fame.

which flows in gradually, and with moderatein-
crease, feeds and nourishes that activity which is
friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vigor-
ous and well-conducted exertions; but when
opulence pours in suddenly, and with too full a
Itream, it overturns all fober plans of industry,
and brings along with it a tafle for what is wild
and extravagant, and daring in bulinefs or in ac-
tion. Such was the great and sudden augmenta-
tion of power and revenue, that the poffefion of
America brought into Spain, and ome symptoms
of its pernicious influence upon the political opera-
tions of that monarchy soon began to appear. For
a considerable time, however, the supply of trea-
lure from the New World was scanty and preca-
rious, and the genius of Charles V. conduc'tcd
public measures with such prudence, that the effccas
of this influence were little perceived. But when
Philip II. ascended the Spanifi throne, with talents
.ar inferior to those of his father, and remittances
from the colonies became a regular and confider-
ablc branch of revenue, the fatal operation of this

t rap)i

rapid change in the state of the kingdom, both on o o K .
the monarch and his people, was at once confpi- -
cuous. Philip, possessing that spirit of unceasing
assiduity, which often characterises the ambition of
men of moderate talents, entertained fucli an high
opinion of his own resources, that he thought no-
thing too arduous for him to undertake. Shut up
himself in the solitude of the Escurial, he troubled
and annoyed all the nations around him. He
waged open war with the Dutch and Englih ; he
encouraged and aided a rebellious faction in
France; he conquered Portugal, and maintained
armies and garrisons in Italy, Africa, and both
the Indies. By such a multiplicity of great and
complicated operations, pursued with ardour
during the course of a long reign, Spain was
drained both of men and money. Under the
weak administration of his successor, Philip III.
the vigour of the nation continued to decrease,
and funk into the lowest decline, when the incon- A, D. 6ir.
fiderate bigotry of that monarch expelled at once
near a million of his most industrious fubjecs, at
the very time when the exhausted slate of the
kingdom required tome extraordinary exertion of
political wildom to augment its numbers, and to
revive its strength. Early in the seventeenth cen-
tury, Spain felt such a diminution in the number
of her people, that from inability to recruit her
armies, he was obliged to contract her operations.
I-er flourinfing manufacurcs were fallen into dc-
eay. Her fleets, which had been the terror of all

Europe,

B K Europe, were ruined. Her extensive foreign con-
. -yJ merce was loft. The trade between different parts

of her own dominions was interrupted, and the
ships which attempted to carry it on, were taken
and plundered by enemies whom Ihe once de-
spifed. Even agriculture, the primary objec of
industry in every prosperous state, was neglected,
and one of the most fertile countries in Europe
hardly raised what was sufficient for the support of
its own inhabitants.

Rapid de- IN proportion as the population and manufac-
chlne of its
rade. tures of the parent state declined, the demands of

her colonies continued to increase. The Spaniards,
like their monarchs, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, deserted the
paths of industry, to which they had been ac-
customed, and repaired with eagerness to those
regions from which this opulence issued. By this
rage of emigration, another drain was opened, and
the strength of the colonies augmented by exhaust-
ing that of the mother-country. All those emi-
grants, as well as the adventurers who had at first
settled in America, depended absolutely upon Spain
for almoit every article of necessary coniumption.
E:ngagcd in more alluring and lucrative pursuits,
or prevented by restraints which government iin-
posed, they could not turn their own attention to-
wards eftablifiing the manufactures requisite for
comfortable fibfiltence. They received (as I have
observed in another place) their clothing, their

furniture,

furniture, whatever ministers to the ease or luxury Bn o K
of life, and even their instruments of labour, from ---.
Europe. Spain, thinned of people, and void of
industry, was unable to supply their increasing de-
mands. She had recourse to her neighbours. The
manufactures of the Low Countries, of England,
of France, and of Italy, which her wants called
into existence, or animated with new vivacity, fur-
nifhed in abundance whatever she required. In
vain did the fundamental law, concerning the ex-
clufion of foreigners from trade with America,
oppose this innovation. Neceltity, more powerful
than any statute, defeated its operations, and
contrained the Spaniards themselves to concur
in eluding it. The Engliff, the French, and
Dutch, relying on the fidelity and honour of Spa-
nifh merchants, who lend their names to cover the
deceit, fend out their manufactures to America,
and receive the exorbitant price for which they are
fold there, either in pecie, or in the rich commo-
dities of the New World. Neither the dread of
danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever induced
a Spanish fatlor to betray or defraud the person
who confided in him S; and that probity, which is
the pride and diffintion of the nation, contributes
to its ruin. In a fllort time, not above a twentieth
part of the commodities exported to America was
of Spanish growth or fabric '. All ilie reft was
the property of foreign merchants, though entered

Zavala Reprcrcntacion, p, 226. ' Campomancs, ii. 39S.

in

B K in the name of Spaniards. The treasure of the
_v_ New World may be said henceforward not to have

belonged to Spain. Before it reached Europe, it
was anticipated as the price of goods purchased
from foreigners. That wealth whioh, by an in.
ternal circulation, would have spread through each
vein of industry, and have conveyed life and move.
ment to every branch of manufacture, flowed out
of the kingdom with such a rapid course, a; neither
enriched nor animated it. On the other hand, the
artizans of rival nations, encouraged by this quick
sale of their commodities, improved so much in
skill and indutify, as to be able to afford them at
a rate so low, that the manufactures of Spain,
which could not vie with theirs, either in quality
or cheapness of work, were still farther deprefled.
This deftru&ive commerce drained off the riches
of the nation fafler and more completely, than
even the extravagant schemes of ambition carried
on by its monarchs. Spain was so much aftonilh-
ed and distressed, at beholding her American trca-
fures vanish almost as soon as they were imported,
that Philip Ill. unable to supply what was requisite
in circulation, issued an eclit, by which he endca-
Youred to raise copper money to a value in cur.
rency nearly equal to that of silver "i; and the lord
of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was reduced
to a wretched expedient, which is the last resource
of petty impoverished fitcs.

" U1ztareT,, c. 104.

THU11s

THUS the poffefiions of Spain in America have B K
not proved a source of population and of wealth a_,_
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na-
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the fpi-
rit of industry subsists in full vigour, every per-
son fettled in such colonies as are similar in their
situation to those of Spain is supposed to give em-
ployment to three or four at home in supplying
his wants x. But wherever the mother-country can-
not afford this supply, every emigrant may be con-
fidered as a citizen loft to the community, and
strangers must reap all the benefit of answering his
demands.

SUCH has been the internal state of Spain from Increarcd hy

the close of the sixteenth century, and such her in- 'the mod, o
ability to supply the growing wants of her colo- i,,,mcou
nies. The fatal effects of this disproportion be- rica,
tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-
ing them, have been much increased by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the in-
tercourfe between the mother country and the co-
lonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing the
trade with America, and debarring her fubjeats
there from any communication with foreigners, that
all her jealous and systematic arrangements have
arisen. These are so singular in their nature and
consequences as to merit a particular explanation.
In order to secure the monopoly at which she aimed,

x Child on trade and colonies.

Spairn

B o o K Spain did not vest the trade with her colonies in an
t_-.-- ' exclusive company, a plan which has been adopted

by nations more commercial, and at a period when
mercantile policy was an object of greater atncn.
tion, and ought to have been better understood,
The Dutch gave up the whole trade with thiir
colonies, both in the East and Weft Indies, to ex.
clufive companies. The English, the French, the
Danes, have imitated their example with refp ct
to the East Indian commerce; and the two former
have laid a similar restraint upon ome branches
of their trade with the New World. The wit of
mn cannot, perhaps, devise a method for check.
ing the progress of industry and population in a
new colony more effetual than this. The intered
of the colony, and of the exclusive company, mutt
in every point be diametrically opposite; and as
the latter poffeifcs such advantages in this unequal
contest, that it can prescribe at pleasure the terms
of intercourse, the former must not only buy dear
and fell cheap, but mutl surfer the mortification of
having the iricreale of its lurplus ock difcour;igec
by those very prfons to whom alone it can dilpo!e
of its productions '.

Thiscon- SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from fall-
finetd 10one ing into this error in policy, by the high idi.s
p"rt in
aisln. whiclh si early formed concerning the riches of

the New World. Gold and filvcr were comInio-

Y Smi tll'slnquiry, ii. 171.

clitic)

dities of too high value to vest a monopoly of B °o K
them in private hands. The crown wished to retain '---
the diretion of a commerce so inviting; and, in
order to secure that, ordained the cargo of every
Ihip fitted out for America, to be inspected by the
officers of the Casa de Contratacion in Seville, be-
fore it could receive a licence to make the voyage;
and that on its return, a report of the commodities
which it brought flould be made to the fame board,
before it could be permitted to land them. In con-
sequence of this regulation, all the trade of Spain
with the New World centered originally in the port
of Seville, and was gradually brought into a form,
in which it has been conducted, with little variation,
from the middle of the sixteenth century almost to
our own times. For the greater security of the
valuable cargoes sent to America, as well as for the
more easy prevention of fraud, the commerce of
Spain, with its colonies, is carried on by flees which
fail under firong convoys. These fleers consisting
of two squadrons, one distinguished by the name
of the Galeons, the other by that of the Flota, are
equipped annually. Formerly they took their de-
parture from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz has
been found more commodious, they have failed
from it since the year 172o.

THE Galeons destined to lupply Tierra F'ir , c:.lI^(ln

and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost leons,
every article of luxury, or ncceflai-y confurmption,
that an opulent people can dcmani, touch first

VOL. III. Y at

S.

at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To the
-. - former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas,

the New Kingdom of Granada, and several other
provinces, refoit. The latter is the great mart fur
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the feaobn
when the Galeons are expeled, the produEt of all
the mines in thele two kiniidoms, together with their
other valuable commodities, is tranlported by ia
to Panama. From thence, as Loon as the appear-
ance of the fleet from Europe is announced, they
are conveyed acrols the illhmus, partly on mules,
and partly down the river Chagre to Porto-bello.
i his altry vililge, the climate of which, from tie
plerniious union of excelive heat, continual moil.
:u:'e, and the putrid exhalations arising from a rank
iiil, is more l atal to life than any. perhaps in the
Inown\ world, is immediately filled with people.
IFrom being the residence of a few negroes and mu-
l.tLros, and of a miserable garrilon relieved cvery
ihree montihs, Porto-bello assumes suddenly a very
(iifferent aliect, and its fireets are crowded witi
opulent mchcants from every corner of Peru, an
the adjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the wcalih
of, America is exchanged for the manulfacures (
l:urope; and, during its prescribcd telin of sori
d'ays, the riclilk traffic on tlle face of the c arl- i3
1i"-gun and fililfcd, with that simplicity of trail-
::liol anl. utnbL ndl d confidence, which accon:
i),my exteliive conillerce . T1he l'lota liuls il
co(Li I t VT.I. (tl'/. The trrcafurcs anll Comlll

: )' F r. LXIV.

diii.

dities of New Spain, and the depending provinces, n o K
which were deposited at Puebla de los Angeles in ._-
expectation of its arrival, are carried thither, and
the commercial operations of Vera Cruz, conducted
in the fame manner with those of Porto-bello, are
inferior to them only in importance and value.
Both fleets, as oon as they have completed their
cargoes from America, rendezvous at the Havanna,
and return in company to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while n.,d : s

thus fettered and refrricted, came necefTarily to be o lngei,,i.
conducted with the fame spirit, and upon the iame
principles, as that of an cxclufive company. Be-
ing confined to a tingle port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole of
it was gradually engrossed by a finall number of
wealthy houses, forimerly in Seville, and now in
Cadiz. These by combinations, which they can
easily form, may altogether prevent that compe-
tition which preserves commodities a their natural
price; and by ating in concert, to which they are
prompted by their mutual interct, they may raile
or lower the value of them at pleasure. In conle-
quence of this, the price of European goods in
America is always high, and often exorbitant.
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundred
per cent. are profits not uncommon in the comn-
inerce of Spain with her colonies . From thl

I 1. Ulloa Ketablin'. part ii. p. 1i .

Y ., amc

B. K fame ingroffing spirit it frequently happens, that

VI.
V. I traders of the second order, whose warehouses do

not contain a complete assortment of commodities
for the American market, cannot purchase from
the more opulent merchants such goods as they
want, at a lower price than that for which they
are fold in the colonies. With the fame vigilant
jealousy that an exclusive company guards againfi
the intrusion of the free trader, those overgrown
mnonopolifts endeavour to check the progress of
every one whose encroachments they dread b. This
restraint of the American commerce to one port,
not only affects its domeftie state, but limits its
foreign operations. A monopolifi may acquire
more, and certainly will hazard less, by a,eifined
trade which yields exorbitant profit,.t1fan by an
extensive commerce in which hreceives only a
moderate returrivi ain.ArIs' often his interest
not to.'fIase, but to circumscribe the sphere of
· hi'" ativity; and, instead of calling forth more
vigorous exertions of commercial industry, it may
be the obje6 of his attention to check and ftt
bounds to them. By ome fach maxim, the mer.
cantile policy of Spain stems to have regulated its
intercourse with America. Instead of furnishing
the colonies with European goods in such. quantity
as might render both the price and the profit mo-
derate; the merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem
to have supplied them with a sparing hand, that

Smith's Inquiry, ii. 17T. Campomancs, Educ. Popul.

the

the eagerness of competition amongst customers B O K
obliged to purchase in a scanty market, might en- I _v
able the Spanish factors to dispose of their cargoes
with exorbitant gain. About the middle of the lalt
century, when the exclusive trade to America from
Seville was in its most flourifling slate, the burden
of the two united squadrons of the Galeons and
Flota, did not exceed twenty-feven thousand five
hundred tons c. The supply which such a fleet could
carry, mufi have been very inadequate to the de-
mands of those populous and extensive colonies,
which depended upon it for all the luxuries, ani
many of the necessaries of life.

SPAIN early became sensible of her declension Remedies

from her'former prolperity, and many refpetable proposed.
and virtuous itizens employed their thoughts in
devising methods forrevilng.tlhe decaying in-
duftry and commerce of their country. From the
violence of the remedies proposcd, we may judge
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared.
Some, confounding a violation of police with cri-
minality againfl the fRate, contended, that in or-
der to check illicit commerce, every person con-
vited of carrying it on, flould be punished with
death, and confiscation of all his effets '. Others,
forgetting the distinction between civil offences and
,ads of impiety, infifed, that contraband trade

, Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 435. ii. Io.
a M. de Santa Cruz Cornmercia Suclto, p. 142.

Y 3 should

n o o K should be ranked among the crimes reserved for
c_^ the cognizance of the Inquisition; that such as

were guilty of it might be tried and punified, ac-
cording to the secret and summary form in which
that dreadful tribunal exercises its jurifd-i&tione.
Others, uninftruted by observing the pernicious
effets of monopolies in every country where they
have been etablifhed, have proposed to vest the
trade with America in exclusive companies, which
interell would render the moit vigilant guardians of
the Spanish commerce against the incroachment of
the interlopers f.

BESIDES these wild projeas, many schemes, bet-

tcr digested and more beneficial, were fuggetce!.
But under the feeble monarchs, with whom the
reign of the Austrian line in Spain closed, inca-
pacity and indecision are conspicuous in every de-
partment of government. Instead of taking for
their model the active adminifiration of Charles V.
they affected to imitate the cautious procrastinating
wisdom of Philip II. and destitute of his talents,
they deliberated perpetually, but determined no-
thing. No remedy was applied to the evils undlcr
which the national commerce, domestic as well as
foreign, languihed. These evils continued to in-
creale, and Spain, with dominions more extcnivc
andn more opulent than any European fltate, pol'

' Moncada Rcflauracion politica de Eflilgna, p. , i.
Z 'avalla y Augnon Rcprcfentacion, c p. p9. )o

it 1I,.'

feffed'"neither vigour nor imoney h,' nor indufry. R
At length, the violence of a great':national con- ---- -
vullfon rotized the slumbering genius'of Spain.
The efforts of the two cootending parties in the
civil wvar; kindled by the'dilfpute concerning the
fuccefflon of the crown at thel begiinning of this
century, 'called forth, in ome degree, the ancient
spirit. and'vigour of the nation. While men were
thus forniig, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than" thoie vwliclh h:d influenced the coun-
cils of the monarchy'during the course of a cen-
tury, Spain'derived from an unexpected source the
means'of availing itself of their talents. -The va-
'rious p'owers Who fiavoured' the pretensions either
of the -Aillrian or Bourbon candidate, for the Spa-
nifh throie, lent foriiidable fleets and armies zo
their iupport; France, England, and Holland re-
mitted immenife umns to 'Spain. These were
spent in the provinces which became the theatre
of war. Part of the American treafute, of which
foreigners had drained the kingdom; flowed back
thither. From this era, one 'of the molt intelli-
gent Spanish authors dates the revival of the mo-
narchy; and, however, humiliating the truth may
be, he acknowledges, that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate to
dle exigencies of the public '

' See N TrE I.XV. Campomanes, i. 42o.

Y .I .

o K As oon as the Bourbons obtained quiet poflef.
VIII.
e- . sion of the throne, they discerned this change in

Step towaras
improve- the spirit of the people, and in the state of the na-
ment by the
Bourbon tion, anddtook advantage of it; for although that
mn:narchs, ,

family has not given monarchs to Spain remark-
able for superiority of genius, they have all been
beneficent princes, attentive to the happiness of
their fubjets, and Solicitous to promote it. It
was, accordingly, the first object of Philip V. to
suppress an innovation which had crept in during
the courte of the war, and had overturned the
whole system of the Spanish commerce with Ame-

by excluding rica. The English and utch, by their fupe-
foreigners . .
from trade riority in naval power, having acquired such com-

mand of the ea, as to cut off all intercourse be-
tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to
furnish her fubjeis in America those necessaries of
life, without which they could not exist, and as
the only means of receiving from thence any part
of their treasure, departed lo far from the ulual
rigour of its maxims as to open the trade with
Peru to her allies the French. The merchants ot
St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted the pri-
vilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in it
with vigour, and carried it on upon principles very
diffirent from those of the Spaniards. They sup-
plied Peru with European commodities at a mode-
rate price, and not in stinted quantity. The goods
which they imported were conveyed to every pro-
vince of Spanill America, in such abundance a
had never been known in ay former period. II

tli'

this interiourfc.had been continued, the epprtation B o o
of European commodities from Spain must have ..'
ceased, and the dependence of the colonies on the
mother-country have been at an end. The most 1713.
peremptory injunAions were therefore iffuedpro-
hibiting the admifflon of foreign vessels into any
port of Peru or Chili , and a Spanilhi fq.udron
was employed to clear the South Sea of intruders,
whose aid was no longer necessary.

BUT though, on the cefation of the war, which by checking

was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht, Spain trade,
obtained relief from one encroachment on her
commercial system, she was exposed to another,
which he deemed hardly less pernicious. As an
inducement that might prevail with Queen Anne
to conclude a peace, which France and Spain de-
fired with equal ardour, Philip V. not only con-
veyed to Great Britain the A.iento, or contraEt for particularly
supplying the Spanish colonies with negroes, which JiAffie^to
had formerly been enjoyed by France, hut granted company.
it the more extraordinary privilege of fending an-
nually to the fair of Porto-bello, a hip of five
hundred tons, laden with European commodities.
In consequence of this, British facories were efta-
blifhed at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Bue-
nos Ayres, and other Spanifl settlements. The
veil with which Spain had hitherto covered the
slate and tranfadions of her colonies was removed.

k Frezier Voy. 256. B. UlloaRetab. ii. o,, &c. Alcedo
y fHcrrera. Avifo, &c. 236.

The

1 o K The agents of a rival iation, residing in the towns

VIII.
-.y- ..j of most extensive trade, and of chief reforr, had

the best opportunities-of becoming acquainted with
:the interior condition of the American provinces,
of observing their stated and occasional wants, and
of knowing what commodiries might be'imported
into them with the greatest advantage. In confe-
quence of information so authentic and expedi-
tious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other Eng-
lifh colonies who traded to the Spanish main, were
enabled to assort and proportion their cargoes b
exactly to the demands of the market, that the
contraband commerce was carried on with a faci-
lity, and to an extent unknown in any former pe-
riod. This, however, was not the most fatal conle-
quence of the Afiento to the trade of Spain. The
agents of the British South-Sea company, under
cover of the importation which they were aurho-
rifed to make by the ship sent annually to Porto-
bello, poured in their commodities on the Spanifl
continent, without limitation or reflraint. Instead
of a hip of five hundred tons, as stipulated in the
treaty, they usually employed one which exceeded
nine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three inaller veflels, which,
mooring in ome neighbouring creek, supplied her
clandeflinely with fresh bales of goods, to replace
filch as were fold. The infpecors of the fair, and
officers of the revenue, gained' by exorbitant pre-
sents, connived at the fraud '. Thus, partly by

' see NOTE LVI.

the operations of the company, and partly by the B o o K
aEtivity of private interlopers, almost the whole -
trade of Spanish America was ingroffed by so-
reigners. The immense commerce of the Ga-
leons, formerly the pride of Spain, and the envy
of other nations, funk to nothing, and the fqua- 1737.
dron itself reduced from fifteen thousand to two
thousand tons m, served hardly any purpose but to
fetch home the royal revenue arising from the fifth
on silver.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, cuarda or-

tas employed

and felt so sensibly their pernicious effTets, it was for this pur-
impossible not to make ome effort to restrain
them. Her first expedient was to station sips of
force, under the appellation of Guarda, Costas, upon
the coats of those provinces, to which interlopers
inoft frequently resorted. As private interell con-
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded those
vcffels vigilant and active, some check was given
to the progress of the contraband trade, though in
(lominions so extensive, and so acceflible by sea, no
number of cruilers was fullicient to guard againrf
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption of
an intercourse, which had been carried on with so
Inuch facility, that the mrchants in the l3ritifi
colonies were accultomed to confdcr it almost as
an allowed branch of commerce, excited murmurs

' Alccdo y IIci-rcr, p. 5'). Canmomancs, i. 436.

;and

B ,0Io .K and complaints. These authorised, in some measure
a__i-» and rendered more intcrefing, by several unjufti.

fiable as of violence committed by the captains
of the Spanish Guarda Coltas, precipitated Great
J?39* Britain into a war with Spain; in consequence of

which the latter obtained a final release from the
Altiento, and was left at liberty to regulate the
commerce of her colonies, without being restrained
by any engagement with a foreign power.

The ueof As the formidable encroachments of the Eng.
regifler ships
introduced. lifh on their American trade, had discovered to

the Spaniards the vast consumption of European
goods in their colonies, and taught them the ad-
vantage of accommodating their importations to
the occasional demand of the various provinces,
they perceived the neceflfty of devising some me-
thod of supplying their colonies, different from
their ancient one, of fending thither periodical
fleets. That mode of communication had been
found not only to be uncertain, as the departure
of the Galeons and Flota was fometinies re-
tarded by various accidents, and often prevented
by the wars which raged in Europe; but long
experience had flewn it to be ill adapted to afford
America a regular and timely supply of what it
wanted. The scarcity of European goods in the
Spanilh settlements frequently became exceflive;
their price role to an enormous height; the vigi-
lant eye of mercantile attention did not fail to ob-
serve this favourable opportunity, an ample futpply

wits

was poured in by interlopers from the English, the B o i
French, and Dutch islands; and when the Galeons ~
at length arrived, they found the markets so glut-
ted by this illicit commerce, that there was no-de-
mand for the commodities with which they wece
loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain has per-
mitted a considerable part of her commerce with
America, to be carried on by regiser /hips. These
are fitted out, during the intervals between the stated
leafons when the Galeons and Flora fail, by mer-
chants in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence
from the council of the Indies, for which they pay
a very high premium, and are destined for those
ports in America where any extraordinary demand
is foreseen or expeted. By this expedient, such a
regular supply of the commodities, for which there
is the greatest demand, is conveyed to the American
market, that the interloper is no longer allured by
the fame profpest of exceflive gain, or the people
in the colonies urged by the fame necessity to engage
in the hazardous adventures of contraband trade.

IN proportion as experience manifeffted the ad- ThetMon

«*-  . , . ,. , , aboliflied.

vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the bi
number of register ships increased; and at length,
in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
laid aside. Fiom that period there has been no in-
tercourfc with Chili and Peru but by single ships,
dispatched from tme to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expeEt a profitable market

will

B K will open. These hips fail round Cape Horn, and
I__'-
- convey directly to the ports in the South Sea the pro-

duEtions and manufactures of Europe, for which the
people, fettled in those countries, were formerly
obliged to repair to Porto-bello or Panama. Thele
towns, as has been formerly obierved, muff gradually
decline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their prosperity. This disadvantage how-
ever is more than compensated, for the whole conti-
nent of South A merica receives supplies of European
commodities, with so much regularity, and in such
abundance, as must not only contribute greatly to the
happiness, but increase the population of all the co-
lonies fettled there. But as all the register ships def-
tined for the South Seas, must still take their de-
parture from Cadiz, and are obliged to return
thither , this branch of the American commerce,
even in its new and improved form, continues subjec
to the restraints of a species of monopoly, and feels
those pernicious effects of it, which I have already
described.

Schemes for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined to
commevnc, regulating the trade with its more flourishing colo-

nies, it has extended likewise to the reviving corn
merce in those settlements where it was ncglected,
or had decayed. Among the new taftes which
the people of Europe have acquired, in conlc-
quencc of importing the produions of thole coun-
trics which they conquered in America, that for

" a;mnpomancs, i, 1., ,,o. chool

chocolate

chocolate is one of the most universal. The use of n o o K

VIII.

this liquor made with a paste, formed of the nut, -
or almond of the cacao-tree, compounded with
various ingredients, the Spaniards first learned
from the Mexicans; and it has appeared to them,
and to the other European nations, so palatable,
io nourilhing, and so wholesome, that it has be-
come a commercial article of considerable import-
ance. The cacao-tree grows pontaneouly in fe-
veral parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the
best quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the
South Sea, are produced in the rich plains of
Caraccas, a province of 'Sierra Firme. In confc-
quence of this acknowledged superiority in the
quality of cacao in that province, and its commu-
nication with the Atlantic, which facilitates the
conveyance to Europe, the culture of the cacao
there is more extensive than in any diftrit of Ame-
rica. But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their
settlements in the fnall islands of Curazoa and
Buen-Ayre, to the coafl of Caraccas, gradually
i;agroffed the greatclf part of the cacao trade.
The traffic with the mother-country for this va-
luable commodity cealicd alnmoft entirely; and such
was the lupine negligence of the Spaniards, or the
defets of their comlmercial arrangements, that
they were obliged to receive from the hands of
foreigners this production of their own colonies, at
an exorbitant price. In order to remedy an evil hy ennblil

ing tie corn-

no lcs dtlilgraceill, than pernicious to his lubjcls, paniy oti c.
'lilip \'. in the year 172 , ranted to a body of '"''CA'

merchants,

o 0' o K rfirHtnts , an excluflve right to the commerce

i with Cataccas and umana, on condition of their
empYoying, at their own expence, a sufficient
numbe' of armed veflls to clear the oast of in-
terlopers. This society, distinguished sometimes
by'r hename of the Company of Guipufcoa, from
the province of Spain in which it is eflablifhed,
and sometimes by that of the Company of Carac-
cas, from the diftriEt of America to which it trades,
has carried on its. operations with such vigour and
success, that Spain has recovered an important
branch of commerce, which he had uffered to
be wrested from her, and is plentifully supplied
with an article of extensive consumption at a mo-
derate price. Not only the parent state, but the
colony of Caraccas, has derived great advantages
from this institution; for although, at the first
aspet, it may appear to be one of those monopo.
lies, whose tendency is to check the spirit of in-
duftry, instead of calling it forth to new exertions,
it has been prevented from operating in this man-
ner, by several alutary regulations, framed upon
foresight of. fich bad effects, and of purpose to
obviate them. The planters in the Caraccas are
not left to depend entirely on the company, either
for the importation of European commodities, or
the sale of their own produtions. The inhabi-
tants of the Canary islands have the privilege of
fending thither annually a register hip of confider-
able burden; and from Vera Cruz in New Spain,
a free trade is permitted in every port compre-

7 hcnded

hended in the charter of the company. In confe- B o o K
quence of this, there is such a competition, that ,"
both with refpedL to what the colonies purchase,
and what they fill, the price feeins to be fixed at
its natural and equitable rate. The company has
not the power of rairing the former, or of degrading
the latter at pleasure; and accordingly, since it
was established, the increase of culture, of popu-
lation, and of live stock, in the province of Carac-
cas, has been very considerable .

BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any Enlarge-

system which time has rendered venerable, and as it commercial
is still more slowly that commerce can be diverted Spain.
from the channel in which it has long been accustom-
ed to flow; Philip V. in his new regulations con-
cerning the American trade, paid such deference to
the ancient maxim of Spain, concerning the limita-
tion of all importation from the New World to one
harbour, as to oblige both the register ships which
returned from Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan
Company from Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes
in the port of Cadiz. Since his reign, lcntiinents
more liberal and enlarged begin to spread in Spain.
The spirit of philolbphical inquiry, which it is the
glory of the present age to have turned from fri-
volous or abftrule fpcculations, to the business and
affairs of men, has extended its inifience beyond
the Pyrenees. In the refarches of ingenious

o See NOTE LXVII.
VOL. III. Z authors,

B 0 o K authors, concerning the police or commerce of

VIi.
.,.-yA.. nations, the errors and defects of the Spanish

system with respect to both met every eye, and
have not only been exposed with severity, but are
held up as a warning to other states. The Spa-
niards, stung with the reproaches of these authors,
or convinced by their arguments, and admonished
by several enlightened writers of their own coun-
try, seem at length to have discovered the de-
truative tendency of those narrow maxims, which,
by cramping commerce in all its operations, have
so long retarded its progress. It is to the monarch
now on the throne, that Spain is indebted for the
sirs public regulation formed in consequence of
such enlarged ideas.

i£lablifh- WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her an.
ment of re. n
guar packet cient maxims concerning her commerce with

America, she was so much afraid of opening any
channel, by which an illicit trade might find ad-
mission into the colonies, that ihe almost hut her-
felfout from any intercourse with them, but that
which was carried on by her annual fleets. There
was no cftablifiment for a regular communication
of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements.
From the want of this necessary institution, the
operations of the state, as well as the business of
individuals, were retarded or conducted unflil-
fully, and Spain often received from foreigners her
frlt information with refpec to very interesting

1. i events

events in her own colonies. But though this de- B o o K
fe6 in police was sensibly felt, and the remedy for v
it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanish monarchs guarded the exclusive trade, re-
firained them from applying it. At length
Charles III. surmounted thole considerations which
had deterred his predecessors, and in the year 1764
appointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the
first day of each month, from Corugna to the
Havanna or Porto-Rico. From thence letters are
conveyed in smaller vessels to Vera Cruz and
Porto-bello, and tranfmnitced by post through the
kingdoms of Tierra Firmn, Granada, Peru, and
New Spain. With no less regularity packet-boats
fail once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the
accommodation of the provinces to the east of the
Andes. Thus provision is made for a speedy and
certain circulation of intelligence throughout the
valt dominions of Spain, from which equal advan-
tages muf redound to the political and mercantile
interest of the kingdom P. With this new arrange-
ment, a scheme of extending commerce has been
more immediately connected. Each of the packet-
boats, which are vessels of bome considerable bur-
den, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
commodities as are the product of Spain, and mot
in demand in the ports whither they are bound.
In return for there they may bring home to Co-

r Ponz Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. i.

Z 2 rugn;

B O O K rugna an equal quantity of American productionsq

. This may be confielred as the first relaxations of

those rigid laws, which confined the trade with the
New World to a single port, and the firll attempt
to admit thl reft of the kingdom to ibme share
in it.

Fre traric IT was soon followed by one more decisive. In
perllmI to

t
cve-ralpro- the year 1765, Chales III. laid open the trad to

the windward iilands, Cba, ] lilpanioia, 'ort,)-
lRico, Margarita., and Trini.ad, to hlis fubjrt.s in
ever province of Spain. lie permitted them to
!iil from certaiii purts in each province, which arc
Ipccicd in the ecJit, at any lfafon, and with .hat-
tvcr cargo they ciLc:nced moll proper, without any
other w'vrrant thin a iimple clearance from the
cuitonl-htuil of the place whence they took thir
departure. 1 Ic releascd them fom the numerous
and oppressive duties impoled on goods exported
to America, and in place of the whole, substituted
a moderate tax of ix in the hundred on the com-
modities sent fiomn Spain. lie allowed them to
rturn cither to the lanm port, or to any other
wvhere they mih;t hope for a more advantageous
market, and there to enter the homeward cargo,
on payment of the ulual duties. This ample pri-
vilege, which at once brolke through all the fenlccs
which the jealous policy of Spain had been labour-

q A2pci.d. ii. a la EJLuc. Po, p.. 31.

111,

ing, for two centuries and a half, to throw round its B o o
commercial intercourse with the New World, was
soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the pro-
vinces of Yucatan and Campeachy r.

T-HE propriety of this innovation, which may be nrcficial

Itcels ot it.

confidered as te most liberal eflort of Spanish Ie-
giflation, hrs appeared son its effects. Prior to
the didc in favo:r of tlhe fee trade, Spain derived
hardly any benefit fromn irs neglcdlelc colonies in
Hlilianiola Porto-Ricu, Margarita, and Trinidad.
Its commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and
tilt of Yucatan and Campeachy was eng'ofild al-
mofl intirely by interlopers. But as soon as a ge-
neral liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
course with those provinces revived, and has gone
on with a rapidity of progrefion, of which there
are few examples in the hiltory of nations. In lels
than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more
than tripled. Even in those iettlements where,
from the languiflhing late of indultry, greater es-
forts were requisite to ref-ore its ativity, their
commerce has been doubled. It is computed,
that fch a number of flips is already employed in
the siee trade, that lhe tonnae of thim 1'ar exceeds
that of the G(al-ons and Flota, at the mufl- fiourifi-
ing ecra of their conmmerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a tw imrchlants,
fllablilbed in a favourite port. They are iltuled
Ilrough every province o te kinduin; and by

t Append. ii. a a Edir. P'i'. 37. J4. 1

Z j openin;

Bo K opening a new market for their various produc-

'
-r-- tions and manufatures, must encourage and add

vivacity to the industry of the farmer and artificer.
Nor does the kingdom profit only by what it ex-
ports, it derives advantage likewise from what it
receives in return, and has the prospect of being
soon able to supply itfeif with several commodities
of extensive consumption, for which it fornerly
depended on foreigners. The consumption of
sugar in Spain is perhaps as great in proportion to
the number of its inhabitants, as that of any Eu-
ropean kingdom. But though pffitffed of coun-
tries in the New World, whose fbil and climate are
most proper for rearing the sugar-cane; though
the domestic culture of that valuable plant in the
kingdom of Granada was once considerable; uIch
has been the fatal tendency of ill-judged inii:.u-
tions in America, and such the pressure of impro-
per taxes in Europe, that Spain has lolt almost
entirely this branch of industry, which has enriched
other nations. This commodity, which has now
become an article of primary necessity in Europe,
the Spaniards were obliged to purchase of foreign-
ers, and had the mortification to fee their coun-
try drained annually of great ums on that ac-
count . But if that spirit, which the per-mifion
of free trade has put in motion, hall persevere in
its efforts with the fame vigour, the cultivation of
sugar in Cuba and Porto-Rico may increase so
much, that in a few years, it is probable, that

' Uztariz, c. 9,t

their

their growth of sugars may be equal to the demand B o° K
of the kingdom. V

SPAIN has been induced, by her experience of the Free trade

permitted

beneficial consequences resulting from having re- betweentlhe
laxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient laws
with refpeEt to the commerce of the mother-coun-
try with the colonies, to permit a more liberal in-
tercourfe of one colony with another. By one of
the jealous maxims of the old system, all the pro-
vinces situated on the South Seas were prohibited,
under the most severe penalties, from holding any
communication with one another. Though each
of these yield peculiar productions, the reciprocal
exchange of which might have added to the happi-
ness of their refpeQive inhabitants, or have facili-
tated their progress in industry, so solicitous was
the Council of the Indies, to prevent their receiving
any supply of their wants, but by the periodical
fleets from Europe, that in order to guard againfl
this, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in
the southern provinces of New Spain, in Guatimala,
and the New Kingdom of Granada, from such a
correspondence with their fellow-fubjefts, as tended
manifestly to their mutual prosperity. Of all the nu-
merous reftridions devised by Spain for securing the
exclusive trade with her American settlements, none
perhaps was more illiberal, none seems to have been
more sensibly felt, or to have produced more hurt-
ful effcts. This grievance, coeval with the fettle-
ments of Spain in the countries situated on the Pa-

Z 4 cific

B 0 K cific Ocean, is at last redressed. In the year 1774,

c_-*- Cl Charles III. publifled an edict, granting to the four

vast provinces which I have mentioned, the privilege
of a free trade with each other . What may be the
effects of opening this communication between coun-
tries deffined by their situation for reciprocal inter-
course, cannot yet be determined by experience,
They can hardly fail of being beneficial and extensive.
The motives for granting this pcrmiflion are mani-
feftly no less laudable, than the principle on which it
is founded is liberal; and both discover the progrch
of a spirit in Spain, far elevated above the narrow
prejudices and maxims on which her system for re-
gulating the trade, and conduting the govern-
ment of her colonies, was originally founded.

*.,ew reu- AT the fame time that Spain has been intent
latinns con-
ceringthe on introducing regulations, suggestcd by more en-
of ;tile ol,- larged views of policy, into her system of Ane-
nies.

rican commerce, fle has not ben inattentive to
the interior government of her colonies. Here too
there was much room for reformation and improve-
ment, and Don Jofcph Galvez, who has now the
diretiion of the department for Indian affairs in
Spain, has enjoyed the bell- opportunilies, not only
of observing the dtcctJs and corruption in the po-
litical frame of the colonies, but of discovering
the sources of thole evils. After being employed

' Real Cedua penes me. Pontz \ ige de I.fpngn., vi.
Prologo. p. z. NO 'T E LXVIA,

li..v'n

Ieven years in the New World on an extraordinary B o o K

VIII.

mission, and with very extensive powers, as in- t-v--
fpeEtor-general of New Spain; after visiting in
person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora,
and California, and making several important al-
terations in the state of their police and revenue;
he began his minitry with a general reformation
of the tribunals of juflice in America. In confe- Reformation

of he couIts

quence of the progress of population and wealth ofjuaice.
in the colonies, the biifnefs of the Courts of Au-
dience has increased so much, that the number of
judges of which they were originally composed, has
been found inadequate to the growing labours and
duties of the office, and the salaries fettled upon them
have been deemed inferiorto thedignityofthe station.
As a remedy for both, he obtained a royal edicr,
etlablifhing an additional number of judges in each
court of Audience, with higher titles, and more
ample appointments"

To the fame intelligent miniiter Spain is in- Newdinri-

hution l

debted for a new distribution of government in its govern,
American pruvinces. Even since the eflablinlh-ments.
ment of a third viceroyalty in the New Kingdom
of Gran;;da, so great is the extent of the Spanifi
dominions in the New World, that several places
fubjedl to the jurililion of each viceroy, were at
fich an enormous liftance fromn the capitals in
which they refidec, that neither their attention, nor

Gazcta de Madrid, 9gth March, 1776.

their

B o K their authority, could reach so far. Some pro-

_-*--J. vinces subordinate to the viceroy of New Spain,

lay above two thoufind miles from Mexico. There
were countries subje&t to the viceroy of Peru till
farther from Lima. The people in those remote
dilrids could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit of
civil government. The opprefflon and insolence
of its inferior ministers they often feel, and rather
submit to these in fijence, than involve themselves
in the expence and trouble of resorting to the dif-
tant capitals, where alone they can find redreds

New vice- As a remedy for this, a fourth viceroyalty has
Aui. 1.76, been erected, to the jurisdiction of which are sub-
on Rio de la
Plata. jeed the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-

Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta Cruz die
la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza
and St. Juan. By this well-judged arrangement, two
advantages are gained. All the inconveniencies occa-
sioned by the remote situation of those provinces,
which had been long felt, and long complained of,
are, in a great measure, removed. The countries
most distant from Lima are separated from the vice-
royalty of Peru, and united under a superior, whole
feat of government at Buenos-Ayres, will be com-
modious and accessible. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive,
as mutt have put a final fop to the exportation of
commodities from Spain to her southern colonies,
may be checked more thoroughly, and with greater
facility, when the supreme magistrate, by his vi-
cinity to the places in which it is carried on, can

view

view its progress and effects with his own eyes. B o o t

VIII.

Don Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised to this * -
new dignity, with appointments equal to those of
the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with
the state and the interest of the countries over
which he is to preside, having served in them long,
and with diftintion. By this dismemberment,
succeeding that which took place at the erection of
the viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granada,
almost two-third parts of the territories, originally
subjet to the viceroys of Peru, are now lopped off
from their jurifdiftion.

THE limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain have Newgovemr

met inpro-

likewise been considerably circumscribed, and with vinces osSo.
no less propriety and discernment. Four of its nora, &
most remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, Califor-
nia, and New Navarre, have been formed into a
separate government. The Chevalier de Croix, who
is intrusted with this command, is not dignified with
the title of viceroy, nor does he enjoy the appoint-
ments belonging to that rank, but his jurifdiclion
is altogether independent on the viceroyalty of New
Spain. The erection of this last government seems
to have been suggested, not only by the consideration
of the remote situation of those provinces from Mex-
ico; but by attention to the late discoveries made
there, which I have mentioned . Countries con-
taining the richest mines of gold that have hitherto

x Book vii. p. 229,

beren

B o K been discovered in the New World, and which

viii.

probably may arise into fch importance, required
the immediate inlpefion of a governor, to whom
they should be specially committed. As every con-
fideration of duty, of interest, and of vanity, mull:
concur in promptinog tho!e new governors to encou-
rage such exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and
prosperity through the provinces committed to their
charge, the beneficial effe'ts of this arrangement
may be considerable. Many diflricts in America,
long deprefTed by the languor ;nd fceblene!s naturai
to provinces which compose he extremities of an
overgrown empire, may be animated with vigoci.;
and activity, when brought tf near the feat of power,
as to feel ics invigorating influence.

At-empts to SUCH, since the accession of the princes of te
rtorm do-
metlic po- House of Bourbon to the throne of Spain, has been
hey,

the progrels of their regulations, and the gradual
expansion of their views with rerpe't to the com-
merce and government of their American colonies.
Nor has their attention been so entirely engrofied
by what related to the more remote parts ol their
dominions, as to render them neglectful of what was
fill more important, the reformation of domeflic
errors and detects in policy. Fully linfible of the
causes to which the declenlion of Spain, from her
former prosperity, ought to be imputed ; they have
made it a great object of tleir policy, to revive a
ffpirit of industry among their fubIjt.s, and to give
luch extent and perfection to their map.ufaltiircsi,

thlit

that they may be able to supply the demands of B o o K
America from their own flock, and to exclude so- -
reigners from a branch of commerce which has been
Ib fatal to the kingdom. This they have endea-
voured to accomplifi, by a variety of ediLts issucd.
since the peace of Utrecht. They have granted
bauntics for the encouragement of tome branches
of industry ; they have lowered the taxes on others;
they have either entirely prohibited, or have loaded
with additional duties, such foreign manufactures
as come in competition with thir own; they have
instituted societies for the improvement of trade
and agriculture ; ti.y have planted colonies of hus-
bandmen in ome uncultivated diftrits of Spain,
and divided among them the wafle fields; they
have had recourse to every expedient, dcevied by
commercial wisdom, or commercial jealousy, for
reviving their own industry, and liicountenancing
tliat of other nations. Tiiefe, however, it is not
my province to explain, or to inquire into the- pro-
priety and effels. There is no effort of legislation
more arduous, no experiment in policy more n-
certain, than an attempt to revive the ipirit of in-
duftry where it has declined, or to iirJuce it
where it is unknown. Nations, already pofcflcd
of extensive commerce, enter into competition with
Iich advantages, c,.rived from the larc capitals
and extenlive credit of their rncrcha:nts, the dexte-
rity of their manufacturers, the alcrtncls acquircd
by habit in every doeartmclnt of business, that the
Itate which ims at rivalling, or flpplainting them,

2 Itmult

B o o K muaf expec& to itruggle with many difficulties, and
S..i__ be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of

producive industry, now in Spain, be compared
with that of the kingdom under the last listless
monarchs of the Auitrian line, its progress must
appear considerable, and is sufficient to alarm the
jealousy, and to call forth the most vigorous es-
forts, of the nations now in possession of the lucra-
tive trade which the Spaniards aim at wresting from
them. One circumstance may render those exer-
tioiis of Spain an objec of more serious attention
to the other European powers. They are not to be
ascribed wholly to the influence of the crown and
its ministers. The sentiments and spirit of the
people seem to second the provident care of their
monarchs, and to give it greater effeEt. The na-
tion has adopted more liberal ideas, not only with
refpe& to commerce, but domeffic policy. In all
the later Spanish writers, defets in the arrange-
ments of their country concerning both are ac-
knowledged, and remedies proposed, which igno-
rance rendered their ancestors incapable of discern-
ing, and pride would not have allowed them to
confess . But after all that the Spaniards have
done, much remains to do. Many pernicious infii-
tutions and abuses, deeply incorporated with the
system of internal policy and taxation, which has
been long established in Spain, must be abolished,
before industry and manufactures can recover an
extensive aivity.

xSee NOTE LXIX.

STILL.;

STILL, however, the commercial regulations of B o o K
Spain with refpec to her colonies, are too rigid -

Contraband

and systematical to be carried into complete exe- trade.
cution. The legislature that loads trade with im-
positions too heavy, or fetters it by refiritions too
ievere, defeats its own intention; and is only mul-
tiplying the inducements to violate its statutes,
and proposing an high premium to encourage
illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in Europe
and America, being circumscribed in their mutual
intercourse by the jealousy of the crown, or
oppressed by its exactions, have their invention
continually on the firetch how to elude its edits.
The vigilance and ingenuity of private interest dif-
cover means of effeting this, which public wis-
dom cannot foresee, nor public authority prevent.
This spirit, counteracting that of the laws, per-
vades the commerce of Spain with America in all
its branches; and from the highest departments in
government, descends to the lowest. The very of-
ficers appointed to check contraband trade, are
often employed as instruments in carrying it on;
and the boards instituted to restrain and punish it,
are the channels through which it flows. The
king is supposed, by the most intelligent Spanilh
writers, to be defrauded by various artifices, of
more than one half of the revenue which he ought
to receive from America Y; and as long as it is the
interest of so many persons to screen those artifices

' Solorz. dc Ind. Jure, ii. lib. v.

from

B O O K from detection, the knowledge of them will never

VIII.
cv. reach the throne. " How many ordinances, fays

" Corita, how many instructions, how many let-
" ters from our sovereign, are sent in order to cor-
" re& abules, and how little are they observed,
· and what finall advantage is derived from them !

To me the old observation appears just, that

as where there are many physicians, and many
' medicines, there is a want of health where there

are many laws, and many judges, there is want
of justice. We have viceroys, presidents, go-
vernors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thou.
" ands of aluazils abt.und every where; but not-

· withitanding all there, public abulis continue to
i' multiply z." Time has increased the evils whjich
he lamented as early as the reign of Philip II. A
ipirit of corruption has infeced all the colonies ot
Spain in America. Men far removed from the
feat of government; impatient to acquire wealth,
that they may return speedily from what they are
apt to confider as a state of exile in a remote un-
healthful country; allured by opportunities too
tempting to be refilted, and teduced by the ex-
ample of thole around them ; find their fentiirents
of honour and of duty gradually relax. In private
life, they give themselves up to a diffblute luxury,
while in their public conduct they beconme unmind-
ful of what they owe to their blvcrcign and to thcic
country.

z MS. penes me.

BEroiih

BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish trade B o0 K

VIII.

in America, there remains one detached, but ii- Tradebe-
portant branch of it, to be mentioned. Soon after Swein Ne
his acceflion to the throne, Philip II. formed a hnril p
scheme of planting a colony in the Philippine
islands, which had been negleced since the time of
their discovery; and he accomplished it by means
of an armament fitted out from New Spain b. Ma- r564.
nila, in the island of Luconia, was the station
chosen for the capital of this new establishment.
From it an active commercial intercourse began
with the Chinese, and a considerable number of
that industrious people, allured by the prospect of
gain, fettled in the Philippine islands under the
Spanish protection. They supplied the colony so
amply with all the valuable productions and manu-
fadtures of the East, as enabled it to open a trade
with America, by a course of navigation, the longest
from land to land on our globe. In the infancy
of this trade, it was carried on with Callao, on
the coast of Peru; but experience having disco-
vered the impropriety of fixing upon that as the
port of communication with Manila, the staple
of the commerce between the east and weft was re-
moved from Callao to Acapulco, on the coall of
New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been brought
into a regular form. One or two hips depart an-
nually from Acapulco, which are permitted to carry

h Torquem. i. lib. v . c . 1.
VoL. TIT. A a out

o o K out silver to the amount of five hundred thousand
V_,_ pesos , but they have hardly any thing else of value

on board; in return for which, they bring back
spices, drugs, china, and japan wares, calicoes,
chintz, muslins, silks, and every precious article,
with which the benignity of the climate, or the in.
genuity of its people, has enabled the East to sup.
ply the reft of the world. For some time the mer-
chants of Peru were admitted to participate in this
traffic, and might fend annually a (hip to Acapulco,
to wait the arrival of the vessels from Manila, and
receive a proportional hare of the commodities
which they imported. At length, the Peruvians
were excluded from this trade by most rigorous
edicts, and all the commodities from the East re:
served solely for the consumption of New Spain.

IN consequence of this indulgence, the inhabi-

tants of that country enjoy advantages unknown
in the other Spanish colonies. The manufactures
of the East are not only more suited to a warm cli-
mate, and more showy than those of Europe, but
can be fold at a lower price; while, at the fame
time, the profits upon them are so considerable, as
to enrich all those who are employed, either in
bringing them from Manila, or vending them in
New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer and
feller concurred in favouring this branch of corn
merce, it has continued to extend in spite of regu

cRecop. lib. ix. c. 45. 1. 6.

Iltion

lations, concerted with the most anxious jealousy to B o o K
circumscribe it. Under cover of what the laws .---
permit to be imported, great quantities of India
goods are poured into the markets of New Spain ",
and when the flota arrives at Vera Cruz from
Europe, it often finds the wants of the people al-
ready supplied by cheaper and more acceptable com-
modities.

THERE is not, in the commercial arrangements

of Spain, any circumstance more inexplicable than
the permiflion of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its fun-
damental maxim of holding the colonies in perpe-
tual dependance on the mother-country, by pro-
hibiting any commercial intercourse that might
suggest to them the idea of receiving a supply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion must appear ill more extraordinary, from
confidering that Spain herself carries on no direct
trade with her settlements in the Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her American colonies,
which she denies to her fubjedts in Europe. It is
probable, that the colonists who originally took
poffeflion of the Philippines, having been ent out
from New Spain, begun this intercourse with a
country which they conidered, in ftme .easure,
as their parent state, before the court of Madrid
was aware of its consequences, or could etablifl

d See NOTE LXX.

A a 2 regulations

B o o K regulations in order to prevent it. Many remon.

_ Ly-j firances have been presented against this trade, as

detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that treasure which
ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending to
give rife to a spirit of independence in the colonies,
and to encourage innumerable frauds, against which
it is impoflible to guard, in tranlfations so far re-
moved from the infpetion of government. But
as it requires no flight effort of political wifdoin
and vigour to abolish any practice which numbers
are intre;teed in upporting, and to which time has
added the fanfion of its authority, the commerce
between New Spain and Manila eems to be as con-
fiderable as ever, and may be confidered as one
chief cause of the elegance and splendor confpi-
cuous in this part of the Spanish dominions.

I'uhic re.' BUT notwithstanding this general corruption in
Anfica.' the colonies of Spain, and the diminution of the

income belonging to the public, occasioned by the
illicit importations made by foreigners, as well as
by the various frauds of which the colonists then-
selves are guilty in their commerce with the parent
Itate, the Spanilh monarchs receive a very confi-
derable revenue from their American dominions.
This arises from taxes of various kinds, which
may be divided into three capital branches. The
first contains what is paid to the king, as fove-
reign, or superior lord of the New World: to this
clals belongs the duty on the gold and filvcr railed

frol')

from the mines, and the tribute exacted from the B o o K

VIll.

Indians; the former is termed by the Spaniards the L -.
right of signiory, the latter is the duty of va/irlage.
The second branch comprehends the numerous du-
ties upon commerce, which accompany and oppress
it in every ftep of its progress, from the greatest
tranfations of the wholesale merchant, to the petty
traffic of the vender by retail, The third includes
what accrues to the king, as head, of the church
and adminiarator of ecclesiastical funds in the New
World. In consequence of this he receives the first
fruits, annates, spoils, and other spiritual revenues,
levied by the apostolic chamber in Europe; and is
entitled, likewise, to the profit arising from the sale
of the bull of Cruzado. This bull, which is pub-
lifhed every two years, contains, an absolution from
past offences by the pope, and, among other immu-
nities, a permission to eat several kinds of prohibited
food, during Lent, and on meagre days. The monks
employed in diiperfing those bulls, extol their vir-
tues with all the fervour of interested eloquence;
the people, ignorant and credulous, liften with im-
plicit aent; nd every person in the Spanish co-
lonies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, pur-
chafes a bull, which is deemed essential to his fal,
vation, at the rate let upon it by government ,

WHAT may be the amount of those various funds, Its amount.
it is almost impossible to determine with preci-

Sec NOTE LXXI.

A a 3 sion;

B O O K sion. The extent of the Spanilh dominions in

.--- America, the jealousy of government, which ren-

ders them inaccessible to foreigners, the mysterious
silence which the Spaniards are accuflomed to ob-
serve with refpe t the interior state of their co-
lonies, combine in covering this subjea with a
veil which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate than it is cu-
rious, has lately been published of the royal re-
venue in New Spain, from which we may form
some idea with refped to what is collected in the
other provinces. According to that account, the
crown does not receive from all the departments of
taxation in New Spain above a million of our
mioney, from which one half must be deduced
as the expence of the provincial efiablifhment.
Peru, it is probable, yields a frnu not inferior tQ
this ;' and if we suppose that all the other regions
of America, including the islands, furnifl a third
Thare of equal value, we shall not perhaps be far
wide fiom the truth, if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain, raised in America, does
iot exceed a million and a half sterling. This
falls far short of the immense tums to which sup-
positions, founded upon conjecure, have raised
the Spanish revenue in America g. It is remark-
'able, however, upon one account. Spain and Por-
tugal are the only European powers, who derive
a direc' revenue from their colonies. All the ad-

f See NOTE LXXII. g See NOTE LXXIII.

vantage

vantage that accrues to other nations, from their B ° 1°
American dominions, arises from the exclusive ie'v_
enjoyment of their trade; but beside this, Spain
has brought her colonies to contribute towards in-
creating the power of the state; and in return for
protection, to bear a proportional share of the com-
mon burden.

ACCORDINGLY, the fim which I. have computed

to be the amount of the Spanilh revenue from
America, arises wholly from the taxes colleEted
there, and is far from being the whole of what ac-
crues to the king from.his dominions in the New
World. The heavy duties imposed on the com-
modities exported from Spain to America h, as well
as what is paid by those which she fends home in
return; the tax upon the negroe-flaves, with which
Africa supplies the New World, together with fe-
veral smaller branches of finance, bring large fums
into the treasury, the precise extent of which I can-
not pretend to ascertain.

BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from Expenc of

adminitnra-

America be great, the expence of administration tion.
in her colonies bears proportion to it. In every
department, even of her domestic police and
finances, Spain has adopted a system more com-
plex, and more encumbered with a variety of tri-
bunals, and a multitude of officers, than that of

i See NOTE LXXIV.

A a 4 any

B K any European nation, in which the sovereign po:.

VII.
_> fetffes fuoh extensive power. From the jealous spirit

with which Spain watches over her American lettle-
ments, and her endeavours to guard against fraud
in provinces so remote from inspection; boards
and officers have been multiplied there with ill
more anxious attention. In a country where the
expence of living is great, the salaries allotted to
every perlon in public office must be high, and
mut load the revenue with an immense burden.
The parade of government greatly augments the
weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
the Newv Kingdom of Granada, as reprelentativcs
of the king's person, among people fond of often-
tation, maintain all the slate and dignity of royalty.
Their courts are formed upon the model of that
at Madrid, with horle and foot guards, a houle-
hold regularly established, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, displaying such pomp, as
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
rity. All the expence incurred by fuplporting the
external and permanent order of government is
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have bLfides
peculiar appointments suited to their exalted lla-
tion. The fiaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
tremely moderate ; that of the viceroy of Peru is
only thirty thousand ducats ; and that of the viceroy
of Mexico, twenty thousand ducats . Of late, they
have been raised to forty thouland.

Recop. lib. iii. tit. iii. c. 72.

TIlESr

THESE salarics, however, confritute but a small B o

part of the revenue enjoyed by the viceroys. The
cxercife of an absolute authority extending to every
department of government, and the power of dif-
poring of many lucrative offices, aflbrd them innu-
merable opportunities of accumulating wealth. To
these, which may be confidered as legal and allowed
emoluments, large fiurns are often added by ex-
actions, which in countries lo far removed from
the feat of government, it is not easy to discover,
and impossible to restrain. By honopolizing some
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the fraus of nerchants,
a viceroy may raise such an annual revenue, as no
fuibjc& of any European monarch enjoys k. From
the ingle article of presents made to him on the
anniversary of his Name-day (which is always ob-
lervcd as an high festival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanish faying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Sensible of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
furmerly oblerved, grant a commillion to their
viceroys only for a few years. This circe mfiance,
however, renders them often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they
labour to improve every moment of power which
they know is haflening salt to a period ; and flort

k Sec NOTE LXV.

as

B o o K as its duration is, it usually affords sufficient time
_i.1-u^ for repairing a hattered fortune, or for creating a

new one. But even in situations so trying to hu-
man frailty, there are inltances of virtue that re.
mains unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis
de Croix finished the term of his viceroyalty in
New Spain with unsuspected integrity; and in-
stead of bringing home exorbitant wealth, returned
with the admiration and applause of a grate.
ful people, whom his government had renderel
happy.

NOTES
-S

N T ES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

10

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATI ONS.

NOTE I. p. .
IN tracing the progress of the Spanilh arms in New

Spain, we have followed Cortez himfclf as our mol

certain guide. His difplatches to the emperor contain a
ninutc account of his operations. But the unlettered
ronqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpec to them, and other
rranfaEions in Peru, is derived however from contemporary
and refpetable authors.

THE most early account of Pizarro's tranfations in

Peru, was publilhcd by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary.
It is a simple inla(ldorled narrative, carried down no far-
ther than the death of Atallualpa, in 1533 ; for the author
returned to Spain in I534, and soon after he landed,
printed at Seville his flort Hiflory of the Conquell of
'eru, addresscd to the emperor.

DON PEDRO SANCIIO, an ofliccr who fcrvcd under

Pizarro, drew up) an ;ccount of his exlpedition, vwlilch was
translatcd into Italan by Ranufio, and inflrtcd in llis va-
tlable collction, but has never been publilledl in its ori-
girnal langoage. Sancho returned to Spain at the fanie
iiin with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both there
uii.liors relate concerning tle progress and operations of

Pizarro;

Pizarro; but the residence of the Spaniards in Peru had
been so fiort, at the time when they left it, and their in-
tercourfe with the natives so slender, that their knowledge
of the Peruvian manners and customs is very imperfet.

THE next contemporary hiltorian is Pedro Cieza de

Leon, who published his Cronica del Peru, at Seville, in
1553. If he had finiffed all that he proposes in the ge-
neral division of his work, it would have been the molt
complete history which had been published of any region
in the New World. He was well qualified to execute i,
having served during seventeen years in America, and
having visited in person most of the provinces concerning
which he had occasion to write. But only the firit part
of his Chronicle has been printed. It contains a defcrip-
tion of Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with
an account of the inltitutions and customs of the natives,
and is written with so little art, and such an apparent re-
gard for truth, that one muff regret the loss of the other
parts of his work.

THIS loss is amply supplied by Don Augulline Zarat',

who published, in 1555, his Hiftoria del Defcubrimiento
y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarate was a mall
of rank and education, and employed in Peru as comp-
troller-general of the public revenue. His history, whc-
ther we attend to its matter or composition, is a book of
considerable merit; as lie had opportunity to be well in-
formed, and seems to have been inquisitive with refpel to
the manners and transaCtions of the Peruvians, great credit
is due to his testimony.

DON DIEGO FERNANDEZ published his Hifloria del

Peru, in 1571. His sole object is to relate the dilenfions
and civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he

served

served in a public tation in Peru, and was well acquainted
both with the country, and with the principal aors in
those singular scenes which lie describes, as he possessed
found understanding, and great impartiality, his work may
be ranked among those of the historians most distinguished
for their indultry in research, or their capacity in judging
with refpe6 to the events which they relate.

THE last author who can be reckoned among the con-

temporary hitforians of the conquest of Peru, is Garci-
lasso de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part of his
work, intitled, Commentarios Reales del Origen de los Incas
Reies del Peru, was not published sooner than the year
1609, feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the
last emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and was the
son of an officer of diftincion among the Spanifli con-
querors, by a Coya, or lady of the royal race, on account
of which he always took the name of Inca; as he was
matter of the language spoken by the Incas, and ac-
quainted with the traditions of his countrymen, his au-
thority is rated very high, and often placed above that of
all the other hiltorians. His work, however, is little
more than a commentary upon the Spanish writers of the
Peruvian story, and composed of quotations taken from
the authors whom I have mentioned. This is the idea
which he himsel gives of it, Lib. i. c. Io. Nor is it in
the account of fads only that he follows them fcrvilely.
Even in explaining the institutions and rites of his an-
ceftors, his information seems not to be more perfec than
theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is almost the fame
with that of Acofla. He produces no fpecilncn of Peru-
vian poetry, but that wretched one which he borrows
from Bias Valera, an early miflionary, whose memoirs
have never been published. Lib. ii. c. 15. As for com-
position, arrangement, or a capacity of diflinguiliing be-

tween

tween what is fabulous, what is probable, and what s
true, one searches for them in vain in the commentaries
of the Inca. His work, however, notwithltanding its
great defects, is not altogether destitute of fe. Some
traditions which he received from his countrymen are
preserved in it. His knowledge of the Peruvian language
las enabled him to correct ome errors of the Spanifl
writers, and he has inserted in it some curious sacs, taken
from authors whose works were never published, and are
now lun.

NOTE II. p. 7.

NE may form an idea both of the hardships which
they endured, and of the sickliness of the regions

which they visited, from the extraordinary mortality
that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried out 112 nmen,
Almagro 70. In less than nine months 30 of these dicd.
Few fell by the sword ; mos of them were cut off by dil-
cafes. Xerez, p. 180.

NOTE III. p. I.
Tr HIS ifand, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfort-

able by the unwholefomenefs of its climate, its im-

penetrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude. of infers and reptiles, that it is lfldom any ioftcr
epithet than that of iflfrnlal is employed in describing it.
The fun is almofi never ifee there, and throughout the
year it hardly ever ceales to rain. Dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3.
Dalnpier touched at this illand in the year 685; and his
account of the cilinite is not nlore favourable. Vol. i.
p. 172. I-Ic, during his cruise on the coafl, visited moll
of te places where Pizarro landed, and his description of
them throws light on the narrations of the early Spanill
liiltorians.

nI NC)OT F.

NOTE IV. p. 29.

Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spanish
settlements on the continent. When Cortes began

his expedition in the year 1518, though his armament was
more considerable than that of Pizarro, and composed of
persons superior in rank to thole who invaded Peru, he
could procure no more than sixteen horses.

NOTE V. p. 30.
IN the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George Juan,

travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame route

which Pizarro took. From the description of their jour-
ney, one may form an idea of the difficulty of his march.
The sandy plains between St. Michael de Pleura and Mo-
tupe extend 90 miles, without water, without a tree, a
plant, or any green thing, on a dreary firetch of burning
sand. Voyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE VI. p. 36.
sTH 1I S extravagant and unseasonable discourse of Val-

verde has been censured by all hiltorians, and with

justice. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigotted monk, nowise resembling the good Olnedo,
who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his address to
Atahualpa mull not be charged wholly upon him. His
harangue is evidently a translation, or paraphrase of that
form, concerted by a junto of Spanish divines and lawyers
in the year 509, fur explaiining the right of their king to
the sovereignty of the New World, and for direcing the
officers enlptoyvd in America how they lhould take polfcfl
sion of any new cmltrv. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The

VOL. III. 1I b sentiments

sentiments contained in Valvcrde's harangue nuft not then
be imputed to tile bigotted imbecility of a particular man,
but to that of the age. But Goniara and Benzoni relate
one circumllance concerning Valverde, which, if authein-
tic, renders .hlim an object, not of cointempt only, uit
of horror. They allert, that during tlic whole ac(ion,
Valverde continued to excite tile 'iTklics to laughlter,
calling to tliLem to ltrike the enemy, nut witl the edlc,
but with the points of their swords. Goin. Cron. c. 1 I.
Benz. Hillor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such cheliou
was very different from that of tlhe Roman Catholic clcrg
in other parts of America, where thcy unitiformly xe-rtcd
their ilnluence to protecti the Indians, and to moderate
the ferocity of their countr)ymen.

N OTE VII. p. 37
r'WO different systems have been tormed concerning

the conduct of Atahualpa. The Spalilh writer.s, i

order to jultify tile violence of their countrymen, 'on-
tend, that all the Inca's profellions of 'riendfhip vere
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxanalca, was to cut off him and!
his followers at one blow; tliat for this pl)-pole lie ad-
va:ced with fiuclh a nullerous body of attendants, wlo
had arms concealed under their garmentts to execute tlii,
fchleme. This is tile account giveln by Xerez and Zaratc,
and adopted by Herrera. But if it liad been the plan ou
the Inca to dellioy tile Spaniards, one can hiardly ilial-
gine that he would have permitted thiemi to mlarch iilm
molelled through tle deicrt of Motupe, or have neglctcidl
to defend the palles in the mcnmitaiins, where they umiglii
have been attacked with o Imuci advantage. If' te 'c-
ritvians Inarched to Caxanlalca witli an intention lo l,11

ulnl'

upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable, that of so great a
body of men, prepared for ation, not one hould attempt
to make refilalnce, but all tamely susser themselves to be
butchered b an enemy whom they were armed to attack.
Atallualpa's mode of advancing to tile interview, has the
aspet of a peaceable proceflion, not of a military enter-
prize. HIe himnfelf and his followers \vere, in their habits
of ceremony, preceded, as on dlays of folcinnity, by un-
armed harbingcrs. Though rde nations are frequently
ctinning and false, yet, if a chenie of deception and
treachery must be imputed either to a monarch, that had
no great reason to be alarmed at a visit from firangers
who fIolicitcd admitfionl into his presence as friends, or to
an adventurer so daring, and so little fcrupuious as Pizarro,
one cannot hesitate in determinig where to fix the pre-
fumption of guilt. Even anidil the endeavours of the
Spanili writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro,
one plainly perceives, that it was his intention, as well as
his interest, to seize the Inca, and that lie had taken mea-
furcs for that purpose previous to any suspicion of that
monarch's designs.

GARCILASSO DE LA VE(;A, extremely solicitous to

vindicatLe his cottntryinmei, the Peruiviiiis, fromn the crim
,f having concerted the delrution of Pizarro and hlis fol-
luwcrs, and no lefi; afralid to charge the Spaniards with
iipropr condu(itl tovards tlie Ica, lias frlamed anotIler
fIvflein. He relates, that a inian of majestic f orl., witl
a long beard, and garments reacling to tle groirlnd, lhav-
ing appeared in vision to Vi acoclia, tle eiglitli I:, ;ill
dclaireld, tlat lie was a child of tile Siin, tlat mnon;arcl
Iitilt a temple in honour of this pcrfoln, and creccid a1
image of hiin, referblinga as 1nacrl f

;s pjlil)le tile fiiigulai

ntril iln wvich lie ad exhibitedl himself to his view. In
tis tetll)le, divine hlonours were paid to hliti, I.v the

B l 2} . : it.;)tt

name of Viracocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22.
When the Spaniards first appeared in Peru, the length of
their beards, and the dress they wore, tfruck every per-
son so much with their likeness to the image of Vira-
cocha, that they supposed them to be children of the
Sun, who had descended from heaven to earth. All con-
cluded, that the fatal period of the Peruvian empire was
now approaching, and that the throne would be occupied
by new possessors. Atahualpa himself, confidering the
Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was so far from en-
tertaining any thoughts of refilling them, that he deter-
mined to yield implicit obedience to their commands.
From those sentiments flowed his profeflions of love and
repet. To those were owing the cordial reception of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizayro in his camp, and the fib-
Ililive reverence with which he himnfllf advanced to visit
the Spanifl general in his quarters; but from the gross
ignorance of Philipillo, the interpreter, the declaration of
the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were so ill explained,
that by their mutual inability to comprehend each other's
intentions, the fatal encounter at Caxanalca, with all its
dreadful conlfcqi.lenccs, was occasioned.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperlitior,

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be
found either in Xcrez, or Sancho, or Zarate, previou;
to the interview at Caxamalca ; and yet the two former
lerved under Pizarro at that time, and the latter visitcd
Peru soon after the conquell. If either the Ifica liinlclf,
or his mcffengers, had addresscd the Spaniards in the
words which Garcilaffo puts in their mouths, they mul!
have been firuck with fitch fiminiflve dcclarations ; and
they would certainly have availed thcmfelvcs of tlhen to
accomplish their own designs witl greater facility. Gar-
rilallb hinifclf, though Iis narrative of the intcrcourfe bc-

t\Vlcl

tween the Inca and Spaniards, preceding the rencounter at
Caxamalca, is founded on the supposition of his believing
them to be,Viracochas, or divine beings, p. ii. lib. i.
c. 17, &c. yet with his usual inattention and inaccuracy
he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians did not
recollea the resemblance between them and the god Vira-
cocha, until the fatal disasters fbfeqluent to the defeat
at Caxamalca, and then only began to call them Vira-
cochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is confirmed by Her-
rera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 2. Inl many different parts of
America, if we may believe the Spanish writers, their
countrymen were confidered as divine beings who had de-
scended from Heaven. But in this intanje, as in many
which occur in the intercourse between nations whole
progrcfs in refinement is very uneqtal, the ideas of thole
who used the exprefliun were different fromn the ideas of
those who heard it. For such is the idiom of the Indian
languages, or such is the simplicity of tlofe who speak
them, that when they fee any thing with which they were
formerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know
the origin; they fay, that it came down from Heaven.
Nugnez. Ram. iii. 327, C.

THE account which I have given of the sentiments and

proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more natu-
ral and consistent than either of the two preceding, and is
better supported by the fans related by the contemporary
hitforians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thousand Peru-

vians were killed. Sancho males the number of the {lain
fix or seven thousand. Rnam. iii. 274, D. By Gar-
cilaffo's account, five thousand were maflacrcd. P. ii.
lib. i. c, 25. The number which I have mentioned,

B b 3 being

being the medium between the extremes, may probably
be nearest the truth.

NOTE VIII. p. 39.
N OTHING can be a more friking proof of tlis, than

that three Spaniards travelled from Caxanalca to

Cuzco. The distance between them is fix hundred mniles.
In every place throughout this great extent of country,
they were treated with all the honours which the Peru-
vians paid to their sovereigns, and even to their divinities.
Under pretext of amassing what was wanting for the ran-
foin of the Inca, they demanded the plates of gold willi
which the walls of the Temple of te Sun in Cuzco wecl
adorned; and though the priefls were unwilling to alienate
those sacred ornaments, and the people refuied to viol-lic
the shrine of their God, the three Spaniards, with their
own hands, robbed tile Temple of part of this valuable
treasure; and such was the reverence of tile natives it;
their persons, that though they beheld this a of facn-
Iege with aflonifhment, they did not attempt to prevent r
diullrb the commilfion of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho
ap. Ramus. iii. 375, D.

NOTE IX. p. 52.
A CORD I N G to Hlerrera, tle fpil of CuZco, ailcr

setting apart the king's.fy/,, was fivided aollong 40

pcrfons. L:,clh receiv\ed 4000 pcIbs. Tllis ailltnillts ti
1,920,000 pelos. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 3. But as thc ge-
ncral, and other olicers, were entitled to a llalre t,
greater tihan that of tli private 1meII, tll (liitl totall nil
have ri'fn mitchl be)'ond whlat I la\ve ilciltioltd. (;,
trira, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. Ifltisfy ttelltkflve

12 V'i;l

with asserting in general, that tle plunder of Cuzco was
of greater value than tile ransom of Atahualpa.

NOTE X. p. 54.
N O expedition in the New World was condudcd with

more perlevering courage than that of Alvarado, and

in none were greater hardlhips endured. Many of the
pcrfons engaged in it were, like their leader, veterans
who hlad lerved under Cortes, inured to all the rigour of
American war. Such of nmy readers as have not an op-
portullity of perusing the firiking dccription of their sus-
ferings by Zarate or Herrera, mna form some idea of the
uature of their march from the fea-coafl to Quito, by
consulting tle account which D. Ant. Ullua gives of his
own journey in I736, nearly in tlie fame route. Vov.
torn. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who pro-
ceded from Perto Vicjo, to Quito, by the ame road
which Alvarado took. lie compares his own journey
with that of the Spanifl leader, and by tile comparison,
gives a moit flriking idea of the boldnels and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through lo many obstacles.
Voyage du Peron, p. 28, &c.

NOTE XI. p. 55.

CCORDING to IIerrera, there was entered on ac-
count of the king, in gold, 155,300 pclos, aIId 5400

marks (eacli 8 ounces) of ilver, bides levcral vcltl:s and
ornaments some of gold, and others o silver; on account
of private perlbns, in gold 499,cco pcfbs, and 54,o00
viarks of lilvcr. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

B b 4 NOT E

NOTE XII. p. 65.
T H E Peruvians not only imitated the military arts of the

Spaniards, but had recourse to devices of their oxn.

As the cavalry were the chief object of their terror, they
endeavoured to render them incapable of ading, by means
of a long thong with a flone faflened to each end. This,
when thrown by a flilfuil hand, twifled about the horse
and its rider, and entangled them so as to obftruR their mo-
tions. Herrera mentions this as an invention of their own.
Dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. ii.
p. 176, this weapon is common among several barbarous
tribes towards the extremity of South America; and it is
more probable, that the Peruvians had observed the dex-
terity with which they used it in hunting, and on this oc-
cafion adopted it themselves. The Spaniards were con-
fiderably annoyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another inflance
of the ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention. By
turning a river out of its channel, they overflowed a valley,
in which a body of the enemy was porled, so suddenly, that
it was with the utmost difficulty the Spaniards made their
escape. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XIII. p. 85.
H ERRERA's account of Orellana's voyage is the

molf minute, and apparently the most accurate. It

was probably taken from the journal of Orellana himself.
But the dates are not diflintly marked. His navigation
down the Coca, or Napo, begun early in February 1541;
and he arrived at the mouth of the river on the 26th of
Augufl, having spent near fevcn months in the voyage.
M. dc la Condainine, in the year 1743, failed from
Cucnca to Para, a fettlcnient of the Portugnucef at the

14 mouth

tmolth of the river, a navigation much longer than that of
Orellana, in less than four months. Voyage, p. 79.
But the two adventurers were very differently provided
for the voyage. This hazardous undertaking, to which
ambition prompted Orellana, and to which the love of
fcicnce led M. de la Condamine, was undertalken in the
year 769, by Madame Godin d(es Odonais, from con-
jilgal affeftion. The narrative of the hardships which
she suffered, of the dangers to which he was exposed,
and of the difa{tcrs which besel her, is one of the molt
singular and asseting stories in any language, exhibiting
in her conduc a flriking picure of the fortitude which
diltingnifhes the one sex, mingled with the sensibility and
tenderness peculiar to the other. Lettre de M. Godin, '
M. de la Condamine.

NOTE XIV. p. 89.
HIERRERA gives a friking picAure of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers of diftinc-

tion under Alnagro, lodged in the fame house, and hav-
ing but one cloak among them, it was worn alternately
by him who had occasion to appear in public, while the
rell, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to
keep within doors. Their former friends and compa-
nions were so much afraid of giving offence to Pizarro,
that they durst not entertain or even converse with them.
One may conceive what was the condition, and what the
indignation of men once accuflomed to power and opu-
lence, when they felt themifelves poor and despised, with-
out a roof under which to ficlter their heads, while they
beheld others, whose merit and services were not equal to
theirs, living with fplcndour in fumnptuous edifices.
Dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE

NOTE XV. p. 103
H ERRERA, whose accuracy entitles him to great cre-

dit, asserts, that Gonzalo Pizarro.. possessed domain:

in the neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, wicli
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of the
archbishop of Toledo, tle best endowed fee in Europe.
Dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XVI. p. i18.
ALL the Spanifi writcrs defcribc his march, al the

dillrcifes of both parties, very minutely. Zarate ob-

serves, that liardly any parallel to it occurs in hiflory,
cither witl refpetE to the length of the retreat or the ar-
dour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his comipu-
tation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thouland
iles. .Lib. v. c. G6. 26.

NO T XVII. p. 133.

T amounted, accor, ig to Fernandez, the bell informed
lifiorian of that i'od, to one million four hundred
tlioufand pesos. Lib. ii. '.9.

NOT X p 135.
CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an adl-

vocate for an ccollmllmo(lationl with Gafca. 1Fiding

Pizarro incapable of holding that bold collr wllich lie
originally fuggcltcd, lie rccoiniemiilcd to hliii a tincl',
rubin'ilion to ills fovrcign is te ll ncalftre. \Vlln
tlie rcrfidnt's offers were firfl conlllmicatcl to Car\<il:;1,

lBy our Lady (lid lie, in tliat lirain of buftooncr

\\\hkh

which was familiar to him) the priest issues gracious bulls.
He gives them both good and cheap, let us not only ac-
cept them, but wear them as reliques about our necks."
Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XIX. p. 142.
D URING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, seven

hundred men were killed in battle, and tliree hun-

dred and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Hcrlenra,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three Ilndred of these were
cut off by Carvajal. Fcl-aandez, lib. ii. c. 9i. Zarate
makes the number of those put to a violent death five
hundred. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE XX. p. I5I.
IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of

the Mexicans, I have received mucli information from

a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the
year 1553, Philip II. in order to discover tle nmole
of levying tribute fronm lis Indiani fiibjcts, that would be
mnolt beneficial to the crown, and calea opprcleive to them,
addrcllld a mandate to all the Courts of Audience in Ame-
rica, enjoinilg tlem to aiuf'cr ccrtain (lerlics wliclh lie
propolcd to tlihe, concerning the aciein frni of govern-
ment elablilhcd(l anllu g the vrious nations of Indians, and
tile ode in which they had been acculonled to pay taxes
to teicr kings or cicfs. iil obedience to this mlandate,
Corita, who liad rcided nineteen )ecars ill A\imrica, foulr-
teen of wl'li; he paflccl i New Spain, complofced the
work of whlichl I hive at col))p. 1 Ie aciinaillt. s I\'c-
rcign, tllat lie had made it al oubjcd during his lctidciice

in

in America, and in all its provinces which he had visited,
to inquire diligently into the manners and cufloms of the
natives, that he had conversed for this purpose with many
aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted several of the
Spanish ecclesiastics, who underflood the Indian languages
most prfeEtly, particularly some of those who landed in
New Spain oon after the conquefl. Corita appears to
be a man of some learning, and to have carried on his
inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to which he
pretends. Greater credit is due to his teflimony from
one circumstance. His work was not composed with a
view to publication, or in support of any particular theory,
but contains simple, though full answers to queries pro-
poscd to him officially. Though Herrera does not men-
tion him among the authors whom he had followed as
guides in his history, I should suppose, from several faas
of which he takes notice, as well as from several expref-
sions which he uses, that this memorial of Corita was not
unknown to him.

NOTE XXI. p. 64.
T HE early Spanish writers were so hally and inaccu-

rate in cftimating the numbers of people in the pro-

vinces and towns of America, that it is impossible to a(-
certain that of Mexico itself with any degree of precifiol.
Cortes describes the extent and populousness of Mexico in
general terms, which imply that it was not inferior to the
greatefl cities in Europe. Gomara is more explicit, and
affirms, that there were 60,o000 oufcs or families in
Mexico. Cron. c. 78. Herrera adopts his opinion
Dec. a. lib. vii. c. 13; and the generality of writers fol-
low them implicitly without inquiry or fcruplc. Accord-
ing to this account, the inhabitants of Mexico mull

havc

have been about 300,000. Torquemada, with his usual
propensity to the marvellous, asserts, that there were a
hundred and twenty thousand houies or families in Mexico,
and consequently about fix hundred thousand inhabi-
tants. Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious account
of the Mexican empire, by one of Cortes's officers, the
population is fixed at 60,ooo people. Ramurio, iii. 309,
A. Even by this account, which probably is much
nearer the truth than any of the foregoing, Mexico was
a great city.

NOTE XXII. p. 167.
T T is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted

for this curious observation. Palafox, bishop of Ciu-

dad de la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and illultrates it
more fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only language
in which a termination indicating refpc, Jilavas rrcvern-
tiales y de corteifa, may be affixed to every word. By add-
ing the final syllable zin or azin to any word, it becomes
a proper expreflion of veneration in the mouth of an in-
ferior. If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father is
to be uscd, it is Tat], but an inferior fays Tatzin. One
priest speaking to another, calls him Teopixque; a pcrfon
of inferior rank calls him epixcatzin. The name of the
emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico, was
Montezuma, but his vassals, from reverence, pronounced
it Mlontezumazin. Torribis, MS. Palaf. VirtLdcs del
Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential
nouns, but reverential verbs. The manner in which
there are formed from the verbs in common use, is ex-
plained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guevara in his Mexican
Grammar, No. 188.

NOTE

NOTE XXIII. P. 173.
'ROM comp aring several pafrlges in Corita and Her-

rera, w\e may collefi witlh oni degree of accrc,:),

tlie various modes il which tle MIexicans contributed to-
wards thec support of government. Some persons of the
firll order e to have bccn exempted from the paymentt
of any tribute, and as their only duty to the public, wcre
bound to perlfnal service in wax, and to fllow the brillet
of the sovereign with their valFals. 2. Ihe ilmnimediate
vassals of the crown wcre bound not only to perlnal i;li-
tarv service, but paid a certain proportion ot tiheproduc of
their lands in kind. . TIlo \V who held oices ot llhllti.
or trnut, paid a certailn share of what they receiveld in -u:.
sequence of holding thcfe. 4. EaLl Capullt, or afiL.c:
tion, cultivated ome part of the :orilnnon ield allottci r
it, for the behoof of tle crown, and dpofited tile prodlu
in the royal granaries. 5. Suonl: part of whatever \;i
brought to the public markets, lwhether fruits of tie cart!:i
or the various produatioios of their artists and iianiif;ac-
turers, was demanded for the public use, and the imer-
chants who paid this were exempted from every otler tax.
6, The llvtye'qtls, or (alj;ripti rlc/', were bond to culti-
vate certain diftlris in every province, iwhich may be
conllidered as cro'ii lailds, anti broughlt til ireafl ito
plblite lorelioufes. l Thus tlie fuvcrignr received f(oile
part of whatever was ulltll or valuable in the counitre.
whlether it was the natural produCtioni of tlhe foil, or c-
(lqircd bl te inllfy o tlie people. \\hat each conlrl-

l)ited to

r the lpp)ort of governmncnt, ftenis to Iia\c

been incofiderable. Corita, in aniLecr to one of tlhe
(Icries put to the Audience of MIexico by Phlilp II. en-
ilcavolurs to cfliinate ill nomicy the value of what each ciii.
icn mi illt le luppoled to pa!,\ and ldous not reckon it t

nionre

mnore than three or four reals, about eighteen pence or two
liillings a head.

NOTE XXIV. p. I74.
CORTES; who seems to have been as much aloniflied

with this, as with any illtance of Mexican ingenuity,

gives a particular description of it. Along one of the
catnfeways, fays he, by which they enter the city, are
colducled two conduits, composed of clay tempered
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raised
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a fiream of
excellent water, as large as tile body of a man, into tihe
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants plen-
tifully. The other is empty, that when it is necefiary
to clean, or repair the former, tile fiream of water may
be turned into it. As this conduit palses along two of
tihe bridges, where there are breaches in the causeway,
tlrough which the salt-water of the lake flows, it is con-
veved over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox,
then carried from the conduit to the remote quarters of
the city in canoes, and fold to the inhabitants. Relit.
ap. Ramus. 241, A.

NOTE XXV. p. 176.
IN the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are flicwil

lilts of armour, which are called iMontczurnil'.

Th'ey are comnplofe of thin lacquered co)lpcr-platcs. In
tile opinion of very intelligent judges tltey are evildently
afltern. The forms of' the silver urnanlcnils upon tIe el,
rc)relenting dragons, &c. may be confidered as c-
firiuiation of this. They are infinitely filperlior in point of
workllian Iip to any lefort of Amncricani art. lTlie Spa-

1i.1,l

niards probably received them from the Plilippine islands.
The only unquestionable fpecimcn of Mexican art that I
know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine gold,
which is said to have belonged to Montczuma. It weighs
5oz. 2 dwt. Three drawings of it were exhibited to
the Society of Antiquaries, June Ix, 765. A man's
head is represented on this cup. On one fide the full face,
on the other the profile, on the third the back parts of the
head. The relievo is said to have been produced by
punching the inside of the cup, so as to make the repre-
fentation of a face on the outside. The features are rude,
but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Spanilh
workmanship. This cup was purchased by Edward earl
of Orford, while he lay in the harbour of Cadiz with the
fleet under his command, and is now in the poelfflion of
his grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted for this in-
formation to my refpeaable and ingenious friend Mr.
Barrington.

NOTE XXVI. p. 182.
TpHE learned reader will perceive how much I have

been indebted, in this part of my work, to the gui-

dance of the bishop of Glouceper, who has traced the fuc-
ceffive steps, by which the human mind advanced in this line
of its progress, with much erudition, and greater ingenuity.
IIe is the firfi, as far as I know, who formed a rational and
consistent theory concerning the various modes of writing
prafifed by nations, according to the various degrees of their
improvement. Div. Legation of Mvofi-s, iii. 69, &c.
Some important observations have been added by M. Ic Pre-
sident de Broffcs, the learned and intelligent author of the
Traitó de la Formation Meclanilqe des Iangllcs, torn. i.
295, &c.

As
9

As the Mexican paintings are the molt curious monu-

ments extant of the earliell mode of writing, it will not
be improper to give some account of the means by which
they were prefeved fiom the general wreck of every work
of art in America, and communicated to the Public. For
the most early and complete collection of these published
by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of that cu-
rious inquirer, Haklu)t. Don Antonio Mendoza, vice-
roy of New Spain, having deemed those paintings a pro-
per present for Cliarles V. the hip in which they were
font to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and they
came into the poffifion of''Thevet, the king's geographer,
who having travelled himself into the New World, and
described one of its provinces, was a curious ol'erver of
whatever tended to illuflrate the manners of the Ame-
ricans. On his death, they were purchased by Hakllyt;
at that time claplain of the English ambassador to the
French court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were
published at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry
Spelman. Purchas, iii. io65.

THE second specimen of Mexican piC'urc-writing, was

published by Dr. Francis Gemclli Carreri, in two copper-
plates. The first is a map, or representation of the pro-
grefs of the ancicnt Mexicans ol their firll arrival in the
country, and of the various Itations in which they fettled,
before they founded the capital of thcir empire in the lake
of Mexico. The second is a Chronological Wheel, or
Circle, rcprefenting the nanler in vwhicli they computed
and marked their cycle of fifty-two years. The former
was given to himi by Dr. Crilloval de Guadalajora, in the
city of Pucbla de los Angeles; tle latter lie received frorn
Don Carlos de Siguenlza y Congorra. But as it eemns
now to be a received opinion (founded I know not on
what evidence) that Carreri was never out of Italy, and

VO,. III. C c that

that his famous Giro del Mundo is an account of a ficiftioui
voyage, have not mentioned these paintings in the text.
They have, however, manifestly the appearance of being
Mexican productions, and are allowed to be so by Bo-
turini, who was well qualified to determine whether they
were gcnuine or supposititious. Tile flyle of painting in
the former is considerably more perfect than any other fpe-
cimen of Mexican design; but as the original is said to
have been much defaced by time, I fufpea that it has been
improved by some touches from the hand of an European
artill. Carreri, Churchill, iv. p. 487. The chrono-
logical wheel is ajuft delineation of the Mexican mode of
computing time, as described by Acofla, lib. vi. c. 2.
It eems to resemble one which that learned Jesuit had
seen; and if it be admitted as a genuine monument, it
proves that the Mexicans had artificial, or arbitrary cha-
radcers, which represented several things besides numbers.
Each month is there represented by a symbol exprcffiv
of ofme work or rite peculiar to it.

THr. third specimen of Mexican painting was disco-

vered by another Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Soturini
Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led by several
incidents to Itudy the language of the Mexicans, and to
collec the remains of their historical monuments. He
perfillcd nine years in his researches, with the enthufiafin
of a projeaor, and the patience of an antiquary. In 1746,
he publilhcd at Madrid, Ilea de una Nueva Hf/loria Gene-
ral dte Ih Aeriia S'jtli'nilronal, containing an account of
the rcfult of his inquiries; and lie added to it a cataloglu
of his American Hiflorical Museum, arranged under
thirty-fix different heads. Hi-s idea of a New Hiflory
appears to me the work of a whiinfical credulous nmin.
But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings, tributc-

rolls,

oblls, calendars, '&c. is much larger than one could have ex-
pelted. Unfortunately a hip, in which he had sent a con-
fiderable part of them to Europe, was taken by an English
privateer during the war between Great Britain and Spain
which commenced in the year 739 ; and it is probable that
they perished by failing into the hands of ignorant captors.
Boturini himself incurred thedi fileafure of theSpanilh court
and died in an hospital at Madrid. The hiflory, of which
the I/en, &c. was only a profpeFtus, was never published.
The remainder of his Museum seems to have been diflperfed.
Some part of it calne into the poffeflion of the present arch-
bishop of Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and
he published from it that curious tribute-roll whicl I have
mentioned.

THE only other collection of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can ]carn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
By order of their Imperial Majelties, I have obtained such
a specimen of there as I desired, in eight paintings, made
with so much fidelity, that I am informed the copies could
hardly be dininguiflled firom the originals. According to
a note in this Codex M4exicanlls, it appears to have been
a present from Emmanuel King of Portugal to Pope Cle-
ment VII. who died A. D. 1533. After pafling through
the hands of fveral illuflrious proprietors, it fell into those
of the cardinal of Saxe-Eifenacli, who prefcnted it to the
emperor Leopold. Tlefe paintings are manifeflly Mexli
can, but they are in a flyle very different from any of the
former. An cngraving has been made of one of thlem, irl
order to gratify such of my rlcaders, as may dcenm this an
objcQl worthy of their attention. Were it an object of
fillicient importance, it might, pcrliaps, be polible, by
recoirfe to the plates of Purclas, and the archbillop of
Toledo, as a kc!, to f)tori plaufiblc conjectures concern-

ri n ,. ;21j

ing the meaning of this picture. Many of the figures are
evidently similar. A. A. are targets and darts, almost
in the fame form with thofe'published by Purchas, p. o70o,
pO71i,.&c. B. B. are figures of temples, nearly resembling
those in Purchas, p. I109 and 1 113, and in Lorenzana,
Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the
figure of which occurs in almost every plate of Purchas
and Lorenzana. E. E. E. seem to be Mexican captains
in their war drcfs, the fantafic ornaments of which re-
femble the figures in Purchas, p. Iiio, 1IIl, 2113. I
should fppofe this pic&ure to be a tribute-roll, as their
mode of noting numbers occurs frequently. D. D.D.
&c. According to Boturini, the mode of computation
by the number of knots, was known to the Mexicans as
well as to the Peruvians, p. 85. and the manner in
which the number of units is represented in the Mexican
paintings in my possession, seems to confirm this opinion.
They plainly resemble a firing of knots on a cord or
ilender rope.

SINCE I published the former Edition, Mr. Waddi-

love, who is ill pleased to continue his friendly attention
to procure me information, has discovered, in the Library
of the Escurial, a volume in folio, confifling of fort)'
sheets of a kind of pafleboard, each the size of a common
Iheet of writing paper, with great variety of uncouth and
whimsical figures of Mexican painting, in very fresh co-
lpurs, and with an explanation in Spanish to most o'
them. The firll twenty-two licets are the signs of the
months, days, &c. About the middle of each sheet ar:
two or more large figures for the month, lfrrounded b)
the signs of the days. The lalt eighteen sheets are not
lo filled with figures. They seem to be signs of Deitics,
and images of various objects. According to this Calen-
dar in the Efcrial, the Mexican year contained 286 days,

dividcd

'divided into 22 months of 13 days. Each day is repre-
sented by a different sign, taken from some natural ob-
jec, a serpent, a dog, a lizard, a reed, a house, &c.
The signs of days in the Calendar of the Escurial are pre-
cifely the fame with those mentioned by Boturini, Idea,
&c. p. 45. But, if we may give credit to that Author,
the Mexican year contained 360 days, divided into 18
months of 20 days. The order of days in every month
was computed, according to him, firt by what he calls
A tr'decennary progression of days from one to thirteen, in
the fame manner as in the Calendar of the Escurial, and
then by a feplenary progreflion of days from one to fevcn,
making in all twenty. In this Calendar, not only the
signs which diltinguifh each day, but the qualities sup-
posed to be peculiar to each month, are marked. There
are certain weaknesses which seem to accompany the hu-
man mind through every flage of its progress in oblerva-
tion and science. Slender as was the knowledge of the
Mexicans in Astronomy, it appears to have been already
conneced with judicial Astrology. The fortune and cha-
raaer of persons born in each month are supposed to be
decided by some fperior influence predominant at the
time of nativity. Hence it is foretold in the Calendar,
that all who are born in one month will be rich, in an-
other warlike, in a third luxurious, &c. The pasteboard,
or whatever fbflance it may be on which the Calendar
in the Escurial is painted, seems, by Mr. Waddilove's
deccription of it, to resemble nearly that in the Imperial
Library at Vienna. In fevcral particulars, the figures
bear some likeness to those in the plate which I have pub-
lilhed. The figures marked D. which induced me to
conjecure, that this painting might be a tribute-roll
lirilar to there published by Purchas and the Archbishop
of Toledo, Mr. Waddilove 'uppofcs to be signs of days;
.tid have such confidence in the accuracy of his obfcr-

C c 3 vations,

vations, as to conclude his opinion to be well founded.
It appears, from the characters in which the explanations
of the figures are written, that this curious monument of
Mexican art has been obtained, soon after the conquest of
the Empire. It is singular that it should never have been
mentioned by any Spanish Author.

NOTE XXVII. p. 184.
T H E first was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance;

the second, the Divider of Men ; the third, the Shed-

der of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Dark-houfe.
Acofta, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 192.
THE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more

holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the molt

considerable. But it was nothing more than a mount of
lolid earth. According to Torqiemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and rose to the
height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19. E\ve
M. Clavigero acknowledges that all the Mexican temples
were solid fruciures, or earthen mounts, and of confe-
quence cannot be confidered as any evidence of their having
made any considerable progress in the art of building.
Clavig. II. 207.

FROM infpElaing various figures of temples in tile

paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems to be fotne
reason for fufpeting that all their temples were con-
Pruced in the fame tnancnr. See Vol. iii. p. l109,
110o. 1113.

NOTE XXIX. p. 93.
N OT only in Tlafcala, and Tepcaca, but even in

Mexico itself, the houfcs of the people were mere

huts built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees.
They were extremely low, and flight, and without any
furniture but a few earthen vessels. Like the rudest In-
dians, several families resided under the fame roof, with-
out having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. 2.
lib. vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22. Dec. 3. lib. iv, c. 17.
Torquem. lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE XXX. p. 93.
J AM informed by a person who resided long in New

Spain, and visited almost every province of it, that

thlere is not, in all the extent of that vas empire, any mo-
nument, or veitige of any building more ancient than
the conquest, nor of any bridge or highway, except
orme remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe to that
gate of Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. MS.
penes me. The author of another account in rnanufcript
observes, " That at this day there docs not remain even
the smallest veltige of the exiflence of any ancient Indian
building, public or private, either in Mexico or in any
province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays lie, through
dll the countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia,
New Bilcav, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New
Kingdom of Leon, and New Santandcro, without hav-
ing obfcrved any monument worth notice, except the
Mins near an ancient village in the valley de CIfas
Grandes, in lat. N. 300. 46'. longit. 258°. 24'. from
hle island of Teneriffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W. froml
MIexico. He dcfcribcs this minutely, and it appears to

C c 4 have

have been a paltry building of turf and stone, plastered
over with white earth or lime. A miflionary informed
that gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of an-
other settlement similar to the former, about an hundred
leagues towards N. W. on the banks of the River St.
Pedro. MS. penes me.

THOSE testimonies derive great credit from one cir-

cumrlance, that they were not given in support of any
particular system or theory, but as simple answers to que-
ries which I had proposed. It is probable, however,
that when these gentlemen assert, that no ruins or monu-
ments of any ancient work whatever are now to be dif-
covered in the Mexican Empire, they meant that there
were no such ruins or monuments as conveyed any idea
of grandeur or magnificence, in the works of its ancient
inhabitants. For it appears from the tellirnony of several
Spanish authors, that in Otumba, Tlafcala, Cholula, &c.
some vestiges of ancient buildings are still visible. Villa
Segnor Theatro Amer. p. 143. 308. 353. D. Fran.
Ant. Lorenzana, formerly archbifbop of Mexico, and
now of Toledo, in his introducion to that edition of the
Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he publilhed at
Mexico, mentions some ruins which are fill visible ill
several of the towns through which Cortes passed in his
way to the capital, p. 4, &c. But neither of these au-
thors give any description of them, and they seem to be
so very inconfiderabce, as to how only that ome build-
ings had once been there. The large mount of earth at
Cholula, which the Spaniards dignified with the name of
temple, still remains, but without any steps by which to
afccnd, or any facing of flonc. It appears now like ;
natural mount, covered with grass and lirubs, and pof-
sibly it was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iil.
c. 19. I have received a minute dcfcription of the rc-
ynains of a temple near Cuernavaca, on the road from

Mcxicq

Mexico to Acapulco. It is conpofed of large flones, fitted
to each other as nicely as tlhofe in the buildings of the
Peruvians, which arc herlafter mentioned. At the foun-
dation it forms a fquarc of 25 yards; but as it ries in
height, it diminishes ill extent, not gradually, but by being
contracted suddenly at regular diflances, so that it must
have resembled the figure B in the plate. It terminated, it
is said, in a spire.

NOTE XXXI. p. 99.
T HE exaggeration of the Spanish hiflorians, with re-

fpe& to the number of human victims sacrificed in

Mexico, appears to be very great. According to Go-
mara, there was no year in which twenty thousand human
vitims were not offered to the Mexican Divinities, and
in rome years they amounted to fifty thousand. Cron.
c. 229. The skulls of those unhappy persons were ranged
in order in a building erected for that purpose, and two
of Cortes's officers who had counted them, informed Go-
rnara that their number was a hundred and thirty-fix
thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's account is still more in-
credible, that the number of victims was so great, that
five thousand have been sacrificed in one day, nay, on
some occasions, no less than twenty thousand. Dec. iii.
lib. ii. c. 6. Torquelnada goes beyond both in extra-
vagance, for he afTerts, that twenty thousand children, ex-
clufivc of other victims, were slaughtered annually. Mon.
Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The most refpccable authority in
favour of such high numbers is that of Zumurraga, the first
biflop of Mexico, who, in a letter to the chapter general
of his order, A. D. 163 , asserts that the Mexicans facri-
siced annually twenty thouland vitiilns. Davila. Tcatro
Ecclcf. 126. In opposition to all theec accounts, B. de

las

las Casas observes, that if there had been such an annual
waste of the human species, the country could never have
arrived at that degree of populousness, for which it was re-
markable when the Spaniards first landed there. This rea-
soning is just. If the number of vicims in all the provinces
of New Spain had been so great, not only must popula-
tion have been prevented from increasing, but the human
race must have been exterminated in a hort time. For
besides the wafle of the species by such numerous sacrifices,
it is observable that wherever the fate of captives taken in
war, is either certain death or perpetual slavery, as men can
gain nothing by submitting speedily to an enemy, they al-
ways resist to the uttermoll, and war becomes bloody and
defirutive to the last degree. Las Casas positively aerts,
that the Mexicans never sacrificed more than fifty or a hun-
dred persons in a year. See his dispute with Sepulveda,
subjoined to his Breviffima Relacion, p. 1o5. Cortes does
not specify what number of viclims was sacrificed an-
nually, but B. Diaz del Caflello relates, that an enquiry
having been made, with refped to this, by the Franciscan
Monks, who were ent into New Spain immediately after
the conquest, it was found that about two thousand five hun,
dred were sacrificed every year in Mexico. C. 207.

N OTE XXXII. p. 200.
I T is hardly ncceffary to oblerve, that the Peruvia

Chronology is not only oblcure, but repugnant to

conclusions deduced from the most accurate and extenfivc
observations, concerning the time that elapses during each
reign, in any given fuccefflon of princes. The medium
has been found not to exceed twenty years. According to
Acofta and Garcilaflo de la Vega, Huana Capac, who
tlicd about the year 1527, was the twelfth Inca. Accordl-

i"si

ing to this rule of computing the duration of the Peruvian
monarchy ought not to have been reckoned above two
hundred and forty years but they affirm that it had sub-
lifted four hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega,
lib. i. c. 9. By this account each reign is extended at a
medium to thirty-three years, instead of twenty, the num-
ber aertained by Sir Isaac Newton's obfcrvations ; but so
imperfect were the Peruvian traditions, that though the
total is boldly marked, the number of years in each reign
is unknown.

NO TE XXXIII. p. 208.
M\yANY of the early Spanish writers assert, that the

Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xeres, p. 19o.

Zarate, lib. i. c. li. Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But Garci-
lalfo de la Vega contends, that though this barbarous prac-
tice prevailed among their uncivilized ancefiors, it was
totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human vicim
was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This after-
tion, and the plausible reasons with which he confirms it,
arc sufficient to refute the Spanish writers, whose accounts
seem to be founded entirely upon report, not upon what
they themselves had observed. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In
one of their festivals, the Peruvians offered cakes of bread
moiflened with blood drawn from the arms, the eye-
brows, and noses of their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This
rite may have been derived from their ancient practice, in
their uncivilized slate, of sacrificing human victims.

NOTE XXXIV. p.214.
T H E Spaniards have adopted both those culloms of the

ancient Peruvians. They have preserved some of
the aqueducIs or canals, made in the days of the Incas,

and

and have made new ones, by which they water every sie!d
that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom. i. 422, 477.
They likewise continue to use guano, or the dung of sea-
fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a description of the al-
mlolt incredible quantity of it in the fiall islands neat
the coast. Ibid. 481.

NOTE XXXV. p. 216.
T1 HE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at

Callo in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-

Cannar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i 286, &c. who
infpeded them with great care. M. de Condamine pub-
lifhed a curious memoir concerning the ruins of Atun-
Cannar. Mem. de 'Academie de Berlin, A. D. I746,
p. 435. Acofta describes the ruins of Cuzco, which he
had examined. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaffo, in his usual
flile, gives pompous and confused descriptions of several
temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. I. c. 21.
lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Zapata, in a large treatise con-
cerning Peru, which has not hitherto been publifled, com-
municates some information with respect to several monu-
ments of the ancient Peruvians, which have not been men-
tioned by other authors. MS. penes me, Articulo xx.
Ulloa describes some of the ancient Peruvian fortifica-
tions, which were likewise Works of great extent and soli-
dity. Tom. i. 391. Three circumfiances firuck all thofc
observers: the vast size of the flones which the Peruvians
employed in some of their buildings. Acofla mcalurcd
one, which was thirty feet long, eighteen broad, and fix in
thickness; and yet, he adds, that in the fortress at Cuzco,
there were stones considerably larger. It is difficult to
conceive how the Peruvians could move there, and raise
them to the height even of twelve feet. The second cir-
cumftance is, tl!l imperfection of the Peruvian art, when

applic4

applied to working in timber. By the patience and perse-
verance natural to Americans, itones may be formed into
any shape, mere.y by rubbing one againt another, or by
the use of hatchets or other inltruments made of stone;
but with such rude tools, little progrcfs can be made il
carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beams
together, or give any degree of union, or liability to any
work comrpofed of timber. As they could not sorn
a centre, they were totally unacquainted with the use of
arches in building, nor can the Spanili authors conceive
how they were able to frame a roof for those ample ftruc-
tures which they raicd. '

TILE third circumstance is a flriking proof, which all

the monuments of tie Peruvians furnish, of their want
of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with patience
no less astonishing. None of the flones employed in those
works were formed into any particular or uniform shape,
which could render them fit for being compacied together
in building. The Indians took them as they fell from the
mountains, or were raised out of the quarries. Some
were square, some triangular, some convex, some concave.
Their art and industry were employed in joining them to-
gether, by forming filch hollows in the one, as perfeEtly
corresponded to the projections or risings in the other.
This tedious operation, which might have been so easily
abridged, by adapting the fiurface of the tfones to each
other, either b rbbing, or by their hlatchers of copper,
would be deemned incredible, if it were not put beyond
doubt by inlpjedting tll remains of those buildings. It
gives tem a very fingiilar appearance to an European
eve. There is no regular layer or Itratum of building,
and no one hlone efemrbles another in dimensions or form.
At the anme time, by the pcrfevering, but ill-direted in-
d!ullry of the Indians, are all joined with that minute nicety

whicli.

which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this obfervatio.
concerning the form of the flones in the fortress ofAtui.
Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pincto givcs a finilar defcrip-
tion of the fortress of Cuzco, the most perfect of all the
Peruvian works. Zapata MS. penes me. According to
MI. de Condamine, there were regular flrata of building il
ibme parts of Atun-Cannar, which he remarks as singular,
and as a proof of some progress in improvement.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 220.
T HE appearance of those bridges, which bend witl

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are con-

fiderably agitated by the motion of every person who paffci
along them, is very frightful at firit. But the Spaniards
liave found them to be the eafielt mode of passing the tor-
rents in Peru, over which it would be difficult to throw
more solid structures either of flone or timber. They
form those hanging bridges io strong and broad, that
loaded mules pass alongft them. All the trade of Cuzco
is carried on by means of such a bridge over the river Apu-
rimac. Ulloa, toni. i. 358. A more simple contrivance
was employed in palling smaller fitrams: A banset, in
which the traveller was placed, being suspended from a
strong rope flretchcd across the fiream, it was pulhcd or
drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 231.
M Y information with refpeat to thore events is taken

from Noticia rcve de la expedicion militar de So-

nora y Cinaloa, fit cxito feliz, y vantojofb eflado, en que
por confecucntia de ello, fe han pueflo abas povincils,
publilhed at Mexico, June 7th, 1771, in order to fatisty

tlie

the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnished the vicc-
roy with money for defraying the expence of the arma-
ment. The copies of this NtAicia are very rare in Ma-
drid; but I have obtained one, which has enabled me to
communicate tlere curious fads to the Public. Accord-
ing to this account, there was found in the mine Yccorato
in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two carats, which
weighed sixteen marks four ounces four ochavas; this was
sent to Spain as a present fit for the king, and is now dc-
posited in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

N O T E XXXVIII. p. 232.

H E uncertainty of geographers with refped to this
point is remarkable, for Cortes seems to have fur-

veyed its coasts with great accuracy. The archbishop of
Toledo has published, from the original, in the pofeffieon
of the Marquis del Vallc, the descendant of Cortcs, a
map drawn in 1541, by the pilot Domingo Caltillo, il
which California is laid down a a peninsula, stretching
out nearly in the fame direcion which is now given to it
in the best maps, and the point where Rio Colorado en-
ters the gulf is marked with precision. I-ift. de Neuva
Efpagna, 327.

NOTE XXXIX p. p. 235.

AM indebted for this fa& to M. L'Abbe Raynal,
tom. iii. 103. and upon con fulting an intelligent per-

son, long fettlcd on the Molquito shore, and who has been
engaged in the logwood trade, I find that ingenious autlior
has been well informed. The logwood, cut near the town.
of'St. Francis of Campeachy, is of much better quality
than that on the other fide of Yucatan, and tle Englifl
trade in the Bay of -Honduras s alinfl lit an end.

N O T E

NOTE XL. p. 254.
p Torribio de Bcnevente, or Motolinea, has enumerated

ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexico, to

which he gives the name of the Ten Plagues. Many oi
these are not peculiar to that province. I. The intro-
duflion of the finall-pox. This disease was first brouglit
into New Spain in the year 1520, by a negroe slave wlio
attended Narvaez in his expedition against Cortes. Tor-
ribio affirms, that one half of the people in the provinces,
visited with this dillemper, died. To this mortality occa-
sioned by the small-pox, Torquemada adds the deftrutiive
effeas of two contagious dillempers which raged in the
years 1545 and 1576. In the former 800,000; in tile
latter, above two millions perished, according to an exaA
account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642.
The small-pox was not introduced into Peru for several
years after the invasion of the Spaniards, but there too that
diitemper proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia Ori-
gen, p. 88. 2. The numbers who were killed or died
of famine in their war with the Spaniards, particularly
during the siege of Mexico. 3. The great famine that
followed after the reduction of Mexico, as all the people
engaged, either on one fide or other, had negleced the
cultivation of thcir lands. Something similar to this hap-
pened in all the other countries conquered by the Spa-
niards. 4. The grievous tasks imposed by the Spaniards
upon the people belonging to their Repartimientos. 5. The
oppreftive burden of taxes which they were unable to pay,
and from which they could hope for no exemption. 6. The
numbers employed in collecting the gold, carried down
by the torrents from the mountains, who were forced
from their own habitations, without any provision made
for their lubfiflcncc, and fubjeAed to all the rigour of cold

I it!

in those elevated regions. 7. The immense labour of re-
building Mexico, which Cortes urged orl with such preci-
pitate ardour, as deltroyed an incredible number of people.
8. The

' number of people condemned to servitude, under

various pretexts, arid employed in working the silver
rmines. These, marked by each proprietor with a hot
iron, like hi§ cattle, were driven in herds to the moun-
tains. The nature of the labour to which they were sub-
jeCed there, the noxious vapours of the mines, the cold-
ness of the climate, and scarcity of food, were so fatal
that Torribio affirms, the country round several of those
mines, particularly near Guaxago, was covered with dead
bodies, the air corrupted with their flench, and so many
vultures, arid other voracious birds, hovered about for their
prey, that the fun was darkened with their flight. lo. The
Spaniards, in the different expeditions which they under-
took, and by the civil wars which they carried on, de-
froved many of the natives, whom they compelled to serve
them as Tanmemes, or carriers of burdens. This las mode
of oppreflion was particularly ruinous to the Peruvians.
From the nmber of Indians who perilhed in Gonzalp
Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the east of the
Andes, one may form fume idea of what they suffered in
similar services, and how fast they were wafted by them.
Torribio, MS. Corita in his Breve y Summaria Relacion,
illufirates and confirms several of Torribio's observations,
to which lie refers. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLI. p. 255.
F \VEN MonterFuieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. 8.

But the paliun of that great man fr system, some-

times rendered him inattentive to research; and from his
capacity to refine, he was apt, in some inftauces, to over-
lok. obviuils and jult cauls.

VoL. III. D d NOTE

NOTE XLII. p. 256.
A STRONG proof of this occurs in the tefament of

Isabella, where he discovers the most tender con-

cern for the humane and mild usage of the Indians. Those
laudable sentiments of the queen have been adopted into
the public law of Spain, and serve as the introducion to
the regulations contained under the title of the good treat-
mcr '
of th,e Indians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. z.

NOTE XLIII. p 258.
IN the seventh itle of the first book of the Recopilaicon,

which contains the laws concerning the powers and

funlions of archbishops and bishops, almoll a third part
of them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as
guardians of the Indians, and points out the various me-
thods in which it is their duty to interpote, in order to
defend them from oppression, either with rcfpeie to their
Oerfbns or property. Not only do the laws commit to
t'iem this honourable and humane office, but the ccclc-
iialics of America atually exercise it.

INN L'U:ERABLE proofs of this might be produced fromn

Spauill authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as lie was
siut dilpofel to afcribc any merit to the popish clergy, to
which they were not fully entitled. Survey, p. 142, 192,
&Yc. Henry Hawks, an Engrlfh merchant, who refled
five years in New Spain, previous to the year 1572, gives
die lame favourable account of the popish clergy. Hak-
luyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V. not only bishops,
b.ut other ecclefiillics, arc impowered to inform and ad-
inonilh the civil magistrates, if any Indian is deprived of
his :jull liberty and rights Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi.

I* cy

Icy 4; and thus were constituted legal proteaors of the
Indians. Some of the Spanifl ecclesiastics refulfed to
grant absolution to such of their countrymen as possessed
Encomiendas, and confidered the Indians as slaves, or
employed them in working their mines. Gonz. Davil.
Teatro Eccles. i. 157.

.NOTE XLIV. p. 259.
A CC OR D I N G to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains

4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of the
largest Indian towns in America, p. 104.

NOTE XLV. p. 259.

T is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the

fiate of population in those kingdoms of Europe where

the police is most perfeac, and where science has made the
greatest progress. In Spanish America, where knowledge
is till in its infancy, and few men have leisure to engage
in researches merely fpcculativc, little attention has been
paid to this curious inquiry. But in. the year 741, Philip
V. enjoined the viceroys and governors of the several pro-
vinces in America, to make an atual fiurvey of the people
under their jurifdicdion, and to transmit a report concern-
ing their number and occupations. In contfcqucnce of
this order, the Conde d Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New
Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio de Villa Segnor y San-
chez, to execute that coniiiilion in New Spain. From
the reports of the Inagiflratcs ill the e'.clal dillrils,. as
vell as from his own ollcrvations, anl long acquaintance
with mole of the provinces, Villa Sgnor publilhed the
result of his inquiries in his Tat'J l/lmricao. His re-
port, llowvcr, is ipcrfca. Of the 1itiic dioceses, intO

D 2 which

which the Mexican empire has been divided, he has pb-
lilhed an account of five only, viz. the archbishopric of
Mlexico, the bishoprics of Puebla de los Angeles, Mechoa-
can, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The biihoprics of Yu-
catan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are entirely omit-
ted, though the two latter comprehend countries, in which
the Indian race is more numerous than in ay part of
New Spain. In his survey of the extensive diocese of
Nova Galicia, the situation of the different Indian villages
is described, but he specifies the number of people only in
a small part of it. The Indians of that extensive pro-
vince, in which the Spaniflh dominion is imperfeLtly efla-
blifhed, arc not registered with the fame accuracy as in
other parts of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the
aFtual state of population in the five dioceses above men-
tioned is of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, in
the dioceses of

Families.

Mexico - - - 105,202
Los Angeles - - - - 30,600
Mechoacan - 30,840
Oaxaca 7,296
Nova Galicia - - - 16,770

190,708

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is 953,540

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico I 9,511
Los Angeles 88,240
Mechoacan - - - - 36,196
Oaxaca - -- - 44,222
Nova Galicia - - -6,222

294,391

At

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is
1,471,955. We may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken from
the /latricula, or regifler, according to which the tribute
paid by them is collected. As four dioceses of nine are
totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia the numbers
are imperfetly recorded, we may conclude, that the num-
ber of Indians in the Mexican empire exceeds two millions.

THE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. seems

not to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa Seg-
nor observes in general terms, that several Spaniards, ne-
groes, and people of a mixed race, rcfide there, without
specifying their number. If, therefore, we make allow-
ance for these, and for all who reside in the four dioceses
omitted, the number of Spaniards, and of tliofe of a
mixed race, may probably amount to a million and a half.
In rome places, Villa Segnor diltinguifhes between Spa-
niards and the three inferior races of negroes, mulattoes,
and meflizos, and marks their number separately. But he
generally blends them together. But from the proportion
observable in those places, where the number of each is
marked, as well as from the account of the hate of popu-
lation in New Spaini by other authors, it is manlifcf that the
number of' irgrocs and perlons of a mixed race far exceeds
that of Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought not to be
seckoned above 5,o,ooo to a million of thei fllcr.

DI. C'rcT.'i: as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure luch intelligence concerning the number
of puple in Perml, as might enable me to form any con-
jetmiie equ(ally flilisfying with rcfpet to the degree of its
p.Opilatinl. I hlave bleen informed, that in the year 1761,
ihe protc iui of tic Indians in the viceroyalty of Peirlu

D d 3 eulnimptcd

cormputed that 612,780 paid tribute to the king. As all
females, and persons under age, are exempted from this
tax in Perub the total number of Indian ought, by that
account, to be 2449,I20. MS. penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess, concerning the state of
population in New Spain and Peru. According to an ac-
count which I have reason to confider as accurate, the
number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to Peru
on each new publication, is 1,171,953; to New Spain
2,649,326. I am informed, that but few Indians pur-
chafe bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the Spanish in-
habitants, and those of mixed race, so that the number of
Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will amount by this
mode of computation to at lear three millions.

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spaniff America, may givis ome idea of the extent of
population, and correEt the naccurate, but popular notion
entertained in Great Britain, concerning the weak and
desolate slate of their colonies. The city of Mexico con-
tains at least 50,o0 people. It is remarkable that Tor-
quemada, who wrote his Monarquia Intiana about the
year 16I2, reckons the inhabitants of Mexico at that time
to be only 7000 Spaniards and 8000 Indians. Lib. iii.
c. 26. Puebla de los Angeles contains above 60,ooo Spa-
niards, and people of a mixed race. Villa Scgnor, p. 247.
Guadalaxara contains above 30,0oo, excluive of In-
dians. Id. ii. 206. Lima contains 54,000. D. Cofinc
Bueno Defcr. de Peru, 1764. Carthagcna contains 25,000.
Pntofi contains 25,000. Bueno, 1767. Popayan con-
rains above 20,000. Ulloa, i. 287. Towns of a second
clals are fill more numerous. The cities in the molt

thriving

gjriving settlements of other European nations in America
cannot be compared with these.

SUCH are the detached accounts of the number of people

in fevcral towns, which I found scattered in authors
whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained
an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in the
province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can lely;
and I communicate it to the Public, both to gratify curio-
fity, and to recify the miflaken notion which I have men-
tioned. St. Francisco de Quito contains between 50 and
60,000 people of all the different races. Beides the city,
there are in the Carregimient 29 curas or parilhcs eta-
blifled in the principal villages, each of which has finaller
hamlets depending upon it. The inhabitants of there are
moily Indians and Metizos. St. Juan de Paflo has be-
tween 6 and 8000 inhabitants, betides 27 dependent vil-
lages. St. Miguel de barra 7coo citizens, and ten vil-
lages. The district of Havala between 8 and 20,000
people. The diflriAl of Tacunna between o1 and 12,000.
The diltri& of Ambato between 8 and o,ooo, be-
fides 6 depending villages. The city of Riobamba be-
tween 16 and 20,000 inhabitants, and 9 depending vil
lages. The district of Chimbo between 6 and 8000.
The city of Guyaquil from 16 to 20,000 inhabitants,
and 14 depending villages. The diltrift of Atuali be-
tween 5 and 6000, and 4 depending villages. The city
of Cuenza between 25 and 30,000 inhabitants, and 9
populous depending villages. The town of Laxa from
: to 0o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. This
degree of population, though slender, if we confider the
vast extent of the country, is far beyond what is com-
monly fippoedl. I have omitted to mention, in its pro-
pcr place, that Quito is the only province in Spanifl

D d Amleric4

America that can be denominated manufacEuring coun-
try; hats, cotton Ituffs, and coarse woollen cloths, arc
made there in such quantities, as to be sufficient not only
for the consumption of the province, but to furnifi a con-
fiderable article for exportatiofi into otlier parts of Sp§nifl
America. I know not whether the uncommon industry
of this province should be confidered as the cause or the
effe& of its populonfnefs. But among the ostentatious
inhabitants of the New World, the paflion for every
thilg that comes from Europe is so violent, that I am in-
formied the manufatLures of Quito are so much under-
valued, as to be on the deeline.

NOTE XLVI. p. 264.
T HESE are eabliflled at the following places. St.

Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in

New Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firine,
Santiago in Guatiinala, Guadalaxara in New Galicia,
Santa Fe in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in
tie country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Qitu,
Sr. Jago de Chili, Buenos Ayrcs. To each of thecf aic
flibjected fevcral large provinces, and foine so far re-
moved from the cities where the courts are fixed, that
they can derive little benefit from their jrifdicRion. The
}Spanifhi writers commonly reckon p twelve courts if
Andience, but they include that of Manila in the Philip-
pine I flalds.

NOTE XLV II. p. 272.
() i N;.ctourt o' tlc dlifldnce of Prl and Cliili from

Sniin, id the (i(liicullt)' o crrvyig conmodities ot

, 11ci 11lk a'. '., i ll ;(ld oil acr ofs I(il iflllm s of l'ainu l,
'the . p uii.l., l i. teiuof, piroviiz'.' . iil'',: l1Iccn pcrilitted to

jlat

plant vines and olives. But they are ftriAly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to any of the provinces on the
Pacific Ocean, which are in filch a situation as to receive
them from Spain. Recop. lib. i, tit. xvii. 1. 5-I8.

N TE XLVIII. p. 274.
PIIIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D. 1550,

fifty-eight years after the discovery of America. Hilt.

Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2. But as Benzoni wrote with
the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to detract from the
Spaniards in every particular, it is probable that his cal-
culation is too low.

NOTE XLIX. p. 275.
MI Y information, with refpec' to the division and tranF-

mifion of property in the Spanish colonies, is im-

perfecq. The Spanish anthors do not explain this fully,
and have not perhaps at:cnded lfficiently to the effcAs of
their own institutions and laws. Solorzano de ure Ind.
vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. 16. explains in omc mcafure the intro-
duction of the tenure of ll/ayorafgs, and mentions some
of its clefls. Villa Segnor takes notice of a singular con-
sequence of it. He obfervcs, that in some of the best
situations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of ground is
unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins of the hioufes
once crclcd upon it; and adds, that as this ground is
held by right of lIAfvoraJ 2, and cannot be alienated, that
desolation and those ruins become perpetual. Thcatr.
Amcr. ol. i. p. 34.

NOTE L. p. 277.
T HERE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices

either civil or etclefiaftic. On the contrary, there

are many Cedulas which recommend the conferring
places of trust indifcrimipately on the natives of Spain
and America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p.
., 6. But notwithflanding such repeated recommen-
dations, preferment in almost every line is conferred on
native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is pro-
duced by the author last quoted. From the discovery of
America to the year 1637, three hundred and fixty-nine
bishops, or archbifliops, have been appointed to the dif-
ferent dioceses in that country, and of all that number
only twelve were Creoles, p. 40. This predilection for
Europeans teems flill to continue. By a royal mandate,
issued in 776, the chapter of the Cathedral of Mexico
is direted to nominate European ecclesiastics of known
merit and abilities, that the King may appoint them to
tpply vacant benefices. MS. penes me.

NOTE LI. p. 283.
M ODERATE as this tribute may appear, such is tile

extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces

of America, that the exa~cing of it is intolerably oppreflive.
Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOTE LII. p. 284.

N New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit

and services of the firlt conquerors, as well as the finall

revenue arising from the country previous to the discovery
of the Inincs of Sacatccas, the encolicndas were granted
for three, and fometimes.for four lives. Recopil. lib. vi.
tit. ii .
c. 14, &c

NOTE,

NO T E LIII. p. 285.
) Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in mines is not

noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, that

many Mctlizos and Indians, who do not belong to any
Repartimicuto, voluntarily hire themselves as miners;
and fcvcral of the Indians, when the legal term of their
service expires, continue to work in the mines of choice.
Enireen. .

p. 265. But his opinion concerning the whole-

fblnences of this occupation is contrary to the experience
of all ages; and wherever men are allured by high wages,
they will engage in any species of labour, however fa-
tiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern. Carillo Alte-
mirano relates a curious fad incompatible with this
opinion. Wherever mines are wrought, fays he, the num-
ber of Indians decreases; but in the province of Cam-
peachy, where there are no mines, the number of Indians
has increased more than a third since the conquest of Ame-
rica, though neither the foil nor climate be so favourable
as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert Collet. In another
memorial presented to Philip III. in the year 1609, Cap-
tain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo asserts, that in every
dillrit of Peru, where the Indians are compelled to la-
bour in the mines, their numbers were reduced to the
half, and in ome places to the third, of what it was
under the viceroyalty of Don. Fran. Toledo in 581.
Colb. Collei.

NOTE LIV. p. 285.
A S labour of this kind cannot be prelcribed with legal

accuracy, the tasks sccem to be in a great mealure

arbitrary, and like the ferviccs exated by feudal superiors,
in vinea prato ait m sesi, from their vafldls, are extremely
burdenfomne, and often wantonly oppreflive. Pcgna Itiner.
par Parochus de Idios.

NOTE

NOTE LV. p. 286.
p HE turn of service known in Peru. by the name of

Mita, is called Tranda in New Spain. There it

contilues no longer than a week at a time.' NQ person
is called to serve at a greater difance from his habitation
than 24 miles. This arrangement is less oppressive to
the Indians than that elablifhed in Peru. Memorial of
Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Cuobert Colle&.

NOTE LVI. p. 288.
Tr HE firongeft proof of this may be deduced from the

laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of

legulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of
the number of abufcs that prevail. Though the laws have,
wifely, provided that po Indian. fhll be obliged to serve
in any mine at a greater dillance from his place of residence
tlhan thirty miles; we arc informed in a memorial of D.
Hcrnan Carillo Altainir-ano presented to the king, that the
Indians of Peru are oiten compelled to serve in mines at the
diflance of a hundred, a lundred and fifty, and even two
hundred leagues from their habitation. Colbcrt Collce.
Many mines are situated in parts of the country, so bar-
ren, and so difant from the ordinary habitations of the
Indians, that the neccfity of procuring labourers to work
there, has obliged the Spanilh monarchs to dilpenfe with
their own regulations in several instances, and to permiit
the viceroys to compel the people of more remote pro-
vinces to resort to those mines. Efcalona Gazopllyl.
lerub. lib. i.c. 6. But in jultice to them it fliould be
Olblcrvcd, tiait they have been fludious to alleviate tis
uoprcflion as nnicli as poflile, by enjoining the vicero:,
Tu ceimploy every nllcthod, in order to induce the Indiill'
Lt, fI:ttle ill foine pIart ol the tOuutry adjacCI!t to the niini1,
Jtl. I i 1l.,

NOT 1.

NOTE LVII. p. 293.
T ORQUEMADA, after a long enumeration, which

has the appearance of accuracy, concludes the num-

ber of monasteries in New Spain to be four hundred.
Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of nonaleries
in the city of Mexico alone was, in the year 1745, fifty-
five. Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons
up forty convents in Lima; and mentioning those for
nuns, he fays, that a small town might be peopled out of
them, the number of persons hut up there is o great.
Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter to the viceroy of
Peru, A. D. 1620, observes, that the number of con-
vents in Lima was so great, that they covered more
ground than all the refl of the city. Solorz. lib. iii.
c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. 6. Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3.
The fir monastery in New Spain was founded A. D.
1525, four years only after the conquest. Torq. lib. xv.
c. 16.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

eftablilhinent of the American church in all the Spanish
settlements was, in the year 1649, patriarch, 6 arch-
bilhops, 32 bishops, 346 prebends, 2 abbots, 5 royal
chaplains, 840 conwents. Teatro Ecclcfiafico de las
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jesuits
was expelled from all the Spanilh dominions, the colleges,
professkd houses, and refidencies, which it possessed in the
province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito sixteen, in
the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru seven-
teen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen; in all a
hundred and twelve. Colleccion General'de Providencias
halta acqui tomadas fobre cllranamcnto, &c. de la Conm-
pagnia, part i. p. 19. The number of Jesuits, priefls

and

and novices in all thcfe, amounted to 2245. MS,
penes me.

IN the year 644, the city of Mexico presented a peti-

tion to the king, praying that no new monatery might
be founded, and that the revenues of those already elta-
blifhed might be circumscribed, otherwise the religious
houses would soon acquire the property of the whole coui-
try. The petitioners request likewise, that the bishops might
be laid under reftri&ions in conferring holy orders, as there
were at that time in New Spain above fix thousand
clergymen without any living. Id. p. 16. These abuses
mutl have been enormous indeed, when the fipcrftition
of American Spaniards was hocked, and induced to re-
monitrate againt them.

NOTE LVIII. p. 297.
rT HIS description of the manners of the Spanish clerg,

I should not have ventured to give, upon the tcli-

mony of protestant authors alone, as they may be fulpcted
of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, wl)o
had a better opportunity than any protestant, to view the
interior slate of Spanilh America, describes the corrup-
tion of the church which he had forsaken, with so much
of the acrimony of a new convert, that I hould have dil-
trusted his evidence, though it communicates ome very
curious and itriking facts. But Benzoni mentions tle
profligacy of ecclesiastics in America at a very early pe
riod after their settlement there. Hilt. lib. ii. c. 19, 20.
M. Frezier, an intelligent observer, and zealous for his
own religion, paints the dissolute manners of the Spanill
ecclefialtics in Peru, particularly the regulars, in flronger
colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 51. 215, &c.
M. Gcntil confirms this account, Voy. i. 34. Correal

COIncUrs

concurs witl bQtb, and adds many remarkable circum-
stances. Voy. i. 61. 55. 6I. I have good reafon..to
believe, that the manners of the regular clergy, particu-
larly in Peru, are ill extremely indecent. Acofta him^,
felfacknowledges that great corruption of manners had
been the consequence. of permitting monks to forsake the
retirement and difciplinc of the cloifier, and to mingle
again with the world, by undertaking the charge of the
Indian parishes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib, iv. c. 13,
&c. He mentions particularly those vices, of which
haie taken notice, and confiders the temptations to them
as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion of those who
hold that the regular clergy flould not be employed as
parill priests. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for
the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among the monks of different orders, when set
free from. the restraint of monastic discipline; and from
the .tone of their defence, one may conclude that the
charge brought againlt them was not deflitute of truth.
In the French colonies, the late of the regular clergy is
nearly the fame- as iri the Spanish -fttlements, and the
fame consequences have followed. M. Biet, fupcrior oi'
the secular priells in Cayenne, inquires with no less al)-
pearance of piety than of candour, into the causes of this
corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemptin of
regulars from the jurifdition and censures of their di6-
cefans; to the temptations to which they are cxpofed ; and
to their engaging in commerce. X\oy. p. 320. It: is
remarkable that all the authors, who cenlre the licen-
tioufnefs of the Spanish regulars with the greatei severity,
concur in vindicating the conducf of the Jcfuits. 'Formed
under a discipline more perfca than that of the other mo-
nallic orders, or animated by l.iat concern for the honour
of the society, which takes such full pofiileion of every
member of the order, the Jesuits, both in Mexico and

14 Peru,

Peru; it is allowed, maintained a most irreproachable de-
cency of manners. Frezier, 223. Gentil, i. 34. The
fame praise is likewise due to the bilhops and most of the
dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

A VOLUME of the Gazeta de Mexico for the years

x728, I729, 1730, having been communicated to me, I
find there a striking confirmation of what I have advanced
concerning the spirit of low illiberal fperitition prevalent
in Spanish America. From the newspapers of any na-
tion, one may learn what are the objects which chiefly
engross its attention, and appear to it most interesting.
The Gazette of Mexico is filled almost entirely with ac-
counts of religious fun&ions, with descriptions of pro-
cefions, consecrations of churches, beatifications of faints,
festivals, autos de f, &c. Civil or commercial affairs,
and even the tranfa6ions of Europe, occupy but a small
corner in this magazine of monthly intelligence. From
the titles of new books, which are regularly inserted in this,
Gazette, it appears that two-thirds of them are treatifs of
scholastic theology, or of monkish devotion,

NOTE LIX. p. 297.
SOLORZANO, after mentioning the corrupt morals

of some of the regular clergy, with that cautious rc-

serve, which became a Spanish layman, in touching on
a fubje& so delicate; gives his opinion very explicitly,
and with much firmness, against committing parochial
charges to monks. He produces the testimony of several
respectable authors of his 'country, both divines and
lawyers, in confirmation of his opinion, De Jure.Ind.
ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A firiking proof of the alarm excited
by the attempt of the Prince d'Erquilachi. to exclude, the
regplars fronm-parochial cures, is contained in the Col,

1- bert

I)crt colleclon of papers. Several memorials tvcer pre-
lfetcd to the king by the procurators for the monaffic
orlers, and replies were made to tlefe in nartme of the
fccular clergy. An eager, and even rancorons; pirit is
mnnieft on both fides, in the condlut of tils dispute.

NOTE LX. p. 302.
T'OT only the native Indians, but the Ac.liz/; - or

children of a Spaniard and Indian, ere originally

excludedl from tlhe priesthood, and restsed admniflon into
any rcligiots order. But by a law 'ifTued Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip II. rquired the prelates of America to or-
da111- fiich- nleflizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
lhould find to b properly qualified, and to permit themi
t:) take tle vows in any monaftery'where they had gone
through a regular noviciate-. Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. I. 7.
Some regard seems to have been paid to this law in New
Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a reprefcntation of this
to Charles II. in the -year 1697, he' iflicd a new edit
enforcing tlie orfervatioti of it, and profcling his de'sire
to have all his fubjcdis, Indians and nimelizos as well a
Spaniards, admitted to tlic enjoymrent of the fane privi-
legcs. Sucli, however, was the aerfion of the Spaniards
in Anmrica to the IndialnsL and. their i-ace, tt tl is feenns
to have prodluced little fjfel ; fr, ;in''tllcti '1

e I 725,

Philip V. wi;s oljiged to rencwle-til iiijiih&i'- in'a n11-,:1
peremptory tone. Butt fb nfilrl'oullltald]( are th lhatrd'
anid contempt of tlie Indians amolng the Periuvlia Spa-
niards, that the prclcIit kTing has bh'i] collflrailcdel to eh-
lorce the former c(ldils anlw by a law, pthliflied Sep-'
temnbcr Ii, 774. Real Cedulla, MS. penrs rc.

IM. CLAVIC ; O lihas contradield what I have rclated
concerning tle ccleiallical late of the Igtlians particu-

VOL. 111. F c . lily

larlv their exclusion fron the sacrament of the Eucharifl, ad(
from holy orders, either as Seculars or Regulars, in fucll a
nmanner as cannot fail to make a deep imprellion. Ile, froin
his own knowleige, allerts, " that in New Spain not only
are Indians permitted to partake of the facraient of tie
altar, but that Indian pricls are lo unuerous that they may
he counted b) hundred. ; and ailorig tilelc have been man',
lhundreds of reftors, canons, and docors, and, as report
goes, even a very learned billop. At prclcnt, there
are many priells, and not a few redors, amiong whom;
there have been three or four our own pupils." Vol. II.
348, &c. I owe it therefore as a duty to the public, a
well as to n)ylclf, to confider each of tlicfe points wi:h
care, and to explain the rcafons which induced me to
adopt the opinion which I have publilied.

I KN EFV that in tile Clhriian church there is no dif-

tindciun of perions, but tlat meic of every nation w!:,
embrace the religion of Jcfus, are equally entitled to
every Chrillian privilege which they are qualified to re-
ceive. I knew, likewile, that an opinion prevailed not
only among niolt of the Spanish laity fettled in Americd,
but among " many eccleliallics, (I u the words o,
Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. xS.) that the Indians were
not perfect or rational men, and were not pofielfcd o(
i'lch capacity as qualified them to partake of the acraiiiciit
of tl:e altar, or of any other benefit of our religion." It
was agailnf this opinion that Las Casas contended wit!
the laudable zeal which I have delcribed in Books II. ad
VI. But as the Bfhop of Darien, Dotor Sepulvid,
and other reipe)eable eccleliaftics, vigorously supported th
comnnion opinion concerninig the incapacity of the Indians.
it became nccellhrv, in order to determine the point, tidt
tie altlbority of the Holy See hould be interposed; and
accordinly Paul I11. filltd a bull A.D. 537, in whiclh,

alter

after condemning the opinion of those who held that tile
Indians, as being on a level with brnte hcatls, flould be
reduced to flrvitudc, he declares that they were really
micn, and as Iclih were capable of embracing the Chriflian
religion, antl I;articipating of all its blefings. My account
of tis bull, Iltithltalading the cavils of M. Clavigero,
nmull appear ju(l to every pcrlon who takes the trouble
of peruiiln it ; ad ny) accouit is the fame with that
jadoptedl by TorJlclmail,:, lib. xi. c. 2. and bv Garcia,
Orig. 1. 31 . But even after this decision, l;o low did
tbil Saiijrds residing i Anerlica rate the capacity of the
natives, that the firl[ counicil of Liria (I call it by that
naIne o the authority o the I'-! Spaniih authors) dif-
c!)uite'nanccd th!c a(l:n:ifl;), of Indians to tl:e holy com-
iniiiil. Tlrqtenlu. lib. xvi. c. 20. Inl New Spain, the
exclutfion of Indians from the facramerit was fill more ex-
plicit. Ibid. After two centuries have elapsed, ad not-
withlianding all the improvcinent that the Indians may be
fippofed to have derived from their intercourse with the
Spaniards during that period, we are informed by D. Ant.
Ulloa, that in Peru, where, as will appear in the sequel of
this note, they are fiippofcd to be better inftruted thau
in New Spain, their ignorance is so prodigious that very
few are permitted to communicate, as being altogetldjr
deflitite of the requisite capacity. Voy. I. 341, &C.
Solorz. Polit. Ind. I. 23.

WirTH refpec to the exclusion of Indians from the

nriefihood, cither as Seculars or Regulars, .we may obfervc,
that while it continued to be the conmmon opinion that the
natives of America, on account of their incapacity, hould
not bepcrmitted to partake of the holy fcrament, we can-
lot flppofe that the) would be clothed with that sacr'd
cli.,radlcr which entitled to confecr.itc and to diflpenfe t.

'When ''orlqumnada coripof'd his ilL.natynia Indiai:, it

E e 2 V.wS

was almost a century after the conqucfl of New Spain; and
yet in his time, it was till the general praaice to exclude
Indians from holy orders. Of this we have the moll
satisfying evidence., Torquemada having celebrated the
virtues and graces of the Indians at great length, and with
all the complacency of a miflionarv, he flarts as an oh-
jetion to what lie had asserted, " If the Indians reall\
polrefs all the excellent qualities which you have defcrihed,
why are they not permitted to alfumne the rcligious habit
Why are they not ordained priests and bifiops, as the Jewili
and Gentile converts were in the primitive church, fpei-
ally as they might be employed with fch superior ad-
vantage to other persons in the inltrucion of their colln-
trvmcn ?" Lib. xvii. c. 13.

IN answer to this objeEtion, which elahblinics, in the

most unequivocal manner, what was the general praftice
at that period, Torqucmada obfervcs, that although ;.
their natural dispositions the Indians are well fitted for ,
subordinate situation, they are deffitule of all tile qualities
requisite in any flation of dignity and authority ; and thai
they are in general so addicted to drunkenness, that, 'upon
the slightest temptation, one cannot proniife on their be-
having witli the decency suitable to tile clerical chlaraclr.
-The propriety of excluding tlhem from it, on these ac-
counts, was, he obfcrved, ii well jultcld by experience,
that when a foreigner of great erudition, who came froi
Spain, condemned the praElice of tlf Mexicanl church,
he was convinced of his miflake in a public dirputatiun
witlh the learned ld

a nofl religious FIathier D. Juain die

Gaoia, and his retracation is 11ill extant. Torqueiiiail.
indeed, acknowledges, as M/I. Clavigero obfcrves, ;'itll
a degree of exultation, that, in his tinie, ome Inianl
hlad been admitted into nlioiillerics; lbut, withl the art (i
a dil)utant, lie forgets tu mention tliat Tolrqueilmada fij'-

cil 'c

ifies only two cxallmples of this, and takes notice that in
both inlances tlihoe Indians had been admitted by niflake.
Relying upon the authority ofTorquemada with regard to
New Spain, and of Ulloa with rcgMrd to Peru, and con-
fidering the bhumiliating dcpreflion of the Indians in all the
Spanish settlements, I concluded tlat they were not ad-
iitted into the cclcfiallicai order, which is held in the
liighelL veneration all over the New W orld.

BUT when M. Clavigcro, upon his own knowledge,

alferted sac's lo rnugnaint to the conchlfion I had foimed,
I began to dillfrl it, and to wish for farther information.
In order to obtain tlis, I applied to a Spanish nobleman,
lhigh in office, and eminent for his abilities, who, on dif-
ferent occasions, has permitted me to have the honour and
benefit of correfpolding with him ; and I requelted imy
lcfpectable friend IMr. Lillon, the Britilh Minifler at the
court of Madrid, to make what inquiries he judged proper
with refpecl to this point. From the former, I have been
favoured with the following answer. " What you have
written concerning the admission of Indians into holy or-
ders, or into monaltcries, in Book VIII. especially as it is
explained and limited in Note LXXXVIII, of the quarto
edition, is in general accurate, and conformable to the au-
lioritics which )youl quote. And although the congre-
gation of the council reolhcld and declared, Feb. 13, A. D.
1682, that the cirtiniaflcce of being an Indian, a mulatto,
r mellizo, dil not (lil;lalily any person from being ad-
nittcd into holy orders, if lie was pofefllld of what is re-
aiired by tie canons to cntitle hinm to that privilege; this
nly proves flich ordinations to be legal and valid, (of
Iiicli Solorz/aiio, and the Spanifli lawyers and hillorians
uioctd by hin, Pol. Ind. lib. ii. c. 29. were peruaded),
lit it icitlicr proves the propriety of admlitting Indians
lto holy orders, nor what was thlCt tile coulilon prac-

EI c 3 tice,

tice, with refpeft to this; but, on tlie contrary, it fIews
that there was some doubt concerning the ordaining of In-
dians, and some repugnance to it.

" SINCE that time, there have been some examples of

admitting Indians into holh orders. \c have no; at
Madrid an aged pricet, a native of Tlafcala. His nalme is
I). Juan Cerilo de Callilla Aquilhial catehutle, defcendcl
of a Caziu(ilc converted to Chrifliaitv soon after tle ern-
quell. He lludicd the ecclesiastical fciencs in a cnli:;lr.
of Puebla de los Angeles. H-e was a candidate, nc-.cr-
thles, for ten years, and it required much irterell lc:'.i
Bilhop Abrcn would consent to ordain liim. This e( i!c
fialtic is a man of unexceptionable charalcer, model, fcli-
denied, and with a competent kn!wledge of Vwhat rcl,:tc
to his clerical funcions. H cainl to Madirid abox tlhi;tv-
four years ago, with the sole Cvicw of foli;itingl, adIririun
for te Indians into the collrges and Ireinarics in N\ew
Spain, that if, after being well intlructed and tried, ti.':
flioould find an inc!initionr to enter into tle cclefiafl(.,
Jate, they nmi ht embrace it, and perorln its funliorn
with the reateft benefit to tlleir countr menll, whom t7y
could addrc!s in their native tongue. le has obtained va-
riorls r t :iltli'ns favourable to his fchllee, particularly tliit
tie firl- college which became vacant in confelqence ot
the exc'lifioll of rlec Jllisit, (hould be set apart for this pur-
)pose. B13t nleithr thlr(C regulations, lnor many iniilir
;le.s in{etrt'l ii tlie law;s l tile Indies, has produced ,l'iv
IlCd[i, n ,laccot'lit of l)jcelitors amll rcpreli-ntattions fro)
tic reCater part of perfIns of chiiefconllideration emnplovydl
ill New Sipailn. WVietier teir ol)pfition b well foiiil
.ir 11,, is a.1 ro'iiiii lifficlllt to ic!iolve, and toward(s 11,'
:;!.ii;) of ',vl;ic!., Icvc al diIlinttins .in d nlodilicatioiis lu

< ,'\Ceu'tttINIK !M

" ACCORDING to the accounts of this cclcfialjic, andl

the information of other persons who have resided in tile
Spanih dominions in America, you iay reil allured tlat
in the kinigloin of Tierra Iirnier no fucli thing is known as
either an Indian secular priclt or monk ; and that in New
Spain there are vcry few ecclefiaflics of Indian race. In
Peru, perhaps, tile number ma) be grcatcr, as in that counl-
try there are more Indians who pol!'(s the nceans of ac-
quiring filch a learned educatioln as is neccl[ary fur persons
who alpire to the clerical claracter."

IFROM Mr. Liflol, owing to fonio ;!lnidclts wich it i

uniicclary to licci', I haI-c not i t received an1 a;:lv:er
to my queries. If tle intelligence which, fr-om my expc-
nnilce of his obliging attention, I certainJv cxpc&, f1iall
Jiffer miatcrially frolm tliat which I lave a!icIly received, I
will not fail to coinmulliatLt it to the ptiailir-, a(nd will,
witlout liefitation or rclilancc, imale \hatecvcr altla-
tions may be l:ccflary in my narrative. cinwlilc, i
Vol. III. p. 32. 1. 2. iiltead of 119 India/ is ci/er --
daciled a p-iJ/, it will be more proper to read, s.,';;c' I.l-
ilians tar odaiied pr-irs.

NOTE LXI. p. 306.
U ZTAR IZ, an accurate alnd cailions calculator, f:ems.,

to admit, that tle quantity of ilhvr wlich locs not

pay dut) Iiay be fatred tllus higl. According to Hcrrcla,
there was not above a third of what was extraiced flro1
Potofi that paid the king's flit. Dec. viii. lii. ii. c. 15.
Solorzano alierts likeviJe, that tlhe (ilantity of iver
wlicl is frall(dlently circulated, is far greater tlia that
wliicli is rcguilarly flabnltel, Iafter pay!ing the fifll. Dc
Ind. Jltic, vol. ii, lib. v. I. 84G6.

E c 4 NOT

NOTE LXII. p. 310.
W IIEN the mines of Potofi were dificovercd in t!i,

year 1545, the veins were so near the filrfcicc, tlil.

tile ore was easily extracded, and so rich tli4t it was re-
lined with little trouble and at fall expence, merely by
tle adion of fire. This simple rnode of refining by ffio
alone continued until thle year 574, vlhen ithe Iiuc of ncer-
cur!v in refining silver, as well as gold, was diflovcrcl.
1'i. t. linecs ihaving been wrought without interruption 1(or
two centuries, tlie veins are now fnk so deep, that tile
cxpecce of extraciung the ore is greatly incr-caed. Be-
iides this, the riclitucf of the ore, contrary to w hat lap-
pens in most otl:er mines, has become Ic, as the veil
continued to dip. The vein has likewise diniiniied to such
a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards fliould
persist in working it. Othler rich mines have been fuc-
ceffively discovered, but in general the value of the orcs
has decreased so much, while the expence of extraflinl
them has augmented, that the court of Spain, in the
year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king from
afif/h to a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Peru, is cx--
tracld from the famous mine of Guancabelica, difcovcrcd
in tle-year 1563.' The crown has reservcd tle property
of this mine to itfclf; and tle pcrfons s-llo purchalie tlhe
quickfilvcr, pay not only the price of it, hilt likcwif a
filth, as a duty to the king. But, in the year 1761, lhis
Iduty on q(iickrilvcr was aboliflicd, on accounti of the ili-
crcafe of expcnce i working mines. Ullo,, Ellrtetcli-
inicntos, xii.--xv. Voyage, i.. 05. 523. Tn coniC-
(uelCee of tlis abolition of tlhe f/ih, andil ifoie illU;.'(ji.'it
iabatelliLilts of price, which lectiame ne-ccflTl- ocm accontli
of the iIncr(-afng exlplmce of working ines, qi.ci .fil(vr,
which was iorniierly lbld at eighly pcss lthe (ijintil, is tiov,

di& livrc4

delivered by the king at the rate of sixty pesos. Campo-
naes Educ. Popul. ii. 132, Note. The duty on gold
is reduced to a tuenlieth, or five per cent. Any of my
readers, who are dcfirous of being acquainted with tle
mode in which the Spaniards conduSt the working of
tllcir mnines, and tle refinement of the ore, will find al
accurate description of the ancient method by Acoa.
Lib. iv. c. I-13. And of their more recent improve-
ments in the metallurgic art, by Gaimboa Comment. a las
ordenanz. de minas, c. 22..

NOTE LXIII. p. 313.
/ANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced llae

of inidufirv in Spain, at the beginning of the fix-

tcenth century. Tie number of cities in Spain was con-
fiderable, and they were peopled far beyond the propor-
tion tliat was common in other parts of Europe. The
causes of this I have explained, Hlifl. of Cla. V. i. 158.
Wherever cities are populous, that fpccies of idu.ltry
whicl is peculiar to them increaces, artificers and mannl-
facurers abound. Tle cc& of the Amcrican trade in
giving aivity to thelie is manifcl, from a filngllar fact,
In the year 1545, while Spain continued to depend on its
own indullry, for the supply of its colonies, o) muchll
work was bef,;)kle from the manufalurers, that it was
fuppolfed tliey coi(ld hardaly) finifll it in less thanl fix years.
Campoln. i. 406. Such a demand nmuf have p)ut muuch
indullry in nmut;on, and have excited extraordinary f-
forts. Accordingly, v' re informed, that i the begin-
ning of Philip II.'s reign, the city of Seville alone, lwhere
the trade with America centered, gave employment to
no fewer tan 6,oo0 looms in silk or woollen work, anid
that above 13o0,000 ])erlos hlad occulpatioi in carrying on
hlicie nanufcLurcs Camllpom. ii. 472. But lo r.ilid and

plernicious

pernicious was the operation of the causes which I hall
enumerate, that before Philip III. ended his reign, the
looms in Seville were reduced to 400. Uztariz, c. 7.

SINCE heC publication of the firlt edition, I have the

fttisfaCtiot to find my ideas concerning the early com-
nlercial intcrcourfe between Spain and her colonies con-
tirncd and illullrated by D. Bernardo Ward, of the Junta
de Conmercio at Madrid, in his Pro.ycLo Economics, Part ii.
c. . '" Under the reigns of Charles V. and Philip II." fays
lie, " the imanulfaclurlcs of Spain and of the Low Coun-
tries subjet to h!er dominion were in a molt flourifhilng
Alate. 'lliofe f France and England were in their in-
fancy. The republic of the United Provinces did not then
cxiit. No European power but Spain had colonies of any
value in the New World. Spain could supply her fettle-
nlents there with the podtcldions of her own foil, the fa-
brics wrought by the hands of her own artisans, and all
ille received in return for these belonged to herself alone.
Then the exclusion of foreign manufacures was proper, bc-
caule it mlght be rendered effectual. Then Spain might
lay hcavy duties upon goods exported to America, or
imported from it, and might impose what reitraints he
deemed proper upon a commerce entirely in her own
hlands. But when time and successive revolutions had oc-
calioned an alteration in all those circumflances, when the
manuftldtlrcs of Spain began to decline, and the demands
of America were filpplicd by foreign fabrics, the original
maxilms and regulations of Spain fliould have been accom-
inod:itel to the change in licr situation. The policy that
was \wife at one period, became absurd in the other."

OTE

NOTE LXIV. p. 322.
j0 bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of treaSure

is examined. Both are received on t credit of the

persons to whom they belong; and onl! one instance of
fiaud is recorded, (luring the long period in which tradie
was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-bello
in the year 1654, was found to be adulterated, and to e
mingled with a ifth part of base metal. The Sparilh
merchiants, with feintiments suitable to their ulhal intc-
grity, fullained le whole lots, and indemnified the o-
riciners, by whoin they were employed. The fraud was
detected, and the treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the
author of it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de

ianuif. &c. liv. ii. p. 102.

NOTE LXV. p. 327. r
M A.NY firiling proofs occur of the fearcity of money

in Spain. Of all the immense films which have

been imported froni America, tlle amount of which I
lhall afterwards have ocafion to mention, Moncada as-
feats that there did not remain in Spain, in 1619, alove
two hundred mnillions of pess, one als in coined money,
the ot;cr in plate and jewels. 1ellaur. d. Efagna, Dilc.
iii. c. i. LU tla;'iz, who pubiliied hll \;.ilutIl)le work i11
1724, contends, i.at in mion'ey, ])late, anmd jewels, there
(hid not irciili liuli idl l iill;n . Ih'li or. . c. 3.
Cainp)oi;ii;!as, on! the authority of a reCim(.;llialic froi th
collinillity oft :cr ;!ts in Toledo to l'hili)p III. rel.tes, as
a certainl pro)i hw

li ,rce callih ad lLcoIie, that pcriotts

w11o lent iio111; , rcceivc(d a liid pil't of tile fill xVIi;(1h
ilt y advanced as Iit-crci

and iu. LEdcnc. PoliIIl.
1. 417.

NOTE

NOTE LXVI. p. 330.

It E account of the mode in which the fathors of t!:
South Sea Company condulcted the trade il the fair

of Porto-bello, which was opened to thlcn by the Affiento,
I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y ilcrrcra, prlci-
d-nt of the court-of Audience in Q!ito, and governor ot
that province. Don Dionv fio was a person of such a -
ip)eable characlr tor probity and difccrnment, that Iii.i
tcttlro;io, in any point, would be of muwh weight; imi.
greater credit is due to it in this cafc, as he was an c!ec-
v.itnels tsf tle tranifat ion: ; which ie relates, and was often
employed in detccting and authenticating tle frauds wlhi Ii
lie deftcribes. It is probable, however, that his reprc-
fentation, being coinpoeed at the conniencement of the
war which broke out between Great Britain and Spain, in
the year 1739, may, in foie inllanccs, discover a por-
tion of the' acrimonious spirit, natural at that jundurec.
Ils detail of fats is curious; and even English authors
coifirm it in some degree, by admitting both that va-
rious frauds were pradifed in the tranfa:tions of the an-
nual ihip, and that the contraband trade from Jamnaica,
and other British colonies, was become cnormoully great.
But for the credit of the Englihf nation it may be ob-
served, that thule raudulent operations arc not to be
confidered as deeds of tile company, but as the dilhonour-
allc arts of their falors and agents. 'The company itfllf
fl(ainicd a confiderablc lols by the Aflicnto trade. Many
it is Ifrvailts acquired imlncinfe fortucs. Anlderfon
Clironol. dcduct. ii. 388.

NO t';

NOTE LXVII. p 337.
S EVERAL faas with refpcft to the inflitution, the

progress, and the effccls, of this company, are ci-

rious, and but little known to English readers. Tlough
the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends folur
hundred miles along the coalt, and is one of the nift
fertile ill America; it was o much neglctled bh the
Spaniards, that during the twenty years prior to the efla-
blifhment of the company, only five ships failed from
Spain to that province; and during 16 years, fiom 17c6
to 1722, not a ingle lhip arrived from the Caraccas in
Spain. Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas, ;. 28.
During this period Spain mufl have been fh)pplie-d al-
mnolt entirely with tlie large quantity of cacao, which it
confunies, lb foreigners. Before the ereltion of tie
company), neither tobacco nor hides wecre imported from
Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. 117. Since the comimercial
operations of the company began in the year J731, tle
importation of cacao into Spain has increaled aazingly.
During thilty years ubfequcnit to 1701, the nm:lber of
]Fngas of cacao (each a hluidred and ten pounds) im-
ported from Caraccas, was 643,215. DLuring cig:tcen
years ubfequcnt to 173r, the number of ';o;'ri;s inm-
ported was 869,247 and if we fiippof the import.ion
to be continuted in the anme proportion irlu itle ic-
lmailnde of thirty )yca:s, it wiill aniotml to 1,448,74(6 /,;-
~w'Y1[, wi ich is an inc'rcal.c of 85, I l 'an,'ras. I.
p. 148. D l)lliii eiglit )'cars luble(lquclt to 1756, thre
las becen i)ported into Spain by tile Coinpany, 88,482
/,'i)2/ils (cacl tvcnt!-five pounils) of to.i:co ; and hides
to the nuI1ber of 177,354. Id. 16i. Since te pullica-
tion o' tile Noticias dc Caml)ania, in 1765, its tradei flns
lo be on tlic inr cale. DLril, five years uibfleqtleut to

y^

1769, it has imported 179,I56 Fanegas of cacao it
Spain, 36,208 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and
221,432 pesos in fpecic. Cainpoimaics, ii .

62. Ie l.lt

article is a proof of the growing wealth of the colony.
It receives cash from Mexico in return for the cacao,
with which it,fiipplies tlat province, and this it remits to
Spain, or lays out in purchasing European goods. 1But,
besides this, the moll explicit evidence is produced, that
the quantity of cacao raised in the province is double to
what it yielded in 173I ; the inumber of its live-floc is
more than treble, and its inhabitants much anicentcd.
The revenue of the bilhop, which aifs wholly frol,
tythles, has increased from eight to twenty thonfand pels.
Notic. p. 69. In confequcnce of tle augmentatioll of
the quantity of cacao imported into Spain, its price ias
decreased from eighty pclos for the fiaega to forty. Id.
61. Since the publication of the first edition, I have
learned that Guyana, including all tlie extensive pro-
vinces situated on the banks of the Orinoco, the illands
of Trinidad and Margarita are added to the countriCs
with which the company of Caraccas had liberty of tradl
by their former charters. Real Ccdula, Nov. 19, ! C776.
But I have likewise been informed, tat tie ililitution
of this company has not been attended with all the benc-
ficial cffecs which I have ascribed( to it. In many of its
operations the illiberal and oppreflive spirit of nmonopoly
is conl)icuous. But in order to explain this, it would
be ncccelary to enter into minute dt.ils, wvhicl are inut
suitcd to the nature of tills work.

NOTE LXVIII. . 344.
'T HI S sirs[ cxperimlent madc b) Spaini of openling a fC

trade with any of her colon i:s, lis produced cll.'.ls
so rleaikasLc, as to Ilerit luiBue ilrtliur illuilratioil. The

tUWIs;

towns to which this liberty hlas been granted, are Ca(l?.
and Seville, for the province of And.iitlia ; Alicant and
Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia ; Barcelona, tor
Catalonia and Arragon ; Santandcr, for Callile ; Co-
rugna, for Galicia; and Gijon, for Afprins. Append. ii.
a la Educ. Popul. . 41. Thlele arc ither the ports of
chief trade in their rciecaixe d ailnria;, or It:ci :iiuii coln-
veniently situated for the expoitationi of tli;r rc.liedive
prodctionis. The following ladts give a view of t!c in-
crease of trade in the cfttlclnctts to \,'hic the new re-
gulations extend. Prior to th!e alil o\;:. c of fire trade(, the
duties col!eted in the cuit'),i-li)iic at te I-I,avannall were
computed to be 104,.'28 pcl);s amnnall)'. D!ritgr the
five years preceding 1 774, tlic rose at a niediurn to
308,000 pclos a yedr. 1I1 Ytucatan, the duties have rieil:
from 8,000 to 5,cco. In Hifianiola, from 2,500 to
5,600. In Porto-Rico, fron 1,200 to 7,0oo. The to-
tal value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, v.'s
reckoned, in 1774, to be 1,500,000 pcfois. l:Euc.
Popul. i. 450, &c.

NOTE LXIX. p. 350.
jII E two Treatires of Don Pedro I'.o(l':,ucz C:lnno-

mianeLS'S, 'iJcuIl (1 rd/'! jjs y Sipi,';'i (an oicc in

rank and )power nearly si lllar to tlt u(s AttrollCe Ge(l--
ral in England), and Director of tle lo(!al Acadcn. of
Hinforv, thle one intitled Difcuribo lo,,r- c l(.Inirrn(lo ldc lb
Indullria Popular; the other, Dil itIfo lobc Li Educe-
cion Popular de los Atefanlos y Ill i'nIICIto; thel loi'r.r
publill'd(l in 1774', and tile 1,tter in 1775, afford a llil:-
ing lpr'of of tis. Aliiot1 everv pl.il t oif iliportaCe
with rfp)tci'l to ilit'tir p)licc, tx.ltiololl, .;:'r;CLIlttre, :ia-
iILltlt urcs, alld traJl-, doinle: ic ; .vc!l a, itorcig, is :':j-

l^ I 1: 1I:....

mined in tle course of there works; and there are not
many authors, even in the nations inof eminent for coim-
mercial knowlcdge, who have carried on their enqiirics
with a more thorough knowledge of those various filb-
jcts, and a more perfect freedom from vulgar and na-
tional prejudices, or who have unitcld more happily the
calm researches of philofoplh, with the ardlct zeal of' a
public-fpirited citizen. Thele books are in high cfinia-
tion among the Spaniards, and it is a decifivc evidence of
the progrels of their own ideas, that they are capable ot
relishing an author whose sentiments are lo liberal.

NOTE LXX. p.355.
T HE galeon employed in that trade, inftcad of the si<

hunlrcd tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop.

lib. xlv. 1. 5. is commonly from twelve hundred to
two thousand tons burden. The ship froi Acapulco,
tatken by Lord Anson, inftlad of the 500,000 pesos per-
mitted by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, besides Ln-
coined ilver equal in value to 43,611 pesos more. Aln-
son's Voyage, 34.1

NOTE LXXI. p. 357.
T- HEI price paid for tle bull varies accordilng to he

rank of different perluns. Thole ill the lowel older,

who are servants or lavcs, pay two reals of plate, or one
flliling; other Spalliards pay eight rcils, and thole in
public olicc, or vwlo hold ccolnin-:i ;, fixtCee r(.ls.
Solorz. de Juic Id. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According
to Chillon, a Enl;lilh inmrcliant \vlho refi.!. long in tile
Spanill leidlllimcnts the bull of Cru/zao bore an higher
price ill the'year 1570, being then fld for flolr reals at
the lorafll. Ilackluvt, iii. 461, 'l: Iri.( lic .ins o have

i r va ied

varied at diffrent periods. That exac6ed for the bulls
issued in the last Predicaion, will appear from the ensuing
table, which will give ome idea of the proportional num-
bers of the different classes of citizens in New Spain and
Peru.

There were iued for New Spain,
Bulls at o1 pesos each - - 4

at 2 pesos each - - - 22,60o
at peso each - - - 164,220
at 2 reals each - - 2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

at 6 pesos 4 reals each - - 3
at 3 pesos 3 reals each - - 14,202
at I peso 5 reals - - - 78,822
at 4 reals - - - 4o,325
at 3 reals .- - 668,60o

J,I71,953

NOTE LXXII. p. 358.
A S Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this in-

formation contained in his Theatro Americano, pub-

lilhed in Mexico, A. D. 1746, was accomptant-general il
one of the most considerable departments of the royal re-
venue, and by that means had access to proper informa-
tion, his teflitnony with refpet to this point merits great
credit. No such accurate detail of the Spanish revenues
in any part of America, has hitherto been publiled in the
Englilh language, and the particulars of it may appear cu-
rious and interefling to some of my readers.
VOL. III. F f FROM

FROM the bull of Cruzada, publifled every two years,
there ariles an annual revenue in pesos IS0,000

From the duty on silver - - - 700,000
From the duty on gold - - 60,oo
From tax on cards - - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Indians - - - I61,ooo

Trom tax on flamped paper - 41,00o
From ditto on ice --. 15,522
From ditto on leather - - 2,500
From ditto on gunpowder - - 7,550
From ditto on salt - - - 32,o00
From ditto on copper of Mechocan - ,0oo
From ditto on alum - - 6,5co
From ditto on Juego de los gallos - 21,1C0,
From tile half of ecclesiastical annats - 49,o00
F'rom royal ninth of bi!hopricks, &c. - 68,80.
From the tribute of Indians - 650,c00
From Alcavala, or duty on ale of go(ods 721,875
From the Almajorifafgo, c;ltom-lhoufe 373,333
From the mint - - - 357,

3,552,680

THIS fum amounts to 819,1611. Sterling; and if nwe

add to it the profit accruing from the ale of 5000 quitals
of quicksilver, imported from the mines of Almanldn, in
Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues from the
Averia, and some pther taxes which Villa Segnor does not
eltimate, the public revenue in New Spain may well Ibe
reckoned above a million pou(nds ilerling noney. Tlhct.
Mex. vol. i p. 38, &c. According to Villa Sgnor,
tlhe total proluce of tle IMexican illilIcs, amoults at ;
medirum to eielt millions of pesos in ilvcr annually, ai1l
to 5912 Lmarks of gold. b. p. 4 . Several brancles 1,i

tlc

the revenue have been explained in the course of tle his-
tory; ome, which there was no occasion of mentioning,
require a particular illultration. The right to the ythes
in the New \Vorld, is veiled in the crown of Spain, by
a bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to
be applied in the following manner: One fourth is allotted
to the bishop of the diocefe,'another fourth to the dean and
chapter, and other officers of the cathedral. The re-
maining half is divided into nine equal parts. Two of
these, under the denomination of los dos Novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and constitute a branch of the
roval revenue. The other seven parts are applied to the
maintenance of the parochial clergy, the building and
support of churches, and other pious uscs. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur. Indic.
vol. i. p. 184.

THE Alcavala is a duty levied by an excise on the

sale of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. Iit
America, to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
lib. vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 186.

TilE Alnajorififgo, or cuflon paid in America on

goods imported and exported, may amount on an average
to fiftccn per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. I.
Avendano, vol. i. 188.

THE Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to

.guard the flips failing to and from America, was firit
ilnpofld when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expeditionll thei South Sea. It amounts
to two per cent, on the value of goods. Avendano, vol, i.
p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Lcy. 43, 44.

F f z I hIAVE

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail of

the several branches of revenue in Peru, later than the
year 1614. From a curious manuscript, containing a
fate of that vice-royally in all its departments, prefcnted
to tle Marquis of Montcs-Claros, by Fran. Lopez Ca-
ravantes, accoinptant-glleral in the tribunal of Lima, it
appears, that tile public revenuc, as nearly as 1 can
compute the value of the money in which Caravantes
states his accounts, amounted in ducats at 4s. Ild.,
to - - - 2,372,768

Expences of government - 1,242,992

Net free revenue 1,I29,776

The total in sterling money - . 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this com-

putation, such as the duty on stamped paper, leather, ec-
clefialtical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru may be
well supposed equal to that of Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a tfandard. There the
annual establishment for defraying the charge of admini-
ftration, exceeds one half of the revenue colleded, and
there is no reason for supposing it to be less in New
Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount of
the public revenue of Spain from America and the Philip-

pines,

pines, which, as the reader will perceive from the two
last articles, is more recent than any of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas (Cuf-

toms), &c. in pesos fuertes - 2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - - 3,000,000
Bull of Cruzada - - 1,000,000
Tribute of the Indians - - 2,000,000
By sale of quicksilver - 300,00o
Paper exported on the king's account,

and fold in the royal warlchouIs - 300,000
Stamped paper, tobacco, and otlicr frmall

duties - - 1,000,000
Duty on coinage of, at thl rate of one

real de la 'l.ita for each nark - 300,000
From the trade of Acapuico, and thle coast-

ing trade from province to province, 500,0oo

Affiento of negroes - - 200,000
From the trade of l'ali/, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly nlonopolized by the
Jesuits - - - 500,
From other revenues formerly belonging

to that order - - 400,000

Total 12,00o,000

Total in flerling money . 2,700,000
Deduc half, as the expence of admini-

flration, and there rcniailis net free
rc\tllC;e - - . /. 1,350,000

1 f 3 NOTE

NOTE LXXIII. p. 358.

AN author, long conversant in commercial speculation,
. has computed, that from the mines of New Spain
alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth, te funi
of two millions of our money. Harris ColleO. of Voy. ii.
p. 164. According to this calculation, the total produce
of the mines mull be ten millions fierling; a fum so ex-
orbitant, and so little corresponding with all accounts of
the annual importation from America, that the informa-
tion on which it is founded mut evidently be erroneous.
According to Campomanes, the total product of the Ame-
rican mines may be computed at thirty millions of pfos,
which~ at four shillings and sixpence a peso, amounts to
7,425,000 1. flerling, the king's fifth of which (if that
were regularly paid) would be ,485,000 1. But from
this um the expence of administration is to be deducSed,
which is very considerable, as appears from the preceding
note., Educ. Popplar, vol. ii..p. 131. note.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 359.
ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign goods

exported fromn Spain to America pay duties of various

kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per cent. As
inoft qs the goods with which Spain fuplplies her colonies
are foreign; such a tax upon a trade so cxtenfivc illt
yield a considerable revenuc. Rctablif. de Manus. & (dl
Commerce d'Efp. p. 50. He computes the value of
goods exported annually from Spain to Amcrica, to be
about two millions and a half flcrliig, p. 97.

NOT E

NOTE LXXV. p. 361.
T HE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by

a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the

Manila trade as well as in that to Spain, gained annually a
million of ducats. In one year he remitted a million of
ducats to Spain, in order to purchase from the Condc
Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation of his go-
vernment, p. 61. He was successful in his suit, and
continued in office from 6.24 to 1635, double the usual
time.

F f 4 INDEX.

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Page.

A
A/B SSrNIA, an embassy ent to that country by

John II. king of Portugal, i. 80.
d4capulco, the nature of the trade carried on from thence to

Manila, iii. 354. Amount of the treasure on board the
ship taken by Lord Anion, 432.
Acofia, his method of accounting for the different degrees

of heat, in the old and new continents, ii. 419.
Adair, his account of the revengeful temper of the native

Americans, ii. 459.
Adanfon, his justification of Hanno's account of the Afri-

call eas, i. 353.
Africa, the weflern coafl of, firIt explored by order of

John I. king of Portugal, i. 58. Is discovered from
Cape Non, to Bojador, 60. Cape Bojador doubled,
66. The countries southward of the River Senegal
discovercd, 74. Cape of Good HIope seen by Bartho-
lomew Dias, 79. Causes of the extreme heat of the
climate there, ii. ii. Ignorance of the ancient aflro-
nomers concerning, i. 354.
Agriculture, tihe ate of, among the native Americans,

ii. 17. Two principal caufcs of the defeas of, 122.
Aguador is sent ro 1-lifpaiola, as a conniflnioncr to infl)pc

the condud of Columbus, i. 187.
Aguilar., Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity

among the Indians at Cozujiicl, by FeriInando Cortes,
ii. 243.
Al/bitrltrUeu, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the In-

dians of Hifpaniiiil, i. 304.
AlcIvala, in the Spanili customs, the term explained,

iii. 435.

Alcxan/ci

Alexander the Greta, his political character, i. 20. His

motive in founding the city of Alexandria, 21. His dif-
coveries in India, 22, 23.
,ilexander VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Isabella of

Caflilc, the right of all their western discoveries, i.
162. Sends ilfionarics with Columbus on his second
voyage, 163.
sAlmagro, Diego de, his birth and charaaer, iii. 4. Afro-

ciates with Pizarro and de Luque, in a voyage of disco-
very, ibid. His unsuccessful attempts, 6. Is neglecqed
by Pizarro in his Spanifi negociation, 16. Is recon-
ciled to him, 17. Brings reinforcements to Pizarro at
Peru, 39. Beginning of dissensions between him and
Pizarro, 56. Invades Chili, 60. Is created governor
of Chili, and marches to Cuzco, 66. Seizes Cuzcu,
out of the hands of Pizarro, 67. Defeats Alvarado,
and takes him prisoner, 69. Is deceived by the artful
negociations of Francis Pizarro, 70. Is defeated by
the Pizarros, 74. Is taken prisoner, 75. Is tried and
condemned, 77. Is put to death, 78.
Ailnugro, the son, affords refuge to his father's followers

at Lima, iii. 88. His character, 89. Heads a con-
fpiracy against Francis Pizarro, ibid. Pizarro affaffi-
nated, 90. Is acknowledged as his successor, 92. His
precarious situation, 93. Is defeated by Vaca de Cafiro,
96. Is betrayed and executed, 97.
uInajorifafgo, in the Spaniih American cufloms, the amount

of, iii. 435.
Alvar-ado, Alonzo, is sent from Lima, by Francis Pi-

zarro, with a body of Spaniards to relieve his brothers
at Cuzco, iii. 68. Is taken priloner by Almagro, 69.
Hiis cfcapc, 71.
Alhvarado, Pedro de, is left by Cortez to command al

Mexico, while lie marched against Narvaez, ii. 322.
He is bcficgcd by the Mexicans, 336. His imprudent
conduLt, 337. Hsis expedition to Quito in Peru, iii.
53.
jnsazos, a community of, fIiid to cxilt in South Ancr i(l,

by Francis Orcllllna, iii. 86.
,lfr,-ica, tle continent of, dilcovered by Chrifloplier Co-

lumbus, i. 198. How it obtained this lname, 214. Ser-
dinand of Crlile nominatcs two governments in, 272.

'hie

The propositions offered to the natives, 273. Ill recep,
tion of Ojeda and NicueiTa among them, 274. The
South Sea discovered by Balboa, 290. Rio de Plata
discovered, 302. The natives of, injuriously treated
by the Spaniards, 331. The valt extent of, ii. 2.
The grand objects it pcfented to view, 3. The cir-
cumilances of, favourable for commerce and civiliza-
tion, 5. The climates of, 7, 8. Various caues of
the peculiarity of its climates, o. Its rude and un-
cultivated Rtate when first dilcovered, 15. Its ani-
mals, 18. Its infeSll and reptiles, 20. Birds, 22. Ge-
lieral account of its foil, 23. Inquiry into the firfl po-
pulation of, 25. Could not be peopled by civilized na-
tions, 33. The northern extremity of, contiguous
to Asia, 38. Probably peopled by Asiatics, 47. Con-
dition and character of the native inhabitants inquired
into, 49. Were more rude than the natives of any
other known parts of the earth, 51. The Peruvians
and Mexicans excepted, 52. The first difcovercrs in-
capable of a judicious speculative examination, 54. The
various systems of philosophers refpetling the natives,
56. Method observed in the prelent review of their
bodilv constitution and circumstances, 59. The venereal
disease derived from this part of the world, 87. Why
so thinly inhabited, 129. The country depopulated by
continual wars, 172. Calfe of the extreme coldness to-
ward the southern extremity of, 424.. The natural un-
cultivated Riate of the country described, 426. Bones
of large extinl:t fiecics of animals dilcovered under
ground near the banks; of tile Ohio, 427. Why Eu-
ropean animals degenerate there, 428. Supposed to have
une(lrgone a convulsive separation fromn Asia, 432.
lThe vicinit) of til two contincnts of Alia and America
clearly ascertained, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438. Caufcs
of tile dcpopulation ol, traced, iii. 252. This depo
pulation not the relillt of any intentional fvllcn of po-
licy, 255. Nor the rclilt of religion, .57. Nmlber of
Indliain atives 11ill Irenmaiilg il Mexico anild Peru, 258.
All tlIe Slpallifh dolinions there, liibjcclc to two vice-
roys, 262. Its llird vicelovalty lat elliblillcd, 263.
See M4i'.i3, 1'cru, (r.'s/, J'i ',lro, 8&c.

Americans,

.mericans, native, in Spanifli America, their bodily con-

flitution and complexion, ii. 60. Their strength
and abilities, 62. Their insensibility with regard to
their women, 64. No deformities in their frame,
7i. This circumflance accounted for, 72. Uni-
formity of their colour, 74. A peculiar race of, de-
fcribed, 77. The Efquimaux, 80. Patagonians, 81.
The existence of Patagonian giants yet remaining to
be decided, 83. Their diseases, 84. The venereal
difcafe peculiarly theirs, 86. The powers and qua-
lities of their minds, 88. Are only solicitous to
supply immediate wants, 90. The art of computa-
tion, scarcely known to them, 91. Have no ab-
lrat ideas, 93. The North Americans much more
intelligent than those of the South, 95. Their aver-
sion to labour, 97. Their social tfate, loo. Do-
nmctic union, 101. The women, 103. Their women
not prolific, o6. Their parental affetion and filial
dutv, o8. Their modes of subsistence, III. Fish-
ing, 112. HuFting, 114. Agriculture, 117. The
various objects of their culture, ibid. Two principal
causes of the defects of their agriculture, 122. Their
want of tame animals, ibid. Their want of xlfeful
metals, I25. Their political inflitutions, 128. Were
divided into finall independent communities, ibid. Un-
acquainted with the idea of property, 130. Their
high sense of equality and independence, 131. Their
ideas of subordination imperfect, 133. To what tribes
these descriptions apply, 135. Some exceptions, 136.
Florida, 137. The Natchez, 138. The islands, 139.
In Bogota, ibid. Inquiry into the causes of these ir-
regularities, 141. Their art of war, 144. Their ino-
tives to holtility, 145. Causes of their ferocity, 146.
Perpetuity of their animofities, 148. Their modes
of conducting war, 149. Are not destitute of col-
rage and fortitude, 151. Incapable of military dif-
ripline, I53. Their treatment of prisoners, 154.
Their fortitude under torture, 56. Never cat hbi-
mnan flesh but to gratify revcnge, 159. How the South
Americans treated their prisoners, 6o. Their mili-
tary\ education, 16. Strange method of chufing a
captail1, among the Indians on the banks of the Ori-

lOCo0

noco, 162. Their numbers wafled by continual wars,
1 65. Their tribes now recruit their numbers by
adopting priloncrs, 166. Are never formidable in
war, to more poliicdl nations, 167. Their arts,
dress, and ornaments, i68, 169. Their habitations, 172.
Their arms, 175. Their domeflic utensils, 177.
Conftrution of their canecs, 178. The litlelhnefs
with which they apply to labollr, 179. Their re-
ligion, 182. Some tril'cs altogether deilitute of any,
84. Rtemarkable diverfitl in tl.ir lcigiit:, notions,
188. Their ideas of the inmoiit.iitv of te loul, 191.
Their modes of burial, 93. \Why their Ip)liciuns
pretend to be conjurers, 195. Their love ot diicing,
199. Their immoderate pallion for gmling, 202. Are
extremely addicted to drunkenncs, 203. IPut their
aged and incurable to death, 208. General climate of
their charaaer, 209. Their intelletulal powers, 21o.
Their political talents, 211. Powers of afrection,
213. Hardncfs of heart, 214. Their iniilfibility,
215. Taciturnity, 217. Tlheir cunning, 2t8. Their
virtues, 220. Their spirit of independencl, ihi. For-
titude, ibid. Attachment to their community, 221.
Their fatisfaaion with their own condition, 222. Ge-
neral caution with refpcct to this inquiry, 225. Two
diftinguiflable clafes of, 227. Exceptio:s as to
their charaater, 229. Their cllaraieriflic features
described, 439. Inflances of their persevering speed,
440. An antipathy idufirioufly enccuraged between
them and the negroes in America, by the Spa-
niards, iii. 280. Their present condition, 282. How
taxed, 283. Stated services deimanded from them,
284. Mode of exacting there clrviccs, 285. I-low
governed, 286. Protelctorof the Indians, his fun(ltion,
ibid. Reasons why so finall a progress is made in their
conversion, 299.
Amerigo Vespucci publiflies the firll written account of the

New World, and hence gave name to America, i. 213.
His claim as a dilcovercr examined, 380.
Anacoana, a female cazique of Hifpanola, her base and

cruel uge y the Spaniards, i. 255.
Andes, flupendous height and extent of that range of

mountains, ii. 4. Their height coinared with other

15 mnountains,

nountains, 417. Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkable e.pc-
dition over, iii. 82.
Animals, large, vcry few found in America at its first diC-

covery, ii. I8.
Ancients, cause of the imperfecEion of the art of navigation

among them, i. 6. Their geographical knowledge ex-
tremely confined, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357.
Arabians peculiarly attached to the fludy of geography,

i. 39.
Argonauts, the expedition of, why so famous among the

Greeks, i. 16, 17.
Arithmetic, or computation, the art of, hardly known to

the native Americans, ii. 91.
Afcolino, father, his extraordinary mifion to the prince of

the Tartars, i. 46.

Aiatic discoveries made by the Ruffians, ii. 38.
Afiento trade, the nature of, cxplained, iii. 329. The

frauds in, and how put an end to, 330, 331.
Atahualpa, is left by his father Huafcar his successor in

the kingdom of Quito, iii. 25. Defeats his brother
Huafcar, and usurps the empire of Peru, 26. SenLi.
presents to Pizarro, 29. Visits Pizarro, 33. Is perli-
dioufly seized by him, 36. Agrees with Pizarro on a
ran'om, 38. Is refufied his liberty, 42. His behaviour
during his confinement, 45. A form of trial beflowned
on him, 46. Is put to death, 48. Compariobn of au-
thorities relating to his tranfadions with, and treat-
ment by, Pizarro, 370.
Audience of New Spain, board of, eflablifhcd by the Emr.

peror Charles V. ii. 41 . Courts of, their jurifdiEtioul
iii. 264.
Averia, a Spanifl tax for convoy to and fronm Amcric.i

when firl ipofcd, iii. 435. Its rte, ibid.
Azores, thofc illands dilcovcred by the Portuguese, i. 72.

B
l', iBI'1i, \;alE( Nugnez de, fett!cs a colony at SanC;

Maria, in thi gulplh of Darien, i. 276. Receives intcl
ligencle of the rich cluitrv of P'crI, 28.4. H1is li;i-
latctr, 287. Marches aciull. thel ilhinus, 2Q8. Dil-

12 cover':

tcovers the Southern Ocean, 29o. Returns, 291. Is
superseded in his command by the appointment of Pe-
drarias Davila, 294. Is fined by Pedrarias for former
tranfacdions, 295. Is appointed lieutenant-governor of
the countries on the South Sea, and marries Pedrarias's
daughter, 298. Is arrefled and put to death by Pedra-
rias, 300.

Ba7'k, Jefitits, a producion peculiar to Pert, iii. 3o.
Barrere, his description of the conlruction of Indian house,

ii. 467.
Behain, Martin, the honour of having discovered America

falfelv ascribed to lim by foine German authors, i. 37 1.
Account of himn and his famiiy, 372.
Behring and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought to

have discovered the northl-weft extremity of America
from the eaftvard, ii. 41. Uncertainty of tleir ac-
counts, 432.
Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces the kingdom

of Qtito, iii. 52. Is deprived of his command lb Pi-
zarro, 83.
Benjamin the Jew of Tudela, lhis extraordinary travels,

i. 45.
Bernalds, instance of the bravery of the Caribbees men-

tioned by him, ii. 473.
Betlencourr, John de, a Norman baron, conquers and pof-

fcffes the Canary Illan(ls, i. 54.
Birds, an account of those natural to America, ii. 22. T'ie

flight of, often iltrciit to an iiimcni ditfflace from lamn,
i. 364.
Bogota in America, some account of the inhabitants

f', i. 141. Caulcs of their tiie filmiifioni to te
Spaniarns, 145. Their rcligious duMtrincs and rites,

201.
Barrdor, cape, te sirs discovery of, i. 6. Is doubled by

tlhe Pol tigtif t'il(ovcrcrs, 6(m.
,B/i, his accolunt of tile Amricanr l \\vr-rfi)g, ii. 462.
B';Jvadi/la, l'r;Ucis de, is flrt to lifjlaiola to iiqtirel into

the coMiludt of Coltuillmbus, i. 220. Sends ColuIILmbus
home in ioc, '222. Is degraded, 225. .230.
Bsftga'I;V,:l, ti:;. dllence of the Peripilus of Il.rnno, i.

352.

Bouguer, M. his charadcer of the native Peruvians, ii.

445.
BraJil, the coast of, discovered by Alvarez Cabral, i. 216.

Remarks on the climate of, ii. 422.

Bridges, Peruvian, described, iii. 398.
Buenos Ayres, in South America, some account of that

province, iii. 240.
Bulls, papal, of no force in Spanish America, before exa-

mined and approved by the royal council of the Indies,
iii. 290. See Cruzado.
Burial of the dead, American mode of, ii. 193.

C
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander, discovers the

coafl of Brasil, i. 216.
Cacoa, the belt in quality, produced in the Spanish Ame-

rican colonies, iii. 31 . The preparation of chocolate
from, derived from the Mexicans, 335.
Cadiz, the galeons and flota, removed thither from Seville,

iii. 321.
California, the peninsula of, discovered by Fernando Cor-

tes, ii. 412. The true state of this country long un-
known, iii. 231. Why depreciated by the Jesuits,
232. Favourable account of, given by Don Joseph
Galvez, 233.

Californians, the characer of, by P. Venegas, ii. 448.
Campeachy, discovered by Cordova, who is repulsed by the

natives, i. 340.
Campomnanes, Don Pedro Rodriguez, character of his po-

litical and commercial writings, iii. 431. His ac-
count of the prbduce of the Spanilh American incs,
430.
Canary islands erecled into a kingdom by pope Clement VI.

i. 54. Are conquered by John de Bethencourt, ibid.
Cannibals, no people ever found to eat human flclh for sub-

fiflence, though often for revenge, ii. 158. 462.
Ca loes, American, the conltrudion of, describcd, ii.

186.

Caraccas,

Caraccas, establishment of the company trading to that

coast, iii. 335. Growth of the trade, 425.
Caribbee islands, discovered by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 164.
Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 229. Their

charaEter by MI. de Chanvalon, 448. Probable con-
jecQure as to the diftintion in claracter between them
and the natives of the larger ilands, 474.
Carpini, his extraordinary million to the prince of the

Tartars, i. 46.
Cairthagena, the harbour of, the safest and best fortified

of any in all the Spanilh American dominions, iii.
244.
Carthaginians, slate of commerce and navigation among,

i. I . Thefamous vJ)ages of Hanno and Hi-milco,
13.
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Castor's

victory over young Almagro, iii. 96. Encourages
Gonzalo Pizarro to assume the government of Peru,
115. Advises Pizarro to assume the fbvereignty of
the country, 120. Is seized by Gafca and executed,
'37.
Caflillo, Bernal Diaz del, charaaer of his Hiltoria

Vardadera de la Conquilta de la Nueva Efpagna, ii.
477.
Centens, Diego, revolts frorn Gonzalo Pizarro to the

viceroy of Peru, iii. 117. Is defeated by Carvajal, and
secretes himself in a cave, 119. Sallies out and seizes
Cuzco, 132. Is reduced by Pizarro, 133. Is em-
ployed by Gafca to make discoveries in the regions
about the river Plata, 143.
Chianvalon, M. de, his character of the native Caribbees,

ii. 448.
Chapetones, in the Spanish American colonies, who thus

diltinguiflled, iii. 277.
ChIrles III. king of Spain, eflablilhes packet-boats be-

tween Spain and the colonies, iii. 338. Allows free
trade to the windwardl ilands, 340. Grants the colo-
nies a free trade with cachl other, 343.
Charles V. emperor, ctinds Roderigo de Figueroa to His-

paniola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatment of
the Indians, i. 319. Caulc'; tis ulbjecl to be debated

VOL. III. G g before

before him, 327. Equips a squadron at the solicitation
of Fcrdinand Magellan, ii. 393. Resigns his claim on
the MIoluccas to-the Portuguese, 399. Appoints Cortes
governor of New Spain, 402. ewards him on coming
home, 410. Eflablifhes a board called the Audience of
New Spain, 411. His consultations on American as-
fairs, iii. 97. Eftablilhes new regulations, 103.
Chi/i, is invaded by Almalgro, iii. 60. How fubjeded

by the Spaniards, 235. Excellence of its climate and
foil, 23b. Cauf ot its being negledted, 27. Profpel
of its improvement, 238.
Chiquitos, political Itate of that people, from Fernandcz,

ii. 458.

Chocolate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans, iii. 335.
Cholula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there, with lbruc

account of the town, ii. 28. A conspiracy against
Cortes discovered, and the inhabitants destroyed,
291.

Cicero, inflance of his ignorance in geography, i. 358.
Cinaloa, political Rate of the people there, i. 458. Their

mode of living, 466. Are deflitute of all religion,
470. E;traordinary large grain of gold found there,
iI. 399.
Cineguilla, in the province -of Sonora, late discoveries of

rich mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 231. Pro-
bable effeds of these dilcoveries, ibid.
Clavigero, M. several of his obje6ions answered, iii. 417-

423.
Clement VI. pope, erects the Canary islands into a king-

dom, i. 54.
Climates, influenced by a variety of caures, ii. 8. Their

operation on mankind, 226. Inquiry into the caufc of
the different-degrees of hcat in, 4 9.
Cochineal, an important producion, alniof peculiar t(

New Spain, ii. 310.
Cold, extraordinary predominance of, in the climate of

America, ii. 8. Causes of this peculiarity, 10.
Colonies, Spanish American, view of the policv and trade

of, iii. 251. Depopulation the firt effct of thein,
ibid. Causes of this depopulation, 252. The Inlall-
pox very fatal to, 254. General idea of the Sparill
policy in, 260. Early interposition of the regal auth,-

ritv

rity in, 261. An exclusive trade the firlt objet in,
269. Compared with those of ancient Greece and
Rome, 270. The great restriCtions they are fibjct
to, 272. Slow progress of their population from Eu-
rope, 273. Are dilcouraged by the flatc of property
there, 274. And by the nature of their ecclcfiallical
policy, 276. The various clafls of people in, ibid.
Ecclefiaflical conflitution of, 289. Form and endow-
ments of the church there, 291. Pernicious effelis of
monastic institutions there, 292. Charater of tlle
ecclefiaflics there, 293. Produdcions of, 302. The
mines, 304. Those of Potofi and Sacotecas, 305.
The spirit with which they are worked, 306. Fatal
effecs of this ardour, 308. Other commlodities tlhat
compose the commerce of, 3o. Amazing increase of
horned cattle there, 3II. Advantages which Spain
formerly derived from them, 33. Wh the fame ad-
vantages are not ill received, 314. Guarda Coflas
employed to check the contraband trade in, 331. The
uife of register hips introduced, 332. And galeons
laid afde, 333. Company of the Caraccas initituted,
335. Eflabliflment of regular packet-boats to, 338.
Free trade permitted between them, 343. New regu-
lations in the government of, 344. Reformation of
the courts of juflice, 345. New iflribution of go-
vernments, ibil. A fourth viceroyalty eftablifed,
346. Attempts to reform domestic policy, 348. Their
trade with the Philippine islands, 353. lcvencie de-
rived from, by Spain, 356. Expcnce ofadniiiiitirati'n
there, 359 State of population in, 404. 'lil
number ol inonalleries there, 413. Sec Ai'xi.,w, Peru,
&c.
Colunbus, Bartlholomew, is ent bl Iis brotheir Ch!i- Rr-

pher to nreiociate with Helnry VII. klilng o lgl.nl
i. 100. '1lhe iisfortunes of hlis voy.lce, IJ5. 'oi-
lows his brother to Hirpaiiniola, 176. Is vcflcd x\1th tlih
adminifiration of afais there l)y liis brotl;lr on his re
turn to Spain, 188. Founds te towsll ol St. Dominigo,

200.
Coluntm/ls, Chrifoplher, birth andt c(iiciiton of, i. 85.

His early voyages, 86. Marries and lfrrlcs at Lilhi,,I,
88. lis geographical rellc9tioir;, 9'. ('oiccives ti.

G g 2 id

idea of making discoveries to the weflward, 93. Offcrs
his services to the Gcnoele senate, 97. Cause of his
overtures being rejeced in Portugal, 99. Applies to
the courts of Caltile and England, ioo. His proposal,
how treated by the Spanilh geographers, 102. Ispa-
tronifed by Juan Perez, 106. His proposals again
rejected, 108. Is invited by Isabella, and engaged il
the Spaniflh service, I 3. Preparations for his voyage,
1 15. Tle amount of his equipment, 116. Sails front
Spain, 118. His vigilant attention to all circuni-
Itanccs during his voyage, 121. Apprclienfions of liii
crew, 122. His addrels in quieting their cabals, 26.
Indications of their approaching land, 128. An island
difcovcred, 129. He lands, 131. His interview with
the natives, 132. Names the island San Salvadore,
134. Prosecutes his discoveries southward, 135. Dif-
covers, and lands on, the island of Cuba, 136. Dif-
covers Hispaniola, 138. Suffers hipwreck, but is
saved by the Indians, I39. Builds a fort, 46. Re-
turns to Europe, I50. His expedient to preserve the
memory of his dilcoveries during a form, 52. Ar-
rives at the Azores, I53. Arrives at Lilbon, 154.
His reception in Spain, 155. His audience with Ser-
dinand and Isabella, 157. His equipment for a second
voyage, 160. Difcovcrs the Caribbee illands, 164.
Finds his colony on Hispaniola destroyed, 65, 66.
Builds a city, which lie calls Isabella, 168. Visits the in-
terior parts of the country, 70. His men discontentcd
and fatious, 1 .72, 173. Discovers the island of Ja-
iaica, 175. Meets his brother Bartholomew at Isabella,
176. 'Tle natives ill ulcd by his men, and begin to
be alarmed, 177, 178. He defeats the Indians, 182.
ExatLs tribute from them, 183. Returns to Spain to
jultify his conduLt, 188. Is furnilhed with a more
regular plan for colonization, 191. His third voyage,
195. Difcovcrs the ifla.id of Trinidad, 197. Discovers
the continent of Amnicla, 198. State of Hilpaniola
on lis arrival, 200. Compoes the mutiny of Roldain
and his adllerents, 203. Is diflrelfcd by the factiouls
behaviour of his men, 217. Complaints carried to
Spain aaainlt imi, 218, 219. Is lent home in irons,
232. Clears his coiidut, but is not reflorcd to hli

aullioiiiv,

authority, 225. His solicitations negleted, 231.
Forms new schemes of discovery, 232. Engages in a
fourth voyage, 234. His treatment at Hispaniola,
235. Searches after a passage to the Indian ocean,
237. Is hipwrecked on the coalt of Jamaica, 239.
His artifice to secure the friendship of the Intians, 243.
Is delivered, and arrives at Hispaniola, 247. Returns
to Spain, 248. His death, 250. His right to the ori-
ginal difcoverv of America defended, 369.
Columbus, Don Diego, fes out Iris claims to his father's

privileges, i. 267. Marries and goes over to Hifpa-
niola, 268. Eflablilhes a pearl ifshery at Cublagliia,
270. Projecds the conqucel of Cuba, 279. His niea-
fures thwarted by Fcrdinand, 303. Rc turns to Spain,
304-
Commerce, tlhe era from which its coinmencerr.cnt is io

be dated, i. 3. Mlotives to an intrc('otrl anio (lit-
tant nations, 5. Still {loirified in tlie ealcrll cipire
after the subversion of tile wcllcri, 37. Rcvi\.l ofr
in Europe, 40.
Conprfs, mariner's, navigation extended more by. te

invention of, than by all the effrts of precedillg ages,
i. 51. By whom invented, 52.
Condanine, M. his account of the country at tle foot of

the Andes, in South America, ii. 426. Ilis remarks
on the character of the native Americans, 446, 447.
Csngo, tlhe kingdom of, discovered by the Portugucfe,

i. 75.
Coln/latlinpic, tile conrequence of removing tile feat of

tlhe Roinan empire to, i. 35. Continued a conilnor-
cial city after tile extinclion of tlhe wvelern empirec, 37.
Became the clief nllrt of Italy, 40.
Cirdozv'a, F1ranciic He-rnailndez, lifcovers 'Yucatan, i.

339. Is rclpulled at Calnpoacliv, and rcturns to Cuba,
341

(.rita, Alonzo, hiis observations on tle contraband trade

of the SpanHill colonies, iii. 351. Characrer of his
American memloirs, 379.
,r/es, l;crnautllo, Iis birth, education, and character,

ii. 233. Is by Velaltilez appoilit t' coi.l lander of tile
arinamncrt fitted out by lilin againril New bipainl, 234.
Velaflil:u' becoimes jealus of hlin, 237. V\l.alii,-/.

G g 3 lki.

fends orders to deprive hin of his commission, and lay
him under an arrest, 238. Is protedced by his troops,
240. The amount of his forces, 241. Reduces ilic
Indians at Tabasco, 243. Arrives at St. Juan de
Ulua, 244. His interview with two Mexican con1-
nialders, 246. Sends presents to Montezuma, 249.
leceives others in return, 250. His Iche;ns, 256.
Eflablilhes a form of civil govreirient, 260. Religns
his comnmiIlion nder Velaqicz, and alfumes the coin-
maijd in the king's name, zo3. His friendlhip courted
by the Zcinpoall.mns, 264. Builds a fort, 267. Con-
ciuil ds a ormal alli1inc,. ith several caziques, ibil.
Dil-overs a conspiracy among his men, arid defirovs
his ilips, 271. Advl es in)to the coiuntrY, 274. Is
opposcd by the Tldl',:ins, 277. ConLilules a peace
-vith them, 284. II., ralh zeal, 2^6. Proceeds to
Chlolula, .i8. D:Luvcrs a conspiracy againit him
here, and defirovs the inhabitants, 291. Approaches
in fight of the capital city of ilexico, 292. H-s firli
interview with Moltezuina, 294. His i:xiety at lis
situation in the city of Vlexico, 301. Stizes Monte-
ziina, 305. Orders him to be fettered, 309. IRealoils
of his conniit, ibid. Prevails on Mlontezuma to o\vn
hirnfcl a vailal to the Spaniih crown, 313. Amount
and rliviion of his treasure, 315. Enrages the Mexi-
cans by his iprutlent zeal, 319. An armament ent
by Veli.quez to ftuprfee him, 323. His deliberations
on this event, 326. Advances to meet Narvaez, 330.
Defeats Narvaez, and takes him prisoner, 334. Gains
over the Spanilh soldiers to his intereli, 335. Returns
to Mexico, 338. His improper condut on his arrival,
339. Is rcolutely attacked by the Mexicals, 340.
Attacks then in return without fccefs, 34 . Death of
Muontezuma, 343. His extraordinary cclpe frlo01
death, 345. Abandons the city of Mlexico, 3,46. Is
attacked by the Mexicans, 347. His great lolles in
the encounter, 348. Difficulties of his retreat, 350.
Battle of Otumba, 352. Defeats the Mlexicans, 354.
Mutinous spirit of his troops, 357. Reduces the Tc-
peacans, 359. Is llrengtencdll by feveial reinforcc-
nlicits, 361. Returns to 1exico, 362. Illabilhcs
his Ilhd-quarters at iczcuco, 365. Reduces or conIi-

liatcs

liates the surrounding country, 366. Cabals among
nis troops, 368. His prudLence iln fiilpllriring theim,
369. Builds and launches a lcct of brigantines on the
lake, 372. Beiieges Mexico, 374. iIdMkes a grand
aliault to take the citv by storm, but is rcpui;led, 379.
Evades the Mexicanl prophecy, 32. 'lakes Guati-
niozin prifoncr, 386. Gains pollcilion of the cit\,
387. And of the whole eirc, 390. Dcfkc.ts an-
other attempt to fupelicde Ilim in lis c:,nillani, 40.
Is al)pointed governor of New Spain, 402 I-is
iClelincs and arrangements, ii.. Cruel trcali u<nt ot
the native$, 403. His conduSt fubj-icle( to inquliry,
408. Returns to Spain to jullif' iiilelt, ibi. Is r-
warded by the cimperor Clarles V. 4o0. Goes back
to IMexico with limiited powers, 41 . Dlcovers Ca-
lilornia, 412. Returns to Spain and dies, 413. In-
quiry into the nature of his letters to thie emperor
Charles V. 475. Authors who wrote of his colnucit
of New Spain, 476, 477.

Council of te Indie', its power, iii. 267.
C(reoles, in the Spanilh American colonies, charatcr of,

iii. 278.
Crrg/an, colonel George, his account of the discover of

the bones ot a large ciinct species of animals in North
America, ii. 427.
Crutfades to the Holy Land, the great polilical advall-

tages derived from, by the Eullopcaln iaionis, i. 42,
43 Cruzao, bulls of, published regularly every two years in

the Spanili colonies, iii. 357. Plrices o, and ainoulnt
of the sale at the lall publication, 432.
Cilba, the island of, discovered by Chriflopher Colunbus,

i. 136. Is failed round by Ocainpo, 267. 'I'e cul-
queit of, undertaken by Diego Velal(itez, 278. Cruel
treatment of the cazi(le liatitCe, alid hlis ictparle to a
friar, 279. Colunmls's enhulialltic dccriptilnt) ol ;
harbour i, 365. Tle tubacco produced thcrc, the
linecl in all America, iii. 311.

Cubagua, a pearl fiihcrv elitalilled there, i. 270.
C'umana, the natives of, revene their ill treatment bv the

Spaiiards, i. 332. The country delolatcd by Diego
Ocanrpo, 335.

G g 4 Cl.co,

Cuzco, the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded by

Manco Capac, iii. 22. Is seized by Pizarro, 52. Is
besieged by the Peruvians, 64. Is surprised by Alma-
gro, 68. Is recovered and pillaged by the Pizarros, 76.
Was the only city in all Peru, 223.

D
Dancing, the love of, a favourite passion among the Ame-

ricans, ii. 199.
Darien, the isthmus of, described, i. 286. The increase

of settlement there, obftruted by the noxiousness of
the climate, iii. 242.
De Solis, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata,

i. 302.
De So/is, Antonio, characer of his Hiftoria de la Con-

quifla de Mexico, ii. 478.
D'Ljfuiilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his vigorous mea-

fures for reitraining the exceffcs of the regular clergy
there, iii. 297. Rendered ineffectual, 298.
Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of Good Hope,

i. 79.
Discoveries, the difference between those made by land,

and those by ea, stated, i. 357.
Dodwell, his objections to the Periplus of Hanno exploded,

i. 35I'
Domilngo, St. on the island of Hispaniola, founded by Bar-

tholomew Columbus, i. 200.
Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publickly remonttrate

againfl the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 305.
See Las Cfias.
Drunkeniefs, lrong propensity of the Americans to in-

dulge in, i. 215.

E
./'a.r*', the ghlic of, Iiow divided into zones by the an-

ticnis, i. 2.
Egyptilns, i slntcnt, flite of conmcrce and navigation

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so called,

made by Francis Orellana, iii. 86.

Elephant, that animal peculiar to the torrid zonc, ii. 428.
Afcurial, curious calendar discovered in the Library there

by Mr. Waddilove, iii. 388. Description of that va-
Inable monument of Mexican art, 389.
Equimaux Indians, resemblance between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders, ii. 45. Some account
of, 16o. 468.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an exchifive

right to all the countries they Ihould discover, from
Cape Non to the continent of India, i. 70.
Europe, how affeaed by the dismemberment of the Ro-

man Empire by the barbarous nations, i. 36. Revival
of commerce and navigation in, 40. Political advan-
tages derived from the crufadcs, 43.

F
Ferdinand king of Caltilc. See Colunibus and Isabella.

Turns lis attention at length to the regulation of
American affairs, i. 26I. Don Diego de Columbus
sues out his father's claims againit him, 267. Eredts
two governments on the continent of America, 272.
Sends a fleet to Darien, and fuplerfcdes Balboa, 293.
Appoints Balboa liculcnant-goveirnor of the countries
on the South Sea, 298. Sends Dias de Solis to difcovcr
a wetclrn passage to the Moluccas, 302. Thwarts the
mncaCfres of Diego Columbus, 303. His decree con-
cerning the treatment of tle Indians, 307.
Fqcrnandez, Don Diego, character of his Hifloria del

Peru, iii. 366.
FerinandTlez P. his description of the political slate of the

Chiquitos, ii. 458.
Figueroa, Roderigo dc, is appointed chief judge of His-

parniola, willl a corilliloliiOl to examine into tlhe treat-
ment of the Ind(ialn natives, i. 319. Makes ali expe-
riment to determine tlle capacity of tie Indians, 333.
Florida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Lcon, i. 280. The

chicles there licrelirar, ii. 135. Account of, frorn Al-
varo NIngncz Cabcca de Vaca, ii. 452.

'lota,

Plota, Spanish, some account of, iii. 321.
Fonseca, bithop of Badajos, minister for Indian affairs,

obflrut s the plans of colonization and difcoverv formed
by Columbus, i. 84. 195. Patronizes the expediiiou
of Alonzo de Ojeda, 212.

G
Galeons, Spanilh, the nature and purpose of there vessels,

iii. 321. Arrangement of their voyage, 322.
Galvez, Don Joseph, sent to discover the true slate of

California, iii. 233.
Ganca, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i. 206. Dou-

bles the Cape of Good Hope, 208. Anchors betore
the city of Melinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut in Malabar,
209.
Gaming, firange propensity of the Americans to, ii.

202.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the position

of that river, i. 356.
Gafca, Pedro de la, lent to Peru as president of the Court

of Audience in Lima, iii. x25. His character and
moderation, ibid. The powers he was vetied with,
126. Arrives at Panama, 128. Acquires polteffion
of Panama with the fleet and forces there, 130. Ad-
vances towards Cuzco, 35. Pizarro's troops desert
to him, 136. His moderate uie of the victory, 137.
Devises employment for his soldiers, 143. His divi-
sion of the country among his followers, 144. The
dilcontents it occasions, 145. Restores order and go-
vernment, 146. His reception at his return to Spaiu,
I47.

Geminus, inflance of his ignorance in geography, i. 358.
Geography, the knowledge of, extremely confined among

the ancients, i. 31. Became a favourite fludy among
the Arabians, 39.
Giants, the accounts of, in our early travellers, uncon-

firmed by recent discoverics, i. 50. ii. 442, 443.
Gioia, lavio, the inventor of the mariner's compass, i.

52.
Globe, its division into zones by the ancients, i. 32.

Gold,

Gid, why the firfl metal with which man was acquaint-

ed, iii. 237. Extraordinary large grain of, found in
tile nines at Cinaloa, 399.
Gmniara, charaicer of his Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna,

ii. 476.
Good Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholoinew Diaz,

i. 79.
Government, no visible form of, among the native Ame-

ricans, ii. 134. Exceptions, 137.
Gran Chaco, account of the method of making war among

tie natives of, from Lozano, ii. 460.
Grlaada, new kingdom of, in America, by whom re-

duced to the Spanilh dominion, iii. 247. Its climate
and lroduce, 248. A viceroy lately eflablifhed there,
263.
Greeks, ancient, progrels of navigation and discovery

among themn, i. 16. Their commercial intercourle
with other nations very limited, 18, 19.

Grecnlanld, its vicinity to North America, ii. 45.
Grijaiv, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of

dilcovery, i. 342. Diicovers and gives name to New
Spain, 343. His realons for not planting a colony in
his newly difcovcred lands, 346.
Guarda Collas employed by Spain to check illicit trade

il the Anmciican colonies, iii. 331.
Guatimnala, the indigo there fuperlor to any in America,

ii. 311.
Gucatinszin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma,

iucceeds Qtetlavaca in the kingdom of' Mexico, ii.
364. Repulls the attacks of the Spaniards, in itorm-
ing the city of Mexico, 379. Is taken prisoner by
Cortes, 386. Is tortured to discover his treasure, 389.
Is hanged, 405.
Guiana, Dutch, cause of the excessive fertility of the lbil

there, ii. 431.

H
Hannte, his Periplus defended, with an account of his

voyage, i. 351.
Haluey, a cazique of Cuba, is cruel treament, and

melluorable repartee to a Francifican friar, i. 279.

14 Hivwktfworth's

Hawkefworth's voyages, account of New Holland, and

the inhabitants from, ii. 454.
Heat, . the different degrees of, in the old and new

continents, accounted for, ii. 419. Eflimated,
430.
Henry Prince of Portugal, his charater and fludies,

i. 6I. Expeditions formed by his order, 63. Applies
for a papal grant of his new discoveries, 69. His
death, 72.
]-Icrrada, Juan de, alTafinates Francis Pizarro, iii. 9o.

Dies, 95.
Herrera, the best hilorian of the conquefl of New

Spain, ii. 478. His account of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 376.
$iYfpanida, the island of, discovered by Christopher

Colilutnlu)s, i. 138. His tranfaftions with the na-
tives, 139. A colony left there by Columbus, 148.
The colony elclroyel, 66. Columbus builds a
city called Ilfaella, 168. The natives ill-used,
and begin to be alarmed, 77. Are defeated by
the Spaniards, 182. Tribute exactcd from them,
183. They fcheine to starve the Spaniards, 185.
St. Doinilgo founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
200. Columbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla,
222. Nicholas de Ovando appointed governor, 226.
Summary view of the conduct of the Spaniards to-
wards the natives of, 254. Unhappy fate of Ana-
coana, 25. Great produce from the mines there,
259. The inhabitants diminish, 262. The Spa-
niards recruit tleml by trepanling the natives of the
Lucayos, 264. Arrival of Don Diego de Columbus,
269. The natives of, alnioil cxtirlated by slavery,
278. 304.. Coitrovcrfy conccrning the treatment
of:d.teemn, 305. Columbus's account of the humane
treatlent he received from tle natives of, 366.
Curious illiance of lupel-llition in the Spanifli planters
tlherc, ii. 427.

l.,/(!,i , 'cdro Alvarez, crels the royal flandard in

Peru, in opposition to the younigr Alinagro, iii. 95.
Vaca de Cro arrives and uliui.cs thle command,
96. '

Homer, his account of the navigation of the ancient Greeks,

i. 17.
Honduras, the value of that country, owing to its pro-

duaion of the logwood tree, iii. 235.
Horned cattle, amazing increale of thcnl in Spanish Ame-

rica, iii. 31 1.
Hoifes, astonishment and mistakes of the Mexicans at the

firt fight of them, ii. 484. Expedient of te Peru-
vians to render them incapable of atioii, iii. 376.
Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, his character and family,

iii. 25.
Huafcar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his brother Ata-

hualpa's ficccflion to Quito, iii. 26. Is defeated ald
taken prisoner by Atahuall.a, ibid. Solicits the afliltance
of Pizarro againll his brother, 28. Is put to death by
order of Atahualpa, 39.

I

Jamaica discovercd by Chriflopler Columbus, i. I75.
Jerome, St. three monks of that order sent by cardinal

Xinienes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of the
Indians, i. 312. Their condut under tils commiflion,
316. Are recalled, 39.
J7ejiits, acquire an ablolute dominion over California,

.iii. 232. Their motives for dprcciating the countr.,
ibid.
Jews, ancient slate of commerce and navigation among

them, i. 10.
Incas of Peru, received origin of tleir empire, iii. 23.

202. lTheir empire founded both i religion andl p,-
licy, 204. See 'eru.
India, the motives of Alexander the Great, in his cxpedi-

tion to, i. 21. The commerce witll lu\v carried (o in
ancient times, 27, 28. And wlhec arls begin to revi\e
ill Eurole, 40. 1 lie firll voy)ge mdde

a roulnd te Caile

of Good lope, 207.

/Idialns in Spaili Amierica. See .4mricas.
Indies, Well, why Cluiiibui' di Icuvelics were so nanied,

i. l6.

]nlo, eIr

Innocent IV. pope, his extrordinary mission to the prince of

the Tartars, i. 45, 46.
rnquifition, court of, when and by whom firfl introduced

into Portugal, i. 36I.
InJfics and reptiles, why so numerous and noxious in Ame-

rica, ii. 20.
John I. king of Portugal, the first who ent ships to ex-

plore the western coasts of Africa, i. 58. His on prince
Henry engages in these attempts, 61.
Johnr II. king of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards

discoveries, i. 75. Sends an embafiy to Abyssinia 8So.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus, 99.
Iron, the reason why savage nations were unacquainted with

this metal, ii. 25, 126.
IJabella, queen of Castile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalf of Chritfopher Columbus, i. 106. Is again ap-
plied to by Quintanilla and Santangel, I o. Is prevailed
on to equip him, 112. Dies, 248. Her real motives
for encouraging discoveries in America, iii. 255.
isabella, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by Christopher

Columbus, i. 68.
Italy, the first country in Europe, where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire,
i. 40. The commercial spirit of, aive and enterprif-
ing, 42.

L
Ladrone islands, difcovcred by Ferdinand Magellan, ii.

396.

Lakes, amazing size of those in North America, ii. 4.
Las Casas, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to so-

licit the cause of the enllaved Indians at tile court of
Spain, i. 311. Is sent back with powers by cardinal
Ximenes, 313. Returns dissatisfied, 314. 318. Pro-
cures a new cormillion to be sent over on this fibjecc,
319. Recommends the fchene of supplying the colo-
nies with negroes, 322. Undertakes a new colony, 323.
His confrence with the bishop of Daricn before the
emperor Charles V. 328. Goes to America to carry
his clhemes into execution, 330. Circllnfllanccs un-
favourable to himr, 333. IiH linial ilcarliagc, 334.

Revives

Revives his representations in favour of tie Indians,*
the desire of the emperor, iii. ioI. Composes a treatire
on the deftruslion of America, o02.
Leon, Pedro Cieza de, character of his Chronica del Peru,

iii. 366.
Lery, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

Toupinambos, ii. 463.

Lima, the city of, in Peru, fomuded by Pizarro, iii. 59.
Lifon, Mr. the British miniter at Madrid, his answer to

several interesting inquiries relating to the admission of
Indians into holy orders, iii. 42I.
Logwood, the commodity that gives importance to the pro-

vinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 234. Policy of
the Spaniards to defeat the Englilh trade in, ibid.
Louis, St. king of France, his embassy to the chan of

the Tartars, i. 47.
Lozano, his account of the method of making war among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 460.
Luque, Hernando de, a priel, abciates with Pizarro N

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 4.

M

Madeira, the island of, firlt discovered, i. 64.
Aladoc, prince of North Walcs, flory of his voyage a}

discovery of North America examined, i. 373.
M/agellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic size of the

Patagonians, ii. 81. The exiflence of this gigantic race
vet to be decided, 83. 442, 443. His itrduLction to
the court of Castile, 391. Is equipped with a uadronl
for a voyage of discovery, 393. Sails through the fa-
mous itrait that hears his name, 395. Dilcovers the
Ladrone and Philippine islands, 396. Is killed, i/il.
lMgnel, its property of attracting iron knoswi to the an-

cients, but not its polar inclination, i. 16. Extraordi-
nary advantages relulting from ihis dicovery, 51.
Malo, St. account of its colmmerce with Spaniflh Ame-

rica, iii. 328.
Manco Capac, founder of the Peruvian Cepire, account o;

iii. 22, 23. 203.
llandville, Sir John, his cxallclr travels, w;ith a clara6er

of hi; writings, i. 5

Al s'nla,

Manila, the colony of, eflabliflled by Philip-II. of Spair,

iii. 353. Trade between, and South America, ibid.
Alankind, their disposition, and manners formed by their

situation, ii. 29. Hence refcmblances to be traced in
very distant places without communication, 30. Have
uniformly attained the greatest perfection of their nature
in temperate regions, 226.
Marco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in the

East, i. 48.
larefi, Gabriel, his account of the country between the

Illinois and Machilimakinac, ii. 455.

Mariana, Donna, a Mexican slave, her hiflory, ii. 245.
.l/Ilinus, Tyrius, his erroneous position of China, i. 363.
Martyr, Peter, his sentiments on the firll discovery of

America, i. 377.
MeJlizos, in the Spanifl American colonies, diflindion be-

tween them and Mulattoes, iii. 279.
Metals, useful, the original natives of America totally un-

acquainted with, ii. 125.
Mexicans, their account of their own origin, compared

with later discoveries, ii. 47. Their paintings few in
number, and of ambiguous meaning, iii. I56. Two
colleaions of them discovered, 157, note. Defcrip-
tions of their historical pictures, 381. Various exag-
gerated accounts of the number of human vitims a-
crificed by them, 389. Their language f.irnifhed with
refpeaful terminations for all its words, 381. How
they contributed to the support of government, 382.

MIexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coafl of, ii.

245. His interview with two Mexican officers, 246.
Information ent to Montezuma, with some Spanill
prefelits, 249. Montezuma lends presents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach his capital, 250. State
of the cmpire at that time, 251. The Zeinpoallans
court the friendship of Cortes, 264. Several caziqlues
enter into alliance with Cortes, 267. Chara6tcr of
the natives of Tlafcala, 275. T'he Tlif:;lans re-
duced to sue for peace, 83. Arrival of Cortes at
the capital city, 294. The city delcribcd, 298. Mon-
tezuida acknowledges hiinrlf a valhal to the Spaniil
crown, 313. Animout of the trealure collected by
Cortes, 315. Reasons of gold being found in such

15 finall

tmall quantities, 316. The Mexicans enraged by the
imprudent zeal of Cortesp 319. Attack Alvarado
during the absence of Cortes, 336. Their resolute
attack on Cortes when he returned, 340. Death of
Montezuma, 344. The city abandoned by Cortes,
346. Battle of Oturnba, 352. The Tepeacans re-
duced, 359. Preparations of the Mexicans againit
the return of Cortes, 362. Cortes besieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, 375. The Spaniards re-
pulsed in storming the city, 379. Guatimozin takeri
prisoner, 386. Corres appointed governor, 402. His
schemes and arrangements, ibid. Inhuman treatment
bs the natives, 403. Reception of the new regula-
tions there, iii. 105. A rctrofpec into the form of
government, policy, and arts in, 151. Our informa-
tion concerning, very imperfect, 154. Origin of the
monarchy, 56. Number and greatness of the cities,
162. Mechanical profeflions there distinguished from
each other, 164. Diflincion of ranks, 65. Politi-
cal inflitutions, 168. Power and splendor of their
monarchs, 171. Order of government, 172. Provi-
sion for the support of it, ibid. Police of, 173. Their
arts, 174. Their paintings, 177. Their method of com-
puting time, 182. Their wars continual and fero-
cious, 183. Their funeral rites, 85. Imperfecion
of their agriculture, ibid. Doubts concerning the ex-
tent of the empire, 186. Little intercourse among its
fevcral provinces, 88. Ignorance of Money, 189.
State of their cities, 191. Temples and other public
buildings, ibid. 192. Religion of, 197. Causes of the
depopulation of this country, 252. The finall-pox very
fatal there, 254. Number of Indian natives remaining
there, 258. Lift and characer of those authors who
wrote accounts of the conquest of; ii. 476. Defcrip-
tion of the aqueduct for the supply of the capital city,
iii. 383. See CGlonies.
Michael, St. the gulph of, in he South Sea, discovered and

named by Balboa, i. 290. The colony of; clablifllhc
by Pizarro, iii. 21.

Migrations of mankind, why firfl made by land, i. I.
lind, human, the efforts of it proportioned to the wants
of the body, ii. 96.

Vo L. III. H 1h A'ies

Miines of South America, the great inducement to popu-

lation, iii. 229. Some account of, 300. Their pro-
duce, 305. The spirit with which they are worked,
306. Fatal effects of this ardor, 308. Evidence of
the pernicious effecs of labouring in them, 41I. Of
Mexico, total produce of, to the Spanifl revenue, 436,
437, 438.
Molucca Islands, the Spanish claims on, fold by the Em-

peror Charles V. to the Portuguese, ii. 399.
MonaJic inflitutions, the pernicious effects of, in the Spa-

nifi American colonies, iii. 292. Number of convent,
there, 413.
Mloftons, the periodical course of, when discovered by na-

vigators, i. 27.
Montlefn, a Dominican preacler at St. Domingo, pub-

licly remonstrates againlt the cruel treatment of the In-
dians, i. 305.
Monlezuma, the firit intelligence received by the Spaniards

of this prince, i. 345. Receives intelligence of the ar-
rival of Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 248.
His presents to Cortes, 250. Forbids him to approach
his capital,. 251. State of his empire at this time,
ibid. His charaeer, 252. His perplexity at the arri-
val of the Spaniards, 253. His timid negociations with
Cortes, 254. His scheme for destroying Cortes at
Cholula discovered, 290., His irresolute condut, 294.
His firfi interview with Cortes, ibid. Is seized by
Cortes, and confined to the Spanish quarters, 306. 1i
fettered, 309. Acknowledges himself a vassal to the
Spanifl crown, 313. Remains inflexible with regard
to religion, 318. Circumltances of his death, 344.
Account of a gold cup of his, in England, iii. 384.
Mulattoes, in the Spanish American colonies, explanation

of this diftindion, iii.. 279.

N
Narvaez, Pamphilo, is ent by Velar(ues with an arma-

ment to Mexico, to supersede Cortes, ii. 324. Takes
polfeflion of Zcmpoalla, 331. Is defeated and taken

prisoner

prisoner by Cortes, 334. How he carried on his cor-
refpondence with Montezuma, 491.
.Naticez, an American nation, their political inltitutions,

i. 137, 38. Causes of their tame libiniffion to ti.e
Spaniards, 142. Tleir religious ldofrines, 143.
ITavigation, the arts of, very slowly improved by man-

kind, i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial
intercourse, 3. Ilnperl'etions of, among the an-
cients, 6. More improved by the invention of the
mariner's compass, than by all the efforts of preceding
ages, 5. The first naval discoveries undertaken by
Portugal, 55.
.Zegroes, their peculiar situation under the Spanish domi-

nion in America, iii. 280.

Newfoundland, its situation described, ii. 418.
New Holland, some account of the country and inhabitants,

i. 454.
New Spain, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i. 343. See Mexico.

Nigno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i. 214.
Norwegians might in ancient times have migrated to, and

colonized America, ii. 46.
Nignez Vela, Blasco, appointed viceroy of Peru, to enforce

the New regulations, iii. o05. His character, lo.
Commits Vaca de Cafiro to prison, I I . Difrenfions
between him and the court of audience, 113. Is con-
fined; 114. Recovers his liberty, 6. Refumies his
command, ibid. Is pursued by Gonzalo Pizarro, ti8.
Is defeated and killed by Pizarro, 119.

0
Ocampo, Diego, sent with a squadron from -Iifpaniola to

delolate the country of Cuniiina, i. 332. 335'
Ocampo, Sebaflian de, fits flails rouni: Cuba, and difco'ers

it to be an island, i. 267.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the intercourse between

diflant countries, continued long a orinidable barrier,
i. 2. See Compnfs and Navigation.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to tle Weft In-

dies, i. 212. His lecoilll voyage, 227. Obtains a
go 'ernmlent on the coitilleni, 272.

H h 2 OlmneJo,

iOmedo, Father Bartholomew de, checks the ra(h zeal of
Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico, ii. 287. Is font by Cortes

' to negociate with Narvaez, 327.
Orellna, Francis, is appointed to the command of a bark

built by Gonzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, iii. 84.
Sails down the Maragnon, 85. Returns to Spain with
a report of wonderful discoveries, 86. Herrera's ac-
count of his voyage, 376.
Orgsgnez commands Alrnagro's party against the Pizarros,

and is defeated and killed by them, iii. 75.
Orinoco, the great river of, discovered by Chriflopher Co-

lumbus, i. 197. The amazing plenty offilhing, ii. 45I.
Strange method of chufing a captain among the Indian
tribes on the banks of, 62.
Otaheite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water, ii. 469.
Otumba, battle of, between Cortes and the Mexicans, ii.

352.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to Hispaniola, i.

228. His prudent regulations, 230. Refuses ad-
miflion to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 235. His
ungenerous behaviour to Columbus, on his lhip-
wreck, 241. 244. Receives him at length; and fends
him home, 247. Engages in a war with the Indians,
253. His cruel treatment of them, 254. Encou-
rages cultivation and manufactures, 260. His method
of trepanning the natives of the Lucayos, 264. Is
recalled, 268.

P

Pacific ocean, why, and by whom so named, ii. 395.
Packet boats, firlt eflablilhment of, between Spain and her

American colonies, iii. 338.

Panaa is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 30I.
Parnwnides, the firil who divided the earth by zones, i.

360. Patagonians, some account of, ii. 8. The reality of their

gigantic size yet to be decided, 442, 443.
Pedrarias Davila is ent with a fleet to supersede Balboa

in his government of Santa Maria on the ilhmus of

Darien,

Darien, i. 294. Treats Balhoa ill, 295. Rapacious
conduct of his men, 297. Is reconciled to Balboa, and
gives him his daughter, 299. Puts Balboa to death,
300. Removes his settlement from Santa Maria to Pa-
.nama, 301.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived from the Welch

language, i. 374.
Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at the court of Caflile,

i. Io6. His solemn invocation for the success of Co-
lumbus's voyage, 8.
Periplus of Hanno, the authenticity of that work justified,

i. 374.
Peru, the first intelligence concerning this country, re-

ceived by Vasco Nugncz de Balboa, i. 285. 291. The
coast of, first discovered by Pizarro, iii. I2. Pizarro's
second arrival, 18. His hostile proceedings agailift
the natives, 19. The colony of St. Michael elta-
blifhed, 2I. State of the empire at the time of this
invasion, ibid. The kingdom divided between Huaf-
car and Atahualpa, 25. Atahualpa usurps the govern-
ment, 27. Huafcar solicits afliflance from Pizarro, 28.
Atahualpa visits Pizarro, 33. Is leized by Pizarro, 36.
Agreement for his ransom, 38. Is refused his liberty,
42. Is cruelly put to death, 48. Confusion of the
empire on this event, 49. Quito reduced by Benal-
cazar, 52. The city of Lima founded by Pizarro, 59.
Chili invaded by Almagro, 60. Infurreaion of the
Peruvians, 6. Almagro put to death by Pizarro, 78.
Pizarro divides the country among his followers, 8.
Progress of the Spanish arms there, 82. Francis Pi-
zarro aaflinated, 90. Reception of the new regula-
tions there, 107. The viceroy confined by the court
of audience, II4. The viceroy defeated and killed by
Gonzalo Pizarro, I 8. Arrival of Pedro de la Gafca,
128. Redution and death of Gonzalo Pizarro, 137.
The civil wars there not carried on with mercenary fol-
diers, 138. But nevcrthelefs gratified with immenfi
rewards, 140. Their profusion and luxury, iid. Fc-
rocity of their contefs, 141. Their want of faith,
142. Inflances, 143. Division of, by Gafca, among
his followers, 144. A retrofpet into the original go-
,ernmnent, arts, and manners of the natives, 151, Tlle

H h 3 high

high antiquity they pretend to, 200. Their re-
cords, 2oi. Origin of their civil policy, 2c2. This
founded in religion, 204. The authority of the Incas
ahfolute and unlimited, ibid. All crimes were pu-
nifled capirallv, 206. Mild genius of their eligion,
2o7. Its influence on their civil policy, 208. And
on their military fyflem, 209. Peculiar ate of pro-
perty there, 210. Diflinclion of ranks, 211. State
of arts, 212. Improved slate of agriculture, 213.
Their buildings, 2I5. Their public roads, 217. Their
bridges, 219. Their mode of refining ilver ore, 22o.
Works of elegance, 222. Their civiliLation, neverthe-
less, but impcrtec, 223. Cuzco the only place that
had the appearance of a city, ibid. No perfeA fepara-
tion of professions, 224. Little commercial intercourse,
ibid. Their unwarlike spirit, 225. Edt their flesh and
fifl raw, 227. lrief account of other provinces under
the viceroy of New Spain, 228. Causes of the depo-
pulation of this country, 252. The small-pox very
fatal there, 254. \Vriters who gave accounts of the
conqiiel of, 365. Tlhir method of building, 396.
State of t!:e levenue derived from, by the crown of Spain,
434. See Colsnies.
Peter I. czar of luflia, his extensive views in prosecuting

Asiatic di!covcries, ii. 38.
Pk'hnicins, ancient, fate of commerce and navigation,

among them, i. 8. Their trade, how conducted, 351.
Philip II. of Spain his turbulent disposition aided by his

American treasures, iii. 315. Elablifhes the colony
* bs Manila, 353.
Philip III. exhaulls his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

iii. 315.
PIilipi;ne i flnds, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan,ii. 396.

A colony eftlblifhcd there by Philip 11. of Spain, iii.
353. Trade between, and America, ibid.
.Physic, the art of, in America, why conneced with divi-

nation, ii. 95.
Pinto, Chevalier, his dcfcription of the characRerilfic sea-

tures of the native Americans, ii. 439.
.Pilzon, Vincent Yancz, commands a vessel under Co-

lumbus in h'is firfl voyage of discovery, i. 117. Sails
to America on a private a!ly;ntfre ith four hips, 1 18.
:ifc'ovcs Yucatah, 206.

.Pizarro,

Pizarro, Ferdiriand, is besieged in Cuzco bv the Peru-

vians, iii. 65. Is surprised there by Alinagro, 68.
Escapes with Alvarado, 7 I. Defends his brother at tile
couit of Spain, 79. Is committed to prison, 8.
Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, ill his settlement on

the isthmus of Darien, i. 26. Marches under him
across the ifhmuis, where tcv lifcover tile South Sia,
289. His birth, edluca'ion, anid ciraacr, ii. As-
fociates with Almagro and De L.irue, in a voyage
of discovery, 4. His ill ficccls, 6. Is recalled, aid
deserted by niolf of his followers, 9. Remains on
the island of Gorgona tfr supplics, II. Dilcovers tlie
coafl of Peru, ibil. Rtrurns to Pianmna, 12. Goes
to Spain to solicit reinf;rcetilelnts, 14. Procures te
fuprerne command for iiiilelf;, 15. Is aflited with
money by Cortes, 16. Lands again in Peru, 18. IHis
hostile proceedings againit thie natives, 19. Ella-
blilhes tile colony of St. Michael, 21. State of tire
Peruvian empire at this time, ibid. Cause of his easy
penetration into the country, 2. Is applied to by
Huafcar for afliflance agaiift lIrs vitforious brotler
Atahualpa, 28. State of his forces, ibid. Arrives at
Caxamalca, 31. Is visited by tie Inca, 33. His per-
fidious leizure of him, 36. Agrees to Atalualpa's of-
fcr for his ransom, 38. Division of their plunder, 40.
Refuses Atahualpa his liberty, 42. His ignorance
exposed to Atallualpa, 46. BIellows a form of trial on
the Inca, ibid. Puts' him to death, 48. Advances to
Cuzco, 50. HIonours conferred on him by the Spa-
nilh court, 55. Beginning of dilfffiiios between hint
anid Alnagro, 56. His vivil regulations, 58. Foun'ls
tile city of Lima, 59. Infurrecion of the Peruvians,
61. Cuzco seized by Alnagro, 68. Deludes Alina-
gro by negociations, 70. IDefeas Alinagro, and takes
him priloncr, 75. Puts Aln:agro to deatli, 78. Di-
vidcs tle coultry among his tfolowv;:r, S. 'ITe in-
politic partiality of Iris allotinenis, ibid. Makes hlis
brother Gonzalo governor of Q {l;o, 83. Is alllliiiatld
by Juan de Hrralda, 9 1.
Pizarro, on;.ilo, is inade governor of Quito, by I'is

brother Francis, iii. 83. Ilis expedition over tihe Ai-
dcs, ibid. is drted by Orellllia, 84. His dillrcfs

11 4 on

pn this event, 87. His difaflrous return to Quito, 88.
Is encouraged by the people to oppose Nugnez Vel,;,
- the new viceroy, II x. Assumes the government of

Peru, I15. Marches againfl the viceroy, 117. De-
feats and kills him, iX1, Ii9. Is advised by Car-
vajal to afume the sovereignty of the country, 120.
Chufes to ngociate with the court of Spain, 122.
Consultations of the court on hlis conldu, 123. His
violent resolutions on the arrival of Pldro de la Gafca,
129. Resolves to oppose hlim by) violence, 131.
Marches to reduce Centeno at Cuzco, 132. Defeats
him, 133. Is deserted by his troops on the approach
of Gafca, 136. Surrenders and is executed, 137.
His adherents men of no principle, 42.
Plata, Rio de, discovercd by Dias de Solis, i. 302. Its

amazing width, ii. 418.
Playf,/ir, Mr. Profeflbr of mathematics in Edinburgh, the

result of his comparison of the narrative and charts given
in Captain Cooke's voyages published in 17o; and
Mr. Coxe's account of the Ruffian difcoyeries, printed
in the fame year, in which the vicinity o the two con-
tinents of Asia and America is clearly afccrtained, ii.
434-439.
Pliny, the naturalist, inflance of his ignorance in geogra-

phy, i. 359t
Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. 286. Romantic

motive of his voyage, 281.

Population of the earth, flow progress of, i. I.
Porto Bello, dilcovered and named by Chriflophcr Co-

lumbus, i. 238.
Porto Rico, is fittled and fubjeced by Juan Ponce de

Leon, i. 265.

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i. 63.
Portuglr, when and by whom the court of inquisition

wvas firil introduced into, i. 361.
PortugueJ, a view of the circumlnances that induced

them to undertake tle discovery of unknown coun-
tries, i. 56. 59. Firlt African discoveries of, 60.
Madeira discovered, 64, 65. They double Cape Boja-
dor, 66. Obtain a papal grant of all the countries tley
flould difcovcr, 70. Cape Verd Islands and the

Azores

Azores discovered, 72. Voyage to the East Indies by
Vasco de Gama, 207.
Potofi, the rich silver mines there, how discovered, iii.

305. The mines of, greatly exhaulted and scarcely
worth working, 424.
Priioners of war, how treated by the native Americans,

1. I54.
Property, the idea of, unknown to the native Americans,

ii. 130. Notions of the Brafillians concerning, 456.
Protetor of the Indians, in Spanish America, his func-

tion, iii. 287.
Ptolemy, the philosopher, his geographical descriptions

more ample and exact than those of his predecessors,
i. 35. His geography translated by the Arabians, 39.
His erroneous position of the Ganges, 356.

Q
ftuetlaaca, brother of Montezuma, succeeds him as king

of Mexico, ii. 362. Conducs in person the fierce
attacks which obliged Cortes to abandon his capital,
363. Dies of the Imall-pox, 364.
.rrivedo, Bishop of Darien, his conference with Las Ca-

fas on the treatment of the Indians, in the presence of
the Emperor Charles V. i. 327.

fuicfilver, the property of the famous mines of, at Gua-

nacabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain, iii. 424.
The price of, why reduced, ibid.
tuinqiina, or Jesuits bark, a production peculiar to Peru,
iii. 310.
.lipos, or historic cords of the Peruvians, some account

of, iii. 201.
.tuito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac, Inca

of Peru, iii. 25. Is left to his son Atahualpa, ibid.
Atahualpa's general revolts after his death, 50. Is re-
duced by the Spaniards under Benalcazar, 52. Be-
nalcazar deprived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made governor,
83.

Rarnljio,

R
Raii/ufio, his defence of Hanno's account of the coat of

Africa, i. 353.
RegifJer hips, for what purpose introduced in the trade

between Spain and her colonies, iii. 332. Supersede
the use of the galeons, 333.
Religion of the native Americans, an inquiry into, ii.

18I.
Ribas, his account of the political ltate of the people of

Cinaloa, ii. 466. Of their want of religion, 470.
Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account of those provinces,

iii. 239.

Rivers, the amazing size of those in America, ii. 4.
RobiJon, profeflbr, his remarks on the temperature of va-

rious climates, ii. 419.
Roldan, Francis, is left chief juflce in Hispaniola, by

Cilriftopher Columbus, i. 188. Becomes the ringleader
of a mutiny, 200. Submits, 204.
Romans, their progress in navigation and discovery, i.

25. Their military spirit averse to mechanical arts
and commerce, 26. Navigation and trade favoured
in the provinces under their government, 27. Their
extensive discoveries by land, 29. Their empire and
the ciences dcfiroycd together, 36.
Rubruquis, father, his embafy from France to the Chan

of the Tartars, i. 47.
Ruffans, Asiatic dilcoveries nade by them, ii. 38. Un-

certainty of, 432.

S
Sacotecas, the rich filvcr mines there, when discovercd,

iii. 305.
San Sulvador, discovered and named by Chriflopher Co-

lumbus, i. 134.
Sancho, Don Pedro, account of his Hiitory of the conquell

of Peru, iii. 365.
Sandoval, the hocking barbarities executed by, in Mexico,

ii. 404.

Sandoval,

Sandval, Francisco Tello de, is sent by the emperor

Charles V. to Mexico, as vifitalor of America, iii.
o5. His moderation and prudence, o6.

Savage life, a general etimate of, ii. 210.
Scalps, motIve of the native Alncicans for taking them

from their enemies, ii. 461.
Serrnlvo, mnTrquis de, his extraordinary gains during his

viceroyalty in Amcri(c, ii. 49.
Scvillc, extraordinary increal o its anuiiflures by the

American trade, iii. 425. Its trade greatly reduced,
426. The American trade leinoved to Cadiz, 321.
Silver ore, method of refining it pradifed by the native

Peruvians, iii. 221.
Ssn:ra, late discoveries of rich mines made there by the

Spaniards, iii. 221.

Soul, American ileas of the immortality of, ii. 19I.
South Sea, firfi dif:overcd by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,

i. 290.
Spain, general idea of the policy of, with regard to the

American colonies, iii. 260. Early interposition of
the regal authority in the colonies, 261. All the
American dominions of, fubjecled to two viceroys,
262. A third vicerovalty lately cftablilhed, 263. The
colonies of, compared with those of Greece and Rome,
270. A vantages flie derived from her colonies, 313.
\Vh\ lhlie des not ill derive the fame, 314. Rapid
decline of trade, 36. This decline increaledl by the
mode of regdlating thle intercourse with America, 319.
Employs guarda collas to check illicit trade, 331.
The ulI of regiltcr flilps introduced, 332. Eflablifh-
meiit of the company of Caraccas, 335. Enlargement
of commercial ideas there, 337. 1rce trade permitted
to lcvcral provinces, 340. Revenue deriv d from
America, 356. Specification, 434.
,;miirds, tlheir curious form of taking poffcilion of new-

difco:'cred coulltries, i. 382.
SIra.c, a citation fron), proving the great geographical

ignorance of te atiiits, i. 355. His own want of
geogriiliical iknowlledge, 360.
j&i.i fiiioni ailways connected with a deSire of penetrating
into tlie cc:ets of futiiiLy, ii. 194.

14 lTapia,

T
Tapia, Chriltoval de, is ent from Spain to Mexico, to

supersede Cortes in his command, but fails in the at-
tempt, ii. 400.
Tartars, the polibility of their migrating to America, ii.

43. Tlfijcala, in Mexico, character of the natives of, ii. 275.

Oppose the passage of the Spaniards, 277. Are reduced
to sue for peace, 283.
Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of any in all

America, iii. 311.
Toupinambos, account of their ferocious courage from

Lery, ii. 463.
Trade, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iii.

340. Increase of the Spanish cultoms from this ina-
sure, 430, 431.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, when discovered

by navigators, i. 27.

Travellers, ancient character of their writings, i. 50.
Trinidad, the island of, discovered by Christopher Columbus

on his third voyage, i. 197.
7tucuman, and Rio de la Plata, account of those provinces,

iii. 239.

T7re, the commerce of that city, how conducted, i. 351.
7yTibes of Spanish America, how applied by the court of

Spain, iii. 435.

v

acra dt Canpro, Chrifloval, is fnt from Spain to regulate
the government of Peru, iii. 80. Arrives at Quito,
94. Assumes the supreme authority, ibid. Defeats
young Alinagro, 96. The feverit) of his proceedings,
97. Prevents an infurrectioi concerted to oppose the
new regulations, 1og. Is imprisoned by the new vice-
roy, 111.
/alverde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to Ata-

hualpa, Inca of Peru, iii. 34. Gives his sanction to
the trial and condcmuation of Atahualpa, 47.

*. I In~~ . ^ ~Vga,

Vega, Garcilaffo de la, chara&er of his commentary on

the Spanish writers concerning Peru, iii. 367.

Vegetables, their natural tendency to fertilize the foil where
* they grow, ii. 24, 2.
lelafquez, Diego de, conquers the island of Cuba, i. 278.

377. His preparations for invading New Spain, ii.
231. His difficulty in chufing a commander for the
expedition, 232. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 233.
His motives to this choice, 235. Becomes fufpicioug
of Cortes, 236. Orders Cones to be deprived of his
commission, and arrested, 237, 238. Sends an arma-
ment to Mexico after Cortes, 321.
Venegas, P. his character of the native Californians, ii.

448.
Venereal disease, originally brought from America, i. 87.

Appears to be wearing out, ibid. Its firit rapid pro-
grefs, ii. 444.

ienezuela, history of that settlement, iii. 245.
Venice, its origin as a maritime slate, i. 43. Travels of

Marco Polo, 48.
erd, islands discovered by the Portuguese, i. 72.
kiceroys, all the Spanilh dominions in America subjected

to two, iii. 262. A third lately cftablifhed, 263.
Their powers, ibid. A fourth established, 346.
Villa Segnor, his account of the state of population in New

Spain, iii. 404. His detail of the Spanish American
revenue, 434.
JIillefagna, Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foments a

mutiny among his troops, ii. 368. Is difcovcred by
Cortes, and hanged, 369.
UVloa, Don Antonio do, his description of the charadcr-

iitic features of the native Americans, ii. 439. His
reason for the Americans not being lo sensible of pail.
as the reft of mankind, 464. His account of the goods
exported fron Spain to America, with the duty on them,
iii. 434. ,
Volcangs, remarkable number of, in the northern parts of

the globe discovered by the Rullians, ii. 433.

//?/43,,

W
7tFafer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of diminu-

tive Americans, ii. 77. Compared with similar pro-
ducions in Africa, 8.
1/ar-fong of the native Americans, the sentiments and

terms of, ii. 462.
ftomen, the condition of, among the native Americans,

ii. 102. Are not prolific, o06. Are not permitted to
join in their drunken feasts, 207. Nor to wear orna-
ments, 465.

X
Xerez, Francisco de, ecretary to'Pizarro, the earlie't

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 365.
Ximenes, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of

the Indians in the Spanilh colonies, i. 312. Patronises
the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 393.

Y
rucatan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and Dias

de Solis, i. 266. Described, 386. From whence that
province derives its value, iii. 233. Policy of the court
of Spain with refpefl to, 234.

z
Zarale, Don Augufline, characer of his History of thq

conqueit of Peru, iii. 366.
Zones, the earth how divided into, by the geography of the

ancients, i. 32. By whom firit so divided, 360.
Zummarraga, Juan de, first bilhop of Mexico, the de-

stroyer of all the ancient records of the Mexican em-
pire, iii. 156. ;^ 1

E-ND OF TlE THIRD VO.L '

# Just Published, New Editions of the following BOOKS:

Jufi Pub li ed,

New Editions of the following BOOKS:

i. The History of Scotland, during the Reigns

of Queen Mary and of King ames VI. till his
Accefflon to the Crown of England; with a
Review of the ScottiJ History, previous to that
Period; and an Appendix containing Original
Papers: 2 Vols. 4to. By William Robertson, D. D.
Il. lOS.

** Another Edition, 2 Vols. 8vo. 12 s.

2. The History of the Reign of the Emperor

Charles V. with a View of the Progress of Society
in Europe, from the Subversion of the Roman
Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Centu-
ry. By William Robertson, D. D. Embelliflsed
with 4 Plates, elegantly engraved: 3 Vols. 4to.
31. 3s.

** Another Edition, 4 Vols. 8vo. 1 . 4s.

3. The History of America, Vols. I. and II. 4to.

By the fame Author. Illustrated with Maps.
21. 2 S.
