THE
H I S T 0 R Y

F
A M E R I C A.

VO L. III.

THE
H I S T O R Y

o F
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPA L of theUniverlity of EDINBURGH, HISTORIO-

CRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND, and

MEMBER of the ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY at MADRID.

VOL. II.
THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXX,

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VI.

ROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa BooKVI.
discovered the great Southern Ocean, and '-'
received the first obscure hints concerning the Scheme, for

discovering

opulent countries with which it might open a pelu.
communication, the wishes and schemes of
every enterprising person in the colonies of
Darien and Panama were turned towards the
wealth of those unknown regions. In an age
when the spirit of adventure was so ardent and
vigorous, that large fortunes were wafted, and
the molt alarming dangers braved, in pursuit
of dilcoveries merely po1ible, the faintest ray
of hope was followed with eager expectation,
and the slightest information was sufficient to

\'o.' I. IB inspire

B;=','!. hflpre iuch perfect confidence, as conduteid

3,'i men to the molt arduous undertakings'.

-., -c-- .AeCCORD':NGc, fev eral armaments were fit-
tlme. t.ed our in order to explure and take poflefiion

of the countries to the ealt of Panama, but
u'der the conduct of leaders whose talents and
re!ources wcre unequal to the atterrpt ". As
the excursions of tihoic adventurers did not
exteni beyond the limits of the province to
wnhih the, Sp aniards have given the name of
Tierra Si..--, a nmouinr.inous region covered
v.:ith ..c. :, th-in!v inhabited, and extremely
unnhcaizyv, they returned vith di/;'al accounts
concerning the difrrefrcs to which they had
been expoicd, and the unpromlifing afpedc of
the places which they had vif:ted. Damped
by th ins ce rage fur dilcoverv in that
d:recton abated ; and it became the general
opinion, that Balboa had founded visionary
hoe-s, oi the tale or 3n i g:orant Indian, ill
tu.dcr:lcoD, or calculated to deceive.

t '. --._'- By'..-::e w;.e :rr e reeperlbns fettled in Pa-

-_- ' r-.- :., cn whouin the circunmf!ances which de-
.... -'" t;-Tred oth.rs made so little imprellion, that,

S.- NOTEI I.

t -_n.h' Curotica, F. z.-t

-" vtc--i

at the very moment when all confidered Bal- BooKVI.
boa's expetations of discovering a rich coun- ,v4
try, by fleering towards the east, as chimerical,
they resolved to attempt the execution of his
ficheme. The names of those extraordinary
men were Francifio Pizarro, Diego de Alma-
gro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was the
natural son of a gentleman of an honourable
family by a very low woman, and, according
to the cruel fate which often attends the off-
spring of unlawful love, had been so totally
neglcóaed in his youth by the author of his
birth, that he see:ns to have destined him
never to rife beyond the condition of his mo-
ther. In consequence of this ungenerous idea,
he set him, when bordering on manhood, to
keep hogs. But the aspiring mind of young
Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation, he
abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as a
foldilr, and after serving some years in Italy,
clnbalrked for America, which, by opening
Inch a boundless range to aftive talents, al-
lured every adventurer whose fortune was not
equal to his ambitious thoughts. There Pi-
zarro early diltinguifled hlimfelf. With a
temper of mind no lets daring than the con-
ilitution of his body was robult, he was fore-
)no'L in every danger, patient under the grearet

B 2 hardships,

EP--:VT. hard;nin,, and un!iubdued by any fatigue.

,~: Thnoi:,!; lo illiterate thia he could not even

read, he was ,-on confidered as a man formed
to colmmand. E.verv operation committed to
his conduct proved uiccefsful, as, bv a happy
but r.are conjunction, he united perseverance
wvith ardour, and was as cautious in executing,
as he was bold in forming his plans. By en-
gaging early in active life, without any re-
source but his own talents and induRry, and
by depending on himself alone in his struggles
to emerge from obfcuritr, he acquired such a
thorough knowledge of affairs, and of men,
that he was fitted to assume a superior part in
conducting the former, and in governing the
latter .

AL MAGRO had as little to boast of his dcfcent

as Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other
a foundling. Bred, like his companion, in
the camp, he yielded not to him in anv of the
Ioldierly qualities of intrepid valour, indefa-
tigable activitv, or insurmountable constancy
in enduring the hardships inseparable fiom mi-
litarv service in the New World. But in Al-

C lfcrr-C-, Gcc. i & 2. dec..:. lc' . vi. c. lo-.
Gorn-2 Hill. c. 1 14. Zara; e, lib. i. c. 9.

magro

magro these virtues were accompanied with BooK VI.
the openness, generosity, and candour natural 4J
to men whose profefion is arms; in Pizarro,
they were united with the addreis, the craft,
and the diffiiulation of a politician, with the
art of concealing his own purpoles, and with
sagacity to penetrate into those of other men.

HERNANIDO DE LUQUE was an ecclesiastic,

who aded both as priest and schoolmaster at
Panama, and, by means which the contem-
porary writers have not described, had amafled
riches that inspired him with thoughts of rising
to greater eminence.

SUCH were the men defined to overturn one Terms ns

their afro-

of the most extensive empires on the face of .iatiin.
the earth. Their confederacy for this purpose
was authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of
Panama. Each engaged to employ his whole
fortune in the adventure. Pizarro, the leafl
wealthy of the three, as he could not throw -o
large a fum as his associates into the common
Itock, engaged to take the department of
grcatcit fatigue and danger, and to command
in perlbn the armament which was to go firit
upon dilcovery. Almagro olffred to condut
:he itpIplies of provisions and reinforcements

B3 of

BcR -VI. of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in

need. Lutue was to remain at Panama to
negocia:e with the governor, and luperintend
whatever vwas carrying on for the general in-
tercrt. As the ipirit of enthufialin uniformly
accompanied that of adventure in the New
Worl, and b'.- that ftr nge union both ac-
,.i:ed a." increai: of i.srce, thi:s conrecr:acy,
fon-red bh. .a;':rion

t, ::d av.:r:ce, was con-

f'-.ired b; tile nmoi i: s,)ic'. a1 i of religion.
L .:c ie c lertbratd m.lss, divided a consecrated
h.r£t into three, and refl-r;-ing one ,part to hiim-
ik-l, ave the othir two to his afiociates, of
xxhich theii 'I-r:oCi ad.-i thus, in name f tihe
Prirce or Peace, ratifi;d a contract of which
piu.ner and bloodshed were the obicis .

THE attempt was begun with a force more

fjz.ed to the humble condition of the three
a.;bciates, than to the grcatnets of the enter-
priic in which the'- were engaged. Pizarro
Nc... I-C; i.el:1 froin Pan.rna with a single vcliel, of

iiinall burdn, and a hundred and twelve men.
Eu: in that age, to i;t:le were the Spaniards
acquaintcd wi:h :-i . pecuiaririesc o; climate in
A\'nc.:; , t. rare tinh e
i which Pizarro choCe

* 1 .cr . c
: . . i.c. 13. 7 .refo, lib.i.c.1.

for

for his departure was the most improper in GooKVI.
the whole year; the periodical winds, which i4.
were then set in, being diretly adveri' to the
course which he purposed to steer '. After
beating about for feventv days, with much
danger and incessant fatigue, Piz.irro's progress 'ss.
towards the south-east was not greater than
what a flilful navigator will now make in as
many hours. Hie touched at several places on
thle coast of Tierra Firme, but found every
where the lame uninviting country which for-
mer adventurers had described; the low grounds
converted into swamps by the overflowing of
rivcrs; the higher, covered with impervious
woods; few inhabitants, and those fierce and
hostile. Famine, fatigue, frequent rencounters
v:ith the natives, and, above all, the diflnm-
pcrs of a moist, sultry climate, combined in
wailing his slender band of followers. iThe ,- * ,"
undaunted resolution of their leader continued, f.,*rs.
however, for some time, to sustain their ipi-
rits, although no sign had yet appeared of dif-
covcring those golden regions to which he had
promiied to conduct them. At length, he was
obligcd to abandon that inholpfitable coair, and
retire to Chuchama, opposite to the pearl

lerrera, dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 8. ::-ez/., . 17-

B 4 i' i's

BCo VI. islands, where he hoped to receive a supply of
--
; provisions and troops from Panama.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port

with feventv men, flood directly towards that
part of the continent where he hoped to meet
with his aflociate. Not finding him there, he
l:nded his soldiers, who, in fCarching for their
co--.--nions, underwent the fame diffrefles,
and v. xolcd to the fame dangers, which
had drive;. trn-m out of the country. Repulsed
at length by the Indians in a sharp conflid, in
which their leader loft one of his eyes by the
wound of an arrow, they likewise were com-
pelled to reimbark. Chance led them to the
place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found
some consolation in recounting to each other
their adventures, and comparing their fuifer-
J:--.2. ings. As Almagro had advanced as far as the

river St. Juan, in the province of Popavan,
where both the country and inhabitants ap-
peared with a more pruinifing aipcet, that
dawn of better fortune was lulficient to detcr-
mine such la.nguir.e proiccors not to abandon
thurr l heme, notwithilanding all that they had
fithcrede in prufocuting it '.

Hc-rcr-, :c. . :i. ;:;.c. ii, i:. See NOTI'
I!.

ALM AGcO 0

ALMACRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of BDoKvl.

recruiting their shattered troops. But what he '~7
and Pizarro had suffered, gave his country- '"ny

Tey

men such an unfavourable idea of the service, u,:e:t;k-
that it was with difficulty he could levy four-
score men g. Feeble as this reinforcement was,
they did not hefiLate about resuming their
operations. After a long series of disasters and
disappointments, not inferior to those which
they had already experienced, part of the ar-
manient reached the Bay of St. Matthew, on
the coast of Quito, and landing at Tacamez,
to the south of the river of Emeraulds, they
beheld a country more champaign and fertile
than any they had yet discovered in the South-
ern Ocean, the natives clad in garments of
woollen or cotton stuff, and adorned with
several trinkets of gold and silver.

BUT, notwithstanding those favourable ap-

pearances, magnified beyond the truth, both
by the vanity of the persons who brought the
report from Tacamez, and by the fond ima-
gination of those who listened to them, Pizarro
and Almagro durst not venture to invade a
country so populous with a handful of men

c Zarate, lib. i. c. i.

enfeebled

BooKVI. enfeebled by fatigue and diieafes. They rc-

tired to the small illand of Gallo, where Pi-
zarro remained with part of the troops, and his
afTociate returned to Panama, in hopes of
bringing such a reinforcement, as might enable
them to take poefliFion of the opulent territories
whose existence seemed to be no longer doubt-
ful .

- Bur forme of the adventurers, less enterpri-
, ....r fltng, or iefs hardy than their leaders, having

. . fecredy conveyed lamentable accounts of their

furt-rings and lofres to their friends at Panama,
A!magro met with an unfavourable reception
from Pedro de los Rios, who had succeeded
Pedrarias in the government of that fettlelnent.
After weighing the matter with that cold (eco-
nomical prudence which appears the firlt of
all virtues to persons whose limited faculties are
incapable of conceiving or executing grcat de-
f:gns, he concluded an expedition; attended
w;th such certain -wafe of men, to be to detri-
mental to an infiat and feeble colony, that lie
not onli prohibitcd the railing of n ew levies,
but diftatched a vefcl to bring home Pizarro
ad his compa.icns from the il.and of Gallo.
\Aimaro ... L;uq::e, thcuzh .de-r- a:ec.cd
' Xe.ez, iS1. Iir:c..., dec. -. li. :.iii. c. 13.

with

with those measures, which they could notpre- Booi Vl.
vent and durst not oppose, found means of ' ~
communicating their sentiments privately to
Pizarro, and exhorted him not to relinquish an
cnterprife that was'the foundation of all their
hopes, and the only means of re-establishing
their reputation and fortune, which were both
on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent with
inllexible obltinacy on all its purposes, needed
no incentive to persist in the Icheme. He pernisian
peremptorily refused to obey the governor of h",desn.'
Panama's orders, and employed all his address
and eloquence in persuading his men not to
abandon him. But the incredible calamities
to which they had been exposed were still so
recent in their memories, and the thoughts of
rcvifiting their families and friends after a long
ablcncc, ruffled with such joy into their minds,
that when Pizarro drew a line upon the land
with his sword, permitting such as wished to
returrn ome to pass over it, only thirteen of all
the daring veterans in his service had resolution
to remain with their comnlandcr .

T:is finall, but determined band, whose
names the Spanish hiltorians record with de-

. Ii'rrcr-, dcc. 3. iib. x. c. ,z, 3. Zaratc, lib. i.
c.. . Xcrcz, 11. Gomara Hiit. c. Ic9.

fc vcd

Bo-VrI. served praise, as the persons to whose perse-

,-6. vering fortitude their country is indebted.for

the molt valuable of all its American posses-
sions, fixed their residence in the island of Gor-
gona. This, as it was farther removed from
the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited, they
confidered as a more secure retreat, where, un-
molested, they might wait for supplies from
Panama, which :hey truited that the activity
of their allociates would be able to procure.
Almagro and Luque were not inattentive or
cold solicitors, and their incefiant importunity
was seconded by the generil voice of the colo-
ny, which exclaimed loudly against the infamy
of exposing brave men, engaged in the public
service, and chargeable with no error but what
flowed from an excess of zeal and courage, ro
perish like the most odious criminals in a desert
ifand. Overcome by those entreaties and.ex-
pofRulations, the governor at last consented to
fend a finall veffl to :heir relief. But that lie
might r,n; fecm to encourage Pizarro to any
n- . .- -crr'rift, he would not permit one land-
r.-:i o emibark on board of it.
'-: .BYI this time, Pizarro and his companions

had remained five mon-;s in an iiland, infa-
mous for the moit ul'n! :.ith climate in that

region

region of American. During all this period, BooKVI.
their eves were turned towards Panama, in hopes ,=6.
of succour friom their countrymen; but worn
out at length with fruitless expectations, and
dispirited with suffering hardships of which
they lIw no end, they, in despair, came to a
relblution of committing themselves to the
ocean on a float, rather than continue in that
detestable abode. But, on the arrival of the
vessel from Panama, they were transported
with Iuch joy, that all their Iufferings were for-
gotten. Their hopes revived, and, with a ra-
pid transition, not unnatural among men ac-
cuflomed by their mode of life to sudden
vicissitudes of fortune, high confidence fuc-
cecding to extreme dejection, Pizarro easily
induced not only his own followers, but the
crew of the vefiel from Panama, to resume his
former scheme with fresh ardour. Instead of
returning to Panama, they flood towards the
south-east, and more fortunate in this than in
any of their patl efforts, they, on the twentieth
day after their departure fiom Gorgona, disco-
vered the coast of Peru. After touching at Dirc.ver.
f;vcral villages on the coast- no wife inviting, PCr".
thcv landed at Tumbez, a place of some note,
about three degrees iouth of the line, diftin-

See NO T E Il.

guiflncd

BOOK VI. guifhed for its frately temple, and a palace of
_.--- the inr,-s or !overeigns of the country'. There

the Spaniards leasted their eyes with the firlt
view of the opulence and civilization of the
Peruvian empire. They beheld a country
full peopled, and cultivated with an appear-
ance of regular induitrv; the natives decently
cloithcc, and po;ie;cd of ingenuity so far llr-
pa'iin; tie oth;er inhabitants of the New World,
a2 to iive the ule of tame donmeiic animals.
Eu- what chiefly attracred their notice, wmas
luc;h a liow of gold and silver, not only in the
ornamecnts of their persons and temples, but in
;veral ve !Tcs and utensils for common use,
formedi of t'he lame precious metals, as left no
room to doubt that thcie abounded with pro-
i;3fon in the country. Pizarro and his com-
panions fleemcd now to have aitained to the
completion of their molt sanguine hopes, and
f/.incicd th.it al their wiflhes and dreams of rich
domiins, and inexlluullible treasures, would
!on be realized.
Re:,-- Bo .BT w\ :h the P.ender force then under his

'" ' c:-mand, Piz'rro co', ld oniv view the rich

country oi whiLh he hoped hereafter to obtain
pouei:ClOn. He ranged, hov,-cvcr, for tome

t t

time along the coast, -maintaining every where BooK VI
a peaceable intercourse with the natives, no less z-
a:.onilhed at their new visitants, than the Spa-
niards were with the uniform appearance of
opulence and cultivation which they beheld.
Having explored the country as far as was re-
quilite to ascertain the importance of the disco-
very, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants
lome of their Llamas or tame cattle, to which
the Spaniards gave the name of sheep, some
vessels of gold and silver, as well as some fpeci-
mens of their other works of ingenuity, and
two young men, whom he proposed to instruct
in the Castilian language, that they might serve
as interpreters in the expedition which he me-
ditated. With these he arrived at Panama,
towards the close of the third year from the
time of his departure thence '. No adventurer
of the age fufTered hardships or encountered
dangers which equal those to which he was ex-
posed during this long period. The patience
v. ithli hich he endured the one, and the forti-
ttdec with which he fiirmounted the other, ex-
ceed whatever is recorded in the history of the

-. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3-6. dec. 4. lib. ii.
c. -, . cga, 2. lib. i. c. o1-i+. Zarate, lib. i. c. z.

ici:;' liil}. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. i.

N-T V

Boo VI. New World, where so many romantic displays

of those virtues occur.

,;IS. NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro

k ....l. gave of the incredible opulence of the country
e lai, 'which he had discovered, nor his bitter com-

ulaints on account of that unseasonable recal of
his forces, which had put it out of his power
to attempt making any settlement there, could
move the governor of Panama to swerve from
his former purpose. He frill contended, that
L:e cclon- was not in a condition to invade
fich a mighty' empire, and refused tc authorise
an expedition which he foresaw would be to
alluring that it might ruin the province in
which he presided, by an effort beyond its
iirength. His coldness, however, did not in
anv degree abate the ardour of the three affo-
ciates; but they perceived that they could not
carry their icheme into execution without the
countenance of superior authority, and must
solicit their sovereign to grant that permiiffon
which they could not extort from his delegate.
With this view, after adjusting among them-
selves that Pizarro fnould claim the fation of
governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-gover-
nor, and Luque the dignity of bishop in the
country which the:; Fp'rpocd to conquer, they

sent

fcnt Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though BOOK VI.
their fortunes were now so much exhausted by 51s.
the repeated efforts which they had made, that
they found some difficulty in borrowing the
finall fum requisite towards equipping him for
the voyage .

PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court, P;iarrorent

and new as the scene might be to him, he ap- 'nSpainto
peared before the emperor with the unembar-
raffed dignity of a man conscious of what his
firvices merited; and he conducted his nego-
ciations with an insinuating dexterity of ad-
dress, which could not have been expeEted
either from his education or former habits of
life. His feeling description of his own sus-
ferings, and his pompous account of the coun-
try which he had discovered, confirmed by the
specimens of its productions which he exhi-
bited, made such an impression both on Charles
and his ministers, that they not only approved
of the intended expedition, but seemed to be
interested in the success of its leader. Prefum-
ing on those dispositions in his favour, Pizarro
paid little attention to the interest of his affo-
ciates. As the pretensions of Luque did not Neg'!eshi.

a(2Toiatcs,

Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. I. Vega, 2. lib.i. c. 14.
XVot. III. C interfere

E) VI. interrc-e with his own, he obtained for him
' T, the eccicfitical dianity to which he aspired.

Fl.r Alinmagro, he claimed only the command
.' the fortress w hich ihould be erected at Tum-
bL-:.. To hlimfilf he secured whatever his

TV -. l i:tc:i.;dleC ambition could desire. He was ap-
-.-..-- poit;:ted gover..or, cap.ain-general, and ade-
:7,'.;- iantaco ors all the country whcich he had disco-

vered, and hoped to conquer, with supreme
a-.:hcri:-., cv:il as vwell as military; and a full
ri i- :o a'l t:c prrivileges and emoluments
--:.i-- g-..r:nted to adventurers in the New
V.'.o-L. lHis .i:;'fdiction was declared to ex-
.end two i'-!-.d- 'i lea-ues .long the coafit to the
-::. er- th- rive-r St. Jago; to be independent
c. ',e o;'ric c; Pian.l.::a; and he had power

:o rnem;.i:-' a!i ::ri.': "cers who were to serve
!n(:Cr h .':. : '

;:-n : , rose conceflions,

;.'::.h c ; t':· .: t ' ..: ' nothing, as the

' : '.n.-r- -', - -: l.e:p;r.dl.,: uron the iuccefs
.f i':7.:r r... . .'- , .".1:.L, ne .; .,-ged to raise

·:''.

.. '. .:: .- .. :.:'.i :.. :v :. , I;;: .; provide the
' : : ..'::-:. .::. ''."ari-ie -res :-.:ifite towards

..:-':. ~..

:- : .e roe n or C: i'r:i the country
: '-. .:. ..; - : -n-: '..:: ,lot ed him.

.: ..:. : :::

:.: '.: i . of men was,
' : : .:':. ; . ..': ':.'.,n;1 to raise, his

funds

funds and credit were so low that he could BooKVI.
hardly complete half the numbers and after i,
obtaining his patents from the crown, he was
obliged to ffeal privately out of the port of
Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny of the
officers who had it in charge to examine whe-
ther he had fulfilled the stipulations in his con-
rrac °. Before his departure, however, he
received some supply of money from Cortes,
who having returned to Spain about this time,
was willing to contribute his aid towards ena-
bling an ancient companion, with whose talents
and courage he was well acquainted, to begin
a career of glory similar to that which he him-
self had finished P.

HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

.crols the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by
his three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gon-
*alo, of whom the first was born in lawful
wedlock, the two latter, like himself, were of
:llegitimate birth, and by Francisco de Alcan-
tara, his mother's brother. They were all in
the prime of life, and of such abilities and
courage, as fitted them to take a diftinguilhed
part in his subsequent transactions.

o Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9.
P Ibid. lib. vii. c. 1o.

C O.

BOOK VI. ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found

-o. Almagro so much exasperated at the manner
Hirtconci- in which he had conduced his negociation,
liarion with
Al maro. that he not only refused to aa any longer in

concert with a man, by whose perfidy he had
been excluded from the power and honours to
which he had a just claim, but laboured to
form a new afrociation, in order to thwart or
to rival his former confederate in his difcove-
ries. Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and
address than to susser a rupture ob fatal to all
his schemes, to become irreparable. By offer-
ing voluntarily to relinquilh the office of ade-
lantado, and promising to concur in soliciting
that title, with an independent government,
for Almagro, he gradually mitigated the rage
of an open-hearted soldier, which had been
violent, but was not implacable. Luque,
highly satisfied with having been successful in
all his own pretensions, cordially leconded Pi-
zarro's endeavours. A reconciliation was es-
feEted; and the confederacy renewed on its
original terms, that the enterprise should be
carried on at the common expence of the affo-
ciates, and the profits accruing from it should
be equally divided among them q.

s Herrera, dec. i. Lib. vii. c. 7. Z.ia:e, !:b. i. 3.
Vega., :. lib. i. c. 4i.

E.VEN

EVEN after their re-union, and the utmost BooK VI.

efforts of their interest, three finall vessels, with
a hundred and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of Thet"lrma-
whom were horsemen, composed the armament
which they were able to fit out. But the afto-
nifhing progrcfs of the Spaniards in America
had inlpired them with such ideas of their own
1uperiority, that Pizarro did not hesitate to fail s53r-
with this contemptible force to invade a great
empire. Almagro was left at Panama, as for-
merly, to follow him with what reinforcement
of men he should be able to muster. As the
fiiafon for embarking was properly chosen, and
the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Pizarro completed
the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the
force of the winds and currents, he was carried
above a hundred leagues to the north of Tum-
bez, the place of his destination, and obliged
to land his troops in the bay of St. Matthew. Land in
Without losing a moment, he began to ad-
vance towards the south, taking care, how-
ever, not to depart far from the sea-shore, both
rhai i,c might easily effect a junction with the
supplics which he expeced from Pantina, and
lecure a retreat in cafe of any disaster, by keep-
ing as near as possible to his ffips. But as the
co'.utry i:n !veral parts on the coast of Peru is

C 3 barren,

BooK VI. barren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as

3r. the Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near

their mouth, where the body of water is great-
efr; and as the imprudence of Pizarro, in at-
tackinc the natives when he should have studied
to gain their confidence, had forced them to
abandon their habitations; famine, fatigue,
and diseases of various kinds, brought upon
him and his followers calamities hardly infe-
rior to thoie which they had endured in their
fo-:mcr expedition. Ws'hat they now experi-
enced correstonded so ill with the alluring
de!fri.tion of the country given bv Pizarro,
that mnanv began to reproach him, and every
i;.,i.:ir i'.;it have become cold to the service,
ni, e-vn in thns u-:crtile region of Peru,
t.;ev hd nor.t: me": i;h fie appearances of
\'o!:h and cui;i;-ation, which feemned to
.'. iurfti-- ;he report cf their leader. At length

te reac!:ed the province of Coaque; and,
hav:ng urr;iled the principal fettlenent of the
n.-::.-., ;h';- 'eized thlre vcffels and ornaments
cf oi2 an.d fii-er, to the amount of thirty
t:culi .-e.D:-, Ew:"h o;ther hoorsy of fich va-
}i:., as dc':'-! i' ai! their doubts, and inspired

' :':",- c'i' i':i:nd·i nz ',i:'th f.ng:1iAne ihopes r.

I'17 .\RRQ

PI zARRO himself was so much delighted. x\ ;t Beno: VI.

tils rich ipoil, which he confidered as th!e firlt- ,..
fiuits of a land abounding with trealfure, that lie i,' .";,.
iIltaiitly dilfpatched one of his Ihips to Panama ,

.l. -

itlh a large remittance to Alnagro; and ano- m:t.
ther to Nicaragua with a considerable fulm to,
iinmc pcrfons of influence in that province,
it hopes of alluring adventurers, by this early
iilplay of the wealth which he had acquired.
MlIenlnwhile, he continued his march along the
coali, and dildaining to employ any means of
,educing the natives but force, he attacked
them with such violence in their fcattcred ha-
bi;itions, as compelled them either to retire
Into i!he interior country, or to submit to his
vo'ec. This lfdden appearance of invaders,
wholic aflpe and manners were lo strange, and
wvihoi: power leemed to be so irrefittible, made
the fa;ne dreadful imprefion as in other parts
of Aw.erica. Pizarro hardly met with refll:-
ance u;til he attacked the illand of Puna in
the bhi' of Guavquil. As that was better
!,.':lcd ilian the country through which he had
i.l'id, and its inhabitants liercer and less civi-
1 :.c ', ian those of the continent, they defended
t.::-::i'i'cs with luch obfiinate valour, that

. 'ert ! x months in reducing thein to

l..i.. ' ro' m P'lna he proceeded to Tum-

C . bez,

Boot.VI. bez, where the distempers whrch-raged'among,

,'1 his nmen...compelled him to remain 'for three

month's'. '

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to

reap advantage from his attention, to spread the

Ract~i fame of his first success at Coaque. Two dif-
some, and
coaDtes to ferent detachments arrived from Nicaragua,

w. which, though neither exceeded thirty men,
he confidered as a reinforcement of great con-
sequence to his feeble band, especially as the
one was under the command of Sebastian Be-
nalcazar, and the other of Hernando Soto, of-
ficers not inferior in merit and reputation to
Miy i6. any who had served in America. From Tum-

bez he proceeded to the river Piura, and in an
advantageous station near the mouth of it, he
eftablilhed the first Spanish colony in Peru; to
which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually
received more full information concerning its
extent and policy, as well as the situation of its
affairs at that juncture. Wiithout some know-

P. Sancho aS. Rar-.uf.i. p. 371, F. Herrera, dec. 4.

lib. ci.

ci . i. lib. ix. c. . ar:e, lib, ii. c. 2, 3.
X-. -..' p- iS, &c.

cledge

ledge of thefei he could-not have conduted Boo VI.
his operations with propriety; and without a ,53.
suitable attention to them, it is impossible to
account for the progress which the Spaniards
had already made, or to unfold the catifes of
their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Stateof th

Peruvian

Peru, the dominions of its sovereigns extended empire.
in length, from north to south, above fifteen
hundred miles along the Pacitic Ocean. Its
breadth, from east to weft, was much less con-
fiderable; being uniformly bounded by the vast
ridge of the Andes, stretching from its one
extremity to the other. Peru, like the reft of
the New World, was originally possessed by
Inall independent tribes, differing from each
other in manners, and in their forms of rude
policy. All, however, were so little civilized,
that, if the traditions concerning their mode
of life, preserved among their descendants,
delrrve credit, they must be classed among the
inoft unimproved savages of America. Stran-
g,'rs to every flecies of cultivation or regular
iidultry, without any fixed residence, and un-
a?.'uainrcd with those sentiments and obliga-
tions which form the first bonds of social union,
Ihts are l.id to have roamed about naked in

6, the

DBo> VI. the forests, with which the country was then

.~ ~ covered, more like wild beasts than like men.

As£er they had firuggied for several ages with
thc hardfnrips and calamities which are inevi-
r:ble in this barbarous state, and when no cir-
cumf.ance s'eemed to indicate the approach of
an..- uncommon effort to\wards improvement,
we are told that there appeared on the banks of
the lake Titiaca, a man and woman of ma-
ieftic form, and clothed in decent garments.
They declared themlelves to be children of the
Sun, tent by their benelfcent parent, who be-
held with pity the miseries of the human race,
to instruct and to reclaim them. At their per-
fiaafon, enforced by reverence for the divinity
in whole name they were supposed to speak,
several of the dispersed savages united together,
and receiving their commands as heaveniy in-
iuncTions, followed them to Cuzco, where they
fettled, and began to lay the foundations of ;
city.

.M.Ico CAP.C and Mama Ocolo, for lfucl

were tie names of tholf extraordinary perlon-
ages, having thus collected some wandering
tribes, formed that obciii union, which, by
nmuli]plving the dcfircs, and u.ni.in the efforts
cf the h_:'.n.an f.'c..s, excites indufry, and

le~d.

leads to improvement. Manco Capac instructed BooK VI.
the Inen in agriculture, and other useful arts. -

1532.

IMama Ocollo taught the women to spin and
to weave. By the labour of the one sex, sub-
lilecnce became less precarious; by that of the
other, life was rendered more comfortable.
After securing the objects of first necessity in
an infant state, by providing food, raiment,
and habitations for the rude people of whom
he took charge, Manco Capac turned his at-
tcntion towards introducing such laws and po-
lic) as might perpetuate their happiness. By
his infsitutions, which ihall be more particu-
larly explained hereafter, the various relations
in private life were established, and the duties
resulting from them prescribed with such pro-
prictr, as gradually formed a barbarous people
to decency of manners. In public adminiflra-
rion, the functions ofperfons in authority were
ob l:'eciiely defined, and the Subordination of
th(oi'e under their jurisdiction maintained with
i'lch a steady hand, that the society in which
Iec prcfided, loon afllmed the aspec of a re-
::.lar and well-governed state.

Tli's, according to the Indian tradition,

v':a t;',onded the empire of the Incas or Lords
c, P- r-. At lirfi, its extent was fimall. The

territory

BooK VL territory of Manco Capac did not reach above

eight leagues from Cuzco. But within its nar-
row precinEts he exercised absolute and un-
controlled authority. His fucceflors, as their
dominions expanded, arrogated a fimilarj-urif-
diction over their fubjeats: the defpotifn of
Asia was not more complete. The Incas were
not only obeyed as monarchs, but revered as
divinities. Their blood was held to be sacred,
and, by prohibiting intermarriages with the
people, was never contaminated by mixing
with that of any other race. The family, thus
separated from the reft of the nation, was dif-
tinguifhed by peculiarities in dress and orna-
ments, which it was unlawful for others to as-
fume. The monarch himself appeared with
ensigns of royalty reserved for him alone; and
received from his fubjets marks of obsequious
homage and respect, which approached almost
to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs seems to have been
uniformly accompanied with attention to the
good of their fubjeas. It was not the rage of
conquest, if we may believe the accounts of
their countrymen, that prompted the Incas to
e:.:cnd the;i dominions, but the desire of dii-

fusing

fusing the blefi.gs of civilization, and the Bo.os,-I,
knowledge of the arts which they pofrefled,
among the barbarous people.whom they re-
duced. During a succession of twelve mo-
narchs, it is said. that not one deviated frpon
this beneficent charaaer'.

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth mo-
narch from the founder of the state, was feated
on the throne. He is represented as a prince
diflinguifhed not only for the pacific virtues
peculiar to the race, but eminent for his mar-
tial talents. By his victorious arms the king-
dom of Quito was fubjeted, a conqueff of
such extent and importance as almofl doubled
the power of the Peruvian empire. He was
fond of residing in the capital of that valuable
province, which he had added to his domi-
nions and, notwithstanding the ancient and
fundamental law of the monarchy against pol-
luting the royal blood by any foreign alliance,
he married the daughter of the vanquished
monarch of Quito. She bore him a son named

r C;eca de Leon, Chron. c. 44. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x.
c. 4. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

Atah! alpa,

Boor VI. Atahualpa, whom, on his death at Quito, which
i3T,- seems to have happened about the year one

thousand five hundred and twenty-nine, he ap-
pointed his successor in that kingdom, leaving
the refl of his dominions to Huafcar, his eldest
son, by a mother of the royal race. Greatly
as the Peruvians revered the memory of a mo-
narch who had reigned with more reputation
and splendour than any of his predecessors, the
destination of Huana Capac concerning the
succession, appeared so repugnant to a maxim
coeval with the empire, and founded on au-
thority deemed sacred, that it was no sooner
known at Cuzco than it excited general disgust.
Encouraged by thoee sentiments of his subje6s,
Huafcar recuired his brother to renounce the
government of Quito, and to acknowledge him
as his lawful fupe:-:or. But it had been the
frfi care of Atai:ua'pa to gain a large body of
troops vhxich had accoi-.panied his father to
Quito. The'.e were the stower of the Peru-
vian wr rors, o v.-hof valtour Huana Capat
haJ be-n irndb.:d for ail his viRcries. Relv-
ing on their iupportr, tahu !'a fr: : eluded his
broth.r's dtirma.,, a-d tren .:-arched a.ainr.
!;.:': :' ,:'',, a-:.:-.'.v.

1'pHa<

T!ius the ambition of two young men, the BooKVI.

title of the one founded on ancient usage, and 15.-
tll:lr of the other aflerted by the veteran troops,
involved Peru in civil war, a calamity, to
.'hich, under a fuccellion of virtuous princes,
it hadl hitherto been a stranger. In such a
contelt the issue was obvious. The force of
arnm, triumphed over the authority of laws.
Atahual pa remained victorious, and made a
cruel use of his viftory. Conscious of the de-
set in his own title to the crown, he attempted
to exterminate the royal race, by putting to
death all the children of the Sun descended
from Manco Capac, whom he could seize either
bv force or itratagem. From a political mo-
tivc, the life of his unfortunate rival Huafcar,
who had been taken prisoner in the battle which
decided the fate of the empire, was prolonged
for some time, that, by issuing orders in his
name, the usurper might more easily establish
his own authority u.

WVIiN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Favour.bil

Matthew, this civil war raged between the two grst oii.
brothers in its greatest fury. Had he made '"""'

'- /.rate, lib. i. c. 15. Vega, i. lib. ix. c. iz and
3,:-4- . Ic rrera, dcc. ;. lib. i. c. 2, lib. iii. c. 7.

·. .v

BOOr VI. any hostile attempt in his former visit tQ Pertl

' in, the year one thousnd five hundred and

twcnty-feven, he must then have encountered
the force of a powerful state, united under a
monarch, possessed of capacity as well as cou-
rage, and unembarraffed with any care that
could divert him from opposing his progress.
But at this time, the two competitors, though
they received early accounts of the arrival and
violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so
intent upon the operations of a war, which
they deemed more interesting, that they paid
no attention to the motions of an enemy, too
inconsiderable in number to excite any great
alarm, and to whose career, it would be ears,
as they imagined, to give a check when more
at leisure.

Hoara1' BY this fortunate coin;cidence of events,
himfeli of
it,andad- whereof Pizarro could have no forcfighr, and

' of which, from his defective mode of intcr-

course with the people of the country, he re-
mained long ignorant, he was permitted to
carry on his operations unmoleited, and ad-
vanced to the centre of a great empire before
one effort of its power was exerted to flop his
career. During their prog:rcfs, te Spaniards
had acquired.fome imperfcWt knov, ledge of this

struggle

fitrggle between the two. contending fa&tions. BooK VI.
The fiilt 'cbohnp & ltewtlintlasid' tH peb '
to it,' tlhe''yl" erensrea'*iom meffengert wihoi
T-fuafcar fenrt tb" IzaTrro, tin ordet tiafoCcitiiis
aid againfA itahailp;a, fomr he repfeferittd as
a rebel and'ah -tfrper. ' Pizarro :perceived;:at
once the importance of this intelligence, arn
foresaw so' clearly all the advantages -which
might be derived from this divided ftateof th6
kingdom, which he had invaded, that, withe-
out waiting for the reinforcement which.he ex-
peted from Panama, he determined to puff
forward, while intestine discord put i.t out of
the power of the Peruvians to: attack him with
their whole force, and while, by taking parts
as circumstances should incline him,. with.one
of the competitors, he might be enabled with
greater ease to crush both. Enterprising as
the Spaniards of that age were in all their ope-
rations against Americans, and distinguished as
Pizarro was among his conttrymeh for daring
courage, we can hardly suppose, that after ha-
ving proceeded hitherto slow.ly, and with much
caution, he would have changed -at nce' his
system of operation, and htiae'Venfuredi pna

Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3.
VOL. III. D - measure

Bosr VI. measure so hazardous, without some new mo-

I;z. tive or profpe& to justify it.

s..,-of-ts As he was obliged to divide his troops, in
f'rcams order to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sus-

ficient to defend a station of equal importance
as a place of retreat in cafe of any disaster, and
as a port for receiving any supplies which should
come from Panama, he began his march with
a very slender and ill-accoutred train of fol-
lowers. They confited of fixty-two horse-
men , and a hundred and two foot-foldiers, of
whom twenty were armed with cross-bows, and
three with muskets. He directed his courle
towards Caxamalca, a small town at the dif-
tance of twelve days march from Sr. Michael,
where Atahualpa was encamped with a con-
fiderable body of troops. Before he had pro-
ceeded far, an officer dispatched by the Inca
met him with a valuable present from that
prince, accompanied with a proffer of his al-
liance, and assurances of a friendly reception
at Caxamalca. Pizarro, according to the usual
arltice of his countrymen in America, pretend-
ed to come as the ambassador of a very power-

See NOTE IV.

ful

fil monarch, and declared that he was now BooxVI.
advancing with an intention to o'ffr Atalhu- C~
aipa his aid against those enemies who disputed
his title to the throne y.

As the objec of the Spaniards in entering i .asos the

their country was altogether incomprehensible co'ncni.g;
to the Peruvians, they had formed various thir d'-
conjectures concerning it, without being able
to decide whether they Ihould confider their
new guests as beings of a superior nature, who
had visited them from some beneficent motive,
or as formidable avengers of their crimes, and
enemies to their repose and liberty. The con-
tinual professions of the Spaniards, that they
came to enlighten them with the knowledge
of truth, and lead them in the way of hap-
piness, favoured the former opinion; the out-
rages which they committed, their rapacious-
ness and cruelty, were awful confirmations of
the latter. While in this state of uncertainty,
Pizarro's declaration of his pacific intentions
so far removed all the Inca's fears, that he
determined to give him a friendly reception.
In consequence of this ref6lution, the Spaniards
vwere allowed to march in tranquillity across

Herr-ea, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 3. Xerez, p. 189.

D 2 the

BooKVI. the sandy desert between St. Michael and

1531. Matupe, where the most feeble effi-t of an

enemy, added to the unavoidable distresses
which they suffered in passing through that
comfortless region, must have proved fatal to
them z. From Motupe they advanced towards
the mountains which encompassed the low
country of Peru, and passed through' a defile
so narrow and inaccessible, that a few men
might have defended it against a numerous
army. But here likewise, from the fame in-
considerate credulity of the Inca, the Spa-
niards met with no opposition, and took quiet
possession of a fort ereted for the iecurity of
that important station. As they now ap-
proached near to Caxamalca, Atahualpa re-
newed his professions of friendship; and as an
evidence of their sincerity, sent them presents
of greater value than the former.

.t 2: , ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took pof-
CL.i:c,. feilon of a large court, on one fide of which

was a house which the Spanish historians call a
palace of the Inca, and on the other a temple
of the Sun, the whole surrounded with a strong
rampart or wall of earth. When he had po(ted

See NOTE V.

his

his troops in this advantageous station, he dilf BooKVI.
patched Hernaado Soto, and his brother Ser- ,5.
dinand, to the camp of Atahualpa, which was
about a league distant from the. town. He
instructed them to confirm the declaration
which he had formerly made of his pacific dif-
position, and to desire an interview with the
Inca, that he might explain more fully the in-
tention of the Spaniards in visiting his country.
They were treated with all the refpetful hofpi-
tality usual among the Peruvians in the recep-
tion of their most cordial friends, and Atahu-
alpa promised to visit the Spanish commander
next day in his quarters. The decent deport-
ment of the Peruvian monarch, the order of
his court, and the reverence with which his
fubjets approached his person and obeyed his
commands, astonished those Spaniards, who
had never met in America with any thing more
dignified than the petty cazique of a barbarous
tribe. But their eyes were still more power-
fully attraced by the vast profusion of wealth
which they observed in the Inca's camp. The
rich ornaments worn by him and his attend-
ants, the velTels of gold and ilver in which the
repast offered to them was served up, the mul-
titude of utensils of every kind formed of those
precious metals, opened profpefts far exceed-

D j ing

BoorVI. ing any idea of opulence that a European of

t53. the fifteenth century could form.

PeCr"in-os ON their return to Caxamalca, while their
{.-r}ne o:
P ;ro. minds were yet warm with admiration and de-

fire of the wealth which they had beheld, they
gave such a description of it to their country-
men, as confirmed Pizarro in a resolution
which he had already taken. From his own
observation of American manners during his
long service in the New W'orld, as well as from
the advantages which Cortes had derived from
seizing Montezuma, he knew of what confe-
quence it was to have the Inca in his power.
For this purpose, he formed a plan as daring
as it was perfidious. Notwmihftanding the cha-
racer he had assumed of an ambassador from a
powerful monarch, who courted an alliance
with the Inca, and in violation of the repeated
offers which he had made to him of his own
friendship and assistance, he determined to
avail himfclf of the unsluipicious simplicity with
which Atahualpa relied on his professions, and
to seize the peribn of the Inca during the inter-
view to which he had invited him. He pre-
pared for rhe execution of his scheme with the
fame dclierate arran,-ment, and with as little
coinpurcto;n: as it it had refieted no disgrace

on

on hitifelf or his country. He divided :his BoOKVI.
cavalry into three finall squadrons, under the i-2-
command of his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and
Benalcazar; his infantry were formed in one
body, except twenty of most tried courage,
whom he kept near his own person to support
him in the dangerous service which he reserved
for hirnfelf; the artillery, consisting of two
field-pieces a and the crofs-bowmen, were placed
opposite to the avenue by which Atahualpa was
to approach. All were commanded to keep
within the square, and not to move until the
signal for action was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp Nor. 16.

Visited by

was all in motion. But as Atahualpa was so- th Inca.'
licitous to appear with the greatest splendour
and magnificence in his first interview with the
tlrangers, the preparations for this were so
tedious, that the day was far advanced before
he began his march. Even then, left the order
of the procession should be deranged, he-moved
so slowly, that the Spaniards became impatient
and apprehensive that some suspicion of their
intention might be the cause of this delay. In
order to remove this, Pizarro dispatched one

a Xerez, p. 194.

D 4 of

Boor.E of his officers with fresh assurances of his

-sa, friendly difpoftion. At length the Inca ap-

proached. First of all appeared four hundred
men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to
clear the way before him. He himself, fitting
on a throne or couch, adorned with plumes of
various colours, and almost covered with plates
of gold and silver enriched with precious stones,
was carried on the shoulders of his principal
attendants. Behind him came some chief of-
ficers of his court, carried in the fame manner.
Several bands of fingers and dancers accom-
panied this cavalcade; and the whole plain was
covered with troops, amounting to more than
thirty thousand men.

- .. - As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters,
f--v,;-. father Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the ex-

' pedition, advanced with a crucifix in one hand,

and a breviary in the other, and in a long dif-
course explained to him the doctrine of the
creation, the fall of Adam, the incarnation,
the ;'::Trings and refurreEtion of Jesus Chriit,
:itc appointment of St. Peter as God's vice-
gerent on earth, the tranfinilinon of his apostolic
power by fucceion to the popes, the donation
made :o tihe lin- of Caf;iie bv pope Alexander
of all the rei ::s in the New MWorld. In con-

5 sequence

sequence of. all this, he required Atahualpa to BOOK VI.
embrace the Chrifian faith,. to acknowledge .
the supreme jurifdi&ion of the pope, and to
submit to the king of Castile as his lawful so-
vereign; promising, if he complied instantly
with this requisition, that the Castilian monarch
would protect his dominions, and permit him
to continue in the exercise of his royal autho-
rity but if he flould impiously refuse to obey
this fumimons, he denounced war against him
in his master's name, and threatened him with
the most dreadful effects of his vengeance.

THIS strange harangue, unfolding deep Replyofthe

miyferies, and alluding to unknown faCts, of a
which no power of eloquence could have con-
veyed at once a distinct idea to an American,
was so lamely translated by an unfilful inter-
preter, little acquainted with the idiom of the
S[-aniil tongue, and incapable of exprefling
liiimtlf with propriety in the language of the
Inca, that its general tenor was altogether in-
comprchenfible to Atahualpa. Some parts in
it, of more obvious meaning, filled him with
ailoniflhmcnt and indignation. His reply,
however, was temperate. He began with ob-
:.irving, that he was lord of the dominions over

ich ll he reigned by hereditary fuccefion ; and

added,

BcorVI. added, that he could not conceive how a so-

,;^ reign priest should pretend to dispose of ter.n

ritories which did not belong to him; that if
such a prcpofterous grant had been made, he;
who was the rightful pofi'effor, refused to con-
firm i:; that he had no inclination to renounce
the religious inftirutions established by his an-
ceftors; nor would he forfike the service of
the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he and
his people revered, in order to worlhip the
God of the Spaniards, who was subject to
death; that with rfpeet to other matters con-
tained in his discourse, as he had never heard
of them before, and did not now understand
their meaning, he desired to know where the
priet had learned things so extraordinary.
" In this book," answered Valverde, reach-
ing ou: to him his breviary. The Inca opened
it eagerly, and turning over the leaves, lifted
it to his e.r: " This," fays he, " is silent; it
c-i;s me nothin;- " and threw it with disdain
ro the ground. The enraged monk, running
towards his countr-ymen, cried out, " To arms,
Chriftiars, to arms; tre word of God is in-
i',ted ; avenge this profanation on those im-
pious dogs '.

.:
S NOTE V

PIZARRO0

PIZARRO, who, during this long conference, BdostrV

had with difficulty restrained his soldiers, eager u'"
to ifize the rich spoils of which they had now Pi rro at.
so near a view, immediately gave the signal of Peruvian,
alfailr. At once the martial music struck up,
the cannon and muskets began to fire, the horse
fjilied out fiercely to the charge, the infantry
rushcd on sword in hand. The Peruvians,
affonifihcd at the suddenness of an attack which
they did not expet, and difinayed with the
deltruclive effe6ts of the fire-arms; and the
irrelil:ible imprelfion of the cavalry, fled with
universal conifernation on every fide, without
attempting either to annoy the enemy, or to
defend theinfelves. Pizarro, at the head of his
chosen band, advanced direcly towards the
Inca; and though his nobles crowded around
him wicth officious zeal, and fell in numbers at
his feet, while they vied one with another in
f.criticing their own lives, that they might
cover the sacred person of their sovereign, the
Spaniards soon penetrated to the royal feat;
and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the arm, drag- and fcizea
ged him to the ground, and carried him as a thi''""
prilbrer to his quarters. The fate of the mo-
narch increased the precipitate flight of his
follow.rs. The Spaniards pursued them to-
wards every quarter, and with deliberate and

unrelenting

Bopr VL unrelenting barbarity continued to faughter

J 3. wretched fugitives, who never once offered to

resist. The carnage did not cease until the
close of day. Above four thousand Peruvians
were killed. Not a single Spaniard fell, nor
-was one wounded but Pizarro himself, whose
hand was slightly hurt by one of his own fol-
diers, while struggling eagerly to lay hold or
the Inca '.

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond

any idea which the Spaniards had yet formed
concerningr the wealth of Peru, and they were
lJ transported with the value of the acquisition,
as well as the greatnc: of their success, that
they passed the night in the extravagant cx-
ultation natural to indglrcit adventurers on
such an extraordinary change of fortune.
r.-..s AT r the c ;ai:;ve monarch could hardly

bte!e:-e a calam;i- which he so little expedced
to he real. Buti he soon felt all the miiry of
his fate, and the deicction into which he funk
was in proportion to the height of grandeur
from which he had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of
losing all the advantages which he hoped to

c See NOT \ iI.

deri; c

derive from the possession of such a prisoner, BooK VI.
laboured to console him with professions of 15,z.
kindness and refpe&, that cortesponded ill with
his actions. By residing among the Spaniards,
the Inca quicklydifcovered their ruling pas-
sion, which, indeed, they were no-wise soli-
citous to con'ceal, and by applying to that,
made an attempt to recover his liberty. He Hi;olfrof
offered as a ransom what astonished the Spa a ranfm'
niards, even after all they now knew concern-
ing the opulence of his kingdom. The apart-
ment in which he was confined was twenty-two
feet in length and sixteen in breadth; he un-
dertook to fill it with vessels of gold as high as
he could reach. Pizarro closed eagerly with
this tempting proposal, and a line was drawn
upon the walls of the chamber, to mark the
ltipulated height to which the treasure was to
riie.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having ob-

tained rome profpet of liberty, took measures
instantly for fulfilling his part of the agreement,
by fending messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and
other places, where gold had been amafred in
largest quantities, either for adorning the tem-
ples of their gods, or the houses of the Inca,
to bring what was necessary for completing his

ranlfou

BoerVI. ranfor dire&tly to Caxamalca. Though Ata.

1,^ hualpa was now in the custody of his enemies,

vet 1o much were the Peruvians accustomed to
refpeEt every mandate issued by their sovereign,
that his orders were executed with the greatest
alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recovering
his liberty by this means, the subje&s of the
Inca were afraid of endangering his life by
forming any other scheme for his relief; and
though the force of the empire was fill entire,
no preparations were made, and no army asSem-
bled to avenge their own wrongs or thcoe of
their monarch 1. The Spaniards remained in

Tte ;s,- Cixanmaca t-anquil and unmolested. Small
c:,r-. detachments of their number marched into re-
p...:s. mote provinces of the empire, and inrread of

meeting with any opposition, were every where
received with marks of the mtoft fubmilfive

rfDec'. .

:---.- INCONSIDERABLE as thoie parties were, and

r . . ceirous as Pizarro might be to obtain fbme
.... knowledge of the interior state of the country,

h- could not have ventured upon any diminu-
.cr-t " t:on of his main bcdy, if he had not about this

time received an account of Almagro's having
landed 2a S:. Michael with luch a reinforcement

, Xe-ez, :c;. ' Sc N\ OTE VILI.

as

as would almost double the number of his fol- BooK VI.
lowels '. The arrival of this long-expected 23.
:'i:cour was not more agreeable to the Spa-
niard, than alarming to the Inca. He saw
the power of his enemies increafc; and as he
knew neither the source whence they derived
their supplies, nor the means by which they
were conveyed to Peru, he could not foresee
to what a height the inundation that poured in
upon his dominions might rile. While dif- ,33.
ouietcd with such apprchenfions, he learned to d'a..'
that tome Spaniards, in their way to Cuzco,
had visited his brother Huafcar in the place
where he kept hin confined, and that the cap-
tive prince had reprelented to them the justice
of his own cause, and as an inducement to
espouse it, had promised them a quantity of
treasure vastly exceeding what Atahualpa had
enclaged to pay for his ransom. If the Spani-
ards should liften to this proposal, Atahualpa
perceived his own destruction to be inevitable;
and ful peeting that their insatiable thirst for
gold would tempt them to lend a favourable
car to it, lie determined to sacrifice his bro-
ther's life, that he might save his own; and
his orders for this purpose were executed, like

Xrez, zo.2 . H-errera, dec. 5 lib. iii. c. I, z.

all

BooK vE all his odier commands, with scrupulous punc-

1533. tualiy g.

The 'D -. MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Cax-
a:c ;. :kt a
di6fin r amalca from different parts of the kingdom,

loaded with treasure. A great part of the fti-
pulated quantity was now amassed, and Ata-
huaipa allured the Spaniards, that the only
thing which prevented the whole from being
brought in, was the remotenels of the pro-
vinces where it was deposited. But such vast
piles of gold, presented continually to the view
of needy fuldiers, had lb inflamed their avarice,
that it was irnpoffble any longer to restrain
their impatcnce to obtain poffelion of this
rich boorv. Orders were given for melting
down the whole, except ifoile pieces of curious
fabric, re-erved as a present for the einperor.
After fctting apar- the 'fi-h due to the crown,
and a hundred thoufind pesos as a donative to
the soldiers which arrived vich Almagro, there
remained one million five hundred and twenty-
eight thousand five hundred pelbs to Pizarro
j.:: :.- and his followers. The feffival of St.' James,

i;c patron fa::t ;:f Sopan, was the Lay chosen
fr tl'c par ::ion or this vral lium, and the man-

g Z ':

>. ci.

.;. 5. Gcm.ra Hillt. c. i j. HIcr-
r c-a, de~. 5. '::. Ei. c. 2.

ner

ner of condut&ing'it strongly marks thatftrange Bobri-1.
alliance of fanaticifin with avarice, which I '
have more than once had occasion to point out
as a striking feature in the character of the
conquerors-of the New World. Though as-
fembled to divide the spoils of an innocent
people, procured by deceit, extortion, and
cruelty, the tranfadidn began with a solemn
invocation of the name of Godh" as if they
could have expected the gtidance of Heaven
in ldifributing those wages of iniquity. In this
division above eight thousand pesos, at that
time not inferior in effetive value to as many
pnunds Sterling in the present century; fell to
the fhnre of each horleman, and half that fum
to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and
his officers, received dividends in proportion
to the dignity of their rank.

THRnE is no example in history of such a Theeffia

ft:d!en acquisition of wealth by military ser- ofit'
vice, nor was ever a fum so great divided
among so fitall a number of soldiers. Many
of them having received a recompence for their
services far beyond their mnoft sanguine hopes,
were so impatient to retire from fatigue and

h Hleriea, dcc. c. lit'. iii. c. 3.
VOL. Ill- . dangr,

Boor VI. danger, in order to spend the remainder of
'-.3 their days in their native country, in ease and

opulence, that they demanded their discharge
with clamorous importunity. Pizarro, fenfi-
ble that from such men he could expect neither
enterprise in action nor fortitude in suffering,
and persuaded that wherever they went, the
display of their riches would allure adventurers,
less opulent but more hardy, to his standard,
granted their suit without reluctance, and per-
nitted above sixty of them to accompany his
brother Ferdinand, whom he sent to Spain with
an account ot his success, and the present de-
ilined for the emperor'.

Tf' 1T. THE Spaniards having divided among them
:i, i:,-? the treature amaired for the Inca's ransom, he

infifed with tlhem to fulfil their promise of set-
ting him at liberty. But nothing was farther
from Pizarro's thoughts. During his long
lervice in the New World, he had imbibed
those ideas and maxims of his fellow-foldiers,
which led them to confider its inhabitants as
an inierior race, neither worthy of the name,
nor intitled to the rights, of men. In his

H rr -, 'c. 5 ib. ii. c. 4. Vega, p. :. lib. i.

compact

rompa& with Atahualpa, he had no other ob- BooK VI,
jcc' than to amuse his captive with such a pro- 13-
ipecI of recovering his liberty, as might induce
him to lend all the aid of his authority towards
collecting the wealth of his kingdom. Hav-
ing now accomplished this, he no longer re-
garded his plighted faith; and at the very time
when the credulous prince hoped to be replaced
on his throne, he had secretly resolved to be-
reave him of life. Many circumstances seem
to have concurred in prompting him to this
action, the most criminal and atrocious that
stains the Spanish name, almidft all the deeds
of violence committed in carrying on the con-
quest of the New World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in H and the

Spaniards

imitation of Cortes's conduct towards the Mex- m,,pualy
ican monarch, he did not possess talents for jea'"""l
carrying on the fame artful plan of policy.
Deltitute of the temper and address requisite
for gaining the confidence of his prisoner, he
never reaped all the advantages which might
have been derived from being matier of his
perron and authority. Atahualpa was, indeed,
a prince of greater abilities and discernment
than Mhntezuima, and seems to have pene-
tratcd more thoroughly into the character and

E 2 intentions

BoK VI. intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual futilcion

,--J- and dillrufe accordingly took place between

them. The strict attention with which it was
neceffarv to guard a captive of fuich import-
ance, greatly increaicd the fatigue of military
duty. The utility of keeping him appeared
inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him as an
incumbrance, from which he wished to be de-
live red .

A'-"--' AL.MAG.OA! a.:-. his foIlowers had made a de-
DanC In, :..

Io-c mand of an equial fliare in the Inca's ranium;

and thoigh Pizarro had befflov.ed upon the
priv.ite -rn ite l.ire g ratuity which I h.:ve
mentiroed, and cnrdeavourcd to sooth their
leader by prc'enis of e rc.t vaiuc, they fill
contr.nued d :iftaieci. Thev

'\ re apprehensive,

that as long as A.ahualpa reanined a prilbner,
PizarrGo's :i.:ers v.'otld applv whacver trea-
sure fihouidl e acc :red, to n:;ake up :v. i was
waan:!i.r. oC.' :.' Ca.' '.' l'.--ilarted soir bhs ran-
:o:nr, rand t.::icr tait i rrc:-: excl de thcmi
fr.-n. an' p.r: oc i:. I '.( :', e.

"ri' on

pr'.ttiri the Inca to d(ath, th..t ail the adven-
torers in Per;: mri'lt " ...'icr b on
a. n c' ,'ia!

}.', i e ,, ,

i:. C.
.C:.:, dt;. 5. .;:. ::. ;, . z.

";'. \.. Oi

PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with BooVI.

accounts of forces assembling in the remote
provinces of the empire, and ilfpeóed Atahu- wMhnch
alpa of having issued orders for that purpose. d- 'Pi-
These fears and suspicions were artfully in- confcn:.
creased by Philippillo, one of the Indians
whom Pizarro had carried off from Tumbez
in the year one thcufand five hundred and
twenrt--leven, and whom lie employed as an
interpreter. The funlion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with
the captive monarch, he presumed, notwith-
ILaindig the meanness of his birth, to raise his
ailetions to a Coya, or descendent of the Sun,
one oi Arahualpa's wives; and secing no pro-
fpcct of gratifying that paflion during the life
of the monarch, he endeavoured to fill the ears
of the Spaniards with fich accounts of the In-
ca's fIcret dcfigns and preparations, as might
awakecn their jealousy and incite them to cut
him oi'.

W\HILE Almagro and his followers openly

demanded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo
laboured to ruin him by private machinations,
that unhappy prince inadvertently contributed
ro lallen his own fate. During his confine-
iient lie had attached himfilf with peculiar

I 3 affcction

Boor VI. affection to Ferdinand Pizarro and Hernando

3 3. Soto; who, as they were perlbns of birth and

education superior to the rough adventurers
with whom they served, were accustomed to
behave with more decency and attention to the
captive monarch. Soothed with this refpea
from persons of such high rank, he delighted
in their society. But in the presence of the
governor he was uneasy, and overawed. This
dread soon came to be mingled with contempt.
Among all the European arts, what he admired
most was that of reading and writing; and he
lon' deliberated with himself, whether he
should regard it as a natural or acquired ta-
lent. In order to determine this, he desired
one of the soldiers, who guarded him, to write
the name of God on the nail of his thumb.
This he shewed successively to several Spani-
ards, asking its meaning; and to his amaze-
me-.r, they all, without hesitation, returned
the fame answer. At length Pizarro entered;
and on presenting it to him, he blushed, and
wi:h some confusion was obliged to acknow-
ledge his ignorance. From that moment,
Atahlllpa conf.dered him as a mean person,
less ir.fru^ted than his own soldiers; and he
hsd not addrei! enough to conceal the senti-
:ie.-.:s wth which this diicove-r inspired him.

6 "To

To be the object of a barbarian's scorn, not BOOK V.
only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited ,5-3
such resentment in his breast, as added force to
all the other considerations which prompted
him to put the Inca to death".

BUT In order to give tome colour of jutice Hi:.rial.

to this violent adction, and that he himself
might be exempted fiom standing singly re-
Iponfiblc fir the commirfion of it, Pizarro
resolved to try the Inca with all the formali-
ties observed in the criminal courts of Spain.
Pizarro himself, and Almagro, with two as-
fiftants, were appointed judges, with full power
to acquit or to condemn; an attorney-general
was named to carry on the prosecution in the
king's name; counsellors were chosen to afift
the prisoner in his defence ; and clerks were
ordained to record the proceedings of court.
Before this strange tribunal, a charge was exhi-
bited f-ill more amazing. It consisted of va-
rious articles; that Atahualpa, though a bas-
r.trd, had difpoffeffed the rightful owner of
the throne, and usurped the regal power;
rhat he had put his brother and lawful so-
'ereign to death; that he was an idolater,
.ind had not only permitted, but commanded
" Hcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. 1 . lib. i.

E 4 the

BooE VI. the offering of human facriices; that he had

-s3. a great number of concubines; that since

his imprisonment he had wafted and embez-
zled the roval trea:ires, which now belonged
of right to the conquerors; that he had incited
his subjects to take alms against the Spaniards.
On thele heads of accufition, some of which
are so ludicrous, others lu absurd, that the
effrontery of Pizarro, in making them the
foundation of a fcrious procedure, is not less
surprising than his injustice, did the court go
on to try the sovereign of a great empire, over
wi;om it Lad no jurildiction. With respect to
each of the articles, witnesses were examined;
bu: as they deliecred their evidence in their
nai;-ve rungue, Philipp:!lo had it in his power
to give the:r words .hatever turn befl suitcd
h;is ;i.evolcnt intentions. To judges pre-
d'.. r:r.ined in their o::n:on, this evidence ap-
F' ;,-- peared :; Tcie.t. Thev pro'rour.ced -tahualpa

.

' ;:'itv, ... condemr.n.d him to be b'!rnt alive.

F:'-:.:- V.diverd proftiiuted the authority of his
sacrcd fun::on to con..rm this fnenence, and
b' his f igna:urc warranted it to be just. Afto-
r.i!hd at his fate, A-tahuapa endeavoured to
ave.-t it cb trars, bv promnics5, and by enr'ea-
ties, t'-.:a: e m-ig: be lent to Spain, where a
ir.onarch would be :te arbitcr of his lot. But
p:y never touched the un:reiin n hear: of Pi-

zarro.

zarro. He ordered him to be led instantly to BboKVI.
execution; and what added to the bitterness of
his la(t moments, the fame monk who had just
ratilied his doom, offered to conlble, and at-
tempted to convert him. The molt powerful
arglmecnt Valverdc employed to prevail with
him to embrace the Christian faith, was a pro-
milkc of mitigation in his punihment. 'The
dric:tl of a cruel death extorted from the trem-
bling victim a delire of receiving baptifln.
The ceremony was performed; and Atahualpa,
inllcad of being burnt, was firangled at the ,,"..cu.
flakle ;'

T APPILY for the credit of the Spanish na- Se aic,-

tion, cvcn among the profligate adventurers n"ri' prn-
w\-ilch it sent forth to conquer and desolate t.
the cNew World, there were persons who re-
tained Ibme ltillnure of the Cattilian generosity
and honour. Though, before the trial of Ata-
hlu.lpri, Ferdinand Pizarro had set out for
Spain, and Soto was font on a separate com-
m;;::d at a diilancc from Caxamalca, this odi-
o:'s t:anfaclion was not carried on without cen-
rf::e and opposition. Several officers, and

/..riat, lh.ii. . . Xere , p 233. Vega, p. 11,

Ib. i. c. -,', 37. Gomara litl. c. 117. Herrera, dec. 5.
lib. i. . 4.

among

Boor Vt. among those fomre of the qreareft reputation
'- '' and most reipectable families in the service,

not onlv remonirrated, but protested against
this real:ure of their general, as disgraceful to
their country, as repugnant to every maxim of
cquirt, as a violation of public faith, and an
i:u:rpartion of uriuLfijction over an independent
:1;.on;rl1, to which trh;' had no title. But
their endeavours were vain. Numbers, and
thc opinion of such as held every thing to be
lawful which they deemed advantageous, pre-
vailed. H:i'ton-, however, records even the
U:n.iccc::f'U! exertions of virtue with applause;
and the SF."llh wriLers, in relating events
v.'.ere the v- lor of their nation is more con-
1,ico::c s than its humanity', have not failed to
Fre-frve the names of those who made this
Lu.dable eftor: to save their ccuntry from the
in.fanv of havinr per;utrateid luch a crime .
r- 0 '-:e d --.th of Ataz:hu.-a, Pizarro inveRted

. ... e .f his :,ins with the cnfifrns of royalty,

" ' i'-- a

yr oung man w itliout experience

.-'::-.~- ,r.l..;. a more pafTive instrument in his

- h-n

..., an r mbit:o;.:s monarch, who had

-' -- --, -. :... '. , c. -, e. i,
'. 2;. Ierrera.

bee.n

been accustomed to independent command. BooK VI.
The people of Cuzco, and the adjacent country, ,53
ncknowledged Manco Capac, a brother of Hu-

iicar, as Inca P. But neither possessed the au-
thority which belonged to a iovereign of Peru.
The violent convulsions into which the empire
had been thrown, first by the civil war between
the two brothers, and then by the invasion of
the Spaniards, had not only deranged the or-
der of the Peruvian government, but almost
dihTolved its frame. When they beheld their
nonarch a captive in the power of strangers,
and at lallt fuilring an ignominious death, the
people in fevcral provinces, as if they had been
ilt free from every refiraint of law and decency,
brouke out into the most licentious excefles q.
So m.inv dclcendcnts of the Sun, after being
treated witth the utmoll indignity, had been
ctit of' by Atahual pa, that not only their in-
iltr ncc i;i tle Hcate di;inifiled with their num-
hcr, but the accullonied reverence for that
.;icred ;.ice f'nfiibly decreased. In consequence
c-f this liate of things, ambitious men in dif-
fir:cnr p:alrs of the empire aspired to independ-
ent a.i:oritv, a:ndL ulfurpcd jurildition to which

r ¾

\ :!, n. i. Iir. lii C.

c .

.
.i-: c r.!, d: c.. tb. ii. c. . lib. iii. c.5.

they

Boor Vi. they had no title. The general who corn-

M, anded for Atahualpa in Quli:o, seized the
brother and children of his nmaflr, put them
ro a cruel deiah, and diS:laiming any con-
ne;tion vwihl either Inca, endeavoured to efta-
biifl a separate kingdom for himself'.

F.p':-- - T4;E Spaniards, with pclafure, beheld the
c-;o. fpirir of discord diiufir.g it:clf, and the vigour

,f government relaxing among the Peruvians.
They confidered thofc diftrders as ,vnmptoms
of a itate .ha1ening tow.ards its difolution.
Pizarro no longer heftratcd to advance towards
Cuzco, and he hld received such considerable
reinforc.en:rnts, that he could venture, with
litile odngcr, to penetriate b far into the in-
terior part of the country. The account of
the wealth acquired at Caxam;alca operated as
hi; had fcrefeenr. No lboner did his brother
Ferdi..:. a, wvth the off.cers and soldiers to
v.;ori he h ad given their diseharge after the

.par:-:in of : he Inca's ran;or:, arrive at Pa-

;;a--.:, and difi.i their riches in the view Of
th!;r ..ionri'.cd c:unrr-ymr:n, than fa;me Ire;a
th'e accol'p . irh lch iu exageration through all
ri.c :S:::.:1: ::r'c -ents on the So'th Sea, 'hat
r 7.^ :-z:, h;. i.:. c. ?. Ve.ga,, _. ;;. !:a. ii. c. 3, 4.

tl
.-

the governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Ni- Boo¥VI.
caragua, could hardly restrain the people un- ,533.
der their jurifdition, from abandoning their
1pofTcflons, and crowding to that inexhaustible
lburce of wealth which seemed to be opened in
Per',i . In spite of every check and regulation,
iochl numbers retorted thither, that Pizarro be-
gan his march at the head of five hundred
men, after leaving a considerable garrison in
St. Michael, under the command of Benal-
cazar. The Peruvians had alfembled some
large bodies of troops to oppose his progress.
Scv'r.il fierce encounters happened. But they
tcrminated like all the aftions in America; a
few Spaniards were killed or wounded; the
natives were put to flight with incredible
flaughlter. At length Pizarro forced his way to
Cuzco, and took quiet possession of that ca-
pital. The riches found there, even after all
that the natives had carried off and concealed,
either from a fuperltitious veneration for the
ornaments of their temples, or out of hatred
to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in va-
lue what had been received as Atahualpa's ran-
fonm. But as the Spaniards were now accuf-

Gomara Hilt c. c 25. Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. i.
Ticrrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5.

I tomed

Boor VI. tomed to the wealth of the country, and it came

1-53 to be parcelled out among a greater number of

adventurers, this dividend did not excite the
fame surprise either from novelty, or the large-
nets of the fum that fell to the share of each
individual '.

DURING the march to Cuzco, that son of

Atahualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died;
and as the Spaniards substituted no person in
nis place, the title of Manco Capac teems to
have been universally recognized ".
QOCC: - WTHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus em-

cL.;iir. ployed, Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael,

an able and enterprising officer, was ashamed of
remaining inative, and impatient to have his
name diftinguithed among the discoverers and
conquerors of the New World. The seasonable
arrival of a fresh bodv of recruits from Panama
and Nicaragua, put it in his power to gratify this
pafTion. Leaving a sufficient force to prote-t the
infant fettlemententrufted to his care, he placed
himfclf at the head of the reft, and fct out to
attempt the reduction of Quito, where, accord-
ing to the report of the natives, Atahualpa
had left the greateit part of his treasure. Not-
S See NOTE IX. c Hcrr- , dec. . ib.. v. c. 2.

wvith-

withstanding the vast distance of that city from BooKVI.
St. Michael, the difficulty of marching through Cz3-
a mountainous country covered with woods,
and the frequent and fierce attacks of the best
troops in Peru, commanded by a skilful leader,
the valour, good conduct, and perfcverance of
Benalcazar surmounted every obstacle, and he
entered Quito with his vicorious troops. But
they met with a cruel mortification there. The
natives, now acquainted, to their sorrow, with
the predominant palEion of their invaders, and
knowing how to disappoint it, had carried off
all thole treasures, the profpeca of which had
prompted them to undertake this arduous ex-
pedition, and had supported them under all the
dangers and hardships wherewith they had to
ltruggle in carrying it on '

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader Alarado',

who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The
fame of its riches attracted a more powerful
enemy. Pedro de Alvarado, who had diftin-
guifihed himfeif lt cmincently in the conquest of'
Mexico, having obtained the government of
Guatimala as a recompence for his valour, ioon
became disgusted with a life of uniform tran-

Zarate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. 1 . lib. ii. c. 9.
Herrera, dec. Jib. ir. c. I1, 12. iib. v. c. 2, 3. lib. vi.

quillity,

Boor VL. quillity, and longed to be again engaged iri

the bustle of military service. The glory and
wealth acquired by the conqu-erors of P-.u
heightened this passion, and gave it a d:-r-
mined direction. Believing, or pretenuhi:;':
believe, that the kingdom of Quito diL nu;
lie within the limits of the province allotted to
Pizarro, he resolved to invaje i-. The high
reputation of the conmmander ailired volunteers
from every quarter. lie :emba!-ked with ive
hundred men, of whom above two hundred
were of such ddifin.ion as to iervc on horle-
back. He ianded at Puerto Viejo, and sith-
out fuficient kn'owledge of the country, or
proper guides to condurt him, attempted to
march directlv to Quito, by following the course
of the river Guayqu:!, and crofirg the ridge
of the Andes towards its head. But in this
route, one of the inof iinpl-acticable in all
America, his tioops cr.J red lucll fatigue in
forcing their way ti:rough foreits and marshes
on the low grounds, and luterced so much
from exceffivc cold .whn th;ey began to al-
cend the mnount.ains, th. before they reached
the plain of Q(uio, a if:h part of the men
and half of their hor:es died, and the relt
were !o much d!p-i:ried and worn our, as
to be almolt unrit for Icrvi-e . There they

S -: NOT1 . ,.

met.

met with a body, not of Indians but of Spa- BtoKVI.
niards, drawn up in hostile array againfl them. s533.
Pizarro having received an account of Alva-
rado's armament, had detached Almagro with
tome troops to oppose this formidable invader
of his jurifdi&ion; and these were joined by
Benalcazar and his victorious party. Alva-
rado, though firprifed at the fight of enemies
whom he did not expet, advanced boldly to
the charge. But, by the interposition of some
moderate men in each party, an amicable ac-
commodation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their conqueffs to
embrue their hands in the blood of their coun-
trymen, was postponed a few years. Alvarado
engaged to return to his government, upon
Almagro's paying him a hundred thousand
pesos to defray the expence of his armament.
Most of his followers remained in the country;
and an expedition, which threatened Pizarro
and his colony with ruin, contributed to aug-
ment its strength Z.

'534.
BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed H."O""

crnfclrcd on
in Spain. The immense quantities of gold and P....rro..

Airnagro.

2 Zarate, lib. ii.c. 10--13. Vega, p. li. lib.ii. c. i,

2. 9, &c. Gomnra Hilt. c. 126, &c. Remefal. HiR.
Guatimal. lib. iii. c. 6. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. I, 2.
-, S.

Vol.. 111. F silver

BooKVI. silver which he imported', filled the kingdom

with no less aftoniihment than they had excited
in Panama and the adjaccnt provinces. Pizarro
was received by the emperor with the attention
due to the bearer of a present so rich as to exceed
any idea which the Spaniards had formed con-
cerning the value of their acquifirions in Ame-
rica, even afier heyc had been ten years masters
of Mexico. In recompence of his brother's
services, his authority was confirmed with
new powers and privileges, and tlhe addition
of seventy leagules, extending along the coast,
to the loutihw\\rd of the territory granted in
his former patecnr. Almagro received the
honours which he had lb long desircd. The
title of Adelantado, or governor, was confer-
red upon hnim, with jurifdition over two hun-
dred leagues of country, f:retching beyond the
southern limn.ir of the province allotted to Pi-
zarro. Ferdinand iim-ifelf did not go unre-
warded. He w.as admitted into the military
c:r of St. J:;go, a di;tinction alwa-.-s accept-
..le to a Span.!; gentl.:'1.::, and loon set out
on his return to Pcru, accompanied by many
perions of hi;her rank than had vet served in

that . :.
- See NOTi: Xi.

b Zia-, b. ::. c. .. \ :, :: S
oi. c. 1.

,::;-, 7.

-r ib.
Ai. c. 19.

SO!.IE

SOME account of his negociations reached BOoKVTI.
'eru before he arrived there himself. Almagro ..- .t
no sooner learned that he had obtained the royal in"r
grant of an independent government, than, tio Lbe.-
pretending that Cuzco, the imperial residence zarro and
of the Incas, lay within its boundaries, he at- Aila°O'
tempted to render himself master of that im-
portant station. Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro
prepared to oppose him. Each of the con-
tending parties was supported by powerful ad-
herents, and the dispute was on the point of
being terminated by the sword, when Francis
Pizarro arrived in the capital. The reconcili-
ation between him and Almagro had never
been cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in
engrofiing to himself all the honours and emo-
luments, which ought to have been divided
with his associate, was always present in both
lheir thoughts. The former, confciousof his
ovwn perfidy, did not expect forgiveness; the
latter, feeling that he had been deceived, was
impatient to be avenged; and though avarice
ani ambition had induced them not only to
dilVl:bie their sentiments, but even to atr in
concert while in pursuit of wealth and power,
ii:) lboner did they obtain poffeflion of these,
;ii. n the fame pa.iions which had formed this
temporary union, gave rife to jealousy and dif-
cord. To cac.h of them was attached a fiall

F 2 band

BooK VI. band of interested dependents, who, with the

J5S4. malicious art peculiar to such men, heightened

their fi!fpicions, and magnified every appear-
ance of offence. Butr with all those feeds of
enmity in their minds, and thus assiduously
cherished, each was so thoroughly acquainted
wi:h the abilities and courage of his rival, that
they equally dreaded the consequences of an
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pi-
zarro at Cuzco, and the address mingled with
firmness which he manifested in his expoftu-
lations with Almagro and his partizans, averted
that evil for the present. A new reconciliation
took place ; the chief article of which was, that
Almagro should attempt the conquest of Chili;
and if he did not find in that province an efta-
blifhment adequate to his merit and expect-
ations, Pizarro, by way of indemnification,
T ,n. l should yield up to him a part of Peru. This

new agreement, though confirmed with the
fame sacred folemnities as their first contract,
was observed w:th as little fidelity '.

Rci.-' .-.S Soos after he concluded this important tranf-
'- FpZ. a^tion, Pizarro marched back to the countries

on the fca-coaff, and as he now enjoyed an
interval of tranquillity, undisturbed by any

' Zarate, lib. ii. c. ij. Vec ., p. 1 . lib. i:. c. 19.
BEr.zo, lib. i':. c. 5. H -:rer1 , dc:. . l ib,'i;.; c. S.

cnem'.,

enemy, either Spanilh or Indian, he applied Boo;sVI.
himself with that persevering ardour, which
distinguishes his character, to introduce a form
of regular government into the extensive pro-
vinces fubje& to his authority. Though ill
qualified by his education to enter into any
disquisition concerning the principles of civil
policy, and little accustomed by his former
habits of life to attend to its arrangements, his
natural sagacity supplied the want both of
science and experience. He distributed the
country into various diftri&s; he appointed
proper magistrates to preside in each and
eftabliihed regulations concerning the admi-
niftration of justice, the colle&ion of the royal
revenue, the working of the mines, and the
treatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
but well calculated to promote the public pro-
fperity. But though, for the prefeni, he
adapted his plan to the infant state of his co-
lony, his aspiring mind looked forward to its
future grandeur. HIe confidered himself as Fr,.undtion
laying the foundation of a great empire, and Li
deliberated long, and with much solicitude, in
what place he should fix the feat of govern-
ment. Cuzco, the imperial city of the Incas,
was situated in a corner of the empire, above
four hundred miles from the sea, and much
farther from Quito, a province of whose value

F 3 he

Boo' VI. he had formed an high idea. No other fettle-

,3-. ment of the Peruvians was to confid-rable as to

merit the name of a town, or to allure the
Spaniards to fix their residence in it. But, in
marching through the country, Pizarro had
been struck with the beauty and fertiiity of the
valley of Rimac, one of the most extensive and
best cultivated in Peru. There, on the banks
of a finall river, of the fame name with the
vale which it waters and enriches, at the dif-
tance of fix miles from Callao, the moit com-
modious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he
founded a city which he destined to be the ca-
;;- ;. pital of his government. He gave it the name

ns Ciudad de los Reyes, either from the cir-
cumftance of having laid the first stone, at that
ieafon when the church celebrates the festival
of the Three Kings, or, as is more probable,
in honour of Juana and Charles, the sovereigns
of Castile. This name it ilil retains among
the Spaniards, in all legal and formal dec.ls;
hut it is better known to foreigners by that of
Jim!a, a corruption of the ancient appcllation
of the va!ley in which it is firuated. Undicr
his inrl.e;tion, the buildings advanced v.ith
itch ra,-; -v, that it soon affumn. the f-rn of
a city, which, by a mnagnificcr.- I '.ce that he
eresed for himkrlft, and by the !rae-!v houfr.
bul! :k \-
by ver.-l of his oCCer-, ,:v,-, eveln :

lit

its infancy, some indication of its subsequent BooKVI.
grandeur d. .

IN consequence of what had been agreed Almagoin-

vidcs Chili.

with Pizarro, Almagro began his march to- hi
wards Chili; and as he poffelied in an eminent
degree the virtues most admired by soldiers,
boundless, liberality and fearless courage, his
itanc!rd was followed'by five hundred and
ifvcr:-- men, the greatest body of Europeans
th!at had hitherto been affernbled in Peru.
From impatience to finish the expedition, or
firon that contempt of hardship and danger
acquired by all the Spaniards who had served
long in America, Almagro, instead of ad-
vancin, along the level country on the coast,
chose to march across the mountains by a route
that was shorter indeed, but almost impra&i-
cable. In this attempt his troops were exposed
to ever;' calamity which men can susser, from
fatigrue, from famine, and from the rigour of
the climate in those elevated regions of the
torrid zone, where the degree of cold is hardly
inferior to what is felt within the polar circle.
Manv of them perifheed and the survivors,

d Hcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 12. lib. vii. c. x.

(.'a'ncho Coonic:a, lib. i.c. 37. Barnuevo, Lirna fun-
,!:t:, ii. -94

F 4 when

BoosVI. when they descended into the fertile plains of

,-.. Chili, had new difficulties to encounter. They

found there a race of men very different from
the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, inde-
pendent, and in their bodily conriitution, as
weil as vigour of spirit, nearly resembling the
-warlike tribes in North America. Though
filled with wonder at the first appearance of
the Spaniards, and still more uioniincd at the
operations of their cavalry and the c:c&ts of
their fire-arms, the Chilele toon recovered so
far from their surprise, as not only to defend
themselves with obstinacy, but to attack their
new enemies with more determined fiercenefl
than any American nation had hitherto dil-
covered. The Spaniards, however, continued
to penetrate into the country, and collected
lome considerable quantities of gold ; but were
so far from thinking of making any settlement
anm-idlt such formidable neighbours, that, in
spire of all the experience and valour of their
leader, the final iflue of the expedition still re-
mained extremely dubious, when they were
recalled from it by an unexpected re-olution
in Peru '. The caules of this important event
I fi;all endeavour to trace to their source.

Zra, ;Db. ii:. c. i. Gorr.S-a Hi". . c.13,. Veg3,

p. . .

: .

I . v Hi. de Ch . ii.

c.

o. H t. e Che, b. . c. I,
c. H .-er2, c;c. . ;lb. vi. c. ' ib. x. c. i, &-c.

So

So many adventurers had flocked to Peru BooxVL

from every Spanish colony in America, and all 5
with such high expetations of accumulating a"i~'rs
independent fortunes at once, that, to men he Pru-
possessed with notions so extravagant, any men-
tion of acquiring wealth gradually, and by
schemes of patient industry, would have been
not only a disappointment, but an insult. In
order to find occupation for men who could
not with safety be allowed to remain inactive,
Pizarro encouraged some of the molt diftin-
guifhed officers who had lately joined him, to
invade different provinces of the empire, which
the Spaniards had not hitherto visited. Several
large bodies were formed for this purpose;
and about the time that Almagro set out for
Chili, they marched into remote diitricLs of
the country. No sooner did Manco Capac, Its ire,
the Inca, observe the inconsiderate security of
the Spaniards in thus diiperfing their troops,
and that only a handful of soldiers remained
in Cuzco, underJuan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than
he thought that the happy period was at length
come for vindicating his own rights, aveng-
ing the wrongs of his country, and extirpating
its oppressors. Though ftritlywatched by the
Spaniards, who allowed him to reside in the
palace of his ancestors at Cuzco, he found
means of communicating his scheme to the

persons
A

Boo: VI. persons who were t bhe etr.ufled with the exe-

-535 cution of it. Amronr people accustomed to

revere their f!verei'n as a d !vini t, every hint
of .s will carries the a'jthor:iv of a command;
an ihcrv themi!lves were now convinced, by
:he caiiv increial in the number of their in-
vadcrs, that the fond }hopes which they had
long cntertained of tlhcr volunt-ary departure
were alroethicr vrii!. All perceived that a
,vs-orous e.orr of th .' W iole nation was requi-
5rte to exel tr:en-,: and the preparations for it
wVre carried on with the secrecy and silence pe-
culiar to Americans.

-:-,,- ' . -
AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the

Inca to make his el-ape, Ferdinand Pizarro
-. happening to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he

obta':ned ptrmin'ion from him to attend a great
felival which was to be celebrated a few leagues
from the capital. Under pretext of that so-
lcim.'..t-, ;he great men of the empire were as-
i,.-.bi¢ei. As soon as the Inca joined them,
the f.r.ncd'.d f vwar was erected ; and in a short
rimct all the fighting men, from the confines of
(Q iro ro the fronier of Chili, were in arms.
Mi-.-.- Saniar.ds, living securely on the fettle-
-.-.: _;'otrtcd them:, .were mafiacred. Several

t.:c t-.: :-.cnts, as theyimarched ca-elefly through
..:.:-;-. -...;ch fcL';c;d to be :at.ncly fubmif-

Eive

li.e to their dominion, were cutoff to a man. BoorVI.
An army amounting (if we may believe the i36.
Sp;.milh writers) to two hundred thousand men,
;ttacked Cuzco, which the three brothers en-
iruavou red to defend with only one hundred and
tfvcnity Spaniards. Another formidable body
i:vcitcd Lima, and kept the governor closely
flih: up. There was no longer any commu-
nication between the two cities; the numerous
forces of the Peruvians spreading over the
country, intercepted every meflenger; and as
the partics in Cuzco and Lima were equally
un:acquainted vwith the fate of their country-
men, cach boded the worift concerning the
other, and imagined that they themfeives were
the only persons who had survived the general
c:-:indlion of the Spanifl namne in Peru u.

IT v\'as at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded s;,rs of

Cu zoo

,i: pcrlion, that the Peruvians made their chief
cirr. iDuring nine months they carried on
rie ci c w ithl incefiant ardour, and in various
so-:ns; and though they displayed not the fame
:'in'.intcrid ferocity as the Mexican warriors,
r;.: conducted some of their operations in a
:mnner which discovered greater sagacity, and

,' c'.c:, p. 1 . lib. ii. c. z8. Zarate, lib.iii. c. 3. Cieca
' ..: ;, ;.:1z. icmnira Hi!. c. 135. Hcrrera, dec. 5.

a genius

Boor VI. a genius more susceptible of improvement in

* the military art. They not only observed the

advantages which the Spaniards derived from
their discipline and their weapons, but they
endeavoured to imitate the former, and .urn
the latter against them. They armed a con-
fiderable body of their bravest warriors with
the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which
they had taken from the Spanish soldiers whom
they had cut off in different parts of the coun-
try. These they endeavoured to marshal in
that regular compact order, to which experi-
ence had taught them that the Spaniards were
indebted for their irreliftible force in action,
Some appeared in the field with Spanish muf-
Kets, and had acquired skill and resolution
erough to uie then. A few of the boldest,
among whom was the Inca himlflf, were
mounted on the hories which they had taken,
and advanced bri!kly to the charge like Spa-
nifh cavaliers, with their lances in the reft.
It was more by their numbers, however, than
by those imperfect eita-s to imitate Euro-
Fean arts and employ European arms, that
the Peruvians annoved the Spaniards'. In
spite of the valour, heightened by despair, with
whic' the three brothers defended Cuzco,
Manco Capac recovered possession of one half

C' e NOTE XII.

of

of his capital; and before the Spariards could t'ooKVI.
drive him out of it, they loft Juan Pizarroj the 56
best beloved of all the brothers, together with
obme other persons of note. Worn out with
the fatigue of inceflant duty, diitreled with
want of provisions, and defpairihg of being
able any longer to resist an enemy whose num-
bers daily increased, the soldiers became im-
patient to abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of
joining their countrymen, if any of them yet
lurvived, or of forcing their way to the sea,
and finding some means of escaping from a
country which had been io fatal to the Spanish
name '. While they were brooding over those
desponding thoughts, which their officers la-
boured in vain to dill)el, Almagro appeared
suddenly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts tranfimitted to Almagro con- Arial of

cerning the general insurrection of the Peru- Alm"o'
vians, were such as would have induced him,
without hesitation, to relinquish the conquest
of Chili, and haften to the aid of his cofi-ntry-
men. But in this resolution he was confirmed and motives

or hs con-

by a motive less generous, but more interest- dut.
ing. By the fame messenger who brought him
intelligence of the Inca's revolt, he received

f lrrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 4.

the

Boor VI. the royal patent creating him governor of

;;$6. Chili, and defining the limits of his jurifdicion.

Upon considering the tenor of it, he deemed it
manifest beyond contradiction, that Cuzco lay
within the boundaries of his government, and
he was equally solicitous to prevent the Peru-
vians from recovering possession of their capital,
and to wrest it out of the hands of the Pizarros.
From impatience to accomplish both, he ven-
tured to return by a new route; and in march-
ing through the sandy plains on the coast, he
suffered, from heat and drought, calamities of
a new Ipecies, hardly inferior to thole in which
he had been involved by cold and famine on
the summits of the Andes.

7;37. His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical mo-
t.,,.' ment. The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed

their eves upon him with equal Ib!icitude. The
former, as he c;d not ltuJv to conceal his prc-
tensions, were at a lols whether to welcome
him as a deliverer, or to take precautions
atainlt him as an enemy. The iatter, know-
ing the points in cor:elt between him and his
countr-men, flattered themrelves t::a they had
more to hope than to dread froan his ocerations.
Almagro hi;nl ls, unacquainted v. irh the detail
of the events whlich haad ppened in his ab-
fence, and solicitous to learn the prccile posture

6 of

of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly, Booc VI.
and with greatcircumfpetion. Various nego- 1,

.

ciations with both parties were set on foot.
The Inca conducted them on his part with
much address. At first he endeavoured to gain
the friendship of Almagro; and after many
fruitless overtures, despairing of any cordial
union with a Spaniard, he attacked him by
surprise with a numerous body of chosen troops.
But the Spanilh discipline and valour main-
tained their wonted superiority. The Peru-
vians were repulsed with luch slaughter, that a
great part of their army dispersed, and Al-
magro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco with-
out interruption.

THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make rake rof.

fe fllo of

head aga:int the Peruvians, directed all their urzco.
attention towards their new enemy, and took
me.iircs to obstruct his entry into the capital.
Prudence, however, restrained both parties for
lbme time from turning their arms against one
anothlcri, wlhile surrounded by common enemies,
who would rejoice in the mutual slaughter.
Different schemes of accommodation were pro-
posed. Each endeavoured to deceive the other,
or to corrlupt his followers. The generous,
ope n, affable temper of Almagro gained many
aderclnts of the Pizarros, who were disgusted

with

Boor VI. with their harsh domineering manners. Ern

:-., c couraged by this defection, he advanced to-

wards the city by night, surprised the centinels3
or was admitted by them, and invelting the
house where the two brothers refidedj com-
pelled them, after an obstinate defence, to fur-
render at discretion. Almagro's claim of ju-
riidi tion over Cuzco was universally acknow-
ledged, and a form of administration established
in his name ó.

·c · a., r Two or three perolns only were killed in this
,c-. :. fiirft act of civil hostility; but it was soon fol-
t' g 'J lowed by Icenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro

having dispersed the Peruvians who had invested
Lima, and received ifme considerable rein-
forcements from Hispaniola and Nicaragua,
ordered five hundred men, under the com-
mand of Alonfo de Alvarado, to march to
Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his brothers, if
they and their garrison were not already cutoff
by the Peruvians. This body, which, at that
period of the Spanish power in America, mufft
be deemed a considerable force, advanced near
to the capital before they knew that they had
any enemy more formidable than Indians to

Zara:e. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p !. lib . . C . 3 1.
Ccmara Hill c. c 13 Herrera, dec. o. lib. ii. c. 1-5.

3 encounter.

encounter. It was withaftonifhment chat they B6oK ViL
beheld their countrymen posted on the banks 537.
of the river Abancay to oppose their progreis,
Alm ngro, however, wished rather mo gain than
to conquer them, and by bribes and promiles'
endeavoured to seduce their leader. The fide-
lity of Alvarado remained unfliaken ; but his
talents for war were not equal to his virtue.
Almagro amused him with various movements,
of which he did not comprehend the meaning,
while a large detachment of chosen soldiers July i«.
pasTed the river by night, fell upon his camp
by lurprife, broke his troops before they had
time to form, and took him prisoner, together
with his principal officers h.

B- the sudden rout of this body, the con- bt doe nrot

improve his

telt between the two rivals must have been dvntagoe.
decided, if Almagro had known as well how
to improve as how to gain a vitory. Rodrigo
Orgognez, an officer of great abilities, who
having served under the constable Bourbon,
when he led the Imperial army to Rome, had
been accustomed to bold and decisive measures,
adviscd him instantly to issue orders for putting
to death Ferdinand and Gonzalo Pizarros,

. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gom. Hil. c. 138. Vega,
p. ii. lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

VOL. Ill. G Alva-

Boor vI. Alvarado, and a few other persons whom he

,5- 7 could not hope to ga:n, and to march direaly

with his victorious troops to Lima, before the
governor had time to prepare for his defence.
But Almagro, though he discerned at once the
utility of the counlfl, and had courage to have
carried i: into execution, suffered himself to be
infuenced by sentiments unlike those of a fol-
dier of fortune grown old in service, and by
scruples which suited not the chief of a party
who had drawn his 1vord in civil war. Feel-
ings of humanity refrained him from sledding
the blood of his opponents; and the dread of
being deemed a rebel, deterred him from en-
tering a province which the king had allotted
to another. Though he knew that arms muff
terminate the dispute between him and Pizarro,
and relolved not to Ihun that mode ofdecifion,
yet, with a timid delicacy prcpofferous at such
a juncture, he was ib solicitous that his rival
should be confidered as the aggressor, that he
marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait his
approach '
rPa' of PIZARRO was still unacquainted with all the

'' interesting events which had happened near

Cuzco. Accounts of Almagro's return, of

Herrera, dec, 6. lib. ii. c. io, 1l.

the

the loss of the capital, of the death of one bro- BooK VI.
ther, of the imprisonment of the other two, and i '

x537.

of the defeat of Alvarado, were brought to
him at once. Such a tide of misfortunes al-
molt overwhelmed a spirit which had continued
firm and erect under the rudest shocks of ad-
verfitv. But the necessity of attending to his
own tafery, as well as the desire of revenge,
preierved him from finking under it. He took
measures for both with his wonted sagacity.
As he had the command of the fea-coatf, and His rtft,

condue.

expeted considerable supplies both of men
and military stores, it was no less his interest
to gain time, and to avoid actions than it was
that of Almagro to precipitate operations, and
bring the contest to a speedy issue. He had
recourse to arts which he had formerly prac-
tifed with success, and Almagro was again
weak enough to susser himself to be amused
with a profpet of terminating their differences
by tome amicable accommodation. By vary-
ing his overtures, and shifting his ground as
often as it suited his purpose, sometimes seem-
ing to yield every thing which his rival could
,lelire, and then retracing all that he had
granted, Pizarro dexterously protracted the
ncgociation to filch a length, that though every
d.iay was precious to Almagro, several months
, lapsed without coming to any final agreement.

G
( While

Boor . While the attention of Almagro, and of the

;- . officers with -hom he consulted, was occu-

pied in detecting and eluding the fraudulent
intentions of the governor, Gonzalo Pizarro
and Alvarado found means to corrupt the fol-
d:ers to whose cuftoIdy they were committed,
and not only made their escape themselves, but
persuaded fixtv of the men who formerly guard-
ed them to accompany their flight . Fortune
having thus delivered one of his brothers, the
governor fcmpled not at one act of perfidy
more to procure the release of the other. He
propo:.J, that every point in controverfv be-
tween Almagro and himself should be submit-
ted to the decision of their sovereign; that
until i:i award was known, each should retain
unditlarbed poilefTion of whatever part of the
country he now occupied; that Ferdinand
Pizarro should be let at liberty, and return
inltantlv to Spain, together with the officers,
whom Al;igro purposed to fend thither to
repreicnt the justice of his claims. Obvious
as the dtcgn of Pizarro was in those propo-
fitions, and familiar as his artifices might now
have been to his opponent, Almagro, with a
crteu:r:. approaching to infatuation, relied on

:- .::, . i. c. S. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii.

his

h's sincerity, and concluded an agreement on BooKVI.
thele terms '. 7.

THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro reco- H', rer.-

vercd his liberty, the governor, no longer w,.
fettered in his operations by anxiety about his
brother's life, threw off every dilguitf which
his concern for it had obliged him to ailume.
The treaty was forgotten; pacific and conci-
liating measures were no more mentioned; it
was in the field, he openly declared, and not
in the cabinet; by arms, and not by negocia-
tion; that it muff now be determined who
should be master of Peru. The rapidity of
his preparations suited fich a decisive refo-
lution. Seven hundred men were loon ready
to march towards Cuzco. The command of s138
thcfe was given to his two brothers, in whom
he couid perfectly confide for the execution of
his molt violent schemes, as they were urged
on, not only by the enmity flowing fiom
family rivalfhip, but animated with the desire
of vengeance, excited by recolleftion of their
own recent disgrace and sufferings. After an
infuccefsful attempt to cross the mountains in
the direct road between Lima and Cuzco, they

I I!crrrra, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 9.
Gomara Hilt. c. i4o. Vega, p. II. lib. ii. c. 35.

G 3 marched

Boor VI. marched towards the south along the coast as

. far as Nafca, and then turning to the left, pe-

netrated through the def;les in that branch of
the Andes which lay between them and the
capital. Almagro, instead of hearkening to
some of his officers, who adviftd him to at-
tempt the defence of rhofe difficult pases,
waited the approach of the enemyv in the plain
of Cuzc. Tw.o rcaf'ns erne to have induced
him to take this re!fu!:tic.n. His iollowers
amounted hardly to fve hiidrcd, and he was
a'raid of weakening fiuch a feeble bodv, by
fending any detachmernt towards the mountains.
His cavalry far exceeded that of the adverse
party, both in numnber and discipline, and it
was only in an open country that he could
avail himself of that advantage.

H .-.v THE Pizarros advanced without any obftruc-
ct.,5. rion, but what arole from the nature of the

dcfert and horrid regions through which they
marched. As soon as they reached the plain,
both fa-tions we-e equally impatient to bring
this long-protradted contest to an issue.
Though countrymen and friends, the fubjets
of the fame sovereign, and each with the royal
standard displayed; and though they beheld
the mourtains that surrounded the plain in
..hich they were drawn up, covered with a vast

multitude

multieude of Indians, assembled to 'enjoy the Boo.V .r
fpetacle of their mutual carnage,.and prepared 13s.
to attack whatever party remained mnafler.of
the field; so fell and implacable was the
rancour which had taken possession of every
breast, that not one pacific counsel, not a
migle overture towards accommodation pro-
ceeded from either fide. Unfortunately for
Almagro, he was so worn out with the fatigues
of service, to which his advanced age was
unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he
could not exert his wonted acivity; and he
was obliged to commit the leading of his
troops to Orgognez, who, though an officer
of great merit, did not poffeis the fame ascend-
ant either over the spirit or affections of the
soldiers, as the chief whom they had long been
accultomed to follow and revere.

THE conflict was fierce, and maintained by Aplii 26.

'A mago

each party with equal courage. On the fide diccatcj,
of Almagro, were more veteran soldiers, and
a larger proportion of cavalry; but these were
counterbalanced by Pizarro's superiority in
numbers, and by two companies of well-difci-
plined musketeers, which, on receiving an
account of the insurrection of the Indians,
the emperor had sent from Spain ". As the

m Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 8.

G 4 ulfe

BoO VI. use of fire-arms was not frequent among the
u,''- adventurers in America', hastily equipped for

service, at their own expence, this tinall band
of soldiers, regularly trained and armed,
was a novelty in Peru, and decided the
fare of the day. Wherever it advanced, the
weigh: of a heavy and well-fuftained fire bore

.':n ;ore:ic and' soo: before it; and Orgognez,
v.whie he cn:ieav:),nud to rallv and animate his
troops, hiving received a dangerous wound,
the rout became general. The barbarity of
the conquerors slained the glory which they
acquired bv this complete victory. The
violence of civil rige hurried on time to

aflauig'r their countrymen with indiscriminate
cr !e: -; the meannels of private revenge in-
fii2'arc.l o:hers to single out individuals as the
oblers of t.heir vengeance. Orgognez and
several ofF. ers of dilin-ion were m?.afacred in
cold blo3. ; above a hundred and fort- soldiers
fell in the ;.::; a large proportion, where the
nutmber of combatants were few, and the heat
of the cn-ite fuoon over. Almagro, though
Io fi--blti :i .: ico Cid not bear the morion of
a horse, h :l inlifted o; being carried in a lit-
ter to ;an c:tm:.cre n. wch overlooked the field
ps b'ttri. 1 -:n tir;.cr, in the utmolt agi-

tataoa)
«~~~~~ilteu,01

tation of mind,..he viewed the Yarious;:mov- aopNVIV4
mients of both parties, and at:laat beheldl,thl ' '~- ,
toril dctfeat of his own troops, with all. the;
paliionate indignation of a veteran leader long
accuilomed to victory. He endeavoured to aRn takcm,
lave himlelf by flight, but was taken prisoner,
and guarded wihth te iriceteft vigilance'.

Ti'E Indians, instead of executing the reFCo

ijLio;. which they had formed, retired quietly
afler the battle was over; and in the history
of t.:c New World, there is not a more firiking
inilli;:ce of the wonderfll alcendant which the
Spaniards had acquired over its inhabitants,
than thiat after feeing one of the contending
parties ruined and dilperfed, and the other
w 'e.,e-ned and fatigued, they had not courage
to flill upon their enemies, when fortune pre-
Ikntcd an opportunity of attacking them with
fulh aidvantage P.

CLuzco was pillaged by the victorious troops, %dw..e.
':io found there a confidcrable booty, con-
f.in-., partly of the gleanings of the Indian
L.c.i ;,rcs, and partly of the wealth amafied by

' 7Zarat, lib. iii. c. I1, 12. Vega, p. ii. lib. ii.

c. !6-3S. Hcrrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 10-12. lib. iv.
c. -6. P Zarate, lib. iii, c. 1 . Vega, p 11.

~!l~. ii~. ~c ~t. 3 .ir

their

BooK VI. their antagonists from the spoils of Peru and

z3g. Chili. But so far did this, and whatever the

bounty of their leader could add to it, fall be-
low the high ideas of the recompence which
they conceived to be due to their merit, that
Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratify such
extravagant expectations, had recourse to the
fame expcdient which his brother had employed
on a similar occasion, and endeavoured -to find
occupation for this turbulent assuming spirit,
in order to prevent it from breaking out into
open mutiny. With this view, he encouraged
his molf active officers to attempt the discovery
and reduction of various provinces which had
not hitherto submitted to the Spaniards. To
every standard erected by the leaders who un-
dertook any of those new expeditions, volun-
teers retorted with the ardour and hope peculiar
to the age. Several of Almagro's soldiers
joined them, and thus Pizarro had the satis-
faction of being delivered both from the im-
portunity of his discontented friends, and the
dread of his ancient enemies .
AlI-rzr ALMAGRO himself remained for several

' months in custody, under all the anguish of

Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 12. Gom. Hlft. c. 141. Her-
rc:a, dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

fufpence,

fufpence. For although his doom was deter- BooxVI.
mined by the Pizarros from the moment that i5g.
he fell into their hands, prudence constrained
them to defer gratifying their vengeance, un-
til the soldiers who had served under him, as
well as several of their own followers in whom
they could not perfectly confide, had left
Cuzco. As soon as they set out upon their
different expeditions, Almagro was impeached
of trealbn, formally tried, and condemned to condemned,
die. The sentence astonished him, and though
he had often braved death with undaunted
spirit in the field, its approach under this igno-
minious form appalled him so much, that he
had recourse to abject supplications, unworthy
of his former fame. He besought the Pizarros
to remember the ancient friendship between
their brother and him, and how much he had
contributed to the prosperity of their family;
he reminded them of the humanity with which,
in opposition to the repeated remonstrances of
his own most attached friends, he had spared
their lives when he had them in his power; he
conjured them to pity his age and infirmities,
and to susser him to pals the wretched remain-
der of his days in bewailing his crimes, and in
making his peace with Heaven. The intrea-
ties, fays a Spanish historian, of a man so much
beloved, touched many an unfeeling heart, and

drev

Boo VI. drew tears from many a hard eve. But the

,;-s. brothers remained inflexible. As soon as Al-

magro knew his fate to be inevitable, he met
it with the dignity and fortitude of a veteran.
ra t to He was strangled in prilbn, and afterwards

publicly beheaded. He fl-tifred in the seventy-
fifth year of his age, and left one son by an
Indian woman of Panamna, whom, though at
that time a prisoner in Lnma, he named as fuc-
ceffor to his gover-.menr, pursuant to a power
which the emperor had gr:ntcd him '.
.:-=. As, durins the civil dilTentions in I'cru, all

:.intercourlc with. Spain was suspended, the de-

tail of the extraordinary tranliactions there did

: not soon reach the court. Unfortunately for
P·-1'. the vic orious faGion, ti-e sirs intelli2ence

v'as brought thither by fomne of Almarro's
officers, who left the co':n.trv upon the ruin
of their cause; and thl-v related what had hap-
pcned, with every circunl"ance unfavourable
to Pizarro and his brothers. Their ambition,
their breach of the nmolt lblemn engagements,
their violence and cruclty were painted with all
the malignity arnd e :-:.grr.t on of party hatred.
Ferdinand Pizarro, who arrived soon after, and

r Zarate. lib. i i. c. i:. G'm. iii. c. 1.tl. Veg'a,

p. 1 . ib. ii. c. ;. Htrc.:.:.r , dec. . i. .

i. c. c
lib. v. c. :.

appeared

a;ppeared in court with extraordinary fplendbr, Boor l.
endeavoured to efface the impresrion which ,9.
their accusations had made, and to justify his
brother and himself by representing Almagro
as the aggrefior. The emperor and his mi-
niflcrs, th-ough they could not pronounce
which of the contending factions was mofi
criminal, clearly discerned the fatal tendency
of their difientions. It was obvious, that
while the leaders, cntrufted with the conduct
of two infant colonies, employed the arms
which ihould have been turned against the
common enemy, in destroying one another,
all attention to the public good must cease, and
there was reason to dread that the Indians
might improve the advantage which the dif-
union of the Spaniards presented to them, and
extirpate both the victors and vanquished.
But the evil was more apparent than the re-
medy. Where the information which had
been received was so defecive and fifpicious,
:ulr the scene of acion so remote, it was almost
impofiible to chalk out the line of conduct that
ought to be followed; and before any plan
that should be approved of in Spain could be
carried into execution, the situation of the
p.rties, and the circuliltances of affairs, might
alter lb entirely as to render its effecs extreme-
ly pernicious.

NOTHING

Boor Vs. NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a

,7;, person to Peru, vested with extensive and dif-
v'^ crerionnary power, who, after viewing deli-
-- - . . ber-ar:cl the poiture of affairs with his own eyes3
rs..n.. an- ci.c': ring upon the spot intothe conduct

o: the dclferent leaders, should be authorised
to e t.:bii!h the government in that form which
he dcemed molt conducive to the interest of
the p. rent stare, and the welfare of the colon;.
The man felecled for this important charge
was Chriftoval Vaca de Caltro, a judge in the
c-Jr t of royal audience at Vaiiadolid; and his
abil:ties, integrity, and firmness, juftfied the
choi:e. His inftruttions, though ample, were
not si:c as to fetter him in his operations;
According to the different aspect of affairs, he
had power to take upon him different charac-
ters. If he found the governor still alive, he
was to fiunme only the title of judge, to main-
tain the appearance of ating in concert with
him, and to guard againif giving any just
cause of ofience to a man who had merited so
highly of hi; country. But if Pizarro were
dead, he was entrusted with a commission that
he might then produce, by which he was ap-
pointed his fucceiffr in the government of
Peru. This attention to Pizarro, however,
seems to have sowed rather from dread of his
power, than from any approbation of his mea-

3 fures;

fures; for at the very time that the court BooK VL
seemed ft solicitous not to irritate him, his ',.
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and
confined to a prison, where he remained above
twenty years .

WHILE Vaca de Castro was preparing for pst5

Pizarr di-
his voyage, events of great moment happened vides Peru

* e r among his

in Peru. The governor, confidering himself, folle.s"
upon the death of Almagro, as the unrivalled
pofeflbr of that vast empire, proceeded to par-
cel out its territories among the conquerors;
and had this division been made with any de-
gree of impartiality, the extent of country
which he had to bestow was sufficient to have
gratified his fiiends, and to have gained his
enemies. But Pizarro condu&ed this tranf-
accion, not with the equity and candour of a
judge attentive to discover and to reward merit,
but with the illiberal spirit of a party leader.
Large diftrifts, in parts of the country moss
cultivated and populous, were set apart as his
own property, or granted to his brothers, his
adherents and favourites. To others, lots less
valuable and inviting were assigned. The
followers of Almagro, amongst whom were

' Gomara HiRf. c. I42. Vega, p. xi. lib. ii. c. 40.
Herrera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. to. ix. lib. x. c. x.

many

BoorVI. many of the original adventurers to wholf

'"o - valour and perseverance Pizarro was indebted

for his fucce's, were totally excluded from any
portion in those lands, towards the acquisition
of lwhi h they had contributed so largely. As
the v-niry of every individual set an immro-
dera:e value upon his own services, and the
idea of each concerning the recompence due
to them rose graduialy to a more exorbitant
height in proportion as their conquests extend-
ed, all who were disappointed in their ex-
pectations exclaimed loudly againit the rapa-
cioulhefs and partiality of the governor. The
pariifans ofAlmagro murmured in secret, and
medi'tated revenge'.

p M,-,-:, o RAriD as the progress of the Spaniards in
,h; .i, South America had been since Pizarro landed

in Peru, their avidity of dominion was not
Yet satisfied. The officers to whom Ferdinand
PRz:rro gave the command of different de-
tachn.ens, penetrated into several new pro-
vinces, and though some of thein were exposed
to great hardships in the cold and barren
rei(o-s of the Andes, and others suffered
dillrcif not inferior amidti the woods and

' .'*.
?. 1. lib. iii. c. z. Ilerrera, dec. 6. lib.

marshes

marfies of the plains, they made discoveries BooKVI.
and conquests which extended their knowledge ,
of the country as well as added to their power.
Pedro de Valdivia re-affumed AlmagrQ's
scheme of invading Chili, and notwithftand-
ing the fortitude of the natives in defending
their poffeflions, made such progress in the
conquefi of the country, that he founded the
city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the
establishment of the Spanifl dominion in that
province". But of all the enterprizes under- Rernrkable

expedition

taken about this period, that of Gonzalo of Gon.alo
Pizarro was the most remarkable. The gover-
nor, who seems to have resolved that no per-
son in Peru should possess any station of
diffinguifled eminence or authority but those
of his own family, had deprived Benalcazar,
the conqueror of Quito, of his command in
that kingdom, and appointed his brother
Gonzalo to take the government of it. He
instructed him to attempt the discovery and
conquest of the country to the east of the
Andes, which, according to the information
of the Indians, abounded with cinnamon and
other valuable spices. Gonzalo, not inferior
to any of his brothers in courage, and no less
ambitious of acquiring diftinfion, eagerly

Zarate, lib. iii. c. 13. Ovalle, lib. ii. c. I, &c.
Vor.. ITl. II engaged

Boo VI. engaged in this difficuil service. He 1et out

-. . from ilQito at the head of three hundred and;

forty soldiers, near one half of whom were
horsemen, with four thousand Indians to carry
their provisions. In forcing their way througl
the (defiles, or over the ridges of the Andes,
excels of cold and fatigue, to neither of which
they were accustomed, proved fatal to the
greater Fart of their wretched attendants. The
*'l'-- Sraniards, though more robuf, and inured

. to a varierv of climates, fufiered considerably,

and loft .o:ne men; but when they descended
into the low country their di:trels increased.
During two months it rained incecfintly, with-
out any in:erval of fair weather long enough
to dry their clothcs=. The vafi plains upon
which thev were nowv cntcring, eiiher altoge-
it'Ir without i;habitnts, or occupied by the
ruider a2nd leat induilriou s ribcs in the New
\V'o;ld, vieided little fubiiilcnce. They could
rot advance a itep but as they cut a road
throuh wvoods, or made :i through marfnes.
Such inciT.:n; toil, and continual scarcity of
ito., !'e:n i: i.tan t

- iecL:iit to have ex-

h-:e.ie- anud . d:'. d anv treops. But the
tbrti'dt.e and pcr:evcr.ince of Spaniards in the
;xteernti ce:;:ury w;-:'e iniupcr.be. Allured

' 7::.:,

H .. c.
c by

bin frequent but false accounts of rich coun- BooKVrT
tries before herm, they persisted in frruggling ;T.
on, until they reached the banks of the Coca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whose waters
pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with inlinite labour, they
buiti a bark, which they expcded would
prove of great utility, in conveying them over
rivers, in procuring provisions, and. in explor-
ing the country.." This was manned with fifty
soldiers, under the command of Francis Orel-
lana, the oficer next in ranl; to Pizarro. The
ftreamn carried them down with such rapidity,
that they were soon far a-head of their coun-
trymen, who followed slowly and with diffi-
culty b,' land:

AT this diltance from his commander, Orel- D>r.rs Lby

lana, a young man of an alfiring mind, began
to fancy himlflf independent, and transported
wich the predominant pafTion of the age, he
formed the scheme of diltinguifhing himlelf as
a dilcoverer, by following the course of the
Maiagnon, until it joined the ocean, and by
ftrvyeving the vafl regions through which it
flows. IThis fchemne of Orellana's was as bold
as it was treacherous. For, if he be charge-
Ible wit! the guilt of having violated his duty
tr. his comll andcr, and with having abandoned

II 2 hIis

Boor VI. his fellow-foldiers in a pathless desert, where

;540. they had hardly any hopes of success, or even

of fafetv, but what were founded on the ser-
vice which they expected from the bark; his
crime is, in some measure, balanced by the
glory of having ventured upon a navigation
of near two thousand leagues, through un-
known nations, in a vessel hastily conftruded,
with green timber, and by very unskilful
hands, without provisions, without a compass,
or a pilot. But his courage and alacrity sup-
S~ls^,n plied every defec. Committing himself fear-

. lefsly to the guidance of the stream, the Napo

bore him along to the south, until he reached
the great channel of the Maragnon. Turning
with it towards the coafr, he held on his course
in that direction. He made frequent descents
on both fides of the river, sometimes seizing
by force of arms the provisions of the fierce
savages feared on its banks; and sometimes
procuring a supply of food by a friendly inter-
course with more gentle tribes. After a long
leries of dangers, which he encountered with
amazing fortitude, and of distresses which he
supported with no lets magnanimity, he reached
the ocean r, where new perils awaited him.
Thele he likewise surmounted, and got safe to

y See NOTE XIII.

the

the Spanilh settlement in the island Cubagua; BooK VI.
from thence he failed to Spain. The vanity z15o
natural to travellers who visit regions unknown
to the reft of mankind, and the art of an ad-
venturer, solicitous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an
extraordinary proportion of the marvellous in
the narrative of his voyage. He pretended to
have discovered nations lo rich, that the roofs
of their temples were covered with plates of
gold; and described a republic of women so
warlike and powerful, as to have extended
their dominion over a considerable trad of the
fertile plains which he had visited. Extrava-
gant as those tales were, they gave rife to an
opinion, that a region abounding with gold,
diftinguilhed by the name of El Dorado, and a
community of Amazons, were to be found in
this part of the New World; and such is the
propensity of mankind to believe what is won-
derful that it has been slowly and with diffi-
culty that reason and observation have exploded
those fables. The voyage, however, even when
stripped of every romantic embellishment, de-
serves to be recorded, not only as one of the
most memorable occurrences in that adven-
turous age, but as the first event which led to
any certain knowledge of the immense regions

H 3 that

BoKV:I. that fretch eastward from the Andes to thQ

ocean'.

' :f No words can describe the consternation of
P·zar:2.

Pizarro, when he did not find the bark at the
confluence of the Napo and M;aragnon, where
he had ordered Orellana to wait for him. He
would no: allow himleif ro ;l:poect that a man,
whom he had entrulred wi:h such an important
command, coilld be lo bac: and so unfeeling,
as to dcfcrt him at luch a junBture. But im-
putinz his ab'.:cce from the place of rcndez-
vou'S to forre unlknown accident, he advanced
above ns v ieagues alone the banks of the Ma-
raz:-',n, ex ercting every moment to fee the
:- a:': ar.rn.r wi:h a lihppli of provisions. At

len-.th.i he came iup with an officer whom Orel-
iian ha lcft tc perift. in the deiferr, becaufc he
had the cc.iura-e to rcmonlrftr.tc against iis pcr-

- r... I r n i; ;; he i.l:ned the extent of

.. i.in.; . > c i-;r.'., an.d hs i;.ll'owers perceived
,: (.-.cc hi .;- ov.in elper.:e firuation, when
.:;'-r-.'cj of r' r nl rci ce. The ipi:rit of
7h.' ;i..;;;' hl ar:<. i veteran ;',nk within him,

:. a; c;.; -,i 1cd to bei iie back inltanilv.

I -- - ;

!. .. C. 2:. -

:.:.',.' :1.:
._"..:'.'.'..'_::, !:. i. C.i.

Pizarro, though he assumed an appearance of BooK VI.
tranquillity, did not oppose their inclination. ,
But he was now twelve hundred miles from
Qjiito; and in that long march the Spaniards
encountered hardships greater than those they
had endured in their progress outward, with-
out the alluring hopes which then soothed and
animated them under their sufferings. Hun,
ger compelled them to feed on roots and,ber-
ries, to eat all their dogs and horses, to devour
the moi. loathsome reptiles, and even to gnaw
the lea her of their saddles and fword-belts.
F-our thousand Indians, and two hundred and
ten Spaniards perifled in this wild disastrous
expedition, which continued near two years;
and as fifty men were aboard the bark with
Orlllana, only fourscore got back to Quito.
These were naked like savages, and so ema-
ciated w.ith famine, or worn out with fatigue,
ttiat t;it-v had more the appearance of spectres
tian of men '.

BUT, instead of returning to enjoy the re- 'urrberrof

polf which his condition required, Pizarro, on ,r..i,"
entering Quito, received accounts of a fatal Pcru'

'Z ..:.:c lib. ;i. . 2-5. Vega, p. I. lib. iii. c. ,,

4A, 5' I . Ic:rcra, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lib. ix.

c. l.:-
: ;. lib. i.i. c. 4. Pizar. Vaonrcz Jllultr.

~-.;,:- 4 event

H 4 event

BooK VI. event that threatened calamities more dreadful

. to him, than those through which he had passed.

From the time that his brother made that par-
tial division of his conquests which has been
mentioned, the adherents of Almagro, con-
fidering themselves as proscribed by the party
in power, no longer entertained any hope of
bettering their condition. Great numbers in
despair retorted to Lima, where the house of
young Almagro was always open to them, and
the slender portion of his father's fortune, which
the governor allowed him to enjoy, was spent
in affording them subsistence. The warm at-
tachment with which every person who had
served under the elder Almagro, devoted him-
fils to his interests, was quickly transferred to
his ion, awho was now grown up to the age of
manhood, and possessed all the qualities which

;,-, cap:iva-:e the affections of soldiers. Of a grace-
iro is iful appearance, dextrous at all martial exer-

cites, bold, open, generous, he leemed to be
formed for command; and as his father, con-
fcious of his own inferioritv from the total want
of education, had been extremely attentive to
have him infiructed in every science becoming
a ger.:ieman; the accomplishments which he
had zcq'.irLd he;,h:ened the respect of his fol-
lowers, s t:cv. giave him diilict ion and emi-
nen.c an:.or.g it:;erate iad.vc;turc.s. In this

-4 'y!oung

young man the Almagrians found a point of BooK VI.
union which they wanted, and looking up to ,74
him as their head, were ready to undertake any
thing for his advancement. Nor was affetion
for Almagro their only incitement; they were
urged on by their own distresses. Many of
them, destitute of common neceflaries , and
weary of loitering away life, a burden to their
chief, or to such of their associates as had saved
some remnant of their fortune from pillage and
confiscation, longed impatiently for an occa-
sion to exert their aftivity and courage, and
began to deliberate how they might be avenged
on the author of all their misery. Their fre- conrire
quent cabals did not pass unobserved; and the life of l.i
governor was warned to be on his guard against "'arr
men who meditated some desperate deed, and
had resolution to execute it. But either from
the native intrepidity of his mind, or from
contempt of persons whose poverty seemed to
render their machinations of little consequence,
he disregarded the admonitions of his friends.
" Be in no pain, said he carelessly, about my
life, it is perfectly safe, as long as every man
in Peru knows that I can in a moment cut off
any head which dares to harbour a thought
against it." This security gave the Alna-

a See NOTE XIV.

grians

Bo-r. V. grians full leisure to digest and ripen every

4,. part of their fch-me; and Juan de Herrada,

an officer of great abilities, who had the charge
of Almairo's education, took the diretion of
their contfutanons, with all the zeal which this
connecaion infiired, and with all the authority
i. i'nh the ascendant that he w, s known to have
over the m-::d of his pupil gave him.
-'-d <.., O-; Sunrd-, the twe:-t--.l'xth of June, at

mid-day, the ifialbn of tranquillity and repose
in all filtr'- i imates, Herrada, nt the hiad of
ei-hteen of .:.e most determined confpi-ators,
fal!.cd out A' Aimagro's lhccfe in complete
ar:-o.:r, and cra.ing their swords, as thev ad-
*?."n-ed haftilv towards the governor's palace,
cried our, " Long live the king, but let the
t-.ra n d.. ." Their afibciares, warned of their
:potions by a fgnal, were in arms at different
iratirns rc.' to support them. Though Pi-
z.i-ro wj s .l;lallv lurroundcd b- such a nu-
reoruus trri:n of attendants as suited the mag-
n:r:ccr.ce -. mo

o

; mo opuient fubjecc of the age

;i. which hc liv;-e, yet as he was just rifn from
tabli, anr. :n:-'i of his do elI'rics had retired to
r.;:;r c'.:n -.'r-..--. ...t, tii:' conspirators paiTcd
t;ir.c.';:':; .: .' '.'.''J cur'tr (*ji :t, o; t''? i-altce tlun-

· o .::-r -.'', ;

..'.v : : .

ii ,tt;i of the
.-.' . - -.- a p1 ;:r wx.s::;;n- coil.i givce

t ':'.

the alarm to his master, who was conversing BOO.KVI.
with a few friends in a large hall. The go- ',.
vernor, whole steady mind no form of danger
could appal, starting up, called for arms, and
commanded Francisco de Chaves to make fast
the door. But that officer, who did not retain
Ib much presence of mind as to obey this pru-
dent order, running to the top of the stair-case,
w.ildly asked the conspirators what they meant,
and whither they were going. Initead of an-
Iwering, they stabbed him to the heart, and
burst into the hall. Some of the persons who
were there threw themselves from the windows;
others attempted to fly; and a few drawing
their ,vords, followed their leader into an inner
apartment. The conspirators, animated with
having the object of their vengeance now in
v:cw, rulled forvard after them. Pizarro,
with no other arms than his sword and buckler,
defended the entry, and ifpported by his half-
brother Alcantara, and his little knot of friends,
he maintained the unequal contest with intre-
pitdiry worthy ur his pall exploits, and with the
vi-llr of a c.(

:-hil.i combatant. '" Courage,

cric.' e , c(on;)'iantons, we are yet enow to
in i'o ' tr.aitos repent of their audacity."

ui*i: rli- :l!!nur of the conspirators protec(cd
t.:.: ' \';Ic everv tliruft they madel took le-

..' , .' l
...,c fell (lciaJ at his brother's t;e!;

ilis

Boor VI. his other defenders were mortally wounded.

1Li l
The governor, so weary that he could hardly

wield his sword, and no longer able to parry
the many weapons furiously aimed at him, re-
ceived a deadly thrust full in his throat, funk to
the ground, and expired.

A'rnr-o As soon as he was slain, the aflaffins ran out
)leaEc tsi into the streets, and waving their bloody swords,

-cJ proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above

two hundred of their airociates having joined
them, they conducted young Almagro in so-
lemn procefflon through the city, and assem-
bling the ragiftrates and principal citizens,
compellkd them to acknowledge him as lawful
successor to his father in his government. The
palace of Pizarro, together with the houses of
several of his adherents, were pillaged by the
soldiers, who had the satisfaction at once of
being avenged on their enemies, and of enrich-
ing themselves by the spoils of thole through
whose hands all the wealth of Peru had
pafled b.

THE boldness and success of the conspiracy,
r. as wrll as the name and popular qualities of

Z:...:e, i. ib . c. c5-S. Gomara Hi;t. c. 144. 145.
\-c: p. i. 11. 'lb. ii c. -7. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x.

*. _- .--. Fzarro \V-. lllu;. p. ! . Al

Alm agro,

Almagro, drew many soldiers to his standard. BaoKVI.
Every adventurer of desperate fortune, all who s4,.
were dissatisfied with Pizarro, and from the
rapaciousness of his government in the latter
years of his life, the number of malcontents
was considerable, declared without hesitation
in favour of Almagro, and he was soon at the
head of eight hundred of the most gallant ve-
terans in Peru. As his youth and inexperience
disqualified him from taking the command of
them himself, he appointed Herrada to aft as
general. But though Almagro speedily col-
lected such a respectable force, the acquiescence
in his government was far from being general,
Pizarro had left many friends to whom his me-
mory was dear; the barbarous assassination of
a man to whom his country was so highly in-
debted, filled every impartial person with
horror. The ignominious birth of Almagro,
as well as the doubtful title on which he founded
his pretensions, led others to confider himr as
an usurper. The officers who commanded
in some provinces refused to recognize his au-
thority, until it was confirmed by the emperor,
In others, particularly at Cuzco, the royal
standard was erected, and preparations made
ro revenge the murder of their ancient leader.

TH osE

BOOK-I. THOSE feeds of discord, which could not

r,-. have lain long dormant, acquired great vigour
;','r "' and activitv, when the arrival of Vaca de Caltro

C was known. After a long and dilaitrous voy-

age, he was driven by stress of weather into a
small harbour in the province ofPopayan; and
proceeding from thence by land, after a jour-
ney no leis tedious than difficult, he reached
Quito. In his way he received accounts of
Pizarro's death, and of the events which fol-
lowed upon it. lie immediately produced the

- royal commimiTon appointing him governor of
t r. Peru, with the fame privileges and authority;

and his juriliiction was acknowledged without
hesitation by Benalcazar, Adelantado, or lieu-
tenant-general for the emperor in Popayan,
and by Pedro de Puelies, who, in the abfcnce
of Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the
troops left in Quito. Vaca de Castro not only
afiumned the supreme authority, but shewed
that he poffeiTid the talents which the exercise
of it at that juncture required. By his in.u-
ence and addreis he loon al'tmbled such a body
of troops, as not only iet him above all fear of
being cxpoled to any infulr from the adverse
party, but enabled him to advance from Quito
with the digniy that became his character.
By dilpa :c;ng pFcribns of confidence to the

different

dliiTr-ient settlements in Peru, with a formal nlooiVf.
notification of his arrival and of his commission, .1-

541.

he communicated to his countrymen the royal
pleafr-e with respect to the government of the
country. By private emilfaries, he excited
such officers as had discovered their difappro-
bation of Almagro's proceedings, to manifest
their duty to their sovereign by supporting the
person honoured with his commission. Those
reall ures were productive of great effects. En-
couraged by the approach of the new govcrnori
or prepared by his machinations, the loyal were
confirmed in their principles, and avowed them
with greater boldness; the timid ventured to
decl.re their sentiments; the neutral and wa-
vering, finding it necefTary to chufe a fide, be-
gan to lean to that which nov appeared to be
the fIafelt as well as the molt j t '.

AM.:AGRO observed the rapid progress of c...l ,a o

this fIirit of difaffetion to his cause, and in Al.o.
order to give an effectual check to it before the
arrival of Vaca de Callro, he set out at t;le 51.
head of his troops foi Cu.co, vwhere the nmoft
cou;-id(rable buoy of opponents had creccd

!''..':on, lib. iii. c. 9. Znr.ra , lib. iv. c. lz. Go-
. c. 146, 147. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x. c. i, z,

the

Boor VI. the royal standard, under the command of Pec

154X- dro Alvarez Holguin. During his march

thither, Herrada, the skilful guide of his youth
and of his counsels, died; and from that time
his measures were conspicuous for their vio-
lence, but concerted with little sagacity, and
executed with no address. Holguin, who,
with forces far inferior to those of the opposite
party, was descending towards the coast at the
very time that Almagro was on his way. to
Cuzco, deceived his unexperienced adversary
by a very simple stratagem, avoided an en-
gagement, and effected a junction with Alva-
rado, an officer of note, who had been the first
to declare againt Almagro as an usurper.

SooN after, Vaca de Castro entered their
C2ir; camp with the troops which he brought

from Quito, and erecting the royal standard
before his own tenr, he declared, that as go-
vernor, he would discharge in person all the
functions of general of their combined forces.
Though formed by the tenour of his past life
to the habits of a fedentarv and pacific pro-
fefion, he at once asSumed the activirt and dif-
covered the decilocn of an officer long accuf-
tomed to command. Knowing his strength to
be now far fuperiur to that of the enein, he

was

was impatient to terminate the conteff by a BooK VI.
battle. Not- did the followers of Almagro, lt4a
vwiio had no hopes of obtaining a pardon for a
crimer ib atrocious as the murder of the go-
vernor, decline that mode of decision. They Sept. 16.
icet at Chupas, about two hundred miles from
Cuzco, and fought with all the fierce aninofity
inlpired by the violence of civil rage, the ran-
cour of private enmity, the eagerness of re-
vcnge, and the last efforts of despair. Vic- DefeataAl.
tory, after remaining long doubtful, declared
at lait for Vaca de Castro. The superior num-
ber of his troops, his own intrepidity, and the
martial talents of Francilco de Carvajal, a ve-
teran officer formed under the great captain in
the wars of Italy, and who on that day laid
the foundation of his future fame in Peru,
triumphed over the bravery of his opponents,
though led on by young Almagro with a gal-
lant spirit, worthy of a better cause, and de-
firving another fate. The carnage was great
in proportion to the number of the combatants.
Many of the vanquished, especially such as
were confvious that they might be charged vith
being accessory to the affaflmation of Pizarro,
rulhing on the swords of the enemy, chose to
fall like soldiers, rather than wait an ignomi-
nious doom. Of fourteen hundred men, the
total amount of combatants on both fides, five

VOL. III. I hundred

BoorVI. hundred lay dead on the field, and the number

i-54z of the wounded was still greater d.

s-.,-s; - IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de
ls.' "'' Cafiro, both in the council and in the field,

furpriled the adventurers in Peru, they were
still more astonished at his conduc after the
victory. As he was by nature a rigid dif-
penser ofjufiice, and persuaded that it required
examples ot extraordinary severity to restrain
the licentious lpirit of sbldiers so far removed
from the feat of government, he proceeded di-
rectlv to try his prisoners as rebels. Forty
were condemned to susSer the death of traitors,
others were banished from Peru. Their leader,
who made his escape from the battle, being
berrayed by some of his officers, was publicly
beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name of
Alm.agro, and the fpiiit of the party, was ex-
tinct

DURING those violen' convulsions in Peru,

c~'-:'. the emperor and his ministers were intently
cr-ccr-.:-

..c-.. employed in preparing regulations, by which
oa.i:ia.

Zd Za:e. lib. iv. c. z1-19. G-mara, c. i.S. Vega,

p .

l . . C. i-ii .
c. i l. erreri. dec. 7. iib. i. c. l,

Z:.-..:c, b. iv. c.. c. i a:. c. i;c. Herrera,

geC. 7. iib. .
i . i. 1 i. ib ,;. c- i.

they

they hoped not only to re-eftablifli tranquillity BooK VI.
there, but to introduce a more perfet system -^
of internal policy into all their settlements in
the New World. It is manifest from all the
events recorded in the history of America, that
rapid and extensive as the Spanish conquests
there had been, they were not carried on by
any regular exertion of the national force, but
by the occasional efforts of private adventurers.
After fitting out a few of the first armaments
for di'covering new regions, the court of Spain,
during the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of
Charles V., the former the most intriguing
prince of the age, and the latter the most am-
bitious, was encumbered with such a multi-
plicity of schemes, and involved in war with
so many nations of Europe, that it had not
leisure to attend to distant and less interesting
objects. The care of prosecuting discovery,
or of attempting conquest, was abandoned to
individuals; and with such ardour did men
pufl forward in this new career, on which no-
velty, the spirit of adventure, avarice, ambi-
tion, and the hope of meriting heaven, prompt-
ed them with combined influence to enter, that
in leit than half a century almost the whole of
that extensive empire which Spain now possesses
in the New World, was fubjefted to its do-
n:inion. As the Spanish court contributed

I 2 nothing

Bor.'. VI. nothing rtowards the vario:is expeditions under-
-YJ taken in America, it was not intitlcd to claim

much from their iuccejs. The fovereri'nty of
the conquered provinces, with the firth of the
gojd and filve;, was reserved for the crown;
every ti.n elle was seized by the aflociates in
ecic expedi ion as their own right. The p!un-
tdr of the countries which thes invaded served
to indemnif- them for what they had expended
in -equipping themselves for the service, and
the conquered territory was divided among
them, according to rules which custom had
introduced, as permanent eflablifhinents which
tn:e r 1:cce.sful valour merited. In the in-
fancy of tho!f settlements, when their extent
as v. il as their value were unknown, ma-
nv ireularities escaped observation, and it
was bfourn necefiary to connive at many ex-
cesses. The conquiered people were pillaged
w-rh d-' ru:ive ra aci.-, a-.d their country
parcelled out among its new masters in exor-
bi;an: ihn.res, far exceeding the hictaift recom-
pe:..'U :i"r rt. their ;r-.ices. The rude con-
c n:'-' :- .' . -.eric., inclal-ble of forming their
elst..hli-.;.n::::s upon an- ge:.errl cr exte :'ve
plan rs r ci:c-v, attentive only to priv'. : in-
re;-cf-, :-.!ili:-n to forego prefcnt ..i:! from
rt:e iro:,'t r of rcno:e or public benet:i, ' cm
to have h?.d no ot ject but to am1ss sudden

wealth,

v altl], without regarding what might be the BooKVI.
co;.ilc(ilences of the means by which they ac- ,s4,.
quire; ir. But when time at length diflovered
to the Spanish court the importance of its
American possessions, the necefriry of new-
modielling their whole frame became obvious,
and in place of the maxims and practices pre-
valent among military adventurers, it was found
requ!Li:e to ufubtiiutce the infitutions of regular
govrllllent.

ONE evil in particular called for an imme-

diate remedy. The conquerors of hMexico and
Peru imitated the fatal example of their coun-
trymen fettled in the islands, and cmployed
thcmselves in searching for gold and flver with
the fame inconsiderate eagerness. Similar es-
fccts followed. The natives employed in this
labou by maflers, who in imposing tafls had
no regard either to what they felt or to what
they were able to perform, pined away and pe-
riflied lo fast, that there was reason to appre-
hend that Spain, instead of polteffing countries
peopled to such a degree as to be susceptible of
progrefcive improvement, would soon remain
proprietor only of a vast uninhabited desert.

THE emperor and his minillers were so fen-
fible of this, and so Iblicitous to prevent the

I 3 extincrton

BooK VT. extinction of the Indian race, which threatened

J. to render their acquisitions of no value, that

froIn time to time various laws, which I have
mentioned, had been made for securing to that
unhappy people more gentle and equitable
treatment. But the difiance of America from
the feat of cmpire, the feebleness of govern-
ment in the new colonies, the avarice and au-
dacity of flidiers unaccustomed to restraint,
p:reentcd ;thiee falu;tarn- regulations from ope-
rating wi::h a.n considerable inufence. The
evil contirued to crow, and at this time the
emperor found an interal of leisure from the
affairs of Europe to take it into attentive con-

t;' r"'i ideration. He consulted not only with his

~ :- _n m
':- i.s ministers and the members of the council of

the Indies, but called upon several persons who
had resided long in the New World, to aid
them with the rcful:t of their experience and
obKervation. Fortunately for the people of
America, among theie was Bartholomew de las
Casas, who happened to be then at Madrid on
a m:l-ion from a chapter of his order at Chi-
ap. i. ThougTh, since the miscarriage of his
former fcheies for the relief of the Indians, he
h.ad continued ihut up in his cloifler, or oc-
cc:pied in rciigious fu: -.ions, his zeal in behalf

r Rc '-: ItI:!. de C*:i.-. , ?.
-i o5.

i- "
"of

of the former objects of his pity was so far from Boo VI.
abating, that, from an increased knowledge of
their sufferings, its ardour had augmented. He
seized eagerly this opportunity of reviving his
favourite maxims concerning the treatment of
the Indians. With the moving eloquence na-
tural to a man on whose mind the scenes which
he had beheld had made a deep impreflion, he
described the irreparable waste of the human
rpecies in the New World, the Indian race al-
most totally swept away in the islands in lets
than fifty years, and hastening to extincion on
the continent with the fame rapid decay. With
the decisive tone of one strongly prepossessed
with the truth of his own system, he imputed
all this to a single cause, to the exations and
cruelty of his countrymen, and contended that
nothing could prevent the depopulation of
America, but the declaring of its natives to be
freemen, and treating them as fubjets, not as
hlaves. Nor did he confide for the success of
this proposal in the powers of his oratory alone.
In order to enforce them, he composed his fa-
mous treatise concerning the deftruftion of
America e, in which he relates, with many hor*
rid circumstances, but with apparent marks of
exaggcrated description, the devastation of

g Remefal, p. I9Z. q99.

I ~ every

BoOK VI. ever- province which had been visited by the
~.-, Spaniards.

F ibf°- THE emperor was deeply afri.ted with the
tc.... i reciral oslo many acJions Ilocking to humanity.
fr>io.-.s. B.:: as his views extended far beyond those of
t.-.:.. Las Casas, he pcrceived that relieving the In-

dians fronm opp"; '-- was but one flep towards
rendering his po!i:ci;ons in the New World a
va!labt:c ccl:ilit;on, and would' be of little
ava:l, un!:s he could circurn.lribc the power
and ufurpaionrs of his own ifubjests there. The
conqu:c-o:'s of -Amnrica, however great their
merit IiaJ been towards their country, were
;i.oi'.-. pt'c;:ns of i.ch Imean birth, and of I-uc
abje r- .-.: in locie:v, as give no distinction in
r; e eve of a ;;or.arch. The exorbitant wealth
-ivth v.':'ch ib;e of them returned, gave um-
b- ae to an age not accuftoned to fee men in
infer:or cc-r.:ion elevated above their level,
and rising to emulate or to surpass the ancient
r.ob.!i. in lplendour. The territories which
the;r cl.i.;'s had appropriated to themlclves
^r'ce of ich enormous extent t, that if the
country :l: uld ever be improved in proportion
to :he fer:;i!it of tI;e foil, they- milll grow too
;'eal,-hy and too rowerful for fubjcis. It ap-

' ;..NOTE \V.

Feared

pered to Charles, that this abuse required a BooKVI.
ren;ediv no less than the other, and that the s5z.
rciulations concerning both must be enforced
b'- a mode of government more vigorous than
hI.l cvt been introduced into America.

VYiy, i this view he framed a body of laws, N-,r.g-

Ijtlonslor

con:aipi:-i g many salutary appointments with thi.purpo.
r;c;'c to the constitution and powers of the
fi.ipr.lme council of the Indies; concerning the

f'irion and jurifdicion of the royal audiences
in sdiT'-rent parts of America; the adminiftra-
ti:,n of juiltice; the order of government, both
e,-clc!iafical and civil. Thele were approved
or b, ail ranks of men. But together with them
\ '.! a i:i!tid the following regulations, which
cx:- tcd. uni\'crfal alarm, and occasioncd the Imolt
vl ithit convulflons:--" That as the repcrti-
0: i:'.''s or shares of land fcized by several per-
ions ani.pared to be excelfive, the royal audi-
ticr.;s are empoV'ered to reduce them to a mo-
decrate extent: That upon the death of any
coni:qucror or plantcr, the lands and Indians
grIianii to lh li f11all not delcend to his widow
or c'.ildlcn, but return to the crown: That the
Indilan liha'l henccforth be exempted from per-
;In.il i(irvice, and shall not be compelled to
carr- the baggage of travellers, to labour in
tr' ;;::n;!- , or to dive in the pearl fiflhrics

That

BooK VI. That the Rated tribute due by them to their

superior shall be ascertained, and they shall be
paid as servants for any work they volun-
tarily perform: That all persons who are or
have been in public offices, ecclefiaflics of
every denomination, hospitals and monasteries,
fh all be deprived of the lands and Indians al-
lotted to them, and these be annexed to the
crown: That every person in Peru, who had
any criminal concern in the contests between
Pizarro and Almagro, should forfeit his lands
and Indians '."

i-, ALL the Spanish minilers who had hitherto
; .-'.r."" been entrulled with the direction of American

affairs, and who were bell acquainted with the
Rate of the country, remonstrated against thole
regulations as ruinous to their infant colonies.
They represented, that the number of Spa-
niards who h2d hitherto emigrated to the New
W\orld was so extremely small, that nothing
could be expec:ed from any effort of theirs to-
-wrds in-roviprg the vast regions over which
they, were fca::ered; that the success of every
fchemne for this purpose must depend upon the
nin;i'trv and ;'r.'ice of the Indians, whose na-

i terCrr3. ,-c. - . Ci;.

xi. C. ;. Fernan2ez Hist. lib. i.
c. 1, 2.

tire

tive indolence and averrion to labour, no pro- BoKVT.
iiect of benefit or promise of reward could $.
surmount; that the moment the right of im-
Iofing a task, and exating the performance of
it, was taken from their masters, every work
of industry muff cease, and all the sources from
which wealth begun to pour in.upon Spain must
be ftopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at
all times of his own opinions, and so much
impressed at present with the view of the dif-
orders which reigned in America, that he was
.'illing to hazard the application even of a dan-
gerous remedy, persisted in his resolution of
publifiing the laws. That they might be car-
ried into execution with greater vigour and
authority, he authorised Francilco Tello de
Sandoval to repair to Mexico as vj/itador or
superintendent of that country, and to co-ope-
rate with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy,
in enforcing them. He appointed BlalcoNug- A ;'i.,.
nez Vela to be governor of Peru, with the luri'ru.
title of Viceroy; and in order to strengthen
his administration, he established a court of 's47.
royal audience in Lima, in which four lawyers
of eminence were to preside as judges k

k Yarate, lib. iii. c, z2. Gomara, c. 151. \cga,
rp 2. lb. iii. c. 2o.

Tli

Boo VI. THE v:ceroy and superintendent failed at the

~ s44 fame time; and an account of the laws which

E, r-:' the were to enforce reached America before
.:...: them. The entry of Sandoval into Mexico

was viewed as the prelude of general ruin.
The unlimited grant of liberty to the In-
dians agfected every Spaniard in America with-
out distinction, a2c1 there was hardly one
who might not on 1;:ne pretext be included
under the othcr ic;.ieitolns, and susser by
themii. But zil c'r.! i1 ew Sp'ain had now
been lb long accu(lk) ed to the reitraints of
l-s anid ,auzhori, y u:inder the ike-dy and pru-
dent iad!i'jiiitrat:o of Mlendoza, that how
mn.;ch loevtr the ipiri: of the new Itatutes was
dctcftcd and dicadled, no n:tr>e-pt was made to
cr-i!rusct tie ;ul!ic ;::.in of' t :cm by any act of
v:lence u:-bcco!-..in. ;'iijcc. The nagi-
~-:a:es and5 rini- ja!

, n:,lanis, howcver, pre-
i-\-e. dcistu;u atJr.: ! -s t vi:ccroy and l:-

er ;r.i rc , c

.Ci'.. ;fial confcquences

u ' c.jr^'.rg Lcr;'. Ii . o:;: l:,'

or t'eem, Men-

.:i.a, bv i.c:: rci.;,cncc in t!ie ccunrrv, vas lo

:iro::hiy :;::::- . 1.v; it h its iiate, that he
ki:cW w\Jha3t \\.: i;- ;:5 in:cr -l_ as well as what it

.i -J t.

b ;r .

- .'.-v.1 t. or!un h new in of-
hit, c.ip,?:;.c a ,du-ree on i', der:.tion feldomi

erc ilc

(rci : of power. They engaged to suspend, BooKVI.
f lb tlme time, the execution of what was of- 5..
f(.nfive in the new laws, and not only consented
th:t a depuration of citizens !hould be sent to
iuruopc to lny beiorc the emperor the appre-
henfions of his fubec'ts in New Spain with re-
fpcc to their tendency and effets, but they
concurred with them in supporting their senti-
nients. Charles, moved by the opinion of men
w'hoe abilities and integrity intitled them to
decide concerning what fell immediately under
their own view, granted such a relaxation of
the rigour of the laws as re-eflablifhed the co-
lony in its former tranquillity '

I I' eru the storm gathered with an aspect InPeru.

still more fierce and threatening, and was not
tb loon dilperled. The conquerors of Peru, of
a rank much inferior to those who who had sub-
ject(ed Mexico to the Spaniflh crown, farther
removed from the infpeEtion of the parent itate,
and intoxicated with the sudden acquisition of
wealth, carried on all their operations with
greater licence and irregularity than any body
of adventurers in the New World. Amidit
the general subversion of law and order, occa-

! Fernandez Hilt. lib. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vega, p. il. lib.

ii. .

. , 22. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. Jib. vii.
c. 14, 15. ''orquen. Mon. Ind. Iib. v . c13.

5 filioned

BooKVI. sioned by tvo fuccefive civil wars, when each
L " individual was at liberty to decide for himself,

without an,- g-ide but his own interefl or pas-
sions, this turbulent spirit rolf above all sense
of lubordination. To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the introduction of regular govern-
ment, the pow;er us a viceroy, and the autho-
rity of a refpe&able court of judicature, would
have appeared formidable rellraints, to which
they would have fubmiitted with reluctance.
But they revolted with indignation againit the
idea of corrplying with laws, by which they
were to be stripped a: once of all they had
earned lo hardly during many years of service
and fufering. As the account of the new laws
pread fi:ccefiivcly through the different fettle-
ments, the inhabitants ran together, the wo-
men in tears, and the men exclaiming against
the injufticc and ingratitude of their sovereign
in depriving them, unheard and unconviEted,
of their polTiffions. " Is this, cried they, the
recoinpence due to pcrf;ns, who, without
publi- a:id, at tieir own expence, and by their
own valo'ur, have flubiecicd to the crown of
Cafile terri:irics of luci vast extent and opu-
lence Are -hcei the rewards befoowed for ha-
vin:g e:: ':rcrd url'ralelcld dfl'rclf, for having
encountrred evcrv Ipecies of danger in the
lervi:e u: t':;_' countr'y W\hose merit is to

great,

great, whose condu&t has been so irreproach- BOOK VI.
able, that he may not be condemned by some 5,t
penal clause in regulations, conceived in terms
as loose and comprehensive, as if it had been
intendcd that all should be entangled in their
snare ? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held
obme public office, and all, without distinction,
have been constrained to take an active part in
the contest between the two rival chiefs. Were
the former to be robbed of their property be-
caule they had done their duty ? Were the lat-
ter to be punished on account of what they
could not avoid ? Shall the conquerors of this
great empire, initead of receiving marks of
liflinaion, be deprived of the natural confo-
lation of providing for their widows and chil-
dren, and leave them to depend for subsistence
on the scanty supply they can extort from un-
feeling courtiers m ? We are not able now, con-
tinued they, to explore unknown regions in
quest of more secure settlements ; our confti-
tutions, debilitated with age, and our bodies
covered with wounds, are no longer fit for
active service; but frill we possess vigour sus-
ficient to afert our just rights, and we will not
tamely susser them to be wrested from us"."

IIlenera, dec. 7. Iib. vii. c. 14, 15.
C;mara, c. 152. Herrera, dec. 7. !ib.vi. c. Io, II.
' rga, p. i . lib. iii. c. 20. 22. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

BY

BooKVT. By diicourfes of this fort, uttered with ve.

r5.4. hemence, and listened to with universal appro-

An infr- bation, their passions were inflamed to such a
.rn.. by pitch, that they were prepared for the most
the m--t-
rT;.n oi violent measures; and began to hold conlult-
¢'" .artons in different places, how they might op-

pole the entrance of the viceroy and judges,
and prevent not only the execution but the
promulgation of the new laws. From this,
however, they were diverted by the addrcfs of
Vaca de Caitro, who flattered them with hopes,
that, as soon as the viceroy and judges hflould
arrive, and had leisure to examine their peti-
tions and remonstrances, they would concur
with them in endeavouring to procure tome
mitigation in the rigour of laws which had
been framed without due attention either to
the rate of the country, or to the sentiments
of the people. A greater degree of accom-
modation to these, and even some concessions
on the part of government, were now become
requ-lire to compole the present ferment, and
to sooth the colonists into submission, by in-
Pi;ring them with confidence in their superiors.
But without profound discernment, conciliating
manners, and flexibility of temper, such a

Tbi:r'-.i: plan could not be carried on. The viceroy
..'..'.. possessed none of these. Of all the qualities

:.-: . that it men for high command, he was en-

dowed

dowed only with integrity and courage; the BooK VI.
former harfl and uncomplying, the latter bor-
dering so frequently on raflinefs or obstinacy,
that in his situation they were defects rather
than virtues. From the moment that he landed Mrch 4.
at Tumbez, Nugnez Vela seems to have con-
fidered himself merely as an executive officer,
without any dicfretionary power; and, regard-
leis of whatever he obfcrved or heard concern-
ing the state of the country, he adhered to the
letter of the regulations with unrelenting ri-
gour. In all the towns through which he
pandti, the natives were declared to be free,
every person in public office was deprived of
his lands and servants; and as an example of
obedience to others, he would not susser a
tingle Indian to be employed in carrying his
own baggage in his march towards Lima.
Amazement and conflernation went before him
as he approached ; and lb little solicitous was
he to prevent thelc fromn alugmenting, that, on
cntcring the capital, he openly avowed that he
caine to obey the orders of his sovereign, not
to dilienle with his laws. This harsh decla-
ration was accompanied with what rendered it
tiill more intolerable, haughtincfs in deport-
menet, a tone of arrogance and decision in dif-
cour!l, and an inlblence of office grievous to
nicn little accustomed to hold civil authority

VOL. III. K in

Boot VI. in high refpet. Every attempt to procure,a

4.. suspension or mitigation of the new laws, the

viceroy confidered as flowing from a spirit of
difafferion that tended to rebellion. Several
persons of rank were confined, and folne put
to death, without any form of trial. Vaca de
Castro was arrefled, and notwithstanding the
dignity of his former rank, and his merit in
having prevented a general insurrection in the
colony, he was loaded with chains, and fihut
up in the common jail .

T;-.:trJ- BcT however ceneral the indionation was
h:'eCo-.- againit such proceedings, it is probable that
o ~i'-ir° the hand of authority would have been llrong
ead;:; e"eough to fipprefs it, or to prevent its burit-

ing our with open violence, if the malcontents
had not been provided with a leader of credit
and eminence to unite and to dircstt their es-
forts. From the time that the purport of the
new re:glations was known in Peru, every Spa-
niard there turned his eves towards Gonzalo
Pizarro, as the only perion able to avert the
ruin with which they threatened the colony.
From all quarters, letters and addresses were
sent to hmr, conjuring him to fland forth as

zara:.c, lb. iv. c. j. 3, 2. Gc: mra, c. 53--

,;;. Ve_:, p. 11. lib. iv. c. 4 ., . Fernandez, lib.i.
c. '6-- 1,

their

tltii' common protecor, and offering to sup- BoaK VI.
port him in the attempt with their lives and '

,

lortunes. Gonzalo, though inferior in talents
to his other brothers, was equally ambitious,
and of courage no less daring. The behaviour
of an ungrateful court towards his brothers
and himself, dwelt continually on his minds
Ferdinand a state prisoner in Europe, the chil-
dren of the governor in custody of the viceroy,
and lent aboard his fleet, himself reduced to
the condition of a private citizen in a country,
for the discovery and conquest of which Spain
was indebted to his family. These thoughts
prompted him to seek for vengeance, and to
assert the rights of his family, of which he now
confidered himself as the guardian and the heir.
B-:t as no Spaniard can easily surmount that ve-
neration for his sovereign which is interwoven
in his frame, the idea of marching in arms
against the royal standard filled him with hor-
ror. He hesitated long, and was flill unre-
Iblved, when the violence of the viceroy, the
universal call of his countrymen, and the cer-
tainty of becoming soon a vitim himself to
the fcverity of the new laws, moved him to
quit his residence at Chuquifaca de la Plata,
and repair to Cuzco. All the inhabitants went
out to meet him, and received him with tranf-
ports of joy as the deliverer of the colon-. In

K 2 the

Booar I. tlhe fcrvou!r of their zeal, thcv elctcd him

,s44 proc;rator-general of the Spanish nation in

Peru, to solicit the repe.:l of the late rcgu-
lations. They en-poweren- him to lav their
rc;'.:1; trances before the royal audience in
L:--a, and upon pretext of danger from the
lI:i.::-s, authoriled him to march thither in
arnms. Under sanction of this nomination Pi-
zarro took polTeifion of the royal trealure,
appointed ooffcers, levied soldiers, seized a
ilrge trr:n of artillery which Vaca de Castro
had .c' p;-rd in Guamaa, and set out for
t.i: , as :

i he had been advancing againri a

':-; C. nr.v. DifT ection having now as-
.::..: .....^:ar forr.-n, and being united under
a c:hie f f fch diflinguinflcd nanme, many per-
. -.s nonr resorted to his standard; and a
co::id cr.ble .-iart of the troops railed by the
vic r:.' ' ) ° i

o ; I'is 1'rogr;:, deserted to him

i:; , -:., .

D--:- EI-CoR:: ' r-o rT -a;;c

i . Lima, a revolution

y' 2 ,.:: 1 na :;,c:;.'. Ur, which encouraged him to
:v... ' -rocec'. \Ih :;.Ct:l'. ccrtaintr of fi:ccefs. The

vic .crc of the viceroy's adminiratrion was

° Z.-r:., !:'.. c. i. G:rn a . c. i;., I1;. Vega,

r. 1. ib. .

Fv.
c.--. Fernan1c.z. li. . iz--I.

c:'.-

, :_ . .: . ii. c. i , &c. ii. i. c. - 5.
a 171 not

int more formidable to the Spaniards of Peru BooK Vs.
r.hn his overbearing haughtiness was odious to s-4.
his ailbciates, the judges of the royal audience.
During their voyage fiom Spain, fio;e fymp-
toms of coldness began to appearP. But as
ioon as they entered upon the exercill of their
ircipetive offices, both parties were so much
exalp erated by frequent contests, arising from
intelrerence of jurii.iiaion, and contrariety of
opinion, that their mutual dil'gufi soon grew
inio open enmity. The judges thwarted the
viccrov in every iaflure, eit at liberty pri-
!nliers wlhom he had confined, juflified the mlal-
contents, and applauded their remonstrances.
At a time when both departments of govern-
nicnr l'nou!d have united againit the approach-
i:lg enlley, they were contending with each
oiher for fupcriority. The judges at length
prevailed. The viceroy, universally odious, The ;,ce-

1ov imri-

and abandoned even by his own guards, was f.nld.
fiztcd in his palace, and carried to a deflrt sc'. '.
iiland on the coaf!, to be kept there until he
cJuld be font home to Spain.

THE judges, in consequence of this, having v;,.,ofp;-

an' :!ed the fuipremc direction of affairs into Zr.
i..r owvn h:nds, ilfued a proclamation ful-

: TGmnr. , c. 171.

I4 ,, penTdih

Boo VI. pending the execution of the obnoxious laws,

,_ and sent a message to Pizarro, requiring him,

as they had already granted whatever he could
request, to difinifs his troops, and to repair to
Lima with fifteen or twenty attendants. They
could hardly expect that a man so daring and
ambitious would tamely comply with this re-
quifiion. It was made, probably, with no
such intention, but onr!y to throw a decent veil
over their own conduct; for Cepeda, the pre-
sident of the court of audience, a pragmatical
and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret
correspondence with Pizarro, and had already
formed the plan, which he afterwards executed,
of devoting himself to his service. The im-
prifonment of the viceroy, the usurpation of
the judges, together with the universal confu-
sion and anarchy consequent upon events l;
fincu!ar and unexpected, opened new and valt
p-ose.&s to Pizarro. He now beheld the
i;pre:pe pFower wkithin his reach. Nor did he
w,:r.t co'urage to push on towards the ,bic-d
x'-e h tfirtune presented to his view. Carv.jial,
the promp-er of his resolutions, and gtiide of
all hs aions, had long fixed his eye upon it
as :he only end at which Pizarro ot!rht to aim.
Inflead of the inferior function of procurator
f£r the Spanilh fcttlemsents in ePer , he (apcnlv
demanued to be ,overnor and captain rcncral

of

of the wlhole.provinre,% and required the court BooKVI.
of audience-to grant him a commifflion to that -4.
effect. ..At. the head of twelve .hundred men,
within a mice of Lima, where there. was nei-
ther leader, nor army to oppose him, such a
request carried with it the authprity of a com-
mand. But the judges, either from unwilling-
ness to rclinquih power, or from a desire of
preserving iome attention to appearances, hefi-
tated, or teemed to hesitate, about complying.
Carvajal, impatient of delay, and impetuous He aflunme

thbe govern-

in all his operations, marched into the city by mcnt.
night, ifized several officers of diftinfion
obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them with-
out the formality of a trial. Next morning
the court of audience ihfled a commifion in
the emperor's name, appointing Pizarro go-
vernor of Peru, with full powers, civil as well
as military, and he entered the town that day
with extraordinary pomp, to take poflefiion of
his new dignity q.

BUT amidlf the disorder and turbulence oa. 2s.

The viceroy

which accompanied this total dissolution of the r.crver his
frame of government, the minds of men, set libet.

7irate, I.v c.

v -.

. 8-. Vega, p. 1i. lib. iv.

c. 3--19. Gomara, c. 159-163. Fcrnandez, lib. i.
q. 1'-2z. Herrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. Io--o.

K 4 loose

BoorVI. loose from the ordinary restraints of law and

,,^. authorirv, acted with such capricious irregu-

}arirv, that events no less extraordinary than
unexpected followed in a rapid succession.
Pizarro had fcarcelv begun to exercise the new
powers with which he was inveired, when he
beheld formidable enemies rife up to oppose
him. The viceroy having been put on board
a vessel by the judges of the audience, in or-
der tha2 he might be carried to Spain under
cuftodv of Juan Alvarez, one of their own
number; as soon as the. were out at sea,
Alvarez, either touched with remorse or moved
by fear, fell at the feet of his prisoner, de-
claring him from that moment to be free, and
that he himsel, and every person in the ship,
would obey him as the legal reprefentarive of
their sovereign. Nugncz Vela ordered the
pilot of the vessel to shape his course towards
Tumbez, and as soon as he landed there,
ere£:ed the royal tlandard, and resumed his
funicons of viceroy. Several persons of note,
to whom the contagion of the seditious spirit
which reigned at Cuzco and Lima had not
reached, inftantlv avowed their reoblution to
1fupor: his authority '. The violence of Pi-

Zara:e, !b.i. .c. 9. Gomrnra, c. lit. Fernandez,
lib. i. c. :2 . H .r:a.-i, dec. 7. lib. \ii. c. 1;.

zarro's

zarro's government, who observed every indi- BOOK VI.
vidual with the jealousy natural to usurpers, -
and who puniflied every appearance of difaffec-
tion with rigour, loon augmented the number
of the viceroy's adherents, as it forced rome
leading men in the colony to fly to him for
refuge. While he was gathering such strength
at Tumbez, that his forces began to assume
the appearance of what was confidered as an
army in America, Diego Centeno, a bold and
active officer, exasperated by the cruelty and
oppreliion of Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in
the province of Charcas, formed a conspiracy
againit his life, cut him off, and declared for
the viceroy t.

PIZARRO, though alarmed with those ap- 1s45.

Pizr5ro

pcarances of hostility in the opposite extremes ,,aches
us the empire, was not disconcerted. He againf'him.
prepared to assert the authority to which he
had attained, with the spirit and conduc of an
ofinccr accustomed to command, and marched
icc'tly against the viceroy as the enemy who
a.is nearest as well as most formidable. As he
wvas mnater of the public revenues in Peru, and
mull ot' the military men were attached to his
family, his troops were to numerous, that the

a.rrnt, lib. v. c. i8. Gomara, c. 169. Herrera,
dec. -. lib. ix. c. 2-.

viceroy,

Bnao5 Vr viceroy, unable to face them, retreated towards

.4-. Qu uito. Pizarro followed him, and in that

long march, through a wild mountainous
country, suffered hardLhips and encountered
difficulties, which no troops but those accuf-
romed to serve in America could have en-
dured or surmounted . The viceroy had
scarcely reached Qujiro, when the van-guard
of Pizarro's forces appeared, led by Carvajal,
who, though near fourscore, was as hardy and
active as any young soldier under his command.
Nugnez Vela initantly abandoned a town in-
capable of defence, and with a rapidity more
resembling a flight than a retreat, marched
into the province of Popayan. Pizarro con-
tinued to pursue, but finding it impossible to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From
thence he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Cen-
teno, who was growing formidable in the
southern provinces of the empire, and he him-
elf remained there to make head against the
vicerov I.

B'- his own activiry, and the afliftance of

Benlcazar, Nugnez Vela loon alfembled four

= ,¢-- NOTL X VI.

Z:-- :, !::. . c. 15. 16-i4. Gomara, c. 167.

._: - . :1. i:b iv. c. 2zS-_:. Fernandez, lib. i.
; : -. _^. :: _c., . b. is. c. 16. -o-2-7.

hundred

hundred men in Popayan. As he retained, Boe VI.
amidllF all his difalters, the fame elevation of ,S.
mind, and the fame high sense of his own dig-
nirv, he reje&ed with disdain the advice of
inme of his followers, who urged him to make
overtures of accommodation to Pizarro, de-
clarinn that it was only by the sword that a
conteit with rebels could be decided. With
this intention he marched back to Quito. Pi- 1546.
zarro, relying on the superior number, and
itil more on the dilcipline and valour of his
troops, advanced resolutely to meet him. The January i$.
battle was fierce and bloody, both parties
fighting like men who knew that the possession
of a great empire, the fate of their leaders, and
their own future fortune, depended upon the
ilfue of that day. But Pizarro's veterans
pushed forward with such regular and well-
directed force, that they soon began to make
imprfnlion on their enemies. The viceroy, by
extraordinary exertions, in which the abilities
of a commander and the courage of a soldier
were equally displayed, held victory for rome
tiie in suspense. At length he fell, pierced ar.d nam.
with many woundss and the rout of hisfol-
lu'. r- became general. They were hotly
p'i i'-:d. HIis head was cut off, and placed
o :1i i public gibbet in Quito, which Pizarro
c;it:.: in triumph. The troops assembled by

6 Centcno

Boor:VI. Centeno were dispersed loon after by Carv.jal,

, and he himfilf curmpeled to fl, to the moun-

tains, where he remlined fur several months
concealed in a cave. Every person in Peru,
from the frontier= of Popayan to those of Chili,
fubmir:ed to P;::rro ; and by his fleet, under
Pedro de Hino:o;i, he had not only the un-
rivailed command of the South-Sea, but had
taken poefieon of Pan:m.a, and placed a gar-
rifon in Non.ibre de Dios, on the opposite
fide of the isthmus, which rendered him ma!ler
of the usual avceni;e of communication becween
Spain and Peru

P:;i.-T Z- AFTER this dec:five viicory, Pizarro and his
rC- ,-o. followers remained for tome time at QLico,
C, =' 'c and during the first tranlports of their exulta-

tion, they ran irro every exce's of licentious
indulgence, wi:h the rioto's ipirit usual among
low adventurers iupon extraordinary success.
EC;-, a:.idi: lthis dhiipa:ion, their chief and his
o:-':d..t;s were obliged to turn their thoughts
Ji-. ;; :ines to w.';.wt was ierious, and dcliberarcd

;-.::' .Lici illic:ude concerning the part that
!. o; i:rit now to take. Carvaial, no lels bold

/ Za b.:.e, '' .

:. ;Gemn'. c. i-.. Vc.:- ,

,. It. i:~.i~'. c..-o, ~-' t ..

:' .b. i. c. 5

I -

'c.

ie e- c, .

7ec . C.

:b . c. 1i. 19- 2:. dec. . lib. i.

c . c.

.. c.z, .
c.

and

ind decisive in counsel than in the field, had BooKVL.
fron the beginning warned Pizarro, that in t-5--
the career on which he was entering, it was
vain to think of holding a middle course;
that he must either boldly aim at all, or at-
tempt nothing. From the time that Pizarro
obtained possession of the government of Peru,
he inculcated the fame maxim with greater
(.'rne';lnefs. Upon receiving an account of
th.: victory at Quito, he rcmonftratcd with
lim in a tone still more peremptory. " You
have uSurped (said he, in a letter written to
Pizarro on that occalion) the lupreme power
in this country, in contempt of the emperor's
comniffion to the viceroy. You have marched,
in holtile array, against the royal flandard;
,-ou have attacked the reprefcntative of your
f:,ercign in the field, have defeated him, and
cut off his head. Think not that ever a mo-
narcii will forgive such insults on his dignity,
or that any reconciliation with him can be
cordial or sincere. Depend no longer on the
precarious favour of another. Afiume youri5:lf
the sovereignty over a country, to the domi-
nion of which your family has a title founded
on the rights both of discovery and conquest.
It is in your power to attach every Spaniard in
Peru of any consequence inviolably to your
intereil by liberal grants of lands and of In-

dians,

Boo VI. dians, or by inftiruting ranks of nobility, and
-6.- creating tides of honour similar to thoe which

are courted with so much eagerness in Europe,
By establishing orders of knighthood, with
privileges and distinctions resembling those in
Spain, you may bestow a gratification upon the
officers in your service, suited to the ideas of
military men. Nor is it to your countrvmen
only that you ought to attend; endeavour to
gain the natives. By marrying the Coya, or
daughter of the Sun next in iuccefiion to the
crown, you will induce the Indians, out of
veneration for the blood of their ancient
princes, to unite with the Spaniards in fiipport
of your authority. Thus, at the head of the
ancient inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the
new settlers there, you may iet at defiance the
power of Spain, and repel with cafe any feeble
force which it can fend at luch a diltance."
Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's
confidential counsellor, warmlv ieconded Car-
vajal's exhortations, and empioyed whatever
learning he possessed in demonl'rating, that all
the founders of great monarchies had been raii'cd
to pre-eminence, not by the antiquity of their
lineage, or the validity of their rights, but by
their own aspiring valour andt personal merit .

Vega, p. il. ]ib. iv. c. 4-. F-r-.-: z, lib.i. c. 3.

lib. ii c. I. 49. Herrera, dec: S. i..
l a. c. i.

PJZARO

PIZAR.,o listened attentively to both, and BooK VI.

could- not!:onceat the fatisfa&ion.with which ,
he contemplated the objec that they presented Butneguct
to his vieW , B ut happily for the tranquillity with the
of the worlds few men possess that superior Spain.
flrength of mind, and extent of abilities,
which are capable of forming and executing
Iuch daring schemes, as cannot be accom-
plifhed without overturning the established
order of society, and violating those maxims
of duvt which men are accustomed to hold
sacred. The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents
circumscribed his ambition within more nar-
row limits. Instead of aspiring at independent
power, he confined his views to the obtaining
from the court of Spain a confirmation of the
authority which he now possessed; and for
that purpose, he sent an officer of diftintion
thither, to give such a representation of his
conduct, and of the state of the country, as
might induce the emperor and his ministers,
either from inclination or from necessity, to
continue him in his present fiation.

WTHILE Pizarro was deliberating with lre- Confllta.

nlons of the

fpei: to the part which he flould take, con- sp.anih mi-
fultations were held in Spain, with no less nift'."
solicitude, concerning the meafurec which
ought to be pursued in order to re-eftablifli

the

hoorVI. the emperor's authority in Peru. Though

unacquainted with the last excesses of outrage
to which the malcontents had proceeded there,
the court had received an account of the infur-
retion against the viceroy, of his imprison-
ment, and the usurpation of the government
by Pizarro. A revolution so alarming called
for an immediate interposition of the emperor's
abilities and authority. But as he was fully
occupied at that time in Germany, in conduct-
ing the war against the famous league of
Smalkalde, one of the most intereiling and
arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of
providing a remedy for the disorders in Peru
devolved upon his son Philip, and the coun-
fellors whom Charles had appointed to aflift
him in the government of Spain during his
absence. At first view, the actions of Pizarro
and his adherents appeared so repugnant to the
duty of fubjeEts towards their sovereign, that
the greater part of the ministers insisted on de-
claring them initantly to be guilty of rebellion,
and on proceeding to punish them with exem-
plary rigour. But when the fervour of their
zeal and indignation began to abate, innu-
merable obfracles to the execution of this
measure presented themselves. The veteran
bands of infantry, the strength and glory
of the Spanish armies, were then employed

in

in Germany. Spain, exhausted of men and Boo VI.
money by a long series of wars, in which the had ,'r46
been involved by the restless ambition of two
luccefslie monarchs, could not easily equip an
armament of sufficient force to reduce Pizarro.
To transport any refpeclable body of troops to
a country so remote as Peru, appeared almost
impossible. While Pizarro continued master
of the South-Sea, the diret route by Nombre
de Dios and Panama was impraticable. An
attempt to march to Quito by land through
the new kingdom of Granada, and the province
of Popayan, across regions of vast extent, de-
iblate, unhealthy, or inhabited by fierce and
hoffile tribes, would be attended with unfur-
mounitable danger and hardihips. The passage
to the South-Sea by the Straits of Magellan
was so tedious, so uncertain, and so little
known in that age, that no confidence could be
placed in any effort carried on in a course of
navigation to remote and precarious. Nothing
then remained but to relinquish the system
which the ardour of their loyalty had first
fugcgeiled, and to attempt by lenient measures
what could not be effected by force. It was
manifetl from Pizarro's solicitude to represent
his conduca in a favourable light to the em-
peror, that, notwithilanding the excefies of

VOL. IlIl . 1, which

Booi\VI. which he had been guilty, he still retained

;4'.S sentiments of veneration for his sovereign. By

a proper application to there, together with
ibme such concessions as should discover a spirit
of moderation and forbearance in government,
he might be vet reclaimed, or the ideas of
loyalty natural to Spaniards might so far revive
among his followers, that they would no longer
lend their aid to uphold his usurped authority.

,'... ,- THE iuccelf, however, of this negociation,
,. .'--: no less delicate than it was important, de-
r P^p, r;- pended entirely on the abilities and address of

the person to whom it should be committed.
After weighing with much attention the com-
p.rative merit of various persons, the Spanish
ministers fixed with unanimity of choice upon
Pedro de la Gafca, a priest in no higher station
than that of counlellor to the Inquisition.
Though in no public office, he had been oc-
cafionally employed by government in affairs
of trust and consequence, and had conducted
them with no leif skill than success; difplaving
a gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied
with much irmnefs; probity, luperior to any
feeling of private inzereftp and a cautious
circumlpection in concerting measures, fol-
lowed by such vigour in executing them, as is

rarely

rarely found in alliance with the other. These BooK VI.
qualities matked him out for the funtion to -6.
which he was destined. The emperor, to
whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly ap-
proved of the choice, and communicated it to
him in a letter, containing exprefTions of good-
will and confidence, no less honourable to the
prince who wrote, than to the fubjeEt who re-
ceived it. Gafca, notwithstanding his advanced
age and feeble constitution, and though, from
the apprehensions natural to a man, who,
during the course of his life, had never been
cut of his own country, he dreaded the effets
of a long voyage, and of an unhealthy climate',
did not hesitate a moment about complying
with the will of his sovereign. But as a proof H; mode-
that it was from this principle alone he acted,
he refutied a bishopric which was offered to him,
in order that he might appear in Peru with a
more dignified charatcr; lie would accept of
no higher title than that of president of the
court of audience in Lima a and declared that
he would receive no falarv on account of his
dificharging the duties of that office. All he
required was, that the expence of supporting
his family fiould be defrayed by the public,
and as he was to go like a minister of peace with

Fern:an: lz, lib. ii. c. 17

L 2 his

Bro: rVI. his gown and breviary, and without any re-

, t. tinue but a few domestics, this would not load

the revenue with any enormous burden .

c.m ~.:= B-er while he discovered such disinterested
.. C... F moderation with respect to whatever related

perflmnally to himself, he demanded his official
powers in a very different tone. He insisted,
a. he was to be employed in a country so re-
mote from the feat of government, where he
could not have recourse to his sovereign for
new instructions on every emergence; and as
the whole lucccls of his negociations muif de-
pend upon the confidence which the people with
whom he had to treat could place in the extent
of his powers, that he ought to be invested with
ulimired authority; that his jurifdiltion muff
reach to all persons and to all caules; that he mufl
be empowered to pardon, to punish, or to re-
ward, as circumitances and the behaviour of
diffcrenr men might require; that, in cafe of re-
fiftrance rom the malcontents, he might be au-
thorifed to reduce them to obedience by force
of arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to
call for a!lmtance from the governors of all the
Spanish fettleents in America. These pow-

b Zar;:e, . '. vi. c. 6. Gcm:ra, c. I-_. Fcrnanjcz,

lib. ii. c. 14 - 15. V\eg, p. i . .ib. v. c. I. lerrcra,
dec. S '. i. c. 4, &Cc.

Cl's,

crs, though manifestly conducive to the great BooK VI.
oije.ts of his mission, appeared to the Spanifih l 16.
ministers to be inalienable prerogatives of roy-
alty, which ought not to be delegated to a
subjec:, and they refused to grant them. But
the emperor's views were more enlarged. As
from the nature of his employment, Gafca must
be entrusted with discretionary power in several
points, and all his efforts might prove inef-
feclual if he was circumscribed in any one par-
ticular, Charles scrupled not to invest him with
authority to the full extent that he demanded.
Highly satisfied with this fresh proof of his
nafter's confidence, Gafca hastened his depart-
ure, and, without either money or troops, let Mays6.
out to quell a formidable rebellion'.

ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found Tly 27.

Hernan Mexia, an officer of note, polled there, at P' ..m
by order of Pizarro, with a considerable body
of men, to oppose the landing of any hostile
forces. But Gafca appeared in such pacific
guise, with a train lb little formidable, and
with a title of no such dignity as to excite ter-
ror, that he was received with much relpect.
From Nombre de Dios he advanced to Panama,
and met with a similar reception from Hino-

' Fernandea, lib. ii. c. 16-18.

L 3 jofa,

BooK VI. jofa, whom Pizarro had entrusted with the go-

v. ernment of that town, and the command of
his fleet stationed there. In both places he
held the fame languiae, declaring that he was
sent by their sovereign as a messenger of peace,
no: as a minister of vengeance; that he came
to redress all their grievances, to revoke the
laws which had excited alarm, to pardon past
offences, and to re-efta'lilh order and jullice
in the government of Peru. His mild deport-
ment, the simplicity of his manners, the Ianc-
tirv of his profession, and a winning appear-
ance of candour, gained credit to his decla-
rations. The veneration due to a pcrfon
clothed with legal authority, and acting in vir-
tue of a royal commi.iion, began to revive
among men accustomed for some time to no-
thing more respectable than an usurped jurif-
diction. Hinoiola, Mexia, and several other
officers of diftinetion, to each of whom Galca
applied separately, were gained over to his in-
terest, and waited only for tome decent occa-
sion of declaring openly in his favour d.

V;ioi;entp THIS the violence of Pizarro soon affbrded
P....;. them. As soon as he heard of Galca's arrival

e Fernandez, lib. ii. c.: I, &ic. Zar.ue, lb. vi. c. 6,7.
Gonara, c. i,;. Vega, r. ii. lib. v. c. ,

at

at Panama, though he received, at the fame BooK VL.
time, an account of the nature of his corn- ;546.
milTion, and was informed of his offers to rjn-
ider every Spaniard in Peru easy concerning
what was past, by an act of general oblivion;
and secure with respect to the future, by re-
pealing the obnoxious laws; instead of accept-
ing with gratitude his sovereign's gracious con-
ceflions, he was so much exalperated on finding
that he was not to be continued in his station
as governor of the country, that he instantly
rcfulved to oppose the president's entry into
Peru, and to prevent his exercising any jurif-
diftion there. To this desperate resolution he
added another highly preposterous. He sent
a new deputation to Spain to justify this con-
duct, and to insist, in name of all the com-
munities in Peru, for a confirmation of the go-
vernment to himself during life, as the only
means of prcferving tranquillity there. The
perfbns entrusted with this strange commission,
intimatcd the intention of Pizarro to the pre-
fidcnt, and required him, in his name, to de-
part fiom Panama and return to Spain. They
carried likcwife secret inflructions to Hinojofa,
dir-eeing him to offer Gafca a present of fifty
thou lind pesos, if he would comply volunta-
rily; ; ih \i hat was demanded of him ; and if he

L 4 flould

Bor VI. flould continue obstinate, to cut him off either

,;56. bv affain ratic;( or poilon

. MANY circumstances concurred in pushing

on Pizarro to rhofe wild measures. Having
b-en once accufftoned to supreme command,
he could not bear the thouchts of deltending
ro a Friva:e fl. ion. Conirious of his own de-
merit, he ifil-ec^t-d th;r the cn-ror fludied
only to dece:ve hii.:, and v ould never pardon
the outraocs -hicn hhe ha d commitred. His
chetf coni.'cents, n.J ]ls gui;' , entertained the
famie api'reher..or.. The approach of Gafca
without any military force excited no terror.
There were now above fix thousand Spaniards
fettled in Peru f; and at the head of rhere he
doub:ed not to mainta:n iis own independence,
if the court of Spain should refule to grant
what he reuired.

he But e knew not that a

firit of defc.ion had already begun to JIread
a:r.orng tho'f whom he trufied moit. Hi;ojofa,
amazed at Pizarro's preci pirae relolution of
:Ie:t:. hi:r.elf in opoli :ion to the cmiperor's
conmmrilion, and di. d inn to be his iniru-
mc.nt in per'etrating the odious crimies pointed

- -

. '.

.

\

.

c.. S. F . z z, i. i. c. , 34.

Herr3':. dc. F. ::b.::. c.c. ac.
I'."rcr,: de;.. S. 3:b. iii. c. i.

cut

out in his lecret inftrutions, publicly recog- BOOKVI.
nized the title of the president to the supreme ~46.
authority in Peru. The officers under his com-
mand did the fame. Such was the contagious
influence of the example, that it reached even
the deputies who had been lent from Peru;
and at the time when Pizarro expected to hear
either of Gafca's return to Spain, or of his
death, he received an account of his being
master of the fleet, of Panama, and of the
troops Itationed there.

IRRITATED almost to madness by an event Pi;rrole.

solves on

so unexpe&ed, he openly prepared for war; ...
and in order to give some colour of jultice to '547'
his arms, he appointed the court of audience
in Lima to proceed to the trial of Gafca, for
the crimes of having seized his ships, seduced
his officers, and prevented his deputies from
proceeding in their voyage to Spain. Cepeda,
though ating as a judge in virtue of the royal
cornmiffion, did not scruple to prostitute the
dignity of his function by finding Gafca guilty
of treason, and condemning him to death on
that account B. Wild, and even ridiculous, as
this proceeding was, it imposed on the low

Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 55. Vega, p. . lib. v. c. 7.
Ilcriera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

illiterate

Boor VI. illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was

~' ' filled, bv the semblance of a legal fantion war-

ranting Pizarro to carry on hostilities against a
convicted traitor. Soldiers accordingly retorted
from every quarter to his standard, and he was
loon at the head of a thousand men, the best
equipped that had ever taken the field in
Peru.

P ep,- GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force
Glica. must be emploved in order to accomplifl the

purpose of his miniion, was no less assiduous in
collecting troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena,
and other settlements on the continent; and
with such success, that he was soon in a con-
dition to detach a squadron of his feet, with a
considerable body of soldiers, to the coast of
ps", Peru. Their appearance excited a dreadful

alarm; and though they did not attempt for
loine time to make any descent, they did more
e-ecbtual fer-ice, by letting ashore in different
places persons who difperled copies of the act
of cgeneral indemnity, and the revocation of
the late edicrts; and who made known every
where the pacific intentions, as well as mild
temper, of the preii.dent. The efec't of ipread-
i:: this information w.s wonderful. All who
.'ere diiFatisfied with Pizarro's violent admini-
-ration, all w:o retained anyv entiments of

fidcli;:-

fidelity to their sovereign, began to meditate BooKVI.
revolt. Some openly deserted a cause which ;,

1S47.

they now deemed to be unjust. Centeno, leav- Infurr,=ion
ing the cave in which he lay concealed, as-
fembled about fifty of his former adherents,
and with this feeble half-armed band advanced
boldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in the
night-time, in which he difplaved no less mi-
litary Ikill than valour, he rendered himself
master of that capital, though defended by a
garrilbn of five hundred men. Most of these
having ranged themselves under his banners,
he had loon the command of a refpetable body
of troops h,

PIZARRO, though astonished at beholding aga~ins

whom Pi.

one enemy approaching by sea, and another by zar..
land, at a time when he trusted to the union mr
of all Peru in his favour, was of a spirit more
undaunted, and more accustomed to the vicif-
fitudes of fortune, than to be disconcerted or
appalled. As the danger from Centeno's ope-
rations was the most urgent, he instantly set
out to oppose him. Having provided horses
for all his soldiers, he marched with amazing

Z 7ar..te, lib. vi. c. 13-16. Gomara, c. o80, 18i.
I er lan;dez, lib. ii. c. 28. 64, &c.

a1 rapidity.

Boo; VI. rapidity. But every morning he found his

force diminished by numbers who had left him
during the night; and though he became sus-
picious to excels, and punished without mercy
all whom he fulpected, the rage of desertion
was too violent to be checked. Before he got
within fight of the enemy at Huarina, near the
lake Titiaca, he could not muster more than
four hundred Ioldiers. But there he justly
confidered as men of tried attachment, on
whom he might depend. They were indeed
the boldest and most desperate of his followers,
conscious like himflif of crimes for which they
could h.rd!, ex-pect forgive:eefs, and without
cnv hope but ;n the iuccels of their arms.
o i' t-j h these he did not hefitare to attack Cen-

teno stroor s, though double to hisown in num-
ber. The rovalifis did not decline the combat.
It was the molt obstinate and bloody that had
*-e-' ;.:. hitherto been fought in Peru. At length the

intrepid valour of Pizarro, and the superiority
of Carvaial's mil::arv talents, triumphed over
numbers, and obtained a complete victory.
The boort was immense:, and the treatment
of the vanquished cruel. By this single success
[he repCuation of Pizarro was re-eftablifled,

See NOTE XVII.

and

and being now deemed invincible in the field, Boor VI.
his army increased daily in number". k a7

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the splendid
victory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left
Lima, when the citizens, weary of his oppref-
five dominion, ereced the royal standard, and
Aldana, with a detachment of soldiers from
the fleet, took poireffion of the town. About arca lands
the fame time , the president landed at Tum- t Pero.
bcz with five hundred men. Encouraged by
his pretence, every settlement in the low coun-
try declared for the king. The situation of
the two parties was now perfectly reverted;
Cuzco and the adjacent provinces were pof-
clffcd by Pizarro; all the reft of the empire,
frnom Quito southward, acknowledged the ju-
rifdiciion of Gafca. As his numbers aug-
mented fast, Gafca advanced into the interior
part of the country. His behaviour still con-
tinued to be gentle and unaflumning; he ex-
prelTed, on every occasion, his ardent wish of
terminating the contest without bloodfied.
More lolicitous to reclaim than to punish, he

kZarare, lib. vii. c. 2, 3. Gomara, c. 181. Vega,

p. 11. lib. v. c. iS, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 79.
Jieriera, dcc. 8. lib. iv. c. I, z.

i Zaratc, lib. vi. c. z7.

upbraided

Boo VI. upbraided no man for past offences, but re-

:r~7. ceived them as a father receives penitent chil-

dren returning to a sense of their duty. Though
desirous of peace, he did not flacken his pre-
parations for war. He appointed the general
rendezvous of his troops in the fertile valley of

tcTs Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco ". There he
Lnc."' remained for some months, not only that he

might have time to make another attempt to-
wards an accommodation with Pizarro, but
that he might train his new soldiers to the use
of arms, and accustom them to the discipline
of a camp, before he led them against a body
of vitorious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated
with the success which had hitherto accompa-
nied his arms, and elated with having again
near a thousand men under his command, re-
fured to liften to anv terms, although Cepeda,
together with several of his officers, and even
Carvajal himself", gave it as their advice to
clole with the president's offer of a general in-
demnity, and the revocation of the obnoxious
laws °. Gafca having tried in vain every ex-
pedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the
D- -:9. blood of his countrymen, began to move to-

= Zara:e, lib. vii. c. i. Fernandez, 1ib.ii. c. 77. 8,z

See NOTE XVIII.
o Z:ra: e, lib . ii. c. 6. Vega, p. Ii. lib. v. c. :,.

wards

wards Cuzco at the head of sixteen hundred BooK VI.
men. 547.

PIZARRO, confident of victory, suffered the Both partis

prepare for

royalists to pals all the rivers which lie between battle.
Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and 1543.
to advance within four leagues of that capital,
flattering himself that a defeat in such a situ-
ation as rendered a retreat impracticable would
at once terminate the war. He then marched
out to meet the enemy, and Carvajal chore his
ground, and made the disposition of the troops April g.
with the discerning eye, and profound know-
ledge in the art of war, conspicuous in all his
operations. As the two armies moved forward
(lowly to the charge, the appearance of each
was singular. In that of Pizarro, composed
of men enriched with the spoils of the most
opulent country in America, every officer, and
ahnolmo all the private men were clothed in
ituffs of silk, or brocade, embroidered with
gold and silver; and their horses, their arms,
their standards, were adorned with all the pride
of military pomp P. That of Gafca, though
not so splendid, exhibited what was no less
striking. He himself, accompanied by the
archbilhop of Lima, the bishops of Quito and

P Zarate, lib. vi. c. xl.

Cuzco,

Boor VI. Cuzco, and a great number of ecclesiastics,

7 inarching a3ng the lines, blerfing the men,

and encoura.ing them to a resolute discharge
of their duzv.

vrry'Lo- ~WVHEi both were just ready to engage, Ce-
s-.te by LS
I.-', peda set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and

surrendered himself to the president. Garci-
lasso de la Vega, and other officers of note,
followcd his example. The revolt of persons
in such high rank itruck all with amazement.
The mutual confidence on which the union and
flrength of armies depend, ceased at once.
Difiruft and conf'ernation spread from rank to
rank. Some silently flipped away, others threw
down their arms, the g-reatest number went
over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
some leaders, employed authority, threats, and
entreaties to stop them, but in vain. In less
than half an hour, a body of men, which might
have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire,
was totally di!ferfcd. Pizarro, feeing all ir-
reiriev.abl¼ lofi, cried out in amazement to a
few officers who Lill faithfully adhered to him,
c What remnains for us to do ?" " Let us rush,
replied one of them, upon the enemy's firmest
battalion, and die lEke Romans." Dejeced
v.ith such a revcrbc of oirtune, he had not spirit
to follow this ioldicrlv counfcl, and with a

3 taiencis

tameness disgraceful to his former fame, he BooKVI.
surrendered to one of Gafca's officers. Car- L48
vaial, endeavouring to escape, was overtaken taken,
and seized.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless vi&ory, did

not stain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, andput'
and a finall number of the most distinguished
or notorious offenders, were punished capitally.
Pizarro was beheaded on the day after he fur-
rendered. He submitted to his fate with a
composed dignity, and seemed desirous to atone
by repentance for the crimes which he had
committed. The end of Carvajal was suitable
to his life. On his trial he offered no defence.
When the sentence adjudging him to be hanged
was pronounced, he carelessly replied, cc One
can die but once." During the interval be-
tween the sentence and execution, he discovered
no sign either of remorse for the past, or of so-
I;citude about the future; cfoffing at all who
vi fted him, in his usual farcaflic vein of mirth,
v.ith the fame quickneft of repartee and gross
p',lcfantry as at any other period of his life.
Ccpeda, more criminal than either, ought to
have Ihared the fame fate; but the merit of
having cdeferted his associates at such a critical
moment, and with such decisive effect, taved
him from immediate punilhlment. He was

Vol.. 111. M sent,

Boor VI. sent, however, as a prisoner to Spain, and died

ts in confinement q

IN the minute detail which the contempo-

rarv historians have given of the civil dissentions
that raged in Peru, with little interruption,
during ten years, many circumstances occur so
striking, and which indicate such an uncommon
state of manners, as to merit particular atten-
tion.

No mne.rt THOUGH the Spaniards who first invaded
nary fo.l. rs
ia -Sciln Peru were of the lowest order in society, and

z
ar: o1 Pre.

. the greater part of those who afterwards joined

them were persons of desperate fortune, yet in
all the bodies of troops brought into the field
by the different leaders who contended for fu-
periority, not one man acted as a hired soldier,
that follows his standard for pay. Every ad-
venturer in Peru confidered himself as a con-
queror, entitled, by his services, to an efta-
blifhmcnt in that country which had been ac-
quired by his valour. In the contests between
the rival chiefs, each chose his fide as he was
.iirecTrd by his own judgment or affections.
Hle iuined his commander as a companion of
his fortune, anr. diia:ned to degrade himself

Za.-e. lib. ii. c. 6. 7, ,. Gomara, c. IS5, 186.

\ 'g2. p. i h. lib. c. 3:. . Ferinandez. Lb. ii. c. 86,
.Sc Herrera. .

d be .
b. i:. c IA . &C.

2 by

by receiving the wages of a mercenary. It was BooK VI.
to their sword, not to pre-eminence in office, or 1548.
nobility of birth, that most of the leaders whom
they followed were indebted for their eleva-
tion; and each of their adherents hoped, by
the fame means, to open a way for himself to
the possesSion of power and wealth'.

BUT though the troops in Peru served with- Arm'esim.

0o~~~~

mt ~~~~rmenlely ex-

out any regular pay, they were raised at im- enfive.
mense expence. Among men accustomed to
divide the spoils of an opulent country, the de-
fire of obtaining wealth acquired incredible
force. The ardour of pursuit augmented in
proportion to the hope of success. Where all
were intent on the fame objet, and under the
dominion of the fame passion, there was but
one mode of gaining men, or of securing their
attachment. Officers of name and influence,
besides the promise of future eftabliflinents,
received in hand large gratuities from the chief
with whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro,
in order to raise a thousand men, advanced
five hundred thousand pesos '. Gafca expended
in levying the troops which he led againfI Pi-
zarro nine hundred thousand pesos'. The dif-

\Vega, p. ii. lib. iv. c. 38. 41.
Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 54.
Zarate, lib. vii, c. io. Herrera, dec. S. lib. v. c.7.

.M1 2 ri!'

Boor -I. tribution of property, bestowed as the reward

,;54. of services, was flill more exorbitant. Ce-

:'-dc'-- peda, as the recompence of his perfidy and
i 'n: r .-. address, in persuading the court of royal audi-

ence to giv-e the fan'*tion of its authority to the
uiurped jurifdicion of Pizarro, received a
grant of lands which yielded an annual in-
come of a hundred and fifty thousand pesos".
Hinojofa, who, by his early defection from
Pizarro, and surrender of the fleet to Gafca,
decided the fate of Peru, obtained a diftric of
country affording two hundred thousand pesos
of yearly value'. While such rewards were
dealt out to the principal officers, with more
than royal mu;niFcence, proportional thares
were confcrred upon tihoe of inferior rank.

r:-- :- SucH a rapid change of fortune produced its
:...-:. natural e'ec.ts. Ir gave birth to new wants,

and new di-ires. Veterans long accuflomed to
hardship ard roil, acquired of a sudden a taste
for profuie and inconsiderate dissipation, and
indulged in all the excecTes of military licen-
rioufneis. The riot of low debauchery occu-
pied .n c; a reli.f ior expensive luxuries spread
a:r.ong o'hers '. The meaner i soldier in Peru
:-ould i:v-c t: tought him'cii degraded b- narch-
: (; ,-'- , c. .4. ' sVeg, p. 1. ;ib. vi. c. 3.

; 1 7.., ,: ... :. . . C. . ; :c. . ii. c. 1C.

in g

ing on foot; and at a time when the prices of BooKVI.
horses in that country were exorbitant, each ,5s.
indfited on being furnished with one before he
would take the field. But though less patient
under the fatigue and hardships of service, they
were ready to face danger and death with as
much intrepidity as ever; and animated by the
hope of new rewards, they never failed, on the
day of battle, to display all their ancient va-
lour.

TOGETHER with their courage, they retained ritIoch

all the ferocity by which they were originally the ..ir-
distinguished. Civil discord never raged with c.rriei on.
a more fell spirit than among the Spaniards in
Peru. To all the passions which usually en-
venom conterfs among countrymen, avarice
was added, and rendered their enmity more
rancorous. Eagerness to seize the valuable
forfeitures expected upon the death of every
opponent, shut the door against mercy. To
be wealthy, was of itself sufficient to expose a
man to accusation, or to subjef him to pu-
nifiment. On the fighteft lifpicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabit-
ants in Peru to death. Carvajal, without
searching for any pretext to justify his cruelty,
cut off many more. The number of those
who suffered by the hand of the executioner,

M 3 was

BcoK VI. was not much inferior to what fell in the field ;

,54a. and the greater part was condemned without

the formality of any legal trial.

Adj «- THE violence with which the contending
or , a-.

parties treated their opponents was not ac-
companied with its usual attendants, attach-
ment and fidelity to those with whom they
acted. The ties of honour which are held
sacred among soldiers, and the principle of in-
tegrity, interwoven as thoroughly in the Spa-
nifh character as in that of any nation, seem to
have been equally forgotten. Even regard for
decency, and the sense of shame, were totally
loft. During their dissensions, there was hardly
a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the
party which he had originally espoused, betray
the associates with whom he had united, and
violate the engagements under which he had
come. The viceroy Nugnez Vela was ruined
by the treachery of Cepeda and the other
judges of the roval audience, who were bound
by the duties of their function to have sup-
ported his authority. The chief advisers and
companions of Gonzalo Pizarro's revolt, were
the first to forsake him, and submit to his ene-
mies. His fleet was given up to Gafca, by the

SC N T E XIX.

man

man whom he had tingled out among his of- BooiVI.
ficers to entrust with that important command. ' Si.S
On the day that was to decide his fate, an
army of veterans, in fight of the enemy, threw
down their arms without striking a blow, and
deserted a leader who had often conducted them
to victory. Instances of such general and
avowed contempt of the principles and obli-
gations which attach man to man, and bind
them together in social union, rarely occur in
history. It is only where men are far removed
from the feat of government, where the re-
ftraints of law and order are little felt, where
the profpef of gain is unbounded, and where
imrmenfl wealth may cover the crimes by which
it is acquired, that we can find any parallel to
the levity, the rapacioulhefs, the perfidy and
corruption prevalent among the Spaniards in
IPeru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in Gaca de-

vises e,--

every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and piymcnt
tranquiliity seemed to be perfectly re-efta- i.'sf.ol.
blifhed. But two very interesting obje&ts still
remained to occupy the president's attention.
The one was to find immediately such employ-
ment for a multitude of turbulent and daring
adventurers with which the country was filled,
as mnihr prevent them from exciting new com-

M 4 motions.

BooK VI. motions. The other, to bestow proper grati-

J, - fications upon those to whore loyalty and valour

he was indebted for his success. The former
of there was in some measure accomplished, by
appointing Pedro de Valdivia to prosecute the
conquest of Chili; and by empowering Diego
Centeno to undertake the discovery of the vast
regions bordering on the river De la Plata.
The reputation of thole leaders, and the hopes
of acquiring wealth and riling to conifquence
in some unexplored country, alluring many of
the most indigent and delperate soldiers to fol-
low their standards, drained off no inconfider-
able portion ot that mutinous spirit which Galca
dreaded.

H:· -:t- THE latter was an afair; of greater difculty,
c.O. .:. and to be adiufled v ith a n-ore attentive and
a-v or3 a

!e
;' .....:. delicate hand. The irrci-rt'o;i:cs, or allot-

rents of lands and Indians which fcil to be di-l
tributed, in consequence of the death or for-
fuiture of t'.e former pofifi'fis, exceeded two
nmilions of pesos of ycarly rent . Gafca, when
r.Dw abolute maftcr of this immenil property,
ret:ir.ed the la:ne difinteresed intimnents which
he had originally profelftd, and reful-d to re-

verv e e inallcfi portion of it for himleif.

,V . _ 1 ,

i. ci.
c. C

Bur

But the number of claimants was great; and BooKVI.
whilst the vanity or avarice of every individual z5s.
fixed the value of his own services, and efti-
mated the recompence which he thought due
to him, the pretensions of each were so extra-
vagant, that it was impossible to satisfy all.
Gafca listened to them one by one, with the
most patient attention; and that he might have
leisure to weigh the comparative merit of their
several claims with accuracy, he retired, with
the archbishop of Lima and a single secretary,
to a village twelve leagues from Cuzco. There
he spent several days in allotting to each a
dillridt of lands and number of Indians, in
proportion to his idea of their past services
and future importance. But that he might
get beyond the reach of the fierce itorm of
clamour and rage, which he forelaw would
burit out on the publication of his decree, not-
withstanding the impartial equity with which
he had framed it, he set out for Lima, leaving
the initrument of partition fealed up, with or-
ders not to open it for some days after his de-
parture.

THE indignation excited by publishing the Au.
, 4.

The aliikcn-

decree of partition was not less than Gafca had tent itc-
expected. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, 'on
shame, rage, and all the other passions which

3 most

Boc. VI. most vehemently agitate the minds of men
'7S'. when both their honour and their interest are

deeply affected, conspired in adding to its vio-
lence. It broke out with all the fury of mili-
tary insolence. Calumny, threats, and curies
were poured out openly upon the president.
He was accused of ingratitude, of partiality,
and of injustice. Among soldiers prompt to
action, such seditious discourse would have
been soon followed by deeds no lets violent, and
they already began to turn their eyes towards
some discontented leaders, expecting them to
stand forth in redress of their wrongs. By
some vigorous interpositions of government, a
timely check was given to this mutinous spirit,
and the danger of another civil war was averted
for the present b.

1::,. GA.SCA, however, perceiving that the flame

ti -... . was suppressed rather than extinguiifhed, la-
L:=-, boured with the utmost assiduity to soothe the

malcontents, by bestowing large gratuities on
some, by promiling reparti;ien.tos, when they
fell vacant, to others, and by caressing and
flattering all. But that the public fecuritv
might reft on a foundation more stable than

b Zar.te. lib. vii. c. 9. Goma.e, c. 1

S. ega, p.

lib. vii. c. i. &c. Fcrnandez, p. II. Jib. i, c.
c , &c.

Ic.rera d:;. S. !: b.iv. c. 17,, &tc.

their

their Good affetion, he endeavouredto strength- BooK VI.
cn the hands of his successors in office, by re- 9.
cftablifhing the regular administration of jus-
tice in every part of the empire. He intro-
duced order and simplicity into the mode of
collecing the royal revenue. He issued regu-
iations concerning the treatment of the Indians,
well calculated to protect them from oppression,
and to provide for their inftru&tion in the prin-
ciples of religion, without depriving the Spa-
niards of the benefit accruing from their la-
bour. Having now accomplished every object 1550
of his miflion, Gafca, longing to return again
ro a private station, committed the govern-
ment of Peru to the court of audience, and
set out for Spain. As, during the anarchy Fcb.i;

and lets oqt

and turbulence of the four last years, there had for Spaia.
been no remittance made of the royal revenue,
he carried with him thirteen hundred thousand
pesbs of public money, which the ceconomy
and order of his administration enabled him to
save, after paying all the expenccs of the war.

HE was received in his native country with nis rcerr

tiun thcrc,

universal admiration of his abilities, and of his
virtue. Both were, indeed, highly confpicu-
ous. Without army, or fleet, or public funds;
with a train so simple, that only three thousand

ducats

Boor VI. ducats were expended in equipping him', he

. et out to oppole a formidable rebellion. By

his address and talents he supplied all those de-
sects, and seemed to create initruments for ex-
ecuting his designs. He acquired such a naval
force, as gave him the command of the sea.
He raised a body of men able to cope with the
veteran bands which gave law to Peru. He
vanquished their leader, on whole arms victory
had hitherto attended, and in place of anarchy
and usurpation, he established the government
of laws, and the authority of the rightful so-
vereign. But the praise bellowed on his abi-
lities was exceeded by that which his virtue
merited. After residing in a country where
wealth presented allurements which had fe-
duced every perlbn who had hitherto possessed
power there, he returned from that trying fta-
tion with integrity not only untainted but un-
suspected. After distributing among his coun-
trmen pofeilfions of greater extent and value
than h.d ever been in the dilpofal of a subjei t
in _inv age 0o n.lion, he himself remained in
his uri.inal f'are of poverty; and at the very
rii;w, whx:n he brought such a large recruit to
t rov .ali crcaiurv, he was obliged to apply bv
.cii:!on for a i nll llin to diilha.rge Jome petty

l\,ne..-i'. 'ib. ;

i
. i

debts which he had contra&ed during the course BooK VI.
of his serviced. Charles was not insensible to "

1550.

such disinterested merit. Gafca was received
by him with the most diftinguilhing marks of
eltcem, and being promoted to the bishopric
of Palencia, he passed the remainder of his days
in the tranquillity of retirement, refpeted by
his country, honoured by his sovereign, and
beloved by all.

NOTWITHSTANDING all Gafca's wife regu-

lations, the tranquillity of Peru was not of
long continuance. In a country, where the
authority of government was almost forgotten
during the long prevalence of anarchy and
mi- rule, where there were disappointed leaders
ripe for revolt, and seditious soldiers ready to
follow them, it was not difficult to raise com-
buftion. Several fucceflive infurrecions defo-
lated the country for some years. But as those,
though fierce, were only transient forins, ex-
cited rather by the ambition and turbulence of
particular men, than by general or public mo-
tives, the detail of them is not the object of
this history. These commotions in Peru, like
v -rv thing of extreme violence either in the
natural or political body, were not of long du-

M ViS. per.es me.

ration,

BooK VI. ration, and by carrying off the corrupted hlu-

r50o. mours which had given rife to the disorders, they

contributed in the end to strengthen the so-
cietv which at first they threatened to destroy.
During their fierce conteits, several of the firit
invaders of Peru, and many of rhofe licentious
adventurers whom the fame of their success
had allured thither, fell by each other's hands.
Each of the parties, as they alternately pre-
vailed in the struggle, cleared the country of a
greater number, by executing, proscribing, or
banishing their opponents. Men less enter-
prifing, less desperate, and more accustomed
to move in the path of fober and peaceable in-
duftry, fettled in Peru; and the royal autho-
rity was gradually established as firmly there
as in the other Spanish colonies.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THE

H 1 S T O R Y
HISTORY

o F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VII.
A S the conquest of the two great empires B OO K

of Mexico and Peru forms the most

splendid and interesting period in the history
of America, a view of their political inftitu-
tions, and a description of their national man-
ners, will exhibit the human species to the con-
templation of intelligent obiervers in a very
singular slage of its progress'.

WHEN compared with other parts of theNew Mico
. nd

Peru more
World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered polined

than other

as polished states. Instead of finall, independ- pars of
enr, hostile tribes, itruggling for fubfiltence A ......
.imidrtc woods and marfles, ftrangcrs to in-

See NOTE XX

<. ,1(T

B o o K duftry and arts, unacquainted with fubordi-
*_- nation, and almost without the appearance of

regular government, we find countries of great
extent fLubected to the dominion of one fove-
reigc., the inhabitants collected together in ci-
ties, the witdoin and foresight of rulers em-
plo!ed in providing for the maintenance and
iecurity of the people, the empire of laws in
o-ne meanure established, the authority of re-
ligion recognized, many of the arts essential to
li;c brought to lome degree of maturity, and
the dawn of such as are ornamental beginning

to appear.
The;i.-e- BUT if the comparison be made with the

¾,,'i"' people of the ancient continent, the inferiority
th"e ne"" of America in improvement will be confpicu-

ous, and neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians
vill be entitled to rank with those nations which
merit the name of civilized. The people of
ncth the grea: empires in America, like the
rude tr:bcs around them, were totally unac-
qi.::;.ted v'iiti the u;eful metals, and the pro-
grefs w.i-ch thev had made in extending their
dominion over the animal creation was incon-
fiderable. The Mexicans had gone no farther
than to tame and rear turkeys, duicks, a fpe-
cies of 1nall dogs, and rabbits . By this

feeble

'lcble ciay of ingenuity, the means of subsist- B K-
Clncc were rendered somewhat more plentiful
aidl secure, than when men depend solely on
hunting but they had no idea of attempting
to iubdue the more robust animals, or of de-
rivin g any aid from their ministry in carrying
on works of labour. The Peruvians seem to
have negleeed the inferior animals, and had
not rendered any of them domestic except the
duck ; but they were more fortunate in taming
the Llama, an animal peculiar to their coun-
try, of a form which bears some resemblance to
a deer, and some to a camel, and of a size
somewhat larger than a sleep. Under the pro-
tection of man, this Ipecies multiplied greatly.
Its wool furnished the Peruvians with clothing,
its lcllh with food. It was even employed as a
beatl of burden, and carried a moderate load
with much patience and docility'. It was
never used for draught; and the breed being
confined to the mountainous country, its fe/-
vice, if we may judge by incidents which oc-
cur in the early Spanilh writers, was not very
extenlive among the Peruvians in their original
slate.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed
towards civilization, the discovery of the use-

Vega, p. i. lib. viii. c. 16. Zarate, lib, i. c. 14.
VOl.. III. N ful

B 0 K ful metals, and the acquisition of dominion

Vii.
L-,-~i over the animal creation, have-been marked as

fReps of capital importance in their progress.
In our continent, long after men had attained
both, society continued in that slate which is
denominated barbarous. Even with all that
command over nature which there confer, ma-
ny ages elapse, before industry becomes so per-
set as to render subsistence secure, before the
arts which supply the wants and furnish the ac-
commodations of life are invented, and before
any idea is conceived of the various institutions
requifire in a well-ordered society. The Mex-
icans and Peruvians, without knowledge of the
useful metals, or the aid of domestic animals,
laboured under disadvantages which must have
greatly retarded their progress, and in their
highest state of improvement, their power was
so limited, and their operations so feeble, that
they can hardly be confidered as having ad-
vanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

AFTER this general observation concerning
tafti:nnioi '-........s the most finguiar and distinguishing circum-

stance in the stare of both the great empires in
America, I shall endea;-our to give such a view
of the constitution a-d interior police of each,
as may en-able us to afcerzain their place in the
poticaiT scale, to lilot tcmr their proper fta-

6 rion

tion between the rude tribes in the New World; BO K
and the polished states of the ancient, and to '
determine how far they had risen above the
former, as well as how much they fell below the
latter.

MEXIco was first fubjeted to the Spanifth Imfpeeti

information
crown. But our acquaintance with its laws concernin

those of

and manners is not, from that circumftancej Mcxico.
more complete. What I have remarked con-
cerning the defective and inaccurate inform-
ation on which we must rely with refpec to the
condition and customs of the savage tribes in
America, may be applied likewise to our know-
ledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes, and the
rapacious adventurers who accompanied him,
had not leisure or capacity to enrich either civil
or natural history with new observations. They
undertook their expedition in quest of one ob-
ject, and seemed hardly to have turned their
eyes towards any other. Or, if during some
short interval of tranquillity, when the occu-
pations of war ceased; and the ardour of plun-
der was suspended, the institutions and man-
ners of the people whom they had invaded
drew their attention, the inquiries of illiterate
soldiers were conducted with so little sagacity
and precision, that the accounts given by them
of the policy and order eftablilhed in the Mex-

N a ican

o, 0o ican monarchy are superficial, confused, and
v-- " inexplicable. It is rather from incidents which

they relate occasionally, than from their own
deductions and remarks, that we are enabled
to form some idea of the genius and manners
of that people. The obscurity in which the
ignorance of its conquerors involved the an-
nals of Mexico, v-as augmented by the super-
frition of those e'ho succeeded them. As the
memory of past events was preserved among
the Mexicans by figures painted on skins, on
cotton cloth, or on the bark of trees, the early
miflionaries, unable to comprehend their mean-
ing, and struck with their uncouth forms, con-
ceived them to be monuments of idolatry
which ought to be deitroved, in order to fa-
cilitate the converfioi of the Indians. In obe-
dience to an edict issued by Juan de Zumma-
raga, a Franciscan monk, the first bishop of
Mexico, those records of the ancient Mexican
f:o-v which could be colleced were committed
to the Pames. In consequence of this fanatical
ze-l of the monks who first visited New Spain,
and which their successors loon began to la-
mi.tr, whatever knowledge of remote events
such rude monuments contained was almioft en-
tirelv loi,, and no information remained con-
cerning the ancient revolutions and policy of the
empire, but what was derived from tradition,

or

or fromn some fragments of their historical paint- B Ol K
ings that escaped the barbarous researches of i-
Zumnaraga 1. From the experience of all na-
tions it is manifest, that the memory of past
trantlations can neither be long preserved, nor
be tranfinitted with any fidelity, by tradition.
The Mexican paintings, which are supposed to
have served as annals of their empire, are few
in number, and of ambiguous meaning. Thus
amidst the uncertainty of the former, and the
obcui-ity of the latter, we must glean what
intelligence can be colle&ed from the scanty
materials scattered in the Spanish writers.

AcCORDING to the account of the Mexicans Origin of

the Mexi-

themselves, their empire was not of long dura- can mo-
tion. Their country, as they relate, was n'"'h
originally poffeifed, rather than peopled, by
finall independent.tribes, whose mode of life
and manners resembled those of the rudest
savages which we have described. But about
a period corresponding to the beginning of the
tenth century in the Christian ara, several
tribes moved in successive migrations from
unknown regions towards the north and north-

d Acofta, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquem. Proem. lib. ii,
lib. iii. c. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

N 3 weft,

B 0 0

v weft, and fettled in different provinces of Ana-
VII.
---- buc, the ancient name of New Spain. These,

more civilized than the original inhabitants,
began to form them to the arts of social life.
At length, towards the commencement of the
thirteenth century, the Mexicans, a people
more polished than any of the former, advanced
from the border of the Californian gulf, and
took poffeflion of the plains adjacent to a great
lake near the centre of the country. After re-
fiding there about fifty years, they founded
a town, since distinguished by the name of
Mexico, which from humble beginnings soon
grew to be the most considerable city in the New
World. The Mexicans, long after they were
eflablifhed in their new possessions, continued,
like other martial tribes in America, unac-
quainted with regal dominion, and were go-
verned in peace, and conducted in war, by
such as were entitled to pre-eminence by their
wisdom or their valour. But among them, as
in other states whose power and territories be-
come extensive, the supreme authority centred
at last in a single person and when the Spa-
niards under Cortes invaded the country,
Monrezuma was the ninth monarch in order
who had swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by
,hereditary right, but by elecion,

SUCH

SUCH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans BOO

concerning the progress of their own empire. --,--i
According to this, its duration was very short. Very ec"nt
From the first migration of their parent tribe,
they can reckon little more than three hundred
years. From the eftablithment of monarchical
government, not above a hundred and thirty
years, according to one account', or a hun-
dred and ninety-feven, according to another
computation f, had elapsed. If, on one hand,
we suppose the Mexican state to have been of
higher antiquity, and to have subsisted during
lich a length of time as the Spanish accounts
ojf its civilization would naturally lead us to
conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, among

people who possessed the art of recording

events by pictures, and who confidered it as
an eliential part of their national education, to
teach their children to repeat the historical
sings which celebrated the exploits of their
ancet[ors l, the knowledge of past tranfaftions
iLot)ld be lb slender and limited. If, on the
orher hand, we adopt their own system with
:erpcit to the antiquities of their nation, it is
no lecis difficult to account either for that im-
orovcd state of society, or for the extensive

olt. Hill. li). vi. c. 8, &c, f Purchas
:a.': ;[ i. p. lo0., &c. e Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii.

N 4 domi-

B o co dominion to which their empire had attained,

r---a when firit visited b.- the Spaniards. The in-

fancy of nations is to long, and, even when
every circumstance is favourable to their pro-
grefs, they advance so flowlv towards any ma-
turi;t of strength or policv, that the recent
origin of the Mexicans seems to be a strong
prefunption of son-e c aggeration, in the
splendid deicriptions. hich have been given of
their governmce;: and manncrs.

r.:!,,.'.Y BUT it is not by theorv or conjectures that
i-: .i bhillory decides, with regard to the state or

character of nations. It produces facts as the
foundation of every judgment which it ven-
rures to pronounce. In collecting those which
mu;t regulate our opinion in the present in-
quirv, 'orne occur that f.agget an idea of con-
fiderable progref in civ:iiization in the Mexican
empire, and o:rhers .whih iFem to indicate that
it had advanced but li:tle beyond the savage
tribes around it. Both lhall be exhibited to
the view of the reader, that, from comparing
therr, he may deter:r.ine on which fide the
evidence preponderates.
T.--,,:.c- THE r.:-h: of p.iva.te property was perfcily

i: - unrerRftuo, ar.d efliablilhe.l in i:s fu!ll extent.

Ameong lI\-ra] .-. .,- c:i[ c-- w.C hwave seen,

that

that the idea of a title to the separate and ex- n o r-
cijefve poifeflion of any object was hardly -y--
known; and that among all, it was extremely
limited and ill-defined. But in Mexico, where
ngriculture and industry had made some pro-
r-trls, the distinction between real and move-
able npofeffions, between property in land and
p . .-r:.- in goods, had taken place. Both
nii:lt C'e transferred from one perlon to ano-
tli;c bLv ile or barter; both might descend by
ir.h--italnce. Every person who could be de-
nominated a free man had property in land.
Tl'i., however, they held by various tenures.
Some possessed it in full right, and it descended
to their heirs. The title of others to their
lands was derived from the office or dignity
which they enjoyed; and when deprived of the
latter, they loft poffefinon of the former. Both
thele modes of occupying land were deemed
noble, and peculiar to citizens of the highest
claf;. The tenure, by which the great body
of the people held their property, was very
difrirent. In every diltrict a certain quantity
of land was measured out, in proportion to
the number of families. This was cultivated
bv the joint labour of the who!i its produce
v.as dcpofited in a common Ilorehoule, and
divided among them according to their re-
!:'ctive exigencies. The membcrs of the Cal-

5 1kp:llee,

B OOK puleee, or aflociations, could not alienate their

- ihare of the common estate; it was an indivi-

fible permanent property, destined for the
lupport of their families ". In consequence of
this diltribution of the territory of the itate,
every man had an interest in its welfare, and
the happineis of the individual was connected
with the public fecuriry,

r--,, :

OE of the most striking circumifances,

...;.. .:;. which diftin=guilhes the Mexican empire from
C':... thole nations in America we have already de-

fcribed, is the number and greatness of its
cities. While society continues in a rude state,
the wants of men are so few, and they stand so
li::1e in need of mutual assistance, that their
iniucements to crowd together are extremely
feeble. Their industry at the fame time is so
inrperfect, that it cannot secure subsistence for
arv conliderable number of families fettled in
" ~ 'J"': They live dispersed, at this period,
irulm choice as well as from necessity, or at the
utmoil alTemble in frmall hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or
on the bordter of :boe plain left open by nature,
cr c:ca:red by their own labour. The Spa-

.::.-e:-, dec. 3. libi c. 1. . Torquem. Mon.
I.' ':-. \ ." . .-. Coria2, MS.

niards.

piards, accustomed to this mode of habitation B O KX
among all the savage tribes with which they -
were then acquainted, were astonished, on
entering New Spain, to find the natives re-
fiding in towns of such extent as resembled
those of Europe. In the first fervour of their
admiration, they compared Zempoalla, though
a town only of the second or third size, to
the cities of greatest note in their own coun-
try. When, afterwards, they visited in fuc-
cefflon Tlafcala, Cholula, Tacuba, Tezeuco,
and Mexico itself, their amazement increased
ft much, that it led them to convey ideas of
their magnitude and populousness bordering
on what is incredible. Even when there is
leisure for observation, and no interest that
leads to deceive, conjectural estimates of the
number of people in cities are extremely loose,
and usually much exaggerated. It is not fur-
prifing, then, that Cortes and his companions,
little accustomed to such computations, and
powerfully tempted to magnify, in order to
exalt the merit of their own discoveries and
conquests, fiould have been betrayed into this
con-mmon error, and have raised their defcrip-
tions considerably above truth. For this rea-
son, fotne considerable abatement ought to be
made from their calculation of the number of
inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may

fix

B O 0 K fix the standard of their population much lower
i-,Ji than thev have done; but 1till they will appear

to be cities of such consequence, as are not
to be found but among people who have made
some considerable progress in the arts of social
life . Mexico, the capital of the empire,
seems to have contained sixty thousand inha-
bitants.

Tt "...- THE separation of prof,[Tions among the
i,1.-.,.' Mexicans is a symptom of improvement no

less remarkable. Arts, in the early ages of
ibciety, are so few and so simple, that each
man is fufifciendty master of them all, to gra-
tify every demand of his own limited desires.
The savage can form his bow, point his ar-
rows, rear his hut, and hollow his canoe,
without calling in the aid of any hand more
skilful than his own. Time muit have aug-
mrented the wants of men, and ripened their in-
c-nuitv, before the productions of art became
lb complicated in their itructure, or so curious
in their fabric, that a particular course of edu-
carion was requisite towards forming the arti-
sicer to expertness in contrivance and work-
manship. In proportion as refinement spreads,
the difintion of profefilons increaces, and
they branch out into more numerous and mi-

: S -e NOTE XXI.

nute

nute subdivisions. Among the Mexicans, this BOOlK
separation of the arts necessary in life had taken '
place to a considerable extent. The functions
of the mason, the weaver, the goldfinith, the
painter, and of several other crafts, were car-
ried on by different persons. Each was regu-
.irlv inftruted in his calling. To it alone
his induflry was confined; and by assiduous
application to one object, together with tile
perlevering patience peculiar to Americans,
their artizans attained to a degree of neatness
and perfection in work far beyond what could
have been expeced from the rude tools which
they employed. Their various productions
were brought into commerce; and by the ex-
change of them in the stated markets held ir.
the cities, their mutual wants were supplied k,
in such orderly intercourse as characterizes an
improved state of society.

THE diltinction of ranks eftablifhled in the Tieilii;nc-

Mexican empire is the next circumstance that ,ilkt.
merits attention. In surveying the savage
tribes of America, we observed, that conscious-
ne!s of equality, and impatience of fubordi-
nation, are sentiments natural to man in the

k Cortes Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 239, &c. Gom. Cron.

cr . - I. 'orquem. lib. xiii. c. 34. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii.
C. 1., &SC.

infancy

B ,0 0 K infancy of civil life. During peace, the atr-

,
--. _. thority of a superior is hardly felt among them,

and even in war it is but little acknowledged.
Strangers to the idea of property, the differ-
ence in condition resulting from the inequa-
lity of it is unknown. Birth or titles confer
no pre-eminence; it is only by personal merit
and accomplishments that distinction can be
acquired. The form of society was very dif-
ferent among the Mexicans. The great body
of the people was in a most humiliating lfate.
A considerable number, known by the name
of Mayequcs, nearly resembling in condition
those peasants who, under various denomina-
tions, were confidered, during the prevalence
of the feudal system, as instruments of labour
attached to the foil. The ,Mayeques could not
change their place of residence without permif-
flon of the superior on whom they depended.
They were conveyed, together with the lands
on which they were fettled, from one proprie-
tor to another; and were bound to cultivate
the ground, and to perform several kinds of
servile work'. Others were reduced to the
lowest form of subjection, that of domestic
servitude, and felt the utmost r:gour of that
wretched state. Their condition was held to

I Hrre.:-. dec. ;'. iv. C. T-. Ccrita, MS.

be

be lo vile, and their lives deemed to be of so B °o K
little value, that a person who killed one of A
those slaves was not fubjcced to any punish-
ment m. Even those confidered as freemen
were treated by their haughty lords as beings
of an inferior species. The nobles, pofreffed
of ample territories, were divided into various
classes, to each of which peculiar titles of
honour belonged. Some of these titles, like
their lands, descended from father to son in
perpetual succession. Others were annexed to
particular offices, or conferred during life as
marks of personal diffintion". The monarch,
exalted above all, enjoyed extensive power,
and supreme dignity. Thus the diftinstion of
ranks was completely established, in a line of
regular subordination, reaching from the high-
eft to the lowest member of the community.
Each of there knew what he could claim, and
what he owed. The people, who were not
allowed to wear a dress of the fame fashion, or
to dwell in houles of a form similar to those of
the nobles, accosted them with the most sub-
miflive reverence. In the presence of their
fovcreign, they durst not lift their eyes fiom
the ground, or look him in the face . The

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7.
lerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Corita, MS.
o Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14.

nobles

To OK nobles themselves, when admitted to an audi-
,-. · ence of their sovereign, entered bare-footed,

in mean garments, and, as his slaves, paid
hin homage approaching to adoration. This
rcl-pcci due from inferiors to those above them
in rank, was established with such ceremonious
accuracy, that it incorporated with the lan-
guage, and infiuenced its genius and idiom.
Tnc Mexican tongue abounded in expressions
of reverence and courtesy. The stile and ap-

a'i.l:ions, usid in the intercourse between

cc'i:a, w.ould have been so inbecoming in
t!he imolthl of one in a lower sphere, when he

r-:of:ed a t'peron in higher rank, as to be

dcc:.-.e an in l:. . It is only in societies,
xwh;icll ti:r.e and the institution of regular
governmen.. i :ave r.ouided into form, that we
f.nd iuch an orderly arrangement of men into
di;T-cent ra.nks, and fluch nice attention paid
;o t'.::.r vario-us rgiihs.

T-. r- i Tize fi;irit of the Mlexicans, thus familiarized
t .
;''-'' .i- ber.:ed to fiubordination, was prepared

:ir ::b:;-.itiing to monarchical government.
B'::, ti;c ;cri or.e-.s of their policy and laws,
-v. ;:. Spaia-rds who overturned them, are so
i::;.::;.::- .:::d co.-:-adictory, tha: it is difficult

; --NOTE, XX.I.

to

to delineate the form of their constitution with B o0°
any precision. Sometimes they represent the '-
monarchs of Mexico as absolute, deciding ac-
cording to their pleasure, with refpeat to every
operation of the state. On other occasions, we
discover the traces of established customs and
laws, framed in order to circumscribe the
power of the crown, and we meet with rights
and privileges of the nobles which seem to be
opposed as barriers against its encroachments.
This appearance of inconsistency has arisen
from inattention to the innovations of Monte-
zuma upon the Mexican policy. His aspiring
ambition subverted the original system of go-
vernment, and introduced a pure despotism.
IIe disregarded the ancient laws, violated the
privileges held most sacred, and reduced his
fubjeets of every order to the level of slaves .
The chiefs, or nobles of the first rank, sub-
mitted to the yoke with such reluctance, that,
from impatience to shake it off, and hope of
recovering their rights, many of them courted
the protection of Cortes, and joined a foreign
power against their domestic oppressor'. It is
not then under the dominion of Montezuma,

Hcrlcr., dec. 3. lib. ii. c 14. Torquem. lib. ii.

c. 69. ' Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. lo, 1.
Torqucmr. lib. iv. c. 49.

VOL. III. 0 but

B oo K but under the government of Lis predecessors$
*-,-- . that we can discover what was the original

form and genius of Mexican policy. From
the foundation of the monarchy, to the election
of Montezuma, it teems to have subsisted with
little variation. That body of citizens, which
may be distinguished by the name of nobility,
formed the chief and most refpetable order in
the state. They were of various ranks, as has
already been observed, and their honours were
acquired and transmittcd in different manners.
Their number seems to have been great. Ac-
cording to an author accustomed to examine
with attention what he relates, there were in
the Mexican empire thirty of this order, each
of whom had in his territories about a hundred
thoufindpeople, and flbordinate to there, there
were about three thousand nobles of a lower
class'. The territories belonging to the chiefs
of Tezeuco and Tacuba, .ere hardly inferior
in extent to those of the Mexican monarch ".
Each of there pofefied complete territorial
jurisdiction, and levied taxes from their own
vaffats. But all followed the standard of Mex-
ico in war, serving with a number of men in
proportion to their domain, and inoft of

t Herrera., dec. :. fib. iii. c. 12.
' Tcr:e. !:b. ii. c. 5 -'. C ri:, .thS.

]i~~~ ~~them

them paid tribute to its monarch as their fupe- B o°:
rior lord. . '

IN tracing those great lines of the Melv icatt

conftittion, an image of feudal policy in its
most rigid form rites to view, and we discern
its three diftinguiihing characeriftics, a nobi-
lity poffefling almost independent authority, a
people depressed into the lowest state of sub-
jedion, and a king entrusted with the executive
power of the state. Its spirit and principles
seem to have operated in the New World in
the fame manner, as in the ancient. The
jurifdition of the crown was extremely limited.
All real and effecive authority was retained
by the Mexican nobles in their own hands,'
and the shadow of it only left to the king.
Jealous to excess of their own rights, they
guarded with most vigilant anxiety against the
encroachments of their sovereigns. By a fun-
damental law of the empire, it was provided
that the king should not determine concerning
any point of general importance, without the
approbation of a council composed of the prime
nobility'. Unless he obtained their consent
he could not engage the nation in war, nor

x errera, dec. 3. lib . i .

c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv.
c- 16. Corita, MS.

0 2 could

B o K could he dispose of the most considerable

- ' branch of the public revenue at pleasure; it

was appropriated to certain purposes from
which it could not be diverted by the regal
authiariy y. In order to secure full effe& to
those conititutional restraints, the Mexican
nobles did not permit their crown to descend
b. inheritance, but disposed of it by election.
The right of election seems to have been ori-
ginallv vested in the whole body of nobility,
bu: was afterwards committed to fix electors,
of whom the Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba
were always two. From respect for the family
of their monarchs, the choice fell generally
upon tome person sprung from it. But as the
activhtv and valour of their prince were of
greater moment to a people perpetually en-
gaged in war, than a striA adherence to the
order of birth, collaterals of mature age or
diftiniuifhed merit were often preferred to
those who were nearer the throne in diret de-
scent . To this maxim, in their policy, the
Mexicans appear to be indebted for such a
succession of able and warlike princes, as raised
their empire in a short period to that extraor-

:' H rrer -, 3doe . 'lib. i'. c. 17.

Acr 'a, 1:. . ;. c. :-. H rr?.'- , d?' . 3. lib. 1L

c. :!. Co.i:,
: ,..

<Ji.-,.aryv

dinary height of power, which it had attained B 00 K
when Cortes landed in New Spain.

WHILE the jurifdition of the Mexican Power and

Iplendour of

monarchs continued to be limited, it is pro- their .o-
bable that it was exercised with little oftenta- nchs.
tion. But as their authority became more
extensive, the splendour of their government
augmented. It was in this last state that the
Spaniards beheld it, and struck with the ap-
pearance of Montezuma's court, they describe
its pomp at great length, and with much ad-
miration. The number of his attendants, the
order, the silence, and the reverence with
which they served him; the vast extent of his
royal mansion, the variety of its apartments
allotted to different officers, and the oflentation
with which his grandeur was displayed, when-
ever he permitted his subje&s to behold him,
seem to resemble the magnificence of the anci-
ent monarchies in Asia, rather than the fimpli-
city of the infant states in the New World..

BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty Order of

that the Mexican potentates exhibited their tveir mn
power, they manifested it more beneficially in
the order and regularity with which they con-
ducted the internal administration and police of
their dominions. Complete jurifdi&ion, civil

0 3 as

B o0 K as well as criminal, over its own immediate
'-- vassals, was vested in the crown. Judges were

appointed for each department, and if we may
rely on the account which the Spanish writers
give of the maxims and laws upon which they
founded their decisions with refpeA to the dif-
tribution of property and the punishment of
crimes, juffice was administered in the Mexi-
can empire, with a degree of order and equity,
resembling what takes place in societies highly
civilized.

Powrsion THEIR attention in providing for the sup-
for the f-p-
porof i:. port of government was not less sagacious.

Taxes were laid upon land, upon the acquifi-
tions of induitrv, and upon commodities of
every kind exposed to sale in the public mar-
kets. These duties, though considerable, were
nor arbitrary, or unequal. They were imposed
according to established rules, and each knew
what share of the common burden he had'to
bear. As the use of money was unknown, all
the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
the natural productions of all the different pro-
vinces in the empire, but every species of
manufacture, and every work of ingenuity and
art, were colleIed in the public store-houses.
From those the emperor supplied his numerous
train of attendants in peace, and his armies

during

during war, with food, with clothes, and oxna- B$, K
ments. People of inferior condition, neither i
poffefling land nor engaged in commerce, were
bound to the perfonnance of various services.
By their flated labour the crown-lands were
cultivated, public works were carried on, and
the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built and kept in repair'.

THE improved state of government among Their po.

the Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points
essential to the being of a well-ordered society,
but in several regulations of inferior confe-
quence with refpet to police. The institution,
which I have already mentioned, of public
couriers, stationed at proper intervals, to con-
vey intelligence from one part of the empire
to the other, was a refinement in police not
introduced into any kingdom of Europe at
that period. The itruRture of the capital city
in a lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways
of great length, which served as avenues to it
from different quarters, ere&ed in the water,
with no less ingenuity than labour, seems to be
an idea that could not have occurred to any
but a civilized people. The fame observation

Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib; 'v.
c. 16, 17, See NOTE XXIII.

0 4 may

BDOo K may be applied to the structure of the aque-

ViI.
- ' ducts, or conduits, by which they conveyed a

itream of fresh water, from a considerable
distance, into the city, along one of the cause-
ways '. The appointment of a number of
persons to clean the streets, to light them by
fires kindled in different places, and to patrole
as watchmen during the night , discovers a
degree of attention which even polilhed nations
are laze in acquiring.
Ti.: . THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts

is confidered as the moit dccifive proof of their
superior refinement. Cortes, and the early
Spani;il authors, dercribe this with rapture, and
maintain, -that the most celebrated European
ar;thls could not iurpa!s or even equal them in
ingenuity and neatnelf of workmanlhip. They
reprcl:nted men, animals, and other objects,
by such a disposition of various coloured sea-
thers, as is said to have produced all the effcsts
of light and ihade, and to have imitated nature
vwih truth and delicacy. Their ornaments of
gold and silver have been described to be of a
fabric no less curious. But in forming any
idea, frclm general dcfcriptions, concerning

' See NOTE XXIV.
.; .U."or-X-c: j,:.
c li:i. C. 4. Torr;bi?, MS.

the

the slate of arts among nations imperfetly BOOK
poliihed, we are extremely ready to err. In *..-v-
examining the. works of people whose advances
in improvement are nearly the fame with our
own, we view them with a critical, and often
with a jealous eye. Whereas, when conscious
of our own superiority, we survey the arts of
nations comparatively rude, we are aftonilhed
at works executed by them under such mani-
fest disadvantages, and in the warmth of our
admiration, are apt to represent them as pro-
dutions more finished than they really are.
To the influence of this illusion, without sup-
poling any intention to deceive, we may im-
pute the exaggeration of tome Spanilh authors,
in their accounts of the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but fi-om

confidering such specimens of their arts as are
frill preserved, that we mufft decide concerning
their degree of merit. As the ship in which
Cortes sent to Charles V. the moit curious
productions of the Mexican artisans, which
were collected by the Spaniards when they first
pillaged the empire, was taken by a French
corsair d, the remains of their ingenuity are less
numerous than those of the Peruvians. Whe-

d Relac. de Cort. Ramus. iii. 294, F.

ther

BOO K ther.any-of their works with feathers, in imi-

,-_- tation of painting, be still extant in Spain, I

have not learned but many of their orna-
ments in gold and -ilver, as well as various
utensils employed in common life, are depo-
fired in the magnificent cabinet of natural and
artificial producions, lately opened by the
king of Spain; and I am informed, by persons
on whose judgment and taste I can rely, that
these boasted efforts of their art are uncouth
representations of common objects, or very
coarse images of the human and some other
forms, destitute of grace and propriety . The
justness of these observations is confirmed by
inspecting the wooden prints or copper-plates
of their paintings, which have been published
by various authors. In them every figure of
men, of quadrupeds, or birds, as well as every
representation of inanimated nature, is ex-
tremely rude and aukward. The hardest
Egyptian stile, stiff and imperfec as it was, is
more elegant. The scrawls of children deli-
peare objects almost as accurately,

BuTr however low the Mexican paintings

mav be ranked, when viewed merely as works
of art, a very different station belongs to them,

See NOTE XXV.

when

when conrfidered as the records of their coun, BOOK
try, as hiftoricalmonuments of its policy and _-
tranfati6ons ; 'anid they become curious as well
as intereftirig objets of attention. The noblest
and most beneficial invention of which humian
ingenuity can boast, is that of writing. But
the firit essays of this art, which hath contri-
buted more than all others to the inprovement
of the species, were very rude, and it ad-
vanced towairds perfection slowly, and, by a
gradual progrefion. When the warrior, eager
for fame, wished to tranfinit some knowledge
of his explbits to succeeding ages; when the
gratitude of a people to their sovereign
prompted them to hand down an account of
his beneficent deeds to posterity; the firit
method of accomplishing this, that seems to
have occurred to them, was to delineate, in the
best manner they could, figures representing
the action of which they were solicitous to pre-
serve the memory. Of this, which has very
properly been called piT7ure-wriiting', we find
traces among some of the most savage tribes
of America. When a leader returns from the
field, he strips a tree of its bark, and with
red paint scratches upon it some uncouth
figures, which represent the order of his march,

t Divine Legat. of Moses, iii. 73.

the

B o o. the nymber of his followers, the enemy whom

- he arracked, the_ scalps and captives which he

brought home. To those simple annals he
trulfs for renown, and sootheS himself with
hope that by their means he shall receive praise
from the warriors of future times .

COMPARED with those aukward essays of their

savage counutymen, the paintings of the Mexi-
cans may be confidered as worksof compofitior)
and design. They were not acquainted, it is
true, with any other method of recording
tranfaaions, than that of delineating the ob-,
jecs which they wifned to repre ent. But they
could exhibit a more complex series of events
in progressive order, and describe, by a proper
diipofition of figures, the occurrences of a
king's reign from his accession to his death;
the progress of an infant's education from its
birth until it attained to the years of matu-
rity; the different recompences and marks of
difrinjtion conferred upon warriors, in pro-
portion to the exploits which they had per-
formed. Somre fngular specimens of this
picure-wriu;ing have been preserved, % hich
are justly confidered as the most curious monu-

g S.i W. Johnfron Phil'o. Tranrfa. aol. xolii. p. 43;
\Mer. de la Hon:an. ii. 19i. Lafitau, Mceurs de
S fuv. . 43.

ments

ments of art brought from the New World. B O°: K
The most valuable of these was published by .--.-.
Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is divided into
three parts. The first contains the history of
the Mexican empire under its ten monarchs;
The second is a tribute-roll, representing what
each conquered town paid into the royal trea-
fury. The third is a code of their institutions,
domestic, political, and military. Another
specimen of Mexican painting has been pub-
lifhed in thirty-two plates, by the present
archbishop of Toledo. To both are annexed
a full explanation of what the figures were in-
tended to represent, which was obtained by
the Spaniards from Indians well acquainted
with their own arts. The style of painting in
all there is the fame. They represent things,
not words. They exhibit images to the eye,
not ideas to the understanding. They may,
therefore, be confidered as the earliest and
moll imrperfet essay of men in their progress
towards discovering the art of writing. The
defecs in this mode of recording tranfactiohs
mufi have been early felt. To paint every
occurrence was, from its nature, a very tedi-
ous operation; and as affairs became more
complicated, and events multiplied in any
society, its annals muff have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Betides this, no objects could

3 be

BOOK be'delneated but those of sense; the conceFp
-,. rtions of the mind had no corporeal form, and

as long as picture-writing could not convey ari
idea of these, it muff have been a very im-
perfec art. The necessity of - improving it
must have rouzed and sharpened invention, and
the human mind holding the fame course in
the New World as in the Old, might have ad-
vanced by the fame successive steps, first, from
an actual picure to the plain hieroglyphic;
next, to the allegorical symbol; then to the
arbitrary character; until, at length, an al-
phabet of letters was discovered, capable of
expressing all the various combinations of
found employed in speech. In the paintings
of the Mexicans we, accordingly, perceive,
that this progress was begun among them,
Upon an attentive infpe&tion of the plates,
which I have mentioned, we may observe
some approach to the plain or simple hiero-
glyphic, where some principal part or circum-
stance in the fubjecc is made to stand for the
whole. In the annals of their kings, published
by Purchas, the towns conquered by each are
uniformly represented in the fame manner by a,
rude delineation of a house; but in order to
point out the particular towns which submitted
to their victorious arms, peculiar emblems,
fomer.imes natural objects, and Sometimes arti-

ficial

ficial figures, are.,employed. .In the,.jIbute- BK
roll, publfhed ;by the archbishp. of Togledo, -
the house,., which was properly the piture .of-
the town, is omitted, and the emblem aloni
is employed, to represent it. The Mexicans
seem even to have made some advances beyond
this, towards the use of the more figurative
and fanciful hieroglyphic. In order to describe
a monarch, who had enlarged his dominions.
by force of arms, they painted a target orna-
mented with darts, and placed it between him
and those towns which he subdued. But it is
only in one instance, the notation of numberst:
that we discern any attempt to exhibit ideap
which had no corporeal form. The Mexican
painters had invented artificial marks, orfign_
of convention, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be-
paid into the royal treasury. The figure of a-a
circle represented unit, and in fnall numbers,
the computation was made by repeating.
it. Larger numbers were expressed by a
peculiar mark, and they had such as de-
noted all integral numbers, from twenty to
eight thousand. The short duration of their
empire prevented the Mexicans from advancing
farther in that long course which conducts men
from the labour of delineating real objects, to

the

BOOK the fimpliciry and ease of alphabetic writing.

Their records, no6withfianding some dawn of
such ideas as might have led to a more perfect
style, can be confidered as nothing more than
a species of picture-writing, so far improved
as to mark their superiority over the savage
tribes of America, but still so defective is to
prove ' --: :'~v had not proceeded far be-
yond the firi lrage in rhat progress which must
be completed before any people can be ranked
among polished nations c

Th-:r me THEIR mode of computing time may be
i:, C=. confidered as a more decisive evidence of their

progress in improvement. They divided their
year into eighteen months, each consisting of
twenty days, amounting in all to three hun-
dred and sixty. But as they observed that the
course of the fun was not completed in that
tine, they added five days to the year. These,
which were properly intercalary days, they
termed Cuernzunmera ryor cwafie; and as they did
not belong to any month, no work was done,
and no sacred rite performed on them ; they
were devoted wholly to festivity and paitime .
This near approach to philofph ic.! accuracy is
a remarkable proof that the Mexicans had be-

-See NO T XXVI. lAccia, lib. vi. c. 2.

lo',ved

flowed some attention upon inquiries and fpe- B ° ° K
culations, to which men in a very rude itate 'v-
never turn their thoughts.

SucH are the most itriking particulars in the Faas nd;i

manners and policy of the Mexicans, which rnml pro-
exhibit them to view as a people considerably llzaon'
refined. From other circumstances, one is apt
to fufpet that their character, and many of
their institutions, did not differ greatly from
those of the other inhabitants of America.

LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mex- Their wars

icans were incessantly engaged in war, and the ondfero
motives which prompted them to hostility seem "

o

to have been the fame. They fought, in or-
der to gratify their vengeance, by shedding the
blood of their enemies. In battle they were
chiefly intent on taking prisoners, and it was
by the number of these that they estimated the
glory of victory. No captive was ever ran-
fomed or spared. All were sacrificed without
mercy, and their fleih devoured with the fame
barbarous joy as among the fiercest savages.
On some occasions it rose to even wilder excesses.
Their principal warriors covered themselves
with the skins of the unhappy vicims, and
danced about the streets, boasting of their own

VOL. III. P valour,

BOoK the fimpliciry and ease of alphabetic writing.
-. -- Their records, notwithstanding ornme dawn of

such ideas as might have led to a more perfect
style, can be confidered as nothing more than
a species of pi&ture-writing, so far improved
as to mark their superiority over the savage
tribes of America, but still so defective as to
prove -. :L 'v had not proceeded far be-
yond the first itage in that progress which muff
be completed before any people can be ranked
among polished nations c

Thb;; t-T THEIR mode of computing time may be
of c.rp.u:-
i- t.... confidered as a more decisive evidence of their

progress in improvement. They divided their
year into eighteen months, each consisting of
twenty davs, amounting in all to three hun-
dred and sixty. But as they observed that the
course of the fun was not completed in that
ri;e, they added five days to the year. These,
which were properly intercalary days, they
tei med fiternrumerary or waje; and as they did
not belong to any month, no work was done,
and no sacred rite performed on them; they
were devoted wholly to festivity and pastime r.
This near approach to phiiofophic?! accuracy is
a remarkable proof that the Mexicans had be-

*-S e N 0 E XXVI. A \cc.;a, lib. vi. c. z.

fto-ved

stowed some attention upon inquiries and fpe- B °o° K
culations, to which men in a very rude itate -J
never turn their thoughts.

SUCH are the most ifriking particulars in the Faets nda.

manners and policy of the Mexicans, which fmai po-
exhibit them to view as a people considerably ,ilization.
refined. From other circumstances, one is apt
to fufpe& that their character, and many of
their institutions, did not differ greatly from
those of the other inhabitants of America.

LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mex- Their wars

icans were incessantly engaged in war, and the c'nonU.l
motives which prompted them to hostility seem O"'u
to have been the fame. They fought, in or-
der to gratify their vengeance, by shedding the
blood of their enemies. In battle they were
chiefly intent on taking prisoners, and it was
by the number of these that they estimated the
glory of victory. No captive was ever ran-
fomed or spared. All were sacrificed without
mercy, and their flesh devoured with the fame
barbarous joy as among the fiercest savages.
On some occasions it rose to even wilder excesses.
Their principal warriors covered themselves
with the skins of the unhappy vi&ims, and
danced about the streets, boasting of their own

VOL. III. P valour,

B 00 valour, and exulting over their enemies

-- Even in their civil institutions we discover

traces of that barbarous disposition which their
system of war inspired. The four chief coun-
fellors of the empire were diftinguified by atro-
cious titles, which could have been assumed
only by a people who delighted in bloodg.
This ferocity of charaaer prevailed among all
the nations of New Spain. The Tlafcalans,
the people of Mechoacan, and other states at
enmity with the Mexicans, delighted equally
in war, and treated their prisoners with the
fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind com-
bine in social union, and live under the in-
fluence of equal laws and regular policy, their
manners soften, sentiments of humanity arise,
and the rights of the species come to be under-
stood. The fierceness of war abates, and even
while engaged in hostility, men remember what
they owe one to another. The savage fights to
deftro:., the citizen to conquer. The former
neither pities nor spares, the latter has acquired
sensibility which tempers his rage. To this
fenfibilitv the Mexicans seem to have been per-
sect strangers, and among them war was car-
ried on with so much of its original barbarity,

f Herrera, dec. 3. lib.i. c. i5. Gem. Chrcn. c. 217.
C See NOTE XXVII.

that

that we cannot but iflpect their degree of civil- B 0° K
ization to have been very imperfet.

THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody Th;ir func-

than those of the most savage tribes. On the l ites.
death of any dillinguifled personage, especially
of the Emperor, a certain number of his at-
tendants were chosen to accompany him to the
other world, and those unfortunate vicims were
put to death without mercy, and buried in the
fame tomb "

THOUGH their agriculture was more exten- Theirpri

cul:ure im-

f ve than that of the roving tribes who trusted pcWta.
chiefly to their bow for food, it seems not to
have supplied them with such subsistence as
men require when engaged in efforts of ative
industry. The Spaniards appear not to have
been struck with any superiority of the Mexi-
cans over the other people of America in bodily
vigour. Both, according to theirobfervation,
were of such a feeble frame as to be unable to
endure fadigue, and the strength of one Spa-
niard .exceeded that of several Indians. This
they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor fare,
fiflicicnt to preserve life, but not to give firm-
ncls to the constitution. Such a remark could

I lerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18. Gom. Chron. c. zoz.

P 2 hardly

BOOK hardly have been made with refpeEt to any
'--r - people furnished plentifully with the necessaries

of life. The difficulty which Cortes found in
procuring subsistence for his small body of fol-
diers, who were often constrained to live on
the spontaneous productions of the earth, seems
to confirm the remark of the Spanish writers,
and gives no high idea of the slate of cultiva-
tion in the Mexican empire .

A '-:-,er A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain
t:i,. appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican

women gave fuck to their children for several
years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their husbands k. This precaution against
a burdensome increase of progeny, though ne-
ceffary, as I have already observed, among fa-
vages, who, from the hardships of their con-
dition, and the precariousness of their fubfit-
ence, find it impoflible to rear a numerous fa-
mly, can hardly be supposed to have continued
among a people who lived at ease and in abun-
dance.

UoS:S cc-. THE valt extent of the Mexican empire,
....t.n..f which has been confidered, and with justice,

X Rela:. ap Ramus. iii. 306, A. Herrera, dec. 3.
lib. iv. c. I-. dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 16.

Gore . Chron. c. 0!o. Herrerz, dec. ;. lib.iv. c. 16.

5 as

as the mofl decisive proof of a considerable Bo
progress in regular government and police, is
one of those faas in the history of the New
World which seems to have been admitted
.ithout due examination or sufficient evidence.
The Spanifi historians, in order to magnify
the valour of their countrymen, are accuflomed
to represent the dominion of Montezuma as
Itretching over all the provinces of New Spain
from the North to the Southern Ocean. But
a great part of the mountainous country was
possessed by the Otomies, a fierce uncivilized
people, who seem to have been the residue of
the original inhabitants. The provinces to-
wards the north and weft of Mexico were oc-
cupied by the Chichemecas, and other tribes of
hunters. None of these recognized the Mex-
ican monarch as their superior. Even in the
interior and more level country, there were fe-
veral cities and provinces which had never sub-
mitted to the Mexican yoke. Tlafcala, though
only twenty-one leagues from the capital of
the empire, was an independent and hostile
republic. Cholula, though still nearer, had
been fubjeted only a short time before the ar-
rival of the Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the dif-
rance of thirty leagues from Mexico, seems
ro have been a separate state, governed by

P 3 its

BOo0 its own laws'. Mechoacan, the frontier of
-..---' which extended within forty leagues of Mex-

ico, was a powerful kingdom, remarkable for
its implacable enmity to the Mexican name .
By there hostile powers the Mexican empire
was circumscribed on every quarter, and the
high ideas which we are apt to form of it from
the description of the Spanish historians, should
be considerably moderated.

L :.'ei - I, consequence of this independence of fe-
T... S veral states in New Spain upon the Mexican
r.t'C" empire, there was not any considerable inter-

course between its various provinces. Even in
the interior country, not far distant from the
capital, there seem to have been no roads to
facilitate the communication of one diftriEt with
another; and when the Spaniards first attempted
to penetrate into it, they had to open their way
through forefis and marshes =. Cortes, in his
adventurous march from Mexico to Honduras
in 152c, met with obfitructions and endured
hardlhips little inftrior to those with which he
must have firuggled in the most uncivilized
regions of America. In rome places, he could

Hcrrera, 2JC. . . x. c. 2. 21. B. Diaz. c. 13C.

' Hcrrera, ecC. :. !,. ii. c. Ic.
r B. Diz c. ito. . 176.

hardly

hardly forceapaflagethrough impervious woods, BWO K
and plains qoerflowed with water. In others -
he found fio little cultivation, that his troops
were frequently in danger of perishing by f4-
mine. Such fats corrvfpond ill with the pomp-
ous description which the Spanish writers give
of Mexican police and industry, and convey
an idea of a country nearly similar to that
pofneffedl by the Indian tribes in North Ame-
rica. Here and there a trading or a war
path, as they are called in North America, led
from one settlement to another 0, but generally
there appeared no sign of any established com-
munication, few marks of industry, and no
monument of art.

A PROOF of this imperfection in their corn- FrthCr

mercial intercourse no less striking, is their Pl s. °
want of money, or tome universal standard
by which to estimate the value of commodities.
The discovery of this is among the steps of
greatest consequence in the progress of nations.
Until it has been made, all their tranfa'tions
must be so aukward, so operose, and so limited,
that we may boldly pronounce that they have
advanced but a little way in their career. The
invention of such a commercial standard is of

* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

P 4 such

B 00 K : fdrhhigT-tatimqityin our hernifphere, and rifes
I_ La-fa far beyond the Era of authentic history, as

tol appear almost coeval with the exiLence of
society. The precious metals seem to have
been early employed for this purpose, and from
their permanent value, their divisibility, and
many other qualities, they are better adapted
to serve as a common standard than any other
fubtfance of which nature has given us the
command. But in the New World, where
these metals abound most, this use of them was
not known. The exigencies of rude tribes, or
of monarchies imperfeftly civilized, did not
call for it. All their commercial intercourse
vas carried on by barter, and their ignorance
Ds any common standard by which to facilitate
rhat exchange of commodities which contri-
butes lb much towards the comfort of life,
may be jufLly mentioned as an evidence of the
infant state of their policy. But even in the
New World the inconvenience of wanting some
general instrument of commerce began to be
felt, and some efforts were made towards sup-
plying that defeft. The Mexicans, among
whom the number and grearnefs of their cities
gave rife to a more extended commerce than
in any part of America, had begun to employ
'a common standard of value, which rendered
finaler transactions much more easy. As cho-

colate

colate was the favourite drink ofi pfdons in BOOK
every rank of life, the nuts or almonds-of ca- -a.
cao, of which. it is composed, were of:fuch
universal consumption, that, in their stated
markets, these were willingly received in re-
turn for commodities of small price. Thus
they came to be confidered as the instrument
of commerce, and the value of what one wished
to dispose of, was estimated by the number ds
nuts of the cacao, which he might expe& in
exchange for it. This seems to be the utmdft
length which the Americans had advanced to-
wards the dicfovery of any expedient for sup-
plying the use of money. And if the want of
it is to be held, on one hand, as a proof of
their barbarity, this expedient for supplying
that want, should be admitted on the other, as
an evidence no less satisfying, of some progrelf
which the Mexicans had made in refinement
and civilization, beyond the savage tribes
around them.

IN such a rude Rate were many of the Doubts eon-

Mexican provinces when first visited by their ft,,ostheir
conquerors. Even their cities, extensive and tS"
populous as they were, seem more fit to be the
habitation of men just emerging from barbarity,
than the residence of a polished people. The

description

BOOK description of Tlafcala nearly resembles that of
.-- -..- an Indian village. A number of low straggling

huts, scattered about irregularly, according to
the caprice of each proprietor, built with turf
and stone, and thatched with reeds, without
any light but what they received by a door,
so low that it could not be entered upright P.
In Mexico, though, from the peculiarity of its
situation, the dilpofition of the houses was
more orderly, the ftrucRure of the greater part
was equally mean. Nor does the fabric of
T:;, their temples and other public edifices appear

to have been such as entitled them to the high
prailes bestowed upon them by many Spanish
authors. As far as one can gather from their
obscure and inaccurate descriptions, the great
temple of Mexico, the most famous in New
Spain, which has been represented as a mag-
nificent building, raised to such a height, that
the ascent to it was by a stair-case of a hundred
and fourteen steps, was a solid mars of earth
of a square form faced partly with stone. Its
base on each i.de extended ninety feet, and de-
crearng gradually as it advanced in height, it
terminated in a quadrangle of about thirty
feet, where were placed a shrine of the deity

F Herrera, dec. :. lb. vi. c. 12.

and

and two altars on which the victims were fa- B o0 K
crificed q. All the other celebrated temples of --
New Spain exa&ly resembled that of Mex-
ico r. Such ftru&ures convey no high idea of
progress in art and ingenuity; and one can
hardly conceive that a form more rude and
simple could have occurred to a nation in its
first efforts towards erecting any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were displayed, and other

publicbuild-

if we may believe the Spanih hittorians, in ing.i
the houses of the emperor and in those of the
principal nobility. There, some elegance of
design was visible, and a commodious arrange-
ment of the apartments was attended to. But
if buildings corresponding to such descriptions
had ever existed in the Mexican cities, it is
probable that some remains of them would still
be visible. From the manner in which Cortes
conducted the siege of Mexico, we can indeed
easily account for the total deftrucion of what-
ever had any appearance of splendor in that
capital. But as only two centuries and a half
have elapsed since the conquest of New Spain,
it seems altogether incredible that in a period
so ihort, every vefRigeof this boasted elegance

1 Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 17.
r Sec NO T E XXVIII.

and

BQOK and grandeur should have disappeared; and
y _-- that in the other cities, particularly in those

which did not susser by the destructive hand of
the conquerors, there are any ruins, which can
be confidered as monuments of'their ancient
magnificence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation
than common dwelling-houfes. Such as are
deffined for holding the council of the tribe,
and in which all assemble on occasions of pub-
Iic festivity, may be calied stately edifices,
when compared with the reft. As among the
Mexicans the distinction of ranks was efta-
blifhed, and property was unequally divided,
the number of distinguished structures in their
towns would of course be greater than in other
parts of America. But these seem not to have
been either so solid or magnificent as to merit
the pompous epithets which some Spanish au-
thors employ in describing them. It is pro-
bable that, though more ornamented, and built
on a larger scale, they were erected with the
fame flight materials which the Indians em-
ploved in their common buildings ', and Time
:n a space much lels than two hundred and fifty

* ' N OTE XXIX.

years,

years, may have swept away all, remains of B oGr
them'. . , ;-

FROM this enumeration of fads, it eeims',

upon the whole, to be evident, that the state of
society in Mexico was considerably advanced
beyond that of the savage tribes which we have
delineated. But it is no less manifest, that
with respect to many particulars, the Spaniilh
accounts of their progress appear to be highly
embelliihed. There is not a more frequent or
a more fertile source of deception in describing
the manners and arts of savage nations, or of
such as are imperfectly civilized, than that o
applying to them the names and phrases ap-
propriated to the institutions and refinements
ofpolifhed life. When the leader of a small
tribe, or the head of a rude community, is
dignified with the name of king or emperor,
the place of his residence can receive no other
name but that of his palace; and whatever his
attendants may be, they must be called his
court. Under such appellations they acquire
an importance and dignity which does not be-
long to them. The illusion spreads, and giving
a false colour to every part of the narrative, the
imagination is so much carried away with the

t See NOTE XXX.

resemblance,

o8 0 K resemblance, that it becomes difficult to dif-
Vn.

- cern objeas as they really are. The Spaniards,

when they first touched on the Mexican coast,
were so much struck with the appearance of at-
tainments in policy and in the arts of life, far
superior to those of the rude tribes with which
they were hitherto acquainted, that they fan-
cied they had at length discovered a civilized
people in the New 'World. This comparison
between the 'people of Mexico and their un-
cultivated neighbours they appear to have kept
conRantly in view, and observing with admi-
ration many things which marked the pre-
eminence of the former, theyemploy in de-
scribing their imperfect policy and infant arts,
such terms as are applicable to the institutions
of men far beyond them in improvement. Both
these circumstances concur in detracing from
the credit due to the descriptions of Mexican
manners by the early Spanish writers. By
drawing a parallel between them and those of
people so much lcfs civilized, they raised their
own ideas too high. By their mode of de-
Icribing them, they conveyed ideas to others
no less exalted above truth. Later writers
have adopted the ftvle of the original hifto-
rians, and improved upon it. The colours
with which De Solis delineates the character
of Montezuma, the splendor of his court, the

,,3~ llaws

laws and policy of his empire, are the fame, B QOG
that he must have employed in exhibiting to ·'-
view the monarch and institutions of an highly
polished people.

BUT though we may admit, that the warm

imagination of the Spanish writers has added
some embellifhnent to their descriptions, this
will not justify the decisive and peremptory
tone, with which several authors pronounce all
their accounts of the Mexican power, policy
and laws, to be the fiftions of men who wished
to deceive, or who delighted in the marvel-
lous. There are few historical facts that can
be ascertained by evidence more unexception-
able, than may be produced in support of the
material articles, in the description of the
Mexican constitution and manners. Eye-wit-
nefles relate what they had beheld, men who
had resided among the Mexicans both before
and after the conquest, describe institutions and
cufroms which were familiar to them, persons
of such different professions that obje&s must
have prelcnted themselves to their view under
every various afpe&; soldiers, priests, and law-
yers, all concur in their tefiimony. Had
Cortes ventured to impose upon his fbvereign,
by exhibiting to him a picure of imaginary
manners, there wanted not enemies and rivals

who

B o°o K who were qualified to detet his deceit, and
'--v--- who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But

according to the just remark of an author,
whose ingenuity has illustrated and whose elo-
quence has adorned the history of AmericaU,
this supposition is in itself as improbable, as
the attempt would have been audacious. Who
among the destroyers of this great empire was
so enlightened by science, or so attentive to the
progress and operations of men in social life,
as to frame a ficitious system of policy so well
combined and so consistent, as that which they
delineate, in their accounts of the Mexican
government ? Where could they have borrowed
the idea of many institutions in legislation and
police, to which, at that period, there was no-
thing parallel in the nations with which they
were acquainted ? There was not at the begin-
ning of the sixteenth century, a regular efta-
blifiment of posts for conveying intelligence,
to the sovereign of any kingdom in Europe.
The fame observation will apply to what the
Spaniards relate, with refpeft to the structure
of the city of Mexico, the regulations concern-
ing its police, and various laws efabliffhed for
the administration of justice, or securing the
happiness of the community. Whoever is ac-
t M. 1'Abbe Raynal Hilt. philof. & polit. &c. iii. 127.

customed

Cuflomed to contemplate the progrefso(i a- B o K
tions, vill often, at very early flages'"of it, '-
difcovcr a premrature and unexpected dawn'of
-thole ideas, which give rife to institutions
that are the pride and ornament of its moif ad-
vanced period. Even in a slate as imperfectly
polished as the Mexican empire, the happy
genius of some sagacious observer, excited or
aided by circumifances unknown to us, may
have introduced institutions which are 'eldom
found but in societies highly refined. But it
is alioft: inpoflible that the illiterate conquer-
ors of the New World should have formed in
any one inftaice a conception of customs and
laws, beyond the standard of improvement in
their own age and country. Or if Cortes
and his followers had been capable of this,
what inducement had those by whom they were
fuperlsedcd to continue the deception ? Why
flould Corita, or Motolinea, or Acofta, have
amufied their sovereign or their fellow-citizens
with a tale purely fabulous ?

IN one particular, however, the guides whvom Rlg;on of
evc mull follow have rcprefented the Mexicans ca.s.
to be nmore barbarous, perhaps, than they really
were. Their religious tenets, and the rites of
their wworllhip, are decl-ibed by them as wild and
crutl in an extreme dgi:ee. Religion, which

VOL. 1ll. ) occupies

BOOK occupies no considerable place in the thoughts
*-,- , of a savage, whose conceptions of any superior

power are obscure, and his sacred rites few as
well as simple, was formed, among the Mex-
icans, into a regular fvftem, with its complete
train of priests, temples, vietims, and fefti-
vals. This, of itself, is a clear proof that the
frare of the Mexicans was very different from
that of the ruder American tribes. But from
the extravagance of their religious notions, or
the barbarity of their rites, no conclusion can
be drawn with certainty concerning the degree
of their civilization. For nations, long after
their ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners
to refine, adhere to fvftemsof superstition found-
ed on the crude conceptions of early ages.
From the genius of the Mexican religion we
may, however, form a moist jufi conclusion
with refoect to its inPfucnce upon the character
of the people. The aspect of fuperffition in
Mex:co was gloonm' and -trocious. Its divi-
;i:ices were clothed with terror, and delighted
;n vengeaice. Tnhe were exhibited to the
people under dcteli'.be forms, which created
horror. The figures of serpents, of tygers, and
of other deftrur-ive animals, decorated their
temples. Fear was the only principle that in-
fired their votaries. FaIls, :murrfications, and
penances, al! rigid, n2;d .--..- of tihem excru-

: ci.uting

ciating to an extreme degree, were the means B1 0K
employed to appease the wrath of their gods, --
and the Mexicans never approached their altars
without sprinkling them with blood drawn from
their own bodies. But, of all offerings, hu-
man lacrifices were deemed the most accept-
able. This religious belief, mingling with
the imp.i:cable spirit of vengeance, and adding
new force to it, every captive taken in war was
brought to the temple, was devoted as a vic-
tim to the deity, and sacrificed with rites no
lets iLlcirn than cruel . The heart and head
were the portion conrecrated to the gods ; the
warrior by whose prowels the priioner had been
flized, carried off the body to feast upon it
with his friends. Under the impreffiln of ideas
so dreary and terrible, and accustomed daily to
fccnes of bloodshed rendered awful by religion,
the heart of man munft harden, and be steeled
to every Icntiment of humanity. The spirit of
the Mexicans was accordingly unfeeling, and
the ,cniuts of their religion so far counterba-
la:ncedl the influence of policy and arts, that,
notv'ithli.Lutiing their progress in both, their
manners, instead of fofteiling, became more
fierce. To what circumftanccs it was owing

C(.';. , . l'.t. ap. Ramnif. iii. 24c. , &c. B. Diaz. c. 82.

AL.>.ta, lil. v. c. 13, &c. Hltrrera, dcc. ,. lib. ii. c. 15,
&c. GC;oi.i:a Clhroi. c. So, &c. Sc N O '1] XXXI.

Qoo2 -..that

B 0K that superstition assumed such a dreadful form

.--.._ among the Mexicans, we have not fuficient
knowledge of their hiftorv to determine. But
its inluence is visible, and produced an effect
that is singular in the history of the human
fpccies. The manners of the people in the
New World who had made the greatest pro-
grefs in the arts of policy, were the most fe-
rocious, and the barbarity of some of their
cufiomr.s exceeded even those of the savage
Mfate.

r ,,-f- THE empi;e of Peru boaits of an higher an-
-*'h- tiqui:; t;an that of Mexico. According to

the traditionary accounts collected by the Spa-
niards, it had subi;; tedi ;lur hndred years, un-
der tw.lve ieuccfve nmonarchs. But the know-
ledgc of their ancient liory, which the Peru-
viars could com:nunicate to their conquerors,
--._i. i.u hiave ben both i.nperfect and uncertain .

L.:r th:c other An-crican nations, they were
tl':.:ilv unac;ua;ted with the art of writing,

. '. dc;.-: ..:' z.ie cilv means by which the

me::nor.- of p.:It tranr.iaons can be prelbrved

i;:h :niv tiegrtc of accuracy. Even among
I '.p'e to h';:n the u:e of letters is known,
tie .ra v. here the a th:ci .tiit of hifiory conm-

S jec N OTE XXXII.

mences,

mences, is much posterior to the introduction. BO OK
of writing. That noble invention continued I
long fublervient to the common business and
wants of life, before it was employed in re-
cording events, with a view of conveying in-
formation from one age to another. But in no
country did ever tradition alone carry down
historic knowledge, in any full continued stream
during a period of half the length that the mo-
narclhy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

THE Z.itpos, or knots on cords of different Decfrn iR

colours, which are celebrated by authors fond ords y
of the marvellous, as if they had been regular ."''
annals of the empire, imperfetly supplied the
place of writing. According to the obicure
description of them by Acolta'', which Gar-
cilaflo de la Vega has adopted with little va-
riation and no improvement, the quipos feein
to have been a device for rendering calculation
more expeditious and accurate. By the various
colours dilsherent objects were denoted, and by
c(.ch knot a distinct number. Thus an ac-
count was taken, and a kind of register kept,
of the inhabitants in each province, or of the
.vc'ral productions collected there for public

' IIif. lib. vi. c. 8.

Q-3 use,

B iO K use. But as by there knots, however varied
----. or combined, no moral or abftrad idea, no

operaticn or quaiity of the mind could be re-
pre:ented, they contributed little towards pre-
ierving the memory of ancient events and in-
rft.utions. The Mexican paintings and flm-
bols, rude as the.- were, conveyed more know-
ledge of remote tranlactions, than the Peru-
-vins could derive frcml their boasted quipos.
Had the latter been clven of more extensive
u:e, a::d better aJapte.s to i',pp. te i sl,:ce of
written records, they perilhcd lio er.eralil, to-
gether with other monun ents of Peruvian in-
genuirt, in the wreck occr-funed by the Spa-
n:fh conquest, and the ci-.':;! .ars subSequent to
it, that no accfi.on c` - .!,h: or knowledge
comes from them. Ail t-he zeal of Garcilaffo
de la Vega for the honour of that race of mo-
narchs from whom he delcended, all the in-
duftrv of his rclearches, and the superior ad-
van ages with which he carried them on, opened
no :ource of information unknown to the Spa-
nif- authors who wrote before him. In his
Rcal C[mment;i-';'.v , he confines himself to il-
lullrate what they had rel'ted concerning the
antiquities and institutions of 'eru "; and his

S' L:ab.; c. ;:o.

illu irations,

illustrations, like their accounts, are derived BOOK
entirely from the traditionary tales current i-
among his countrymen.

VFERY little credit then is due to the minute

details which have been given of the exploits,
the battles, the conquests, and private cha-
rader of the early Peruvian monarchs. We
can reft upon nothing in their story, as authen-
tic, but a few fa&s, so interwoven in the sys-
tem of their religion and policy, as preserved
the memory of them from being loft; and
upon the description of such customs and in-
fltitutions as continued in force at the time of
the conquest, and fell under the immediate
observation of the Spaniards. By attending
carefully to there, and endeavouring to separate
them fiom what appears to be fabulous, or of
doubtful authority, I have laboured to form an
idea of the Peruvian government and manners.

THE people of Peru, as I have already ob- originof

served', had not advanced beyond the rudest policy.
iorin of salvage life, vAhen Manco Capac, and
his conlort Manma Ocollo, appeared to inftrut
and cl\ ilie them. Who these extraordinary
ncribnaces were, whether they imported their

look li. p. :5, &c.

Q(,4 rfxlcm

BOOK fyifem of legislation and knowledge of arts

c-,-
, from iome country more improved, or, if na-

tives of Peru, how they acquired ideas ol far
superior to those of the people whom they ad-
dresscd, are circumstances with respect to which
the Peruvian tradition conveys no information.
Manco Capac and his conforr, taking advan-
tage of the propenCity in the Peruvians to fu-
p-rftition, and particularly of their veneration
for the Sun, preten!ed! to be children of that
glorious luminar;, and to deliver their inftruc-
tions in his name a.d authority. Thle multi-
tude listened and belitved. W'hat reform-
ation in policy and manners the Peruvians
alcribe to thoi: founders of their empire, and
how, from the Frecepts of the Inca and his
consort, their ancestors graduall- acquired some
knowlede of thoic alts, anrd 0nme relifli fbr
that hidulr', which rcr.ier f-ubfilstucc secure
and life co; ifrtable, !ath been formerly re-
I-:ed. TIhoac bislrin s v.ere originallv confined
within nar ro preci::-s; tor the autiority of
the fir.i Irca did r r.e r.ch many leagues be-
yond Cu:zco. BE : r,)cfs of time, his fuc-
ceffors ext:enid. t-::r dicminion over all the re-
gions thar i-:.r to -te .efc of the Andes
from Ch:ili to Q<.::, ci.-ailing in every pro-
vince their nec.i.-r' policy and religious infli-

TutE

THE most singular and striking circumrtance B OK

in the Peruvian government, is the influence -,
of religion upon its genius and laws. Reli- Fhsin
gious ideas make such a feeble impression on
the mind of a savage, that their effeCE upon
his fcntimcnits and manners is hardly percep-
tible. Among the Mexicans, religion, reduced
into a regular system, and holding a confider-
able place in their public institutions, ope-
rated with conspicuous efficacy in forming the
pcculiar character of that people. But in Peru,
the whole system of civil policy was founded on
religion. The Inca appeared not only as a
legislator, but as the messenger of Heaven.
His precepts were received not merely as the
injunctions of a superior, but as the mandates
of the Deity. His race was held to be sacred;
and in order to preserve it diftin&c, without
being polluted by any mixture of lels noble
blood, the sons of Manco Capac married their
own fitlers, and no person was ever admitted
to the throne who could not claim it by such
.a pure dclcent. To those Children of ite Sun,
f)r that w?.s the appellation betlowed upon all
tle nflepring of the firflt Inca, the people looked
iup wili the reverence due to beings of a fupe-
:;'ir order. They were deemed to be under
!,c ij ncdi.atc protection of the deity from

whom

B 0 0 K whom they issued, and by him every order of
'.----. the reigning Inca was supposed to be ditated.
n^2 -'_ FRO.MF those ideas two consequences resulted.

Te-f he authority of the Inca was unlimited and
absolute, in the moil extensive meaning of the
words. \Whentver the decrees of a prince are
cnfidered as the commands of the Divinity,
:! is not only an a ot of rebellion, but of im-

r- * ':- pict-, to dilpu:c or c lppfe his will. Obedi-
o,::.i . ence becomn;s a dutv of religion; and as it

would be profane to controul a monarch under

cne guidance of -Ieaven, and prelumptuous to

advise h:rm, nothing remains but to iubmit
v.'i:h imllcih rc.ipecl. This mufft necessarily
be the c.ic;; ui every government eftablilhed
cn prte:e:ion.; or intercourle with superior
pcowers. Si;cil according!lv was the blind sub-
mifion ih

i h :hc Peruviars yielded to their

loverc1igs. The perlbns of highest rank and
Egr;ateF. owcr in their dominions acknow-
ledged :'.-;rm to be of a :;r.;-e exalted nature;
a.id .. t:i-:;o.y f this, v. itn admitted into
their pretence, thl. e.:erc.d with a burden up-
cn their flouilders, as an emblemi of their icr-
vi- ue, and v.illn-efis to bear whatever the
Inca was eOied co impoei. A-inon g their iIlb-
jcc:s, force .':s nr.: r'"Ki... to sccond their

commarinds.

commands. Every officer entrusted with the BO K
execution of them was revered, and, accord- I
ing to the account of an intelligent observer of
Peruvian manners', might proceed alone from
one extremity of the empire to another, with-
out meeting opposition; for, on producing a
fringe from the royal Borla, an ornament pe-
culiar to the reigning Inca, the lives and for-
tunes of the people were at his diipofal.

ANOTHER consequence of establishing go- Allcrime

p:,ni(hed ca-

vernment in Peru on the foundation of reli- pitaily.
gion was, that all crimes were punilhed ca-
pitally. They were not confidered as tranf-
greflions of human laws, but as infuils offered
to the Deity. Each, without any diftindtion
between such as were ilight and such as were
atrocious, called for vengeance, and could be
expiated only by the blood of the offender.
Conlonantly to the fiame ideas, puniflhment
fol0lowed the trel'afs with inevitable certainty,
becaule an offence againf I-Heaven was deemed
iuch an high enormity as could not be par-
doned '. Among a people of corrupted mo-
rals, maxims of jurisprudence so revere and
;:nrielcnting, by rendering men ferocious and

lefier ate, would be more apt to multiply
Zarate, lib. i. c. 13. c Vega, lib. ii. c. 6.

crimes

oOK crimes than to rerrain them. But the Peru-
VII.
_, --. vians, of simple manners and unfufpicious faith,

were held in such awe by this rigid discipline,
that the number of offenders was extremely
sInall. Veneration for monarchs, enlightened
and direcóted, as they believed, by the divinity
whom they adored, prompted them to their
duty; the dread of punishment, which they
were taught to confider as unavoidable venge-
ance infliced by offended Heaven, withheld
them from evil.

..-- , THE f-yfrem of superstition on which the In-
.;.o'". cas ingrafted their pretensions to such high

authority, was of a genius very different from
that established among the Mexicans. Manco
Capac turned the veneration of his followers
entirely towards natural objects. The Sun, as
the great Iburce of light, of joy, and fertility
in the creation, attracted their principal ho-
mage. The Moon and Stars, as co-operating
with him, were entitled to fecondarv honours.
WXherever the propensity in the human mind
to acknowledge and to adore some fupcrior
power, takes this direction, and is empiuy)ed
in contemplating the order and bencfi.nce
that really exist in nacure, the spirit of luoer-
ifition is mild. W\herever imaginary beings,
created by the fancv and the fears of men, are

!t ppoufel

iuppofed to preside in nature, and become the B 00 K

VII.

objects of worship, superstition always assumes ---i-
a more revere and atrocious form. Of the
latter we have an example among the Mexi-
cans, of the former among the people of Peru.
The Peruvians had not, indeed, made such
progress in observation or inquiry, as to have
attained just conceptions of the Deity; nor
was there in their language any proper name
or appellation of the Supreme Power, which
intimated that they had formed any idea of him
as the Creator and Governor of the World '.
But by directing their veneration to that glo-
rious luminary, which, by its universal and
vivif ing energy, is the best emblem of divine
benericence, the rites and observances which
they deemed acceptable to him were innocent
and humane. They offered to the Sun a part
of those productions which his genial warmth
had called forth from the bosom of the earth,
and reared to maturity. They sacrificed, as
an oblation of gratitude, rome of the animals
who were indebted to his influence for nouriflh-
ment. They presented to him choice fpcci-
menns of those works of ingenuity which his
light had guided the hand of man in forming.
PBtl the Incas never stained his altars with hu-

f Acr;fta, lib, . c. 3,

mailll

B OO K man blood, nor could they conceive that their

VII.
-,--' beneficent father the Sun would be delighted

with such horrid vitimsg. Thus thePeruvians,
unacquainted with those barbarous rites which
extinguish fenfibiliry, and suppress the feelings
of nature at the fight of human sufferings,
were formed, by the spirit of the superstition
which they had adopted, to a national cha-
racter, more gentle than that of any people in
America.

- i-F- rc. THE influence of this fuperfition operated
L,, even upon their civil institutions, and tended

to correct in theim whatever was adverse to
gcntlcne'; of character. The dominion of
the Incas, though the imoft absolute of all de-
irotii;is, was mitigated by its alliance with
religion. The mind was not humbled and de-
pre ici bv the idea of a forced fublection to the
will of a superior; obedience, paid to one who
was believed to be clothed with divine autho-
rity, vas willingly yielded, and implied no de-
gradation. The sovereign, conscious that the
fubmiTive reverence of his people flowed from
their belief of his heavenly descent, was conti-
nually reminded of a diftlintion which prompt-
ed him to imi:r:e that beneficent power which

See N TE XXXIII.

he

he was supposed to represent. In consequence Boo K
of thole impressions, there hardly occurs in the - _.
traditional history of Peru, any instance of re-
bellion against the reigning prince, and, among
twelve iucceffive monarchs, there was not one
tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, and on their

were carried on with a spirit very different from fy'.,
that of other American nations. They fought
not, like savages, to deitroy and exterminate;
or, like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty di-
vinities with human sacrifices. They conquer-
cd, in order to reclaim and civilize the van-
quilled, and to diffule the knowledge of their
own institutions and arts. Priolners seem not
to have been exposed to the insults and tortures,
v. hich were their lot in every other part of the
New World. The Incas took the peoplewhom
they subdued under their protection, and ad-
mitted them to a participation of all the ad-
vantages enjoyed by their original fubjecs.
This pracice, so repugnant to American fe-
rocity, and refcmbling the humanity of the
moit polished nations, muff be ascribed, like
other peculiarities which we have observed in
the Peruvian manners, to the genius of their
relgiion,. The Incas, confidering the homage
paid to any object but the heavenly powers

which

BOO r which they adored, as impious, were fond of

- gaining..prfelytes to their favourite fyitem.

The.idols of every conquered province were
carried in triumph to the great temple at Cuz-
co', and placed there as trophies of the superior
power of the divinity who was the protector of
the empire. The people were treated with
lenitr, and inftruEted in the religious tenets of
their new maiters , that the conqueror might
have the glory of having added to the number
of the votaries of his father the Sun.

P'1-"O' THF lPate of property in Peru was no lets
r, -, u2 r_-
pert. ifingiuar than tha: of religion, and contributed,

likewise, towards giving a mild turn of cha-
race;r to the people. Ali the lands capable of
cultivation were divided into three shares. One
was confecra:-d to the Sun, and the produc of
it was appiied to the erection of temples, and
furnifning what was requi!'ce cowards celebrat-
ing the public rites of religion. The second
bclon-ed to rlte Inca, and was iet apart as the
proviion made by the comlnunity for the sup-
port uiv govcrnr.;enr. The third and largest
share wab rcl;cr\ i for the maintenance of the
Feople, among whom t was p..rcelled out.

Her-e.-, cr :. :. i. b. iv. c.4. V\ :'., lib. v.c. i2.
H{rrer. dec.

5- .
. :" . iv. c. S.

No

No person, however, had a right of cxclufive B o
property in the portion allotted to him. He ·
pofleffed it only for a year, at the expiration of
which a new division was made, in proportion
to the rank, the number, and exigencies of
each family. All those lands were cultivated
by the joint industry of the community. The
people, fulnmoned by a proper officer, repaired
in a body to the fields, and performed their
common task, while fbngs and musical inftru-
melits cheered them to their labour k. By this Ercatof
singular distribution of territory, as well as by
the mode of cultivating it, the idea of a com-
mon interest, and of mutual subserviency was
continually inculcated. Each individual felt
his connecion with those around him, and
knew that he depended on their friendly aid for
what increase he was to reap. A slate thus
constituted may be confidered as one great fa-
mily, in which the union of the members was
Ib complete, and the exchange of good offices
ib pcrceptibie, as to create stronger attach-
ment, and to bind man to man in closer inter-
co-iurf, than subsisted under any form offocietv
elfhblii ed in America. From this resulted
gentle manners, and mild virtues unknown in
t}:c lavage flatc, and with which the Mexicans
were little acquainted.

k; Hcrrer., dec. lib. iib . c. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. 5.
VOL. III. R Bur,

B OO BUT, though the institutions of the Incas

_--,-- were so framed as to strengthen the bonds of
*,>'V affeEtion among their subje&s, there was great

inequality in their condition. The diftintion
of ranks was fully established in Peru. A great
body of the inhabitants, under the denomina-
tion of Tanaconas, were held in a itate offervi-
tude. Their garb and houses were of a form
different from those of free-men. Like the
Tamemes of Mexico, they were employed in
carrying burdens, and in performing every
other work of drudgery'. Next to them in
rank, were such of the people as were free,
but distinguished by no official or hereditary
honours. Above them were raised, those
whom the Spaniards call Orejones, from the
ornaments worn in their ear;. They formed
what may be denominated the order of nobles,
and in peace as well as war held every office
of power or trust . At the head c: all were
the children of the Sun, who, by their high
descent, and peculiar privileges, were as much
exalted above the Orciones, as these were ele-
vated beyond the people.
saf,: r. SuCH a form of focietv, from the union of

its members, as well as from the difinction in

I Herrera, deec. ; ib. i ii. c. 4. lib. x. c. C.
= Uirrera, dec. 5 lib. iv. c. ;.

their

their ranks, was favourable to progress in the Bo06k
arts. But the Spaniards having been a'cqdainted '--
with the imprdved state of various arts in
Mexico, several years before they dircdcered
Peru, were hot f6 mu'ch itruck with what.they
observed in the latter country, and defcribi the
appearances of ingenuity there with less warmth
of admiration. The Peruvians, nevertheless,
had advanced far beyond the Mexicans, both
in the necessary arts oflife, and in such as have
some title to the name of elegant.

IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary ne- Improvcd

slate of.gri.

ceffity in social life, was more extensive, and cultute.
carried on with greater skill than in any part
of America. The Spaniards, in their progress
through the country, were so fully supplied
with provisions of every kind, that in the rela-
tion of their adventures we meet with few of
those difinal scenes of distress occasioned by
f.mine, in which the conquerors of Mexico
were si often involved. The quantity of foil
under cultivation was not left to the discretion
of individuals, but regulated by public autho-
rir.' in proportion to the exigencies of the com-
nunit:. Even the calamity of an unfruitful
fcafon was but little felt, for the produt of the
lands consecrated to the Sun, as well as those
fc: apart for the Incas, being depafired in the'

R 2 Yanfirba,

B O 1o Tamjbos, or public ftorchoules, it remained

there as a stated provision for times of scarcity .
As the extent of cultivation was determined
with iuch provident attention to the demands
of the fate, the invention and industry. of the
Peruvians were called forth to extraordinary.
exertions, by certain defects peculiar to their
climate and foil. All the vail rivers that flow
from; the Andes take their course eastward to
the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered only by
some streams which rufih down from the moun-
tains like torrents. A great part of the low-
country is sandy and barren, and never re-
frcfiled with rain. In order to render such an
unpromising region fertile, the ingenuity of
the Peruvi.:ns had recourse to various expe-
cdients. Bi- mcans of artificial canals con-
duited, with much patience and considerable
art, from the torrents that poured across their
count-y, the. conveyed a regular supply of
meinture to their fields'. They enriched the
foii by manuring it with the dung of sea-fowls,
of wichn thev found an inexhaustible fiore on
all the i'.nins> icat:ered along their coasts r. In
delfri;bng the customs of any nation tho-

r7r:e ,. lib. i. c. ir. eg~ ., lib. i.c. S.

, Z;iatc, lb. i. c.j. V\ce. , !Lb. v. c. i. &S 24.

Act.fia, iib. i. C. -

c ea, lib v. c. 3. .:c
N O T XXXIV.

rou.hly '

roughly civilized, such praCices would hardly B 00K
draw attention, or be mentioned as in any de- --
gree remarkable; but in the hiffory of the im-
provident race of men in the New' World,
they are entitled to notice as singular proofs of
industry and of art. The use of the plough,
indeed, was unknown to the Peruvians. They
turned up the earth with a kind of Tnattock of
hard wood q. Nor was this labour deemed so
degrading as to be devolved wholly upon the
women. Both sexes joined in performing this
neccffarv work. Even 'the children 'of the
Sun set an example of industry, by cultivating
a field near Cuzco with their own hands, and
they dignified this funntion, by denominating
it their triumph over the earth r.

THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is Thiribild-

obvious, likewise, in the conftrution of.their '"
hofics and public buildings. In the exterfive
plains which stretch along the Pacific Ocean,
wher e fle sy is perpetually serene, and the
climate mild, their houses were very properly
of a fabric extremely flight. But in the higher
regions, where rain falls, where the vicissitude
of sealbns is known, and their rigour felt,
:oust's were conftru&ted with greater solidity.
Thc. were generally of a square form, the walls

/.i.r:c, ! i. c. S.
C ' Vea, lib, y. c. ..

R3 iabout

BOOK about eight feet high, built with bricks hard-
l -,-_ ened in the fun, the door low and strait, and

without any windows. Simple as these ftruc-
tures were, and rude as the materials may
seem to be, of which they were formed, they
were so durable, that many of them fIill subsist
in different parts of Peru, long after every mo-
nument that might have conveyed to us any
idea of the domeitic state of the other Ame-
rican nations has vanished from the face of the
earth. But it was in the temples consecrated
to the Sun, and in the buildings destined for
the reidence of their monarchs, that the Pe-
ruvians diiplayed the utmost extent of their art
and contrivance. The descriptions of them
by such of the Spanish writers as had an op-
portunity of contemplating them, while, in
some measure, entire, might have appeared
highly exaggerated, if the ruins which till re-
main, did no: vouch the truth of their relations.
These ruins of sacred or royal buildings are
found in every province of the empire, and by
their frequency demonstrate that they are mo-
numents of a powerful people, who must have
subsisted, during a period of tome extent, in a
itate of no inconsiderable improvement. They
appear to have been edifices various in their
dimensions. Some of a moderate size, many
of :n;renif ex:e;:, all remarkable for solidity,

6 and

and resembling each other in the stile ofarchi- B 0oors
tecture. The temple of Pachacamac, toge-
ther with. a palace 9.f the Inca, and a foritrefs,
were so. qonnected together as to form on.e
great ftrqtjure, above half a league in circuit,
In this prodigious pile, the fame singular taste
in building is conspicuous, as in other works
of the Peruvians. As they were unacquainted
with the use of the pulley, an,d other mecha-
nical powers, and could not elevate the large
stones and bricks which they employed in
building to any considerable height, the walls
of this edifice, in which they seem to have
made their greatest effort towards magnifi-
cence, did not rife above twelve feet fi-om the
ground. Though they had not disco.vered the
use of mortar or of any other cement in build-
ing, the bricks or stones were joined with so
much nicety, that the seams can hardly be
dilcerned'. The apartments, as far as the
distribution of them can be traced in the ruins,
were ill-difpofed, and afforded little accom-
modation. There was not a single window in
any part of the building, and as no light could
enter but by the door, all the apartments of
largest dimernion must either have been per-
fe'^tly dark, or illuminated by some other
means. But with all there and many other

* See NOTE XXXV.

R 4 imper-

B OK* imperfections that might be mentioned in their
- _--. art of building, the works of the Peruvians

which still remain, muff be confidered as ftu-
pendous efforts of a people unacquainted with
the use of iron, and convey to us an high idea
of the power possessed by their antient mo-
narchs.
:-;-P;-:.c THESE, however, were not the noblest or

most useful works of the Incas. The two great
roads from Cuzco to QLito, extending in an
uninterruptcd fircEch .:bove five hundred
leagues, arc entitled to still higher praise. The
one was conducted through the interior and
-.cn..a:rnous country, the other through the
!:.ains on the fea-coat. From the language of
a miration in which rome of the early writers
express their aflonilhnment when they first
xvev.'ed thoSe roads, and from the more pomp-
ous defcriptirns of later writers, who'labour to
fl:mort some favouri:e theory concerning Ame-
r':., one might be led to compare this work of
the I-.cas to the famcus military ways which
r- mrin as nonume.ts of the Roman power:
But in a countrv where there was no tame ani-
nal except the Llama, which was never used
for dnaucht, and but little as a beast of bur-
den, where the high roads were ieldom trod
by any bu: a human foot, no great degree of

labour

labour or ,art-was requisite in forming them. BO K
The Peruvian roads were only fifteen feet in -----
breadth's and in many places fo'lightlyjformed,
that time has.efaced every vestige of the courfa
in which they ran. In the low country little
more teems to have been done, than to plant
trees or to fix posts at certain intervals, in order
to mark the proper route to travellers. To
open a path through the mountainous country
was a more arduous tak. . Emiinences were le-
velled, and hollows filled up, and for the pre-
servation of the road, it was fenced with a bank
of turf. At proper distances, Tambos, or
storehouses, were erected for the accommoda-
tion of the Inca' and his attendants, in their
progress through his dominions. From the
manner in which the road was originally
formed in this higher and more impervious
region, it has proved more durablej and
though, from the inattention of the Spaniards
to every object but that of working their mines,
nothing has been done towards keeping it in
repair, its course may still be traced . Such
was the celebrated road of the Incas; and even
from this description, divested of every cir-

' Cieca, c. 60.

Xerez, p. 189. 191. Zarate, lib. i. c 13, 14. Vega,

lib. ix. c. 3. Bouguer Voyage, p. oS5. Ulloa Entrc-
tenemientos, p. 365.

cumftance

OO cumftance of manifeP exaggeration, or offuf,
vii.
_.- J picious aspec, it muff be confidered as a ftrik-

ing proof of an extraordinary progress in im-
provement and policy. To the savage tribes
of America, the idea of facilitating communi-
cation with places at a distance had never oc-
curred. To the Mexicans it was hardly known.
Even in the most civilized countries of Europe,
men had advanced far in refinement, before it
became a regular object of national police tQ
form such roads as render intercourse conmmo-
dious.
and: ;'.- THE formation of those roads introduced an-

other improvement in Peru equally unknown
over all the reft of America. In its course
from south to north, the road of the Incas wa&
interfccted by all the torrents which roll from
the Andes towards the Western Ocean. From
the rapidity of their course, as well as from the
frequency and violence of their inundation,
there were unnavigable. Some expedient,
however, was to be found for passing them.
The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance with
the use of arches, and their inability to work
in wood, could not construct bridges either of
f:or.e or timber. But neceffiry, the parent of
invention, suggested a device which supplied
that defect. They formed cables of great

firength,

tlrength, bytwifting together some of the pliable B o K
withs or osiers, with which their country I
abounds; fix of which they stretched across the
fiream parallel to one another, and made themn
fait on each fide.. These they bound firmly to-
gether by interweaving smaller ropes so close,
as to rorm a compac; piece of net-work, which
being covered with branches of trees and earth,
they passed along it with tolerable security%.
Proper persons were appointed *to attend at
each bridge, to keep it in repair, and to affiit
paflcngcrs'. In the level country, where.,the
livers became deep and broad and still, they
are passed in Ba/zas, or floats; in the conftruc-
tion, as well as navigation of which, the inge-
nuir'' of the Peruvians appears to be far fupe-
rior to that of any people in America. These
had advanced no farther in naval skill than the
use of the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians ven-
tured to raise a mast, and Ipread a fail, by
means of which their balzas not only went
nimbly before the wind, but could veer and
tack with great celerity .

NoR were the ingenuity and art of the Pe- Modecfre.
ruvi;lans confined foiely to objets of essential irnfi'"e

Sec NOTE XXXVI.
aS.i2nco p Ram. iii. 376, B. Zarate, lib. i. c. 14.

i.

s-, i:1. iii. c. 7, 8. Herrera, dec. v. lib iv. c. 3, 4.
* . I, cI Vo';. i. 167, &c.

utility.

nOOK utility. They had m-nae frme progrcfs in arts,
_ which may be called elegant. They possessed

the precious metals in greater abundance than
any people of America. They obtained gold
in the lame manner with the Mexicans, by
searching in the channels of rivers, or washing
the earth in which particles of it were con-
tained. But in order to procure silver, they
exerted no inconsiderable degree of skill
and invention. They had not, indeed, at-
tained the art of fnining a shaft into the bowels
of the ear:h, and pe;ctr,.Jng to the riches
concealed there ; but they hollowed deep ca-
verns on thc banks ct rivers and the fides of
moun:ains, an.d emItied ft:ch veins as did
not dip iud.derly beyond their reach. In
other places, where the vc:n lav near the fur-
.ace, they dug pits to auch a depth, that the
perion who worked beiow could throw out the
ore, or hand it up in balkets'. They had dif-
covered the art of fmncl:ing and refning this,
cither by the fimnple aDp!i:ation of fire, or
!where the ore was more tub born, and i:nprer-
nated vwizh 'cr.:g.- l'1-!bi'a!ccs, by placing it in
-:all overns or fi:r:naces on hnih grounds, so
.:r:inciai'- conlr'u ecd, th:t :he d: u.i: hr oF air
]'erfur;i'i:d ::' :.:.

i j. of a bciJ 'ws, an engine

v.'kh v,.'..:h ti':y were ;t:e. u' .
t; cquainted.

By

BOO K

By this simple device, the purer ores were Bvt!:
fin]ltcd with facility, and thequantity of silver l
in Peru was so considerable, that many of the
utensils employed in tie funcions of common
life were made of itb. Several of those veftels
and trinkets are iaid to have merited no small
defgre of estimation, on account of the neatness
of the workmanship, as well as the intrinsic
value of the materials. But as the conquerors
of America were well acquainted with the
latter, but had scarcely any conception of the
former, most of them were melted down, and
rated according to their weight and finenels in
the division of the fpoi].

IN other works of mere curiofitv or orna- Worksof

niment, their ingcnuity has been highly cele- elega"c.
brated. Many fJpecimens of those have been
dug out of the Guacas, or mounds of earth,
with which the Peruvians covered the bodies
f thle dead. Among these are mirrors of va-
rious diicnefons, of hard shining stones highly
polilhled; vefiels of earthen ware of different
Ifrmsl ; hatchets, and other inItruments, some
dtinir.cd for war, and others for labour. Some
v ere of flint, some of copper, hardened to such
.a degree by an unknown process, as to fipply

c .s-o.a, lib. i-. c. 4, S. VAegl, p. i. lib. viii. c. 25.
L. i ,. : Lntrcten. 2S.

I the

BOOK the place of iron on several occasions. Had

-- the use of those tools formed of copper been

general, the progress of the Peruvians in the
arts might have been such, as to emulate
that of more cultivated nations. But either
the metal was so rare, or the operatibr by
which it was hardened, so tedious, that their
instruments of copper were few, and so ex-
tremely finall, that they seem to have been
employed only in flighter works. But even to
such a circumscribed use of this imperfect me-
tal, the Peruvians were indebted for their fu-
periority to the other people of America in
various arts'. The fame observation, hoe.-
ever, may be applied to them, which I for-
n-erlv made with respect to the arts of th:e
Mexicans. From several specimens of Pe-
ruvian utensils and ornaments, which are de-
posited in the royal cabinet of Madrid, and
from some preserved in different collecions in
other parts of Europe, I have rrafon to bt!ieve
that the workmanfbip is more to be adi;:ir 1i
on account of the rude tools with whi; it ..
executed, than on account of its ir.tint c i .::
ness and elegance, and that the Pcrv.,:.:: ,
though the molt improved of a' tih A-mcri-
cans, were not advanced beyond the infancy of

arts.
c ilca: V\ov. tern. i. 3 1, &c. Id. En:re:en. p. 367. &'

BE

BUT notwithstanding so many circumftancs, BOO K

which feerr to indicate an high degree of im- n
provement in Peru, others occur that fuggefR a'ciTii .
the idea of a focicty fiill in the first stages of its zati'l.
transition from barbarifn to civilization. In
all the dominions of the Incas, Cuzco was the Nocities

but Cuzco.

only place that had the appearance, or was en
titled to the name of a city. Every where elfes
the people lived mostly in detached habitations,
dispersed over the country, or, at the utmost,
fettled together in finall villages". But until
men are brought to assemble in numerous bo-
dies, and incorporated in such close union, as
to enjoy frequent intercourse, and to feel mu-
tual dependence, they never imbibe perfecly
the spirit, or assume the manners of social life,
In a country of immense extent, with only one
city, the progress of manners, and the im-
provement either of the necessary or more re-
fined arts, must have been so flow, and carried
on under filch disadvantages, that it is more
surprising the Peruvians should have advanced
lb far in refinement, than that they did not
proceed farther.

I' consequence of this ifate of imperfect N, p.rfe

union, the reparation of professions in Peru prfrfior.
was not so complete as among the Mexicans.
" Zarate, lib. i. c. 9. Hcrrera, dec. v. lib. vi. c. 4.

The

B"O0 The less closely men associate, the more firrnple
L-,-- are their manners, and the fewer their wants;

The crafts of common and mofl necessary use
in life do not, in such a ftatej become so com-
plex or difficult, as to render it requisite that
men should be trained to them by any parti-
cular course of education. All those pro-
fefflons were accordingly exercised by every
Peruvian indiscriminately. None but the
arrits, employed in works of mere curiosity or
ornament, conitituced a Ieparate order of men,
or were diftinguiihed from other citizens'.
i;r.leccr.- FROM the want o( cities in Peru, another

-.. consequence followed. There was little com-

mercial intercourse among the inhabitants of
that great empire. The activity of commerce
is co-eval with the foundation of cities; and
from the moment that the members of any
community fettle in considerable numbers in
one place, its operations become vigorous.
The citizen m":ft depend for subsistence on the
labour of those who cultivate the ground.
They, n re:-rn, must receive some equivalent.
Thus mutual intercourse is established, and the
productions of art are regularly exchanged for
the fruits of agriculture. In the towns of the

' Acof:l, lib. vi. c. . I. \e , :ib v. c. 9. Herrera,
dec. ;. lib. iv. c. 4.

Mexican

Mexican empire, fRated markets werei held, B oo
and whatever could supply any want or desire ---
of man was an object of commerce. .But iri
I'cru, from the fiigular mode of dividing
property, and the manner in which the people
were fettled, there was hardly any species of
commerce carried on between different pro-
vincesf, and the community was less acquainted
with that active intercourse, which is at once a
bond of union, and an incentive to improve-
mcnr.

BUT the unwarlikc spirit of the Peruvians Unwa.l;ke

fp:rt of the

was the most remarkable, as well as most fatal Pcruvins.
dl-fcc& in their character r. The greater part of
the rude nations of America opposed their in-
vadcrs with undaunted ferocity, though with
little condut or success. The Mexicans main-
t tined tie struggle in defence of their liberties,
with flich persevering fortitude, that it was
with difficulty the Spaniards triumphed over
t'inm. Peru was subdued at once, and almost
without resistance; and the moist favourable
opportunities of regaining their freedom, and
of crufsing their oppressors, were loft through
the timidity of the people. Though the tradi-

\' Vc., lib vi. c. S.
Xerc7. 19o. Sancho np R'am. iii. 372. Herrera,

i: .;. il I
i. c. o.

VoL. 111. S tional

B o K tional history of the Peruvians represents all the

--v-- Incas as warlike princes, frequently at the head

of armies, which they led to vic'tor and con-
quest; few f-mptoms of such a martial fpiric
appear in any of their operations subsequent to
the invasion of the Spaniards. The influence,
perhaps, of those institutions which rendered
their manners gentle, gave their minds this
unmanly fofrnefs; perhaps, the constant fere-
nir; and mi!dnefs of the climate may have ener-
vated the vigour of their frame ; perhaps, some
princiyle in their government, unknown to us,
w-s the occasion of this political debility.
\h.a:c',-cr nma have been the cause, the sac: is
ce-rai,, and threre is no: an instance in history
cf ar.v peopie ib little advanced in refinement,
so toraii:.- e!::ure o n- ii:ar)- enterprize. This
chara;e- hath deccendcd to their pofterit-.
The Indians of Peru are now more tame and
deprefied th?.n any people of America. Their
feeble firits, relaxed in lifeless inaction, seem
ha:di- capab'e of anv bold or manly exertion.

Bur, belies those capital defeats in the po-

lirica! 2fate of Peru, emie detached circum-
irances a.d sacs occur in the Spanish writers,
which di!cov :r a considerable remainder of bar-
bar;iy in their manners. A cruel custom, that
prevaile_ i:n fJ;uc of [rhe moit savage tribes,

subsisted

subsisted among the Peruvians. On the death B O'K
of the Incas, and of other eminent persons, a --
considerable number of their attendants was
put to death, and interred around their Guacas,
that they might appear in the next world with
their former dignity, and be served with the
fame refpet. On the death of Huana-Capac,
the most powerful of their monarchs, above a
thousand victims were doomed to accompany
him to the tombh. In one particular, their
manners appear to have been more barbarous
than those of moss rude tribes. Though ac-
quainted with the use of fire in preparing
maize, and other vegetables for food s they de-
voured both flefi and fifih perfectly raw, and
aftonifled the Spaniards, with a praaice re-
pugnant to the ideas of all civilized people'.

BUT though Mexico and Peru are the pof- Otherdo-

sessions of Spain in the New World, which, on spo inO,
account both of their antient and present state, America
have attracted the greatest attention; her other
dominions there are far from being inconfi-
dcrahle, either in extent or value. The greater
part of them was reduced to subjection during
the fir-st part of the sixteenth century, by pri-

i Acofla, Jib. v. c. 7.

Xecz, p. 19o. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372, C. Herrcra,
d c. 5. lib. i. c. .

S
o vate

B 0 0 K vate adventurers, who fitted out their small

' armaments either in Hispaniola or in Old

Spain; and were we to follow each leader in
his progress, we should discover the fame
darinc courage, the Iame persevering ardour,
the fame rapacious desire of wealth, and the
lame capacity of enduring and surmounting
every thing in order to attain it, which diftin-
guifhed the operations of the Spaniards in their
greater American conquerss. But, iniftead
of entering into a detail, xhich, from the fimi-
laritv of the transactions, would appear al-
molt a reetition of what has been already
A b.- efi - related, I lhall lftisfv mvfelf with such a view

of thoie provinces of the Spanilh empire in
America, which have not hitherto been men-
rzoned, as may convey to mv readers an ade-
c.iic idea of its greatneif, fertility, and
(pul1 nee.

.:. . . - I scGN! .,i::h the countries con:ignuous to the
r- -,; two -e.:: monarchies, of whose hifrorv and

''i ini:';ir:.ns I have : ven, some accou nt, and

fill ' r;: br i;-' dci!-ribe the other dil;ricss of
S ni an'n America. The jurifliiction of the
vicer-'. of N -w S;ain extends over several
province_, 'v. hich v.ere not ftib;cct to the do-

c-_'., :- ;- i;,'.. o t;ri. M exicans. Ti:C countr:ics of
-' '"- C.inalo, a-d jo'ora, tht iLrctch along the east

fide

fide of the Vermilion lea, or gulf of California, B O0 K
as well as the immense kingdoms of New L-
Navarre and New Mexico, which bend to-
wards the weft and north, did not acknow-
ledge the sovereignty of Montezuma, or his
predecessors. These regions, not inferior in
magnitude to all the Mexican empire, are re-
duced tome to a greater, others to a less degree
of Iilbjedion to the Spanish yoke. They ex-
tended through the most delightful part of the
temperate zone; their foil is, in general, re-
markably fertile, and all their producions,
whether animal or vegetable, are most perfect
in their kind. They have all a communication
either with the Pacific Ocean, or with the
Guilh of Mexico, and are watered by 'uch
rivers as not only enrich them, but may be-
come subservient to commerce. The number
of Spaniards fettled in those vast countries, is
indeed extremely finall. They may be said to
have subdued, rather than to have occupied
them. But if the population in their ancient
ellablihiments in America fliall continue to in-
crcale, they may gradually spread over those
provinces, of which, however inviting, they
have net hitherto been able to take full pof-
fclflon.

S 3 ONE

BOOrK ONE circumstance may contribute to the
'---' speedy population of rome districts. Very

rich mines both of gold and silver have been
discovered in many of the regions which I have
mentioned. Wherever these are opened, and
worked with success, a multitude of people
retort. In order to supply them with the ne-
ceffaries of life, cultivation must be increased,
artilans of various kinds must aflemble, and
industry as well as wealth will be gradually
diffused. Many examples of this have oc-
curred in different parts of America since they
fell under the dominion of the Spaniards.
Populous villages and large towns have fud-
denlv arisen amidit uninhabited wilds and
mountains; and the working of mines, though
far from being the most proper objec towards
which the attention of an infant society should
be turned, mav become the means both of pro-
moting useful activity, and of augmenting the

A rtr.t number of people. A recent and singular
..L'.:..J'" inrance of this has happened, which, as it is

but little known in Europe, and may be pro-
duscive of great effects, merits attention. The
Spaniards fettled in the provinces of Cinaloa
and Sonora, had been long disturbed by the
depredations of some fierce tribes of Indians.
In the year 1765, the incursions of those

savages

savages became so frequent, and so deftruaive, B 0°0 K
that the Spanish inhabitants, in despair, ap- '---.
plied to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of
Mexico, for such a body of troops as might
enable them to drive thole formidable invaders
from their places of retreat in the mountains.
But the treasury of Mexico was so much ex-
haufted by the vast fums drawn from it, in
order to support the late war againfi Great
Britain, that the viceroy could afford them no
aid. The respect due to his virtues, accom-
pliflhed what his official power could not effect.
He prevailed with the merchants to advance
about two hundred thousand pcfos for defray-
ing the expence of the expedition. The war
was conducted by an officer of abilities; and
after being protracted for three years, chiefly
by the difficulty of pursuing the fugitives over
mountains and through defiles which were al-
moss impassable, it terminated, in the year
1771, in the final fiibmiffton of the tribes,
wvhich had been so long the object of terror to
the two provinces. In the course of this ser-
vice, the Spaniards marched through countries
into which they seem not to have penetrated
before that time, and dilcovered mines of such
value, as was aftonifiing even to men ac-
quainted with the riches contained in the
niountiins of the New World. At Cineguilla,

S

B oVn K in the province oi Sonora, t enterel a plain
---i.- of fourteen leagues in extent, in which they

found gold in grains, a: the depth of only
sixteen inches, of such a size, that foime of
them weighed nine marks, and in iuch quan-
tities, that in a short time, with a few labourers,
they collet ed a thousand marks of gold in
grains, even w:ithout taking time to wash the
earth that had been dug, which appeared to
be :o rich, that persons of lkill computed that
it iniht yield what would be equal in value to

:- a million of peioi. Bcfore the end of the year
-;i." 177I, above two thouland persons were fettled

in Cineguila, under the government of proper
magiitrates, and the inspection of several ec-
clefiaftics. As several other mines, not infe-
rior in riches to that of Cineguilla, have been
discovered, both in Sonora and Cinaloa , it is
probable that the^se neglected and thinly inha-
bited provinces, may ioon become as populous
a.nd valuable as any part of the Spanifn empire
in America.
C,:::o-::, TtIE peninsula of Caifornil on the other

fie-: of the Ver;ilion sea, seems to have been
lel- known to th'e ancient Me:ican,, than the
o-n.'.ices which I h.ve mentioned. It was

S.c- NO rE XY!\'!!.

d ::-overcJ

discovered by Cortes in the year I536 '. During B o° K
a long period it continued to be ib little fre- '--
quented, that even its form was unknown,
and in most charts it was represented as an
iland, not as a peninsula ". Though the cli-
mate of this country, if we may judge from
its situation, must be very desirable; the Spa-
niards have made finall progress in peopling it.
Towards the close of the last century, the
jesuits, who had great merit in exploring this
neglected province, and in civilizing its rude
inhabitants, imperceptibly acquired a domi-
nion over it as complete as that which they
poflTefed in their mifnions in Paraguay, and
they laboured to introduce into it the fame
policy, and to govern the natives by the fame
maxims. In order to prevent the court of
Spain from conceiving any jealouly of their
designs and operations, they seem studiously to
have depreciated the country, by representing
the climate as so dilagreeable and unwhole-
flme, and the foil as so barren, that nothing
but a zealous desire of converting the natives,
could have induced them to fettle there".
5evei-.il public-fpirited citizens endeavoured to
undeceive their sovereigns, and to give them a

' Vokl v-. vol. ii. p. 453. m See N OT E XXXXVlI.
: '.'iniE :, Hill. of California, i. zC.

better

B00K better view of California; but in vain. At

VII.

_-~-. length, on the expulsion of the Jesuits from
bi,'v" the Spanish dominions, the court of Madrid,
m..-rc.g. as prone at that juncture to fufpe't the purity

of the Order's intentions, as formerly to con-
fide in them with implicit trust, appointed
Don Joseph Galvez, whose abilities have since
railed him to the high rank of minister for the
Indies, to visit that peninsula. His account
of the country was favourable; he found the
pearl fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and
discovered mines of gold of a very promising
appearance . From its vicinity to Cinaloa
and Sonora, it is probable, that if the popu-
lation of there provinces shall increase in the
manner which I have fuppoled, California
may, by degrees, receive from them such a
recruit of inhabitants, as to be no longer
reckoned among the desolate and useless dif-
tricts of the Spanish empire.

Vocaua ON, the eafl of Mexico, Yucatan and Hon-
and Hontx

duras are comprehended in the government of
New Spain, though anciently they can hardly
be said to have formed a part of the Mexican
empire. These large provinces, stretching
from the Bay of Campeachy beyond Cape

-Lcrs'zano, 349, 3c-0

Gracia

Gracias a Dios, do not, like the other terri- Boi "
tories of Spain in the New World, derive their -
value either from the fertility of their foil, or
the richness of their mines, but they produce
in greater abundance, than any part of Ame-
rica, the logwood tree, which, in dying some
colours, is so far preferable to any other mate-
rial, that the consumption of it in Europe is
conlicerable, and it has become an article in
commerce of great value. During a long
period, no European nation intruded upon the
Spaniards in those provinces, or attempted to
obtain any share in this branch of trade. But
after the conquest of Jamaica by the Englilh,
it soon appeared what a formidable rival was
now feated in the neighbourhood of the Spa-
nifh territories. One of the first objects which
tempted the Englifl, was the great profit
arising from the logwood trade, and the facility
of wresting some portion of it from the Spa-
niards. Some adventurers from Jamaica made Their dc-
the firl: attempt at Cape Catoche, the south- ciine,
east promontory of Yucatan, and by cutting
logwood there, carried on a gainful traffic.
When inoft of the trees near the coafl in that
place were felled, they removed to the island
of Trift, in the Bay of Campeachy; and in
later times, their principal station has been in
the Bay of Honduras. The Spaniards, alarmed

at

B 00 K at this encroachment, endeavoured by nego-

VIL
'-*- ciation, remonstrances, and open force, to

prevent the English from obtaining any footing
on rha; part of the American continent. But
after ftruggiing against it for more than a cen-
tury, the disasters of lafr war extorted from the
court of Madrid a reluctant consent to rnierate
this fetileiment of foreigners in the heart of its
territories . The pain which this humbling
concession occasioned, 1f.ems to have prompted
the Spaniards to devilc a method of rendering
it of little conficuenze, more effecrual than
all the efforts of negociation or violence. The
logzwood produced on the weft coast of Yuca-
tan, where the foil is drier, is in quality far
iuperior to that which grows on the marfhv
;- ':.-.:-. grounds where the Englilh are fettled. By

encourag;ng the cutting of this, and permit-
ting the importation of it into Spain without
pavi.ng any duty ', such vigour has been given
to ti:s branch of commerce, and the logwood
whi-cn the Engiifh bring to market has funk
so mu!;h in value, that their trade to the Bav
of Honduras has gradual'l declined' since it
obtained a legai Janltion; and, it is probable,

r Tr-.: of Par-i, A tI. xnii.

R-;! Ce'-,=. Ca-ir o.mane; , iii. 145.
' S.e NOTE XXXiX.

will

will ibon be finally abandoned. In that event, BOOK
Yucatan and Honduras will become poireflEons '
of considerable importance to Spain.

STILL farther eaff than Honduras lie the two Coda Rica

and Vera-

provinces of Costa Rica and Veragua, which Eu,.
likewise belong to the vice-royalty of New
Spain; but both have been so much negleted
bv the Spaniards, and are apparently of such
Imrall value, that they merit no particular at-
tention.

THE most important province depending on Chiii.

the vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas
had eflablifhed their dominion in some of its
northern districts; but in the greater part of
the country, its gallant and high-fpirited in-
habitants maintained their independence. The
Spaniards, allured by the fame of its opulence,
carl- attempted the conquest of it under Diego
Almagro; and after his death, Pedro de Val-
divia resumed the design. Both met with
fierce opposition. The former relinquished the
enterprize in the manner which I have men-
tioned '. The latter, after having given many
di;:ilays, both of courage and military skill,
w.as cut ofl, together with a considerable body

' Book; i. p. ;, &c.

of

BOOK of troops under his command. Francisco de

VII.
vL_-_ Villagra, Valdivia's lieutenant, by his Spirited

conduct, checked the natives in their career,
and saved the remainder of the Spaniards from
dcrfru tion. By degrees, all the champaign
country along the coast was subjected to the
Spaniih dominion. The mountainous country
is fill poffelFed by the Puclches, Araucos, and
othner tribes of its original inhabitants, formi-
dable neighbours to the Spaniards; with whom,
during the course of two centuries, they have
been obliged to maintain almost perpetual hof-
tilt.-, fulpended only by a few intervals of
inlecure peace.

rc-ll.nc THAT part of Chili then, which may pro-
°n .-'.:i perly be deemed a Spaniff province, is a
fil. narrow district, extending along the coast from

the desert of Atacamas to the illand of Chiloe,
above nine hundred miles. Its climate is the
moit delicious in the New World, and is
hardly equalled by that of any region on the
face of the earth. Though bordering on the
Torrid Zone, it never feels the extremity of
heat, being fereened on the east by the Andes,
and refre;hed from the weft by cooling sea-
breezes. The temperature of the air is so
mii' and equable, that the Spaniards give it
the preference to that of the southern provinces

in

in their native country. The fertility of the DooK
foil corresponds with the benignity of the cli- L- -v-
mate, and is wonderfully accommodated to
European produRions. The most valuable
of these, corn, wine, and oil; abound in
Chili, as if they had been native to the coun-
try. All the fruits imported from Europe
attain to full maturity there. The animals
of our hemisphere not only multiply, but im-
prove in this delightful region. The horned
cattle are of larger size than those of Spain.
Its breed of horses surpasses, both in beauty
and in spirit, the famous Andalufian race,
from which they sprung. Nor has Nature
exhautled her bounty on the surface of the
earth; flhe has flored its bowels with riches.
Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of copper,
and of lead, have been discovered in various
parts of it.

A COUNTRY distinguished by so many blef- Caufeof its

being ne-

sings, we may be apt to conclude, would early glet.d by
become a favourite station of the Spaniards, 'tdSp'"
and must have been cultivated with pecu-
liar predilection and care. Instead of this, a
great part of it remains unoccupied. In all
this extent of country, there are not above
eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about
t!ree times that number of negroes and

people

BOOK of troops under his command. Francisco de

Villagra, Valdivia's lieutenant, by his ipirited
conduct, checked the natives in their career,
and saved the remainder of the Spaniards from
dcltrucstion. By degrees, all the champaign
country along the coast was subjected to the
Spanilh dominion. The mountainous country
is still poffeired by the Puelches, Araucos, and
other tribes of its original inhabitants, formi-
dable neighbours to the Spaniards; with whom,
during the course of two centuries, they have
been obliged to maintain almost perpetual hof-
tilirk, fulpended only by a few intervals of
insecure peace.

:rrell.nc. THAT part of Chili then, which may pro-
e.==ci- ;perly be deemed a Spanifi province, is a

narrow diftrici, extending along the coast from
the desert of Atacamas to the illand of Chiloe,
above nine hundred miles. Its climate is the
most delicious in the New World, and is
hardly equalled by that of any region on the
lace of the earth. Though bordering on the
Torrid Zone, it never feels the extremity of
heat, being screened on the east by the Andes,
and refreshed from the weft by cooling sea-
breezes. The temperature of the air is so
mild and equable, that the Spaniards give it
the preference to'that of the southern provinces

in

in their native country. The fertility of the D°O
foil corresponds with the benignity of the cli- i.
mate, and is wonderfully accommodated to
European productions. The most valuable
of these, corn, wine, and oil; abound in
Chili, as if they had been native to the coun-
try. All the fruits imported from Europe
attain to full maturity there. The animals
of our hemisphere not only multiply, but im-
prove in this delightful region. The horned
cattle are of larger size than those of Spain.
Its breed of horses surpasses, both in beauty
and in spirit, the famous Andalufian race,
from which they sprung. Nor has Nature
exhausted her bounty on the surface of the
earth; she has flored its bowels with riches.
Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of copper,
and of lead, have been discovered in various
parts of it.

A COUNTRY distinguished by so many blef- Caufeof its

being he-

sings, we may be apt to conclude, would early glcaed by
become a favourite station of the Spaniards, therd;S-
and must have been cultivated with pecu-
liar prediletion and care. Instead of this, a
great part of it remains unoccupied. In all
this extent of country, there are not above
eightv thousand white inhabitants, and about
three times that number of negroes and

people

B OO K people of a mixed race. The most fertile foil
VII.

in America lies uncultivated, and some of its
most promising mires remain unwrought.
Strange as this neglct of the Spaniards to
avail themflves of advanrages,-which seemed
to court their acceptance, may appear, the
c:ules of ir can be traced. The only inter-
cour;c of Sp.in with its colonies in the South
Sea, was carried on during two centuries by
the annual fleer to Porto-bello. All the pro-
duce of the;e colonies were shipped in the
ports of C:.iian, or Arica in Peru, for Panama,
and carried 'rom thence across the isthmus.
Ail the commoditics which they received from
the rmo:hcr-counr-;., were conveyed from Pa-
nama to the fame harbours. Thus both the
exports and imports of Chili passed through
the hands of merchants fettled in Peru. These
had of course a profit on each; and in both
tranfGations the Chilefe felt their own fubordi-
nrtion; and having no diret intercourse with
the parent flace, they depended upon another
province for the disposal of their productions,
as well as for the fupplv of their wants. Under
lich di:-cnuraements, population could not
increase, and induftrv was defitute of one
r-r:'-? o- chief incitement. But now that Spain, from

-.' motives which I lhall mer.;ion hereafter, hah

adopted a rne-w Ivtem, and carries on her

con;mmercc

tiommerce with the colonies in the Soutli Sea;, BOiotC
by ships which go round Cape Horn, a dire& i
intercourse is opened between Chili ahd the
Mother-country. The gold, the filvei', and
the other commodities of the province Will be
exchanged in its own harbours foi the manu-
factures of Europe. Chili may speedily rife
into that importance among the Spanilh fettle-
inents to which it is entitled by its natural ad-
vantages. It may become the granary of
Peru, and the other provinces along the Pacific
Ocean 3 it may supply themn with wine, with
cattle, with horfesi with hemp, and many
other articles for Which they now depend upori
Europe. Though the new system has been'
established only a few years, those effects of it
begin already to be observed'. If it shall be
adhered to with any steadiness foi- half a cen-
tury, one may venture to foretel, that popu-
lation, industry, and opulence will advance iri
this provitice with rapid progress.

To the eai of the Andes, the provinces of P"';""
Tucuman and. Rio de la Plata, border on man and

Rio de ]a

Chili, and like it were dependent on the Vice- plat..
royalty of Peru. These regions of immense
ixtent Itletch in length from north to south

t Campomanes; ii. Ij7.
VOL. Ill. T above

BOO 00 above thirteen hundred miles, and in breadth

VIL

L-.... mort than a thousand. This country, which
ad fh- s larger than most European kingdoms, na-

diog rurally forms itself into two great divisions,

one on the north, and the other on the south
of Rio de la Plata. The former comprehends
Paraguay, the famous miflions of the Jesuits,
and several other districts. But as disputes
have long subsisted between the courts of Spain
and Portugal, concerning its boundaries,
which, it is probable, will be soon finally
ascertained, either amicably, or by the deci-
sion of the i'word, I chule to reserve my account
of this northern division, until I enter upon
the history of Portuguese America, vith which
it is intimately connected; and, in relating it,
I lhall be able from authentic materials, sup-
plied both by Spain and Portugal, to give a
full and accurate defcriprion of the operations
and views of the Jesuits, in rearing that fingu-
lar fabric of policy in America, which has
drawn so much attention, and has been so im-
perfeStlv understood. The latter division of
the province contains the governments of Tu-
cuman and Buenos-Ayres, and to there I shall
at present confine my observations.

V>,, ofhe THE Spaniards entered this part of America
::. by the river De la Plata, and though a fuccef-

sion

sion of cruel disasters besel them in their early BoaK
attempts'to establish their dominion in it, they j
were encouraged to persist in the design, at
firfl by the hopes of discovering mines in the
interior country, arnd afterwards by the necef-
fity of occupying it, in order to prevent any
other nation from fettling there, and pene-
trating by this route into their rich pofleffions
in Peru. But except Buenos-Ayres, they have
made no fettlemrent of any consequence in all
the vast space which I have mentioned. There
are, indeed, scattered over it, a few places bn
which they have belfowed the name of towns,
and to which they have endeavoured to add
some dignity, by erecting them into biihoprics;
but they are no better than paltry villages,
each with two or three hundred inhabitants.
One circumstance, however, which was not
originally foreseen, has contributed to render
this diftri&, though thinly peopled, of confi-
derable importance. The province of Tucu-
man, together with the country to the south
of the Plata, instead of being covered. with
wood like other parts of America, forms one
vas open plain, almost without a. tree. The
foil is a deep-fertile mould, watered by many
streams descending from the Andes, and
clothed in perpetual verdure. In this rich
pasturage, the horses and' cattle imported by

T 2 the

B 0VO the Spaniards from Europe have multiplied to
'-l-- a degree which almost exceeds belief. This

has enabled the inhabitants not only to open
a lucrative trade. with Peru, by supplying it
with cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry
on a commerce no less beneficial, by the ex-
portation of hides to Europe. From both the
colony has derived great advantages. But its
commodious situation for carrying on contra-
band trade, has been the chief source of its
profperiry. While the court of Madrid ad-
hered to its ancient system, with refpe&t to its
communication with America, the river de la
Plata lay so much out of the course of Spanish
navigation, that interlopers, almost without
any rifque of being either observed or ob-
firucted, could pour in European manufac-
tures in such quantities, that these not only
supplied the wants of the colony, but were
conveyed into all the eastern diftrits of Peru.
.When the Portuguese in Brasil extended their
settlements to the banks of Rio de la Plata, a
new channel was opened, by which prohibited
commodities flowed into the Spanish territo-
ries, with fill more facility, and in greater
abundance. This illegal traffic, however de-
trimental to the parent ltate, contributed to
the increase of the settlement, which had the
immediate benefit of it, and Buenos Ayres

becanme

became gradually- a l'populous.' a'rd' bpUlernt'- B 0o
town. Wliat may 'be 't she efl-ef- of'thea i- t.---
tion lately-made in the' g6vernmenh't'f'this
colony, Ithe'hatdre of which shall be defiribed
in the fubtequent Book, cannot hitherto be
known,

ALL the other t'eritories of Spain in- the Other teri-

New World, the iflards excepted, of'wh6Fe toel, of
discovery and reduction'I have formerly given
an account, are comprehended under two great
divisions; the former deniominated the king-
dom Tierra Firm6, ' the' provinces 'of' which
fIretch along the Atlantic, from the'eaftern
frontier of New Spain to the mouth of-the'
Orinoco; the latter,' the New Kingdom of
Granada; fituared in 'the interior coutitrv.
With a ffort view of there' I hall'clofe thise
part of my work. - :

To the east of Veragua, the last province

'-lbiccE to the viceroy of' Mexico, lids 'the
isthmus of Darien. Thoigh it was in this Darien.
part of the 'continent that 'the Spaniards'fiift'
began to plant colohies, they have i'ade no
considerable progress in pebpling it. As fh'-
country is ' extremely mountairious, deluged
with rain during a good part of the year,' re-
markably unhealthful,' and contains no mines

T 3 of

s. .it of- great value, the Spaniards would probably

- hae abaandcded it altrogt-her, if they'had not

been aliured to continue by the excellence of
the harbour of Porto-bello on the onp-fea, and
that of Panama on the other. Thtfe have
been called the keys to the communication
between the north and south sea, between Spain
and her mort valuable colonies. In coafe-
quence -of this advantage, Panama has become
a considerable and thriving town. The pecu-
liar noxiousness of its climate has prevented
Porro-bc.lo froin increasing in the fame pro-
portion. As the inrtercourfe with the fettle-
ments in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on
by another channel, it is probable that both
Porto-bello and Panama will decline, when nQ
longer nourished and enriched by- that com-
merce to which they were indebted for their
prosperity, and even their existence.

.;: THE provinces of Carthagena and. Santa
U- *A.D . Martha stretch to the eastward of the.ifthmus

of Darien. The country frill continues moun-
tainous, bu: its vallies begin to expand, are
well watered, and extremely ferrile. Pedro de
H-eredia fubjeded this part of America to the
crown of Spain, about the year 1532. It is
thinly peopled, and of course ill cultivated. It
produces, however, a variety of valuable drugs,

and

and obme precious ffdnes, ,particularly eme- B 061 g
raids. But its chief importance is derived i* v-,-
from the hartbour of 'Carthageria, the safest
and belt fortified of any in the Americanido-
minions of Spain. In a situation so favour-
able, cbmmerce foon'began to flourilh. As
carlv as the'year 1544, it.feems to have been
a town of some note. But when Carthageba
was chdfen as the poet in which the galeons
fiould first begin to trade-on their arrival from
Europe, and to which' they were directed to
return, in order to prepare for their voyage'
homeward; the commetce of its inhabitants
was so much favoured by this arrangement,
that it soon becarme one of the most populotu,'
opulent, and beautiful cities in America.
There is, howeveri reason to apprehend, that
it has reached its highest point of exaltation,
and that it will be so far affeced by the change
in the Spanish fyflemn of trade with America,
which has withdrawn from it the desirable visits
of the galebns, as to feelat least a temporary
decline. But the wealth now collected there,
muit find or create employment for itself,
and may be turned with.advantage into some
new channel. Its harbour. is so safe, and so
conveniently situated for receiving comrmodi-
ties from Europe, its merchants have been so
long accufftomed to convey these into all the

T 4 adjacent

B O K adjacent provinces, that it is probable they
_i.' will Uil retain this branch of trade, and Car-

thagena continue to be a city of great im-
por.Lance.
v:z:_:'. ITHE province contiguous to Santa-Martha

on the east, was first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda,
in the year 1499'; and the Spaniards, on their
landing there, having observed some huts in
an Indian village built upon piles, in order to
raise them:above the stagnated water which
covered the plain, were led to bestow upon it
the name of Venezuela, or Little Venice, by
their usual propensity to find a resemblance,
between what they discovered in America, and
the obje6ts which were familiar to them in
Europe. They made some attempts to fettle
there, but with little success.. The final re-
duction of the province was accomplished by
means very different from those to which Spain
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the
New World. The ambition of Charles V.
often engaged him in operations of such variety
and extent, that his revenues were not ilffi-
cient to defray the expence of carrying them
into execution. Among other expedients for
,ilpplying the deficiency of his funds, he had

Bcck.i. -c'. . F. :':.

turroweci!

borrowed large furns fiom the Velfers:.of. B3.OKo,
Augfburgh, the most opulent merchants.at. , ---.
that time in Europe.'. By way of retribution;
for these, or in hopes, perhaps,..ofobtaining.a:
new loan, he bestowed upon them the province
of Venezuela, to.be held as an hereditary fief.
of the.,crown of. Castile, : on..condition .that
within a liimied, time they fho.l.ld render; them-
selves mafters:-pf,,thei country,-:and. efablilh a.
colony there.. - Under, the direftion ,of such
persons, it might .have. been .expeted, that a.
lettement would have,been established on max-
ims very different from those of the Spaniards,
and better calculated to encourage such useful
industry, as mercantile proprietors might. have
known to be the only certain source of profpe-
rity and opulence. But unfortunately.,they.
committed. the execution of their plan to some
of those soldiers of fortune with which Ger-
many abounded in the sixteenth century. These
adventurers, impatient to amass riches, that
they might speedily abandon a station which
they soon discovered to be very uncomfortable,
instead of planting a colony in order to culti-
vate and improve the country, wandered from
diltric't to diftria in search of mines, plunder-
in: the natives with unfeeling rapacity, or op-
prefing them by the imposition of intolerable
casks. In the course of a few years, their ava-

I rice

BOo K rice and exactions, in comparison with which
*'- .- those of the Spaniards were moderate, defo-

lated the province so completely,: that it could-
hardly afford them subsistence, and the Velfers
relinquilhed a property, from- 'hichthe in-
considerate conduct of their aents left them
no hope of ever deriving any.:advantage".
When- tie wiretched remaii'der of the Germants
dfei-ted Venezuela, the Spaniards again took
poffiefon Es it; 'but, nbtwithiftndirig rhaiy na-
mira advantages, it is one of their most lanh

uihing and unproductive fettleiments.
C-,=ndi THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are

the last of the Spanish territories on-this coast
but in relating the origin and operations of the
mercantile company, in which an exclusive
riht of trade with them has been vested, I
:hall hereafter have occasion to confider their
.-are and productions.

, -. , T NHE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an
. 'c.
: . inlard country of vast extent. This important

.ddiion was isade to the dominions of Spain
about the year 1536, by Sebaitian de Benal-
cazar anr, Gonzaio Ximenes de Quelada, two
of th- bravc: n;-d moi.t accompliihcd officers

' 'ivc -. Bagr.o Hi.S de eireneuela, p. 11, &c.

eliployed

employed in the. conquest of America. The BOK
former, who commanded at thattime in Quito, -, -
attacked it from the iouh; the.latter made.his
invasion from Santa Martha. on the north. As
the original inhabitants of this, egion were far-
ther advanced in improvemengn than an y people
in America uut-.the Mexieans sda P.erutians x,
they defenced the'mselves wi4t great; resolution
and. good coadu .. The abilitiesand peife~
verance of Benalaziar .and! Qefada surmounted
all oppoition~, though not without encounter-
ing many dangerS,'ad reduced the country, in'to
the form of a Spanish province.:

THE New :XKipgdom of Granada is so far

elevated abo-t- he level of the sea. that thotigfi
it approachsi almost t6 t he equator, the cli-
mate is rem'arkably termperate;. The fertility
of its vallies,is not inferior tothat of the richest
diltrits in America, and its higher grounds
yield gold and precious stones of various.kinds.
It is not by digging into theboiwels of the earth
that- this gold is found; it is mingJed with the
foil near the: surface, and separated from, it by
repeated waihin-g with- water. This operation:
is carried on wholly bynegro slaves;. for though
the chill subterranean air has been discovered,

Bookiv. vol. ii p. it4, &c.

by

BOOK by experienes- to befo fatalto them, that they

vii;
_ arcannot be employed in the deep-filver mines;

they are nrove capable of performing the other
fpeciesof labour-than Indians; As the natives
in the New Kingdom of Granada: are exempt
from that service, which has wafted their race
so .rapidly i other. parts of America, it is re-
markably populous. Some diftri&s yield gold
with a profufion-no.lefs wonderful than that in
the.vale of. Cineguilla, whith I have-formerly
mentionedi and' it is often fo4nd in large pe-
ptta, or grains, which manifest the abundance
in which it is produced. On a rising.ground
near Pamplona, single labourers have collected in
a day what was equal in value to a thousand pe-
sos Y. A late governor of SantaFe brought with
him to Spain a lump of virgin gold, estimated
to be worth seven hundred and forty pounds
flerling. This, which is, perhaps, the largest
.md fineit specimen ever found in the New
World, is now deposited in the royal cabinet
of Madrid. But without founding any cal-
culation on what is rare and extraordinary, the
value of the gold usually colle&ed in this coun-
try, particularly in the provinces of Popayan
and Choco, is of considerable amount. Its
:jwns are populous and flourishing. The

:c>::-.? _ Hi:.. del N. Re r.o, r. +Sl, MS. penes me.

number

number of inhabitants in almost every part of B O 0 K
the country daily increases. Cultivation and -
industry of various kinds begin to be encou-
raged, and to prosper. A considerable trade
is carried on with Carthagena, the produce of
the nines, and other commodities, being con-
veyed down the great river of St. Magdalen to
that city. On another quarter, the New King-
dom of Granada has a communication with the
Atlantic by the river Orinoco; but the country
which stretches along its banks towards the
ean-, is little known, and imperfectly occupied
liy the Spaniards.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

THE
H IS TORY

O F
A M E R I CA.

B O O K VIII.
A FTER tracing the progress of the Spa- BOOK

niards in their discoveries and conquests Vi,.

during more than half a century, I have con, Viewofthe
ducted them to that period when their authority trdc of the
was established over almost all the vast regions ion.i c
in the New World still subjec to their domi-
nion. The effeft of their settlements upon
the countries of which they took pofieflion, the
maxims which they adopted in forming their
new colonies, the interior firu&ure and policy
of these, together with the influence of their
progressive improvement upon the parent state,
and upon the commercial intercourse of na-

5 tions,

B °0 0- L ions, are the objects to which we now turn otur
'-r-.-J attention.

Dono.'- Tns first visible confequence.of the efta-
e' taib blimfienrs made by the Spaniards in America,
th==. was the diminution of the ancient inhabitants,

to a degree equally astonishing and deplorable.
I have already, on different occasions, men-
tioned the disastrous influence under which the
connection of the Americans with the people
of our hemilfhere commenced, both in the
ifands, and in levcral parts of the continent,
and have touched upon various causes of their
rapid consumption. Wherever the inhabitants
of America had resolution to take arms in de-
fence of their liberty and rights, many pe-
rifhed in the unequal contelt, and werecut off
by their fierce invaders. But the greatest de-
folation was followed after the sword was sheath-
e-d, and the conquerors were fettled in tran-

thi inte quillirv. It was in the islands, and in those
;aid. ..dn provinces of the continent which firetch from
the coni- the Gulf of Trinidad to the confines of Mexice,
"t; that the fatal effects of the Spanili dominion

were first and most sensibly felt. All these were
occupied either by wandering tribes of hunters,
or by such as had made but small progrefa in
cultivation and industry. When they were

compelled

compelled by their new masters to take up a BO 0ol
fixed residence, and to apply to regular labour; v'
when tasks were imposed upon them difpropor-
tioned to their ffrength, and were exacted with
unrelenting severity, they possessed not vigour
either of mind or of body to sustain this unusual
load ofoppreffion. Dejetion and despair drove
many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine destroyed more. In all those ex-
tensive regions, the original race of inhabitants
wafted away; in tome it was totally extin-
guilhed. In Mexico, where a powerful and
martial people diitinguifled their opposition to
the Spaniards by efobrrs of courage worthy of
a better fate, great numbers fell in the field;
and there, as well as in Peru, still greater
numbers perished under the hardihips of at-
rending the Spanish armies in their various ex-
ctdiitions and civil wars, worn out with the in-
ceii.nt toil of carrying their baggage, provi-
sions, and military itores.

Et:r neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- In New

niards were so dellrucive to the people of Mex- pr prun
rco and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with
wiih I they eitabiifhed their new settlements.
'ii e tormner were temporary calamities, fatal
to individuals; the latter was a permanent evil,
v.'hich, with gradual consumption, wafted the

Vi.. III. U nation,

B °0 0 tions% are the objects to which we now turn our
L--M-_ attention.

or,0"o~- THi first visible consequence. of the efta-
Mien- :t bliifhfents made by the Spaniards in America,
f. efs£c cf cf
4t=n. was the diminution of the ancient inhabitants,

to a degree equally aftonilhing and deplorable.
I have already, on different occasions, men-
tioned the diiaftrous influence under which the
connecion of the Americans with the people
of our hemisphere commenced, both in the
islands, and in ievcral parts of the continent,
and have touched upon various causes of their
rapid confuimption. Wherever the inhabitants
of America had refolntion to take arms in de-
fence of their liberty and rights, many pe-
riihed in the unequal conreil, and were,cut off
by their fierce invaders. But the greatest de-
folation was followed after the sword was sheath-
ed, and the conquerors were fettled in tran-

Cti" quillirv. It was in the islands, and in those
iftind provinces of the continent which stretch from
the con- the Gulf of Trinidad to the confines of Mexico,

that the fatal effects of the Spanifl dominion
were firit and most fenlibly felt. All these were
occupied either by wandering tribes of hunters,
or by such as had made but small progress. in
cultivation and induRfry. When they were

compelled

compelled by their new masters to take up a BOV K
fixed residence, and to apply to regular labour; ---i
when tafls were imposed upon them difpropor-
tioned to their strength, and were exacted with
unrelenting severity, they possessed not vigour
either of mind or of body to sustain this unusual
load of oppression. Dejetion and despair drove
many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine destroyed more. In all those ex-
tensive regions, the original race of inhabitants
waftcd away; in some it was totally extin-
guilhed. In Mexico, where a powerful and
martial people diftinguifled their opposition to
the Spaniards by efforts of courage worthy of
a better fate, great numbers fell in the field;
and there, as well as in Peru, still greater
numbers perifled under the hardflips of at-
tending the Spanish armies in their various ex-
peditions and civil wars, worn out with the in-
cciih.nt toil of carrying their baggage, provi-
sions, and military stores.

ELT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- in New

Spain and

n'ia!ds were so delfrutive to the people of Mex- P'Pu.
ico and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with
wvii.i they established their new settlements.
T'ie former were temporary calamities, fatal
to individuals; the latter was a permanent evil,
vhich, w ith gradual consumption, wafted the

V . II. U nation.

B 0 K nation. When the provinces of Mexico and
'--- e- Peru were divided among the conquerors, each

was eager to obtain a district, from which he
might cxpect an instantaneous recompence for
all his lIrvices. Soldiers accustomed to the
careletiTefs and dissipation of a military life,
had neither industry to carry on any plan of
regular cultivation, nor patience to wait for its
flow, bu: certain returns. Instead of fettling
in the vallies occupied by the natives, where
the fer:ilitv of the foil would have amply re-
-wr.'ed the diligence of the planter, they chose
to ix their (tations in iome of the mountainous
rceLuns, frequent both in New Spain and in
Peru. To iearch for mines of gold and silver,
was the chief obec;t of their activity. The vast
prcipects which this opens, and the alluring
hopes which i; continually prelents, correspond
wonderfullv with the Ipirit of enterprize and
adventure that animated the firif emigrants to
America in every part of their conduct. In
order tn push forward those favourite projecs,
;o ma-.r hands were wanted, that the service of
the r.a:;.es became indifpenfablv requisite.
They vere, a.cordinglv, compelled to aban-
don their ancient habitations in the plains, and
driven in troxds to the mountains. This fud-
den transition from the sultry climate of the
val!cs, to the chill penetrating air peculiar to

high

high lands in the torrid zone the fatigue of s o

o ;

exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholefone nou-
rillimcnt, and the delpondency occasioned by
a Ipecies of oppression to. which they were not
:!ccuftoined, and of which they saw no end, as-
fci'ted them nearly as much as their less indus-
trious countrymen in the islands. They funk
under the united pressure of those calamities,
and melted away with almost equal rapidity z.
In consequence of this, together with the in-
trodudction of the small-pox, a malady un-
known in 'America, and extremely fatal to the
natives , the number of people both in Spain
and Peru was so much reduced, that in a few
years the accounts of their ancient population
appeared almost incredible b

SUCH are the mofl considerable events and Nt therc.

fp-t O! a-y

caulis, which, by their combined operation, fI;emof
con tibuted to depopulate America. Without P":cy'i
attending to these, many authors, aftoniflled at
the suddenness of the desolation, have ascribed
this unexampled event to a fyftcm of policy no
iJls profound than atrocious. The Spaniards,
as they pretend, conscious of their own inability
to occupy the vast regions which they had dif-

1 Torquemada, i. 613. B. Diaz, c. 124. Her-
rera, dic. 2. lib. x. c. 4. Ulloa Entreten, 2c6.

b Torquem. 615. 642, 643. See NOTE XL.

U 2 covered,

BOOK covered, and foreseeing the imporibilitv of

maintaining their authority over a people in-
finitel]y superior to themselves in number, in
order to preserve Amrerica, resolved to exter-
minare the inhabitants, and by converting a
great part of the country into a defart, endea-
voured to secure their own dominion over it'.
But nations seldom extend their views to ob-
jects so remote, or lay their plansfo deep; and,
for the honour of humanity, we may observe,
that no nation ever deliberately formed such an
execrable scheme. The Spanish monarchs, far
from acting upon any such fyltem of deftruc-
tion, were uniformly solicitous for the prefer-
vation of their new subjects. With Isabella,
zeal for propagating the christian faith, together
with the desire of communicating the know-
ledge of truth, and the consolations of religion
to people deffiture of spiritual light, were more
than ofrenfible motives for encouraging Co-
lumbus to attempt his discoveries. Upon his
success, she endeavoured to fulfil her pious pur-
pose, and manifested the most tender concern
to secure not only religious instruction, but
mild treatment, to tha: inoffensive race of men
subjected to her crown,. Her succesSors adopt-
ed the fame ideas; and, on many occasions,

S-e NOTE XLI. d See NOTE XLTI.

which

which I have mentioned, their authority was B0ooK
interposed in the most vigorous exertions, to '-
protet the people of America from the op-
preflion of their Spanish subjects. Their regu-
lations for this purpose were numerous, and
often repeated. They were framed with wis-
dom, and dictated by humanity. After their
poffcflions in the New World became so ex-
tensive, as might have excited some apprehen-
lions of difficulty in retaining their dominion
over them, the spirit of their regilations was
as mild as when their settlements were confined
to the islands alone. Their solicitude to pro-
tec the Indians seems rather to have augmented
as their acquisitions increaed ; and from ar-
dour to accomplifli this, they enaced, and en-
deavoured to enforce the execution of laws,
which excited a formidable rebellion in one of
their colonies, and spread alarm and dilaffec-
tion through all the reft. But the avarice of
individuals was too violent to be controuled by.
the authority of laws. Rapacious and daring
adventurers, far removed from the feat of go-
vernment, little accustomed to the reifraints
of military discipline while in service, and
rill less disposed to refpec the feeble jurif-
diction of civil power in an infant colony, de-
spifcd or eluded every regulation that set bounds
to their exactions and tyranny. The parent

U 3 state,

B 0o,1 state, with persevering attention, iffuc. edics

t- o prevent the opprefiion of the Indians; the
coloni fs, regardless of these, or trusting to
their difance for impunity, continued to con-
fider, and treat them as slaves. The governors
thermfelves, and other officers employed in the
colonies, several of wvhom were as indigent and
rapacious as the adventurers over whom they
pref:dcd, were too apt to adopt their con-
temr-utous ideas of the conquered people;
and, instead of checking, encouraged or con-
nived at their excelTes. The deibla.ion of the
New Wocrld fho'.Jid ro: then be charged on the
co-:rt of Spain, or be confidered as the effect
of an. ifi 4em of policv adopred there. It ought
to be imputed whollv to the conquerors and
fir: 1parnters of America, who, by measures
no le:s incorfidrrate than unjuit, counteraEted
the ed'its of their sovereign, and have brought
disgrace upon their country.

no'; es. WITH still greater injuffice, have many au-
f' of : i . . . . . . . . .

r .
E..;.. thors reprelented the intolerating spirit of the

Roman Catholic religion, as the caule of ex-
terminating the Americans, and have accused
the roaniih ecclefiallics of animating their
countrymen to the fllaughter of that innocent
people, as idolators and enemies of God. But
the first missionaries who visited America,

though

though weak and illiterate, were pious men. B 0 K

viii.

They early espoused the defence of the natives, '---i
and vindicated their character from the as-
perfions of their conquerors, who, describing
them as incapable of being formed to the of-
sices of civil life, or of comprehending the doc-
trines of religion, contended, that they were
a subordinate race of men, on whom the hand
of nature had set the mark of servitude. From
the accounts which I have given of the hu-
mane and persevering zeal of the Spanill mif-
fionaries, in protecting the helpless flock com-
mitted to their charge, they appear in a light
which refle&s lustre upon their function. They
were ministers of peace, who endeavoured to
wrclt the rod from the hands of oppreflbrs.
To their powerful interposition, the Americans
were indebted for every regulation tending to
mintigate the rigour of their fate. The clergy
in the Spanish settlements, regular as well as
fciilir, are (till confidered by the Indians as
their natural guardians, to whom they have re-
cou:cfe under the hardships and exactions to
whi. ih they are too often cxpofed '

B':T, notwithstanding the rapid depopula- Thr-n.lm
t'on of America, a very conliderable number J,,',,:2'hgi

rer.ainli;g.
See NOTE XLII1.

U4 of

-BOK -ofthtt-mative race fiill remains both in Mexico
. r .. and--Pen, .especially in thole parts which were

:nor exposed to the first fury of the Spanish
.arms, or desolated by the first efforts of their
indultry, f/ill more ruinous. In Guatimala,
Chiapa, Nicaragua, and the other delightful
provinces of the Mexican empire, which
firetch along the south-sea, the race of In-
dians is frill numerous. Their icttlements
in lome places are io populous, as to merit
the name of cities'. In the three audiences
into which New S;ain is divided, there are at
leaf' two millions of Indians; a pitiful rem-
nant, indeed, of its ancient population, but
i.;ch as fiis l futr.s a body of people superior in
num-;cr to thiat of;

ta1 rhe other inhabitants of

this vait countr-y . In Peru ieveral diitricls,
particr:;arl, in the kingdom of Quito, are oc-
cupied aimoit entirely by Indians. In other
provinces, they are mingled with die Spaniards,
and in many of their f;ttlements practile the
i.echanic arts, and fill -moit of the inferior fta-
tions in iucie:v. As the inhabitants both of
Mexicoio an Peru were accufiomed to a fixed
residence, and to iome deFree of regular in-
duifry, le-s violence was recuifite in bringing
them to ioirc conformity with the European

f See CNOTE XIv. . Scc NOTE XLV.

modes

modes of civil life;. Balt!uwherever, the Spa- B O K
niards fettled :ao.ngthe- fav.age-tribes:of Ame- - r--
rica, their attempts to.incorporate with.them
have been, always fruitless, and often fatal. to
the natives. Impatient of restraint, and dif-
daining labour as a mark of servility, they
either abandoned their original feats, and fought
for independence in mountains and forests in-
acccflible to their oppressors, or perilhed when
reduced to a state repugnant to their ancient
ideas and habits. In the districts adjacent to
Carthagena, to Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres,
the desolation is more general than even in those
parts of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spa-
niards have taken most full pofleflion.

BUT the eflablifhments of the Spaniards in General

the New World, though fatal to its ancient in- po'iiy of
habitants, were made at a period when that Spaiinits

colonies.

monarchy was capable of forming them to best
advantage. By the union of all its petty king-
doms, Spain was become a powerful slate, equal
to Io great an undertaking. Its monarchs,
having extended their prerogative far beyond
the limits which once circumscribed the regal
power in every kingdom of Europe, were
hardly fubjeft to controul, either in concerting
or in executing their measures. In every wide
extended empire, the form of government must

3 be

eo OK be simple, and the sovereign authority such,
---;. . that its resolutions may be taken with promp-

titude, and may pervade the whole with sus-
ficient force. Such was the power of the Spa-
nifh monarchs, when they were called to deli-
berate concerning the mode of establishing their
dominion overthe most remote provinces, which
had ever been fubiccted to any European state.
In this deliberation, they felt themselves under
no constitutional restraint, and that, as inde-
pendent masters of their own resolves, they
rr.ght issue the ediJs reouifite for modelling
the overnment of the new colonies, by a mere
adt of prerogative.

' 'r- TH iS early intert Dftion of the Spanifli crown,
- .-. in order to reg'ila:e the polcv and trade of its

colos:is, is a pcc;!ari;tv .'iiich distinguishes
their prorrc!s tro: '.: ah of the colonies of any
other Euri:pean n:.:ion. \\.'ien the Portuguese,
thce IEnrl-F', -nd Frcr.ch, tock pofrfciion of
the rev-.'ns in \imcrica which thev now oc-
cu'Ip, the .dvanta-cs which t':hle pro;nifed to
-'iId v.ere if re-n;,t: an.d c::certain, that their
colon:es v.'cre l;'! .r'ed to l:rutrgle through a
h.zrd ins'-'cv, almoit without guidance or pro-
tection tf:;n the parent .-a:e. But gold and
f;lv r, tlhe irf. i:oc: citons of the Spanili fettle-
r.ents in the _Newv W\orld, v.-ere more alluringr,

ai;l

and immediately attra&ed the attention of their B ° ocp
monarchs. Though they had contributed little i _
to the discovery, and almost nothing to the
conquest of the New World, they instantly as-
lfumed the fun&tion of its legislators; and ha-
ving acquired a species of dominion formerly
unknown, they formed a plan for exercising it,
to which nothing similar occurs in the history
of human affairs.

TIoE fundamental maxim of Spanifl ju- All poer

and property

rifprudence with refpea to America, is to vcnid in the
confider what has been acquired there as
vcicld in the crown, rather than in the itate.
By the bull of Alexander VI. on which, as
i:s great charter, Spain founded its right,
al! the regions that had been, or should be
aiifcovered, were beltowed as a free gift upon
Ferdind and and Jbella. They and their fuc-
ccllbrs were uniformly held to be the universal
proprietors of the vast territories, which the
a.rms of their fubjeats conquered in the New

o rld. From them, all grants of land there

P.owcd, and to them they finally returned. The
leaders who conduted the various expeditions,
the governors who prcfided over the different
colonies, the officers of justice, and the mini-
flers of religion, were all appointed by their
:,tcoarity, and removable at their pleasure.

The

BooK; The people who composed infant settlements
--,~ .' were intitled to no privileges independent of

the sovereign, or that served as a barrier against
the power of the crown. It is true, that when
towns were built, and formed into bodies cor-
porate, the citizens were permitted to elect
their own magistrates, who governed them by
laws which the community enacted. Even in
the most despotic fiates, this feeble spark of
liberty is not extinguilhed. But in the cities
of Spanish America, this jurisdiction is merely
municipal, and is confined to the regulation of
their own interior commerce and police. In
whatever relates to public government, and
the general interest, the will of the sovereign
is law. No political power originates from the
people. All centres in the crown, and in the
oicers of its nomination.

..... '"" VH.ENx the conquests of the Spaniards in

domm;niors

soil.n r-- America were completed, their monarchs, in

jedc tio h* o
...>... forrring the plan of interior policy for their

new dominions, divided them into two im-
mense governments, one subjet to the viceroy
of New Sp:in, the other to the viceroy of Peru.
The juri!dUicion of the former ex:ended over
all the provinces belonging to Spain in the
northern d:vifion of the American continent.
Under that of the latcr, swas comprehended

whatever

whatever she possessed in South America. This B O 'x
arrangement, which, from the beginning, was
attended with many inconveniencies, became
intolerable when the remote provinces of each
viceroyalty began to improve in industry and
population. The people complained of their!
lubjetion to a superior, whose place of refi-
dencc was so distant, or so inaccessible, as al-
most excluded them from any intercourse with
the feat of government. The authority of the
viceroy over diftrits so far removed from his
own eye and observation, was unavoidably both
feeble and ill direted. As a remedy for those
evils, a third viceroyalty has been established
in the present century, at Santa Fe de Bogota,
the capital of the new kingdom of Granada,
the jurifdi&cion of which extends over the whole
kingdom of Tierra Firm;, and the province of
Qiitoh. Those viceroys not only represent Theirpow.
the person of their sovereign, but possess his ''
regal prerogatives within the precincts of their
own governments, in their utmost extent. Like
him, they exercise supreme authority in every
department of government, civil, military, and
criminal. They have the sole right of nomi-
nating the persons who hold many offices of
the highest importance, and the occasional pri-

h Voy. deUlloa, i. 23. 255.

vilege

BOOK vilege of supplying such as are in the royal
i .----. gift, until the successor appointed by the king

mhall arrive. The external pomp of their go-
vernment is suited to its real dignity and power.
Their courts are formed upon the model of that
at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a house-
hold regularly established, numerous attend-
ants, and ensigns of command, displaying such
magnificence, as hardly retains the appearance
of delegated authority '.
Conr.S o' BUT as the viceroys cannot dilcharge in per-

son the functions of a supreme magistrate in
every part of their extensive jurifdiftion, they
are aided in their government by officers and
tribunals ftmilar to those in Spain. The con-
duct of civil affairs in the various provinces and
ditiricts, into which the Spaniih dominions in
America are divided, is committed to magi-
firates of various orders and denorrinations;
iome appointed by the king, others by the
viceroy, but all subject to the command of the
latter, and amenable to his jurildi-ticn. The
administration of justice is velfed in tribunals,
known by the rn:ne of /Audienccs, and formed
upon the model of the court of Chancery in
Spain. Theie are eleven in number, and dif-

Ut'oa, Vo;. i. 43;. Gage, 61.

penfe

penL' .justice to as many districts, into which QgrQ,-
the Spanifi dominions in America are divided'. v_
The number of judges in the court of Audi-
ence is various, according to the extent and
importance of their jurifdieion. The flatiop
is no less honourable than lucrative, and is
commonly filled by persons of such abilities
and merit as renders this tribunal extremely
refpeciable. Both civil and criminal causes
come under their cognizance, and for each pe-
culiar judges are set apart. Though it is only Theirjurif.
in the most despotic governments, that the so-
vereign exercises in person the formidable pre-
rogative of administering justice to his subje&s,
and in absolving, or condemning, consults no
law but what is deposited in his own breaftj
though, in all the monarchies of Europe, ju-
dicial authority is committed to magistrates,
whose decisions are regulated by known laws
and eltablifhed forms, the Spanish viceroys
have often attempted to intrude themselves
into the feat of justice, and with an ambi-
tion which their distance from the controul
of a superior, rendered bold, have aspired
ar a power which their master does not ven-
ture to assume. In order to check an usurp-
ation which muf have annihilated juflice and

k See NOTE XLVI.

fecul-ty

BOOK fecurirt in the Spanilh colonies, by subjecting
-,- _ the lives and property of all to the will of a

single man, the viceroys have been prohibited,
in the most explicit terms, by repeated laws,
from interfering in the judicial proceedings of
the courts of Audience, or from delivering an
opinion, or giving a voice with relpe& to any
point litigated before them '. In some parti-
cular cafes, in which any question of civil right
is involved, even the political regulations of
the viceroy may be brought under the review
of the court of Audience, which, in thole in-
stances, may be deemed an intermediate power
placed between him and the people, as a con-
ftitutional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdic-
tion. But as legal restraints on a person who
represents the sovereign, and is clothed with
his authority, are little suited to the genius of
Spanish policy; the hesitation and reserve with
which it confers this power on the courts of
Audience, are remarkable. They may advise,
they may remon trate, but in the event of a
dire&t colifion between their opinion and the
will of the viceroy, what he determines must
be carried into execution, and nothing remains
for them, but to lay the matter before the king

I R ap. . ib . :i:. "-. i. ;;. ;?. 44. lib. iii. tit. iii.

1~. 3, 5~~. ~and

and

and the council' of tieInd.ies',T ,BtoAitjnbleri'
titled to remontirate; and-infpor guin ft

i pgir r

gp ~

son, before whoin all.others mulfbe-fis-enrsn.r
tamely submit to his -decrees, is a-ispriviiege
which adds'dignity: to the courts of -Audience;
This is-farther-augmented by another circaunm
stance. -Upon;the death of a viceroy, wiidlou
any provision of a successor by the kings, the
fuprelme power is vested in tle court of Audi-
ence resident in the capital of the viceroyalty,
and the senior judge, aflifted by his brethren,
exercises all the funcions of the viceroy while
the office continues vacant". In matters which
come under the cognizance of the Audiences,
in the course of their ordinary jurifdi6tionj as
courts of justice, their sentences are. final in
every litigation concerning property of less va.
lue than fix thousand pesos but when the £ub*
ject in ditpute exceeds that fum, their .decisions
are iubteEt to review, and may be carried .by
appeal before the royal council of the Indies°.

IN this.council, one of the molt considerable Council of

in the monarchy for dignity and power, is
veited the supreme government ,of all the Spa-.
nifh dominons in America. It was first eftac

m Solorz. De jurelnd. lib. ivy. 3. . n.p, 41,. Recop.
lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1. 34. lib. v. tit. ix. 1. i.

Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 57, &c.

° Recop. lib. v. tit. xiii. 1. i, &c.
VOL. III. X blifhed

B3OK security in the Spanish colonies, by fubijefing
a-,- the lives and property of ail to the will of a

single man, the viceroys have been prohibited,
in the motl explicit terms, by repeated laws,
from interfering in the judicial proceedings of
the courts of Audience, or from delivering an
opinion, or giving a voice with respect to any
point litigated before them'. In some parti-
cular cafes, in which any question of civil right
is involved, even the political regulations of
the viceroy may be brought under the review
of the court of Audience, which, in thole in-
stances, may be deemed an intermediate power
placed between him and the people, as a con-
ftitutional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdic-
tion. But as legal reflraints on a person who
represents the fovcreign, and is clothed with
his authority, are little suited to the genius of
Spanish policy; the hesitation and reserve with
which it confers this power on the courts of
Audience, are remarkable. They may advise,
they may remonstrate, but in the event of a
d:rest collision between their opinion and the
will of :he viceroy, what he determines must
be carried into execution, and nothing remains
for them, but to lay the matter before the king

I Recap. i . .

b . - . 3;. 4; . 4 . lib. iii. tit. iii.
]. 3., ..a

and

and the council, of the Indies ; tBlutwaQ-rq-yR Qi
titled to remonftrate;,and^ inforsn gainft ip* '-
Ton, before whomn all others multt bqe.dtenr"jo
tamely submit to his -decrees, =is a-.privi1ege
which adds;dignity:to the courts of -Audience;
This is-farther:augmented by another eircumt
stance. -U;pon:the death of a viceroy3 wiithomt
any provision -of a successor by the king, the
fupremie power is vested in the court of Audi-
ence resident in the capital of the vicerpyaltyj
and the senior judge, affited by his brethren,
exercises al1 the functions of the viceroy while
the office continues vacant". In matters which
come under the cognizance of the Audiences,
in the course of their ordinary jurifdi6tionj.as
courts of justice, their sentences are final in
every litigation concerning property of less va-
lue than fix choufand pesos ; but when.the sub,
jet in diipute exceeds that fum, their.decifions
are Ifbjecd to review, and may be carried .by
appeal before the royal council of the IndiesP.

IN this council, one of the molt considerable Courc;l of

the I rnlcr.

in the monarchy for dignity and :powvers i
veited the supreme government of all the Spag-
nifh dominons in America. It was first efi-

" golorz. De Jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 49, 4-. Recop.
lib. ii. tit. xv. I. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1. 34. lib. v. tit. ix. 1. .

" Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 57, &c.
o Recop. lib. v. tit. xiii. 1. I, &c.
VOL. III. X blifhed

BOOK blifhed by Ferdinand, in the year ISII, and

A-=-v-. brought into a more perfece form by Charles V.
I. o.Cr. in the year I524. Itsjurifdic'ion extends to

every department, ecclesiastical, civil, mili-
tar,-, and commercial. All laws and ordinances
relative to the government and police of the
colonies originate there, and muff be approved
of by two-thirds of the members, before they
are ifiued in the name of the king. All the
offices, of which the nomination is reserved to
the crown, are conferred in this council. To
it each peroln employed in America, from the
viceroy downwards, is accountable. It reviews
their conduct, rewards their services, and in-
flicts the punishments due to their malverfa-
tions . Before it, is laid whatever intelli-
gence, either public or secret, is received from
America, and every scheme of improving the
administration, the police, or the commerce of
the colonies, is iubnitted to its consideration.
From the fir2t institution of the council of the
Indies, it has been the constant objec of the
catholic monarchs, to maintain its authority,
and to make such additions from time to time,
both to its power and its splendor, as might
render it formidable to all their fubjets in the
Nevw W-orld. Whatever degree of public
order and virtue still remains in that country,
v.:lere so nm.v c;rcum;::nces conspire to relax

. ' ;
. ;; ::.:. i, 2, &C.

the

the former, and to corrupt the latter, may be B0 oKo
ascribed in a great measure to the wife regula- .--r.
tions and vigilant inspection of this refpeEtable
tribunal 9

As the king is supposed to be always present Cara deCon.

in his council of the Indies, its meetings are trat
held in the place where he resides. Another
tribunal has been instituted, in order to regu-
late such commercial affairs as required the
immediate and personal infpeaion of those
appointed to superintend them. This is called
Canfa de la Contratacion, or the house of trade,
and was established in Seville, to whose port
commerce with the New World was confined,
as early as the year 50oI. It may be confi- isfrnc.
dered both as a board of trade, and as a court '""''
of judicature. In the former capacity, it
takes cognizance of whatever relates to the in-
tercourfe of Spain with America, it regulates
what commodities should be exported thither,
and has the inspection offuch as are received in
return. It decides concerning the departure of
the fleets for the Weft Indies, the freight, and
burden of the ships, their equipment, and defti-
nation. In the latter capacity, it judges with re-
fipcet to every question, civil, commercial, or
criminal, arising in consequence of the tranf-
ations of Spain with America; and in both

' Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. 1. 1z,

X 2 these

B vu L these departments, its decisions are exempted
.----1' from the review of any court but that of the

council of the Indies '.

SUCH is the great outline of that system of

government, which Spain has established in
her American colonies. To enumerate the
various subordinate boards and officers em-
ployed in the administration of justice, in col-
leCting the public revenue, and in regulating
the interior police of the country; to describe
their different funcions, and to enquire into
the mode and effeic of their operations; would
prove a detail no less intricate than minute and
uninteresting.

Fr'i :.-e, TEa first ibje& of the Spanish monarchs
ta sc--re al

·].5.: was to secure the producions of the colonies to
".'. the parent state, by an absolute prohibition of

any intercourse with foreign nations. They
took poffeflion of America by right of con-
quest, and conscious not only of the feebleness
of their infant settlements, but aware of the
difficulty in eftablilhing their dominion over
such vast regions, or in retaining so many re-
lutcant nations under the yoke, they dreaded
the intrusion of 1lrangers; they even shunned
their infpeci:on, and endeavoured to keep

r Reco?. !i.. i:.: . i. diia Nore de la Contrata-
c'en, lib.. t;.

X them

them at a distance from their coasts. This BOoK
spirit of jealousy and exclusion, which at firlt -
was natural, and perhaps necessary, augmented
as their poffe(lions in America extended, and
the value of them came to be more fully in-
deritood. In consequence of it, a fyflem of
colonizing was introduced, to which there had
hitherto been nothing similar among mankind.
In the ancient world, it was not uncommon to
fend forth colonies. But they were of two
kinds only. They were either migrations,
which served to disburden a IRate of its super-
fluous subjects, when they multiplied too fast
for the territory which they occupied: or they
were military detachments stationed, as garri-
ions, in a conquered province. The colonies
of some Greek republics, and the swarms of
northern barbarians which fettled in different
parts of Europe, were of the firIt species. The
Roman colonies were of the second. In the
former, the conne&ion with the mother-country
quickly ceased, and they became independent
states. In the latter, as the disjunction was
not complete, the dependence continued. In ReguLitons

for ;lia: pur.

their American settlements, the Spanish mo- piu,.e
narchs took what was peculiar to each, and
ltudied to unite them. By fending colonies to
regions so remote, by .etablifhing in each a
form of interior policy and adminiftrarion,
under diftinft governors, and with peculiar

X 3 laws,

B 0 0 O laws, they disjoined them from the mother-

- country. By retaining in their own hands the

rights oflegiflation, as well as that of imposing
taxes, together with the power of nominating
the persons who filled every department, civil
or military, they secured their dependence.
Happily for Spain, the situation of her colonies
was such, as rendered it possible to reduce this
new idea into practice. Almost all the coun-
tries which she had discovered and occupied,
lay within the tropics. The prodluions of
that large portion of the globe, are different
from those of Europe, even in its most south-
ern provinces. The qualities of the climate
and of tile boil naturaily turn the industry of
such as fettle there into new channels. When
the Spaniards first took pofirelion of their do-
mains in America, the precious metais which
they yielded, were the only object that at-
tracted their attention. Even when their es-
forts began to take a better direction, they em-
ployed themselves almost wholly in rearing
such peculiar productions of the climate, as,
from t:eir r ra.ir or '..i:e, v.er. es chief de-
mand in the mother-country. Allured by vast
pro', eC;s of immediate wealth, they disdained
to w;!}e their indufr orn %\hat was less lu-
crative, but c.f Iuperier m-C.ilnt. In order to
render i- irm ;.ibi to aorrect this error, and
rt -."e;--.: them e r,.O making any efiorrs in

inclufiry

i-ndustry which might interfere with those of B o0K
the mother-country, the establishment of fe- ---
veral species of manufactures, and even the
culture of the vine, or olive, are prohibited in
the Spanish colonies ', under revere penalties '.
They mull trust entirely to the mother-country
for the objets of primary neceflity. Their
clothes, their furniture, their instruments of
labour, their luxuries, and even a considerable
part of the provisions which they consume,
were imported from Spain. During a'great
part of the sixteenth century, Spain possessing
an extensive commerce and flourishing manu-
facAures, could supply with ease the growing
demands of her colonies, from her own stores.
The produce of their mines and plantations was
given in exchange for these. But all that the
colonies received, as well as all that they gave,
was conveyed in Spanish bottoms. No vessel
belonging to the colonies was ever permitted to
carry the commodities of America to Europe.
Even the commercial intercourse of one colony
with another, was either absolutely prohibited,
or limited by many jealous restrictions. All
that America yields flows into the ports of
Spain ; all that it consumes must issue from
them. No foreigner can enter its colonies
without express permiflon; no vessel of any

Sec NOTE XLVII.
t C. Ulloa Retab. dcs Manus. &c. p. zo6.

X 4 foreign

Bv si foreigir nation is received into their harbours

_ - rand the pains of death, with confiscation of

moveables, are denounced against every inha-
bitant who prefurnes to trade with them ".
Thus the colonies are kept in a state of perpe-
tual pupillage; and by the introduction of this
commercial dependence, a refinement in policy
of which Spain let the first example to the Eu-
ropean nations, the fupremaoy of the parent
state hath been maintained over remote colonies
during two centuries and a half.

?':-3 ." SUCH. are the capital maxims to which the
pn-i:.n Spanith monarchs seem to have attended in

: forinig their new settlements in America.

But they could not plant with the fame rapidity
that they had destroyed; and, from many
concurring causes, their progress was extremely
flow, in filling up the immenie void which their
dcvatlations had occasioned. As soon as the
rage for dilcovery and adventure began to
abate, the Spaniards opened their eyes to dan-
gers and distresses, which at firit they did not
perceive, or had despised. The numerous
hardlhips with which the members of infant
colonies have to struggle, the diseases of un-
whole!b-e climates, fatal to the constitution of
Europeans; the difficulty of bringing a coun-
tr-, covered with forests, into culture; the

cR^cril. lib. ix. ti. ,ii, w. a.
4. 7, &c

want

want of handslneefflaary for labour inifome pro- slo K
vinces, an''the flow reward ds' industry in all,
unless where 'het accidental discovery- of mines
enriched 'a 'few 'fortunate adventurers, were
evils univerfilly felt'and magnified, 'Difcou-
raged by the view of these, the spirit of migra-
tion was so much damped, that sixty years after
the discovery of the New World, ,the number
of Spaniards in all its provinces is computed
not to have excedede fifteen thousand'.

THE mode in which property was distributed Dicouraged

by the 1tate

in the Spanish colonies, and the regulations oiproperty,
eltablifhed with refpe& to the tranfiniffion:of
it, whether by derfent or by sale, were ex-
trcmely unfavourable to population. In order
to promote a rapid increase of people in! any
new settlement, property in land ought to be
divided into fimall shares, and the alienation of
it should be rendered extremely easy Y. But the
rapacioufiefs of the Spanish conquerors of the
New World paid no regard to this fundamental
maxim of policy; and, as theypoffeffed power,
which enabled them to gratify the utmost ex-
travagance of their wilhes, many seized districts
and provinces of vast extent, and held them
as encomiendas. By degrees they obtained the

See NOTE XLVIII.
Dr r. Smith's Inquiry, ii, 166.

privilege

BOOK privilege of converting a part of these into
.',lay'r.ijgcs, a species of fief, introduced into.

the Spaninh iyilen of feudal jurilprudence2,
which can neither be divided nor alienated.
Thus a great portion of landed property, un-
der this rigid form of entail, is withheld from
circulation, and deicends from father to son
uniimproved, and of little value either to the
proprietor or to the comimunity. In the ac-
coui which I have given of the reduftion of
Peru, various examples occur of enormous
tracts of country occupied by some of the con-
querors . The exceifes in other provinces
were similar, for as the value of the lands
which tiey acquired, was originally estimated
according to the number of Indians which lived
upon them, America was in general so thinly
peopied, that only districts of great extent
could afford such a number of labourers as
might be employed in the mines with any
pro:peJt of considerable gain. The pernicious
ertc;;s of those radical errors in the dliiribution
ar., i;..re of propcrty in the Spanih fettle-
miens, a,'- ;ca: ctiirou, h every department of
indu'ry, .ndl nyv be confidered as one great
cauie oi a progress in population ib much

Reze? . 'ib. i:'. t::. ;i 1. z4.

1- L _ r:; . L.
1.w .

flower

flower than that which has taken place in better Bo;K
constituted colonies b. , . -' ,-

To this we may add, that the support of 'ad the na.

tre of their

the enormous and expensive fabric of their e/- ccclefiafaica
clefiaftical establishment, has been a burden p0i"y.
on the Spanish colonies, which has greatly re-
tarded the progress of population and industry,
The payment of tythes is a heavy tax on ih-
du!try; and if the exaction of them be not re-
gul.,ted and circumscribed by the wisdom of
the civil magifrate, it becomes-intolerable:and
ruinous. But, instead of any restraint on!the
cl]a'n of ecclesiastics, the inconsiderate zeal of
the Spanifa legislators admitted them into Ame-
rica in their full extent, and at once imposed
on their infant colonies a burden which is in no
fight degree oppressive to society, even in its
n:oit improved slate. As early as the year
15oi, the payment of tythes in the colonies
was enjoined, and the mode of it regulated by
la\. Every article of primary neceflity, to-
wards which the attention of new settlers mult
naturally be turned, is Subje&ed to that grievous
exafton . Nor were the demands of the
clergy confined to articles of simple culture.

b See NOTE XLIX.
Rccop. lib. i. tit. xiv. i. 2.

Its

BOO t Its more artificial and operose produ&ions;
V111. C'-a iSfuch as sugar, indigo, and cochineal, were

loon declared to be tythable d; and thus the
indultry of the planter was taxed in every stage
of its progrc'ts, from its rudefl essay to its
highest improvement. To the weight of this
legal imposition, the bigotry of the American
Spaniards has made many voluntary additions.
From their fond delight in the external pomp
and parade of religion, and from fuperfitiious
reverence for ecdefiaftics of every denomina-
tion, they have bestowed profuse donatives on
churches and monasteries, and have unprofit-
ably wafted a large proportion of that wealth,
which might have nourished and given vigour
to productive labour in growing colonies.

'- -:- Bu so fertile and inviting are the regions of
pi, i :- America, which the Spaniards have occupied,

that notwirhftanding all the circumstances,
which have checked and retarded population,
Fit has gradually increased, and filled the colo-

nies of Spain with citizens of various orders.
Among there, the Spaniards, who arrive from
,:'°.; Europe, distinguished by the name of Cbape-

tcnes, are the firfi in rank and power. From
the jealous attention of the Spanish court to fe-
cure the dependence of the colonies, all de-

d Recop. !ib. i. tit. xiv. 1. 3 and 4.

partments

partments of consequence are filled by persons, R OO K
Itnt from Europe; and in order to prev¢pt, -_---.
a;ny of dubious fidelity from being, emp1oyed.,
each must bring proof of a clear descent from
a family of Old Cbrifiians, untainted with any
mixture of Jewifli or Mahometan blood, and.
never disgraced by any censure of the inqui-
fition . In such pure hands, power is deemed
to be aifely lodged, and almost every public
funLtion, fiom the viceroyalty downwards, is
committed to them alone. Every person,
who by his birth, or residence in America,
may be fufpeAed of any attachment or interest
adverle to the mother-country, is the objedt
of difruft to such a degree, as amounts nearly
to an cxclufion from all offices of confidence
or authority '. By this conspicuous predilec-
tion of the court, the Chapetones are raised
to fulch pre-eminence in America, that they
look down with disdain on every other order
of In1n.

TorE chara&er and ltate of the Creoes, or c.eolesthe

ca

. . cond.

.cfc':ndants of Europeans fettled in America,
the second class of ilbje&ts in the Spanifn co-
lonic-, have enabled the Chapetones to ac-

ERccopil. lib. ix. tit. x'vi. 1. l;, 16.
Ss S NOTE ]..

quire

P 0 0 K quire other advantages, hardly less confider-

able than those which they derive from the
partial favour of government. Though some
of the Creolian race are descended from the
conquerors of the New World; though others
can trace up their pedigree to the noblest
families in Spain; though many are possessed
of ample fortunes, yet by the enervating in-
fluence of a sultry climate, by the rigour of
a jealous government, and by their despair of
attaining that diflinEion to which mankind
naturally aspire, the vigour of their minds is
so entirely broken, that a great part of them
waste life in luxurious indulgencies, mingled
with an illiberal superstition frill more de-
basing. Languid and unenterprifing, the
operations of an a-tive extended commerce
would be to them if cumbersome and op-
prefiive, that in almost ever-; part of America
they deciine engaging in it. The interior
tr.'r-c of every colony, as well as its trade
with the neighbouring provinces, and with
Spain irtllr, are carried on chiefly by the
Chapetones ; who, as the recompence of their
indufi-y, ama's immense wealth, while the
Creoles, fun;k in sloth, are satisficd with the
revenues of their paternal eftatcs.

: '.U'c'. d -' .;c:, !. 2-'. -1I. V.'. deFrezier, 227.

7 FROM

FROM this stated competition for power.and BOO K

VIII.

wealth between those two .orders of citizens, v-
and the various passions excited. by a rivalfhip bRiawle
so intereffing, their hatred is violent and-im tlhere
placable. On every occasion, symptoms of
this aversion break out, and the common ap-
pellations which each bestows on the other,
are as contemptuous as those which flow from
the most deep-rooted national antipathyh. The
court of Spain, from a refinement of distrustful
policy, cherishes those feeds of discord, and
foments this mutual jealousy, which not only
prevents the two most powerful classes of its
fubjets in the New World from combining
against the parent state, but prompts each
with the most vigilant zeal, to observe the
motions and to counteract the schemes of the
other.

TiiE third class of inhabitants in the Spa- A mried

forms

ninf colonies is a mixed race, the offspring cIleehfrdmr-
either of an European and a negroe, or of an d, of citi.
European and Indian, the former called Mu-
laloes, the latter Mestizos. As the court of
Spain, solicitous to incorporate its new vassals
with its ancient fubjefts, early encouraged the
.Spaniards fettled in America to marry the na-

n Gage's Survey, p. 9. Frezier, 226.

tives

B oo tivesof that country, fevera -alliances of -his
, .I kind were formed in their infant colonies .

But it has been more owing to licentious indul-
gence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed
has multiplied so greatly, as to constitute a
considerable part of the population in all the
Spanish settlements. The several flages of
descent in this race, and the gradual variations
of ihade until the African black, or the copper
colour of America, brighten into an European
complexion, are accurately marked by the
Spaniards, and each distinguished by a peculiar
name. Thole of the first and second genera-
tions are confidered, and treated as Indians
and Negroes; but in the third descent, the
characteristic hue of the former disappears
and in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter
is so entirely effaced, that they can no longer
be diffinguilhed from Europeans, and become
entitled to all their privileges k. It is chiefly
by this mixed race, whole frame is remark-
ably robust and hardy, that the mechanic arts
are carried on, and other afive funtions in
society are discharged, which the two higher

i Recopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. z. Herrera, dc. i. lib. v.

c. I:. Dec. 3. ib. vi.. c. :. k dVo. de U!loa, i.
p. 27.

classes

classes of citizens, from pride, or from indo- B9(O X
lence, disdain to exercise'. . .

THE negroes hold the fourth rank among Negroes

the inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. The 'frhbe.
introduaion of that unhappy part of the hu- dIr.
man species into America, together with their
services and sufferings there, shall be fully ex-
plained in an'other place; here they are men-
tioned chiefly, in order to point out a pecu-
liarity in their situation uhder the Spaniih do-
minion. In several of their settlements, par-
ticularly in Ne-w Spain, negroes are chiefly
employed in domestic service. They form a
principal part in the train of luxury) and are
cherified and carenfed by their superiors, to
whose vanity and pleasures they are equally
lublfrvient, Their dress and appearance are
hardly less splendid than that of their masters,
whose manners they imitate and whose paifins
they imbibe". Elevated by this diftin&ion,
they have affmred fiach a tone of superiority
over the Indians, and treat them with fucl'
insolence and' scorn, that the antipathy be-
tween the two races has become implacable.

Voy. de Uiloa, i. 29. Voy. de Bouguer, p. 104.
Melendcz, Tcforos Vcrdaderos, i. 354.

'" Cage, Fp 56. Voy. de Ulloa, i. 451.
VOL. III. Y Even

Bs O;o- Even.ianPeru, where negroes seem to be more

_- - nim.raerous, and are employed in ficld-woric as

well. as.domertic service, they maintain their
ascendant over the Indians, and the mutual
hatred. of. one to the other lubfifts with equal
violence. The laws have induftrioufy so-
mented. this aversion, to which accident gave
rife, and, by most rigorous injuntions, have
endeavoured to prevent every intercourse that
might form a bond of union between the two
races. Thus, by an artful policy, the Spa-
niards derive strength from that circunftance
in population which is the weakness of other
Europcan colonies, and have secured as affo-
ciates and defenders, those very persons who
elsewhere are objects of jealousy and terror'.

Th;e l,'i;:n THE Indians form the last, and the molt
1P, orof depressrd order of men in the country, which
''t-5' .belonged to their ancestors. I have already

traced the progrels of the Spanish ideas with
rcl:eJc to the :ondidion and treatment of that
;eop'., and I ave mentioned the most import-
ant of their more early regulations, concern-
ing a matier of io much consequence in the
ad:ni;;ir:ation of rheir new dominions. But

= Re:c.:!. lib. vii. ti:. v. !. -. Herrer:, dec. viii.
lbg. v;i. c. l:. Frezie.r. z4.

fiOnce

since the period to which I have brought down BVO ;C
thc history of America, the information and a,--
experience acquired during two centuries, have
enabled the court of Spain to make such im-
provements in this part of its American system,
that a (hort, view of the present condition of the
Indians may prove both curious and. interest-
in.-

By the famous regulations of Charles V. in Their pr-

I 42, which have been so often mentioned, fcnto ondi-
the high pretensions of the conquerors of the
New World, who conlidered its inhabitants
as slaves, to whose service they had acquired
a full right of property, were finally abro-
gated. From that period, the Indians have
been reputed freemen, and entitled to the
privileges of fubjets. When admitted into
this rank, it was deemed just, that they ihould
contribute towards the support and improve-
ment of the society which had adopted them
as members. But as no considerable benefit
could be expeted from the voluntary efforts of
men unacquainted with regular industry, and
averle to labour, the court of Spain found it
neceilary to fix and secure, by proper regu-
lations, what it thought reasonable to exa&
from them. With this view, an annual tax Tax im;
was imposed upon every male, from the age of Ps' do

Y 2 eighteen

Bs o: eighteen, to fifty; and, at the fame time, the

-r a nature as well as the extent of the services

which they might be required to perform,
were ascertained with precision. This tribute
varies in different provinces; but if we take
thar paid in New Spain as a medium, its an-
nual amount is nearly four shillings a head;
no exorbitant urm in countries where, as at
the iburce of wealth, the value of money is
extremely low°. The right of levying it
likewise varies. In America, every Indian is
either an immediate vassal of the crown, or
depends upon tome subjed to whom the diftric,
in which he resides, has been granted for a
limited time, under the denomination of an
encomienda. In the former cafe, about three-
fourths of the tax is paid into the royal trea-
fury; in the latter, the fame proportion of it
belongs to the holder of the grant. When
Spain first took poffefTion of America, the
greater part of it was parcelled out among its
conquerors, or those who first fettled there,
and but a finall portion reserved for the crown.
As those grants which were made for two
lives only', revertcd successively to the fove-

o See NOTE LI. RecopDi. lib. vi. ti. v. 1. 4z.
..i...u.;, vo.. iii. r. 45:.
= Recop?'. lib. -vi. ti;. vi. I. _.i. So'orz. de Ind.
lure, sib. ii. c. 16.

reign,

reign, he had it in ris power either to-diffufe B-o oK
his favours; by grants. to new ,prdprietors, or to '-
augment his own revenue by valuable ianre-xa-
tions q. Of these, the latter has been fre-
quently chosen; the-number of Indians now
depending immediately on the crown, 'is much
greater than in the first age after the-conqueft,
and this branch of the royal revenue continues
to extend.

THE benefit arising from the services of the Tlhe rfe;ce

demanded.

Indians accrues either to the crown, or to the
holder of the encomienda, accordingto the fame
rule observed in the payment of tribute. Those
services, however, which can now be legally
exaEted, are very different fi-om the servile
tasks originally imposed upon the Indians.
The nature of the work which they mufi per-
form is defined, and an equitable recomperioe
is granted for their labour. The stated ser-
vices demanded of the Indians, may be .di-
vided into two branches. They are either
employed in works of primary necessity, with-
out which society cannot subsist comfortably,
or are compelled to labour in the mines, from
which the Spanilh colonies derive their chief
value and importance. In consequence of the

S See NOTE LII.

Y 3 former,

Bv OOK former, they are obliged to affif in the culture
i .-- . of maize, and other grain of necessary con-

fumption; in tending cattle; in erecting
edifices of public utility; in building bridges;
and in forming high-roads r but they cannot
be constrained to labour in raising vines, olives,
and sugar-canes, or any species of cultivation,
which has for its object the gratification of
luxury, or commercial profit . In confe-
quence of the latter, the Indians are compelled
to undertake the more unpleasant talk, of ex-
tracting ore from the bowels of the earth, and
of refining it by successive processes, no lets
unwholesome than operose ',

r....ace THE mode of exacting both there services is
':". ' the fame, and is under regulations framed with

a view of rendering it as little oppreilive as
pofible to the Indians. They are called out
alternately in civifions, termed Mitas, and no
person can be compelled to go but in his
turn. In Peru, the number called out must
not exceed the seventh part of the inhabitants
in any district . In New Spain, where the

r Recepil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Solorz. de Ind.

Jure, ii. lib. i. c. 6, 7. 9.

' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. S. Solorz. lib. i. c. 7.

N° 41, &c.

t See N O T E LIII. Recopil. lib. vi.
;it. xii. 1. 21.

Indians

Indians are more numerous, it is fixed at four BOOs
in the hundred . During what time tln e la- ---
hour of those Indians, who *are employed in
agriculture, continues, I have not been able
to learn a. But in Peru, each Mita,. or divi-
sion, destined for the mines, remains there fix
months; and while engaged in this -ferv.ce ,a
labourer never receives less than two shillings
a day, and often earns more than double that
iuln Y. No Indian, residing at a- greater diS-
tance than thirty miles from a mine, is included
in the Mita, or division employed in working
it ; nor are the inhabitants of the low country
cxpofed to certain deitruction, by compelling
them to remove from that warm climate, to
the cold elevated regions where minerals
abound '.

THE Indians who live in the principal towns, How go.

are entirely subjet to the Spanilh laws and
magistrates; but in their own villages, they
are governed by Caziques, some of whom are
the descendants of their ancient lords, others
are named by the Spanish viceroys. These
regulate the petty affairs of the people under

" Recopil. lib. vi. 1. 22. See NOTE LIV.
r Ulloa Entrcten. 265, 266. 'Recopil. lib. vi.

:it. xii. 1. 3. t Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1. 13. See
NOTE LV.

Y 4 them,

o.QK them, according to maxims of justice, tranf-
u. ~-'~ mitted to them by tradition from their ancef-

tors. To the Indians, this jurifdi&ion, lodged
in such friendlv hands, affords some confo-
lation; and so little formidable is this dignity
to their new masters, that they often allow it
to descend by hereditary right b. For the far-
ther relief of men so much exposed to oppref-
Lion, the Spanish court has appointed an officer
in every diffrit, with the title of Protector
of the Indians. It is his funEtion, as the
nanle implies, to assert the rights of the In-
dians, to appear as their defender in the courts
of justice; and, by the interposition of his
authority, to set bounds to the encroachments
and exations of his countrymen'. A certain
portion of the reserved fourth of the annual
trib'te, is destined for the salary of the ca-
ziques and protectors; another is applied to
the maintenance of the clergy employed in
the instruction of the Indians d. Another part
stems to be appropriated for the benefit of the
Indians themselves, and is applied for the pay-
rr.nt of their tribute in years of famine,
or when a particular difftrift is affected by any

S'!Iorz. der !re Ind. ;ib. i. c. 26. '.ecop. lib. vi. tit. vii.
Solerz. lib. i. c. 2- .

p 2c. Recopi!. lib: vi.
t.r. vi. ; Recopil. lih. vi. tit. \. 1. 3o. Tit. xvi.

extraordinary

extraordinary calamity . Besides, this, :.prp- Bg1a .
vision is made by various laws,..that.hofpitls . av.
ihall be founded in every new fet.tleient, for
the reception of Indians'. Such- hospitals
have accordingly been ere&ed, both for the
indigent and infirm, in Lima, in Cuzco, and
in Mexico, where the Indians are treated with
tenderness and humanity g.

SUCH are the leading principles in the jurif-

prudence and policy by which the Indians are
now governed in the provinces belonging to
Spain. In those regulations of the Spanish
monarchs, we discover no traces of that cruel
system of extermination, which they have been
charged with adopting; and if we admit, that
the neceflity of securing subsistence for their
colonies, or the advantages derived from.work-
ing the mines, give them a right to avail
themselves of the labour of the Indians,, we
muit allow, that the attention with which they
regulate and recompence that labour, is pro-
vident and sagacious. In no code of laws is
greater solicitude displayed, or precautions
multiplied with more concern for the prefer-
vation, the security, and the happiness of the

Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. 13. f Ibid. lib. i.

tit. iv. 1. I, &c. s Voy. de Ulloa, i. 429. 509.
ChLrchiil, iv. 496.

subject,

B2OK subje&.l, than we discover in the collection of

-- the Spanifl laws for the Indies. But those

later regulations, like the more early edics
which have been already mentioned, have too
often proved ineffectual remedies against the
evils which they were intended to prevent. In
every age, if the fame causes continue to ope-
rate, the fame effecs must follow. From the
immnenfe distance between the power entrusted
with the execution of laws; and that by whose
authority they are enafted, the vigour even of
the most absolute government must relax, and
the dread of a superior too remote to observe
with accuracy, or to punifl with difpatch,'muft
insensibly abate. Notwithstanding the nu-
merous injuncions of the Spanish monarchs,
the Indians still susser, on many occasions,
both from the avarice of individuals, and from
the exactions of the magistrates, who ought to
have protected them; unreasonable tafks-are
.mpofed; the term of their labour is prolonged,
and they groan under all the insults and wrongs
which are the lot of a dependent people ].
From some information on which I can de-
pend, fich opprefiion abounds more in Peru,
than in any other colony. But it is not geie-
r"l. According to the accounts, even of those

. .--. ' D T r '-,hor

authors

authors who are m6ds disposed' to exaggerate Ba.OK
the ilfferings of the Indians, they, in feveiral .
provinces, enjoy not only ease, but affluence';
they possess large farms; they are maiters of
numerous herds and flocks; and, by the
knowledge which they have acquired of Euro-
pean arts and industry, are fipplied not only
with the necessaries, but with many luxuries
of lifei.

AFTER explaining the form of civil. gbvern- EccInd.;'il.'

conflitusioQ

ment in the Spanifi colonies, and' thd state"6s oithe col-
the various orders 6ofperf6os subje'6t t6'it;, -the
peculiarities in their etclefiaftical constitution
merit confideratin.' ' Notwithstanding the fiu-
perltitious veneration With which the Spaniiads
are devoted to the Holy See, the vigilant a:id
jealous policy of Ferdinand early pro6mp'ted
him to take precautions against the intfo-
duEtion of the papal dominion into America.
With this view, he solicited Alexander VI. Reflaint

on the pa-

for a grant of the tythes in all the newly-difl p: jlrifdic-
covered countries ', which he obtained oh o.'""
condition of his making provision for the
religious inftru&ion of the natives. Soon

i Gage's Survey, p. 85. go. 104. 119, &c.
k Bulla Alex. VI. A. D. 1501, ap Solorz. de Jure
Ind. ii. p. 498.

after,

B O0K after, Julius II. conferred on him the right of
._ _., patronage, and absolute disposal 'of all eccle.

fiaftical benefices. there'. Bothl these pontiffs,
unacquainted with the value, of what he de-
manded, bestowed those donations with an
inconsiderate liberality, which their fuccefflrs
have often lamented, and wiihed to recal. In
consequence of those grants, the Spanish mo-
narchs have become, in effee&, the heads of
the American church. In them the admini-
ftrarion of its revenues is vested. Their nomi-
nation of persons to supply vacant benefices is
instantly confirmed by the pope. Thus, in
all Spanish America, authority of every species
centres in the crown. There -no collision is
known between spiritual and temporal jurif-
diction. The king is the only superior, his
name alone is heard, and no dependence upon
any foreign power has been introduced. Papal
bulls cannot be admitted into America,' nor
are they of any force there, .until they have
been previously examined, and approved of
by the royal council of the Indies -; and if
any bull should be surreptitiously introduced,
and circulated in America without obtaining
that approbation, ecclefiafcics are required not

Bulla Julii, ii. i oa, ap Solo-z. de Jure Ind. ii. 509.
m Recopil. lib. i. fit. ix. 1. z. ard Auras del Confejo
de a-= Indias, c:.li.

only

only to prevent -it-frbm takingJ.effeYlbutto. BooK.
fcize all thetcopies of it, and tranfmiittherm.,it
the council of therIndies n. To -this limitation
of the papaljurifdidion, equally fingularwhe--
ther we confider the age and nationin which it
was devised, or, the jealous attention with
which Ferdinand, and his successors, have
Itudied to maintain it in full force , Spairn is
indebted, in a great measure, for the uniform
tranquillity whieh has reigned in her Americah
dominions.

THE hierarchy is established in America;-in Form and

e ndo-ments

the lame form as in Spain, with its full train of the
of archbishops, bihfops, deans, and other the Sponish
dignitaries. The inferior clergy are divided colonics.
into three claflTs, under the denomination of
Clras, DoBrineros, and Miianeros. The firsb
are parifi-priefts in those parts' of the country
where the Spaniards have fettled. The second
have the charge of such diftri&s as are inha-
bited by Indians fubje&ed to the Spanish go-
vernment, and living under its protection.
The third are employed in converting and
initructing those fiercer tribes, which dif-
dain fubmiflion to the Spanifih yokel and
live in remote or inaccessible regions, to which
" Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. I. 55. Ibid. paflim.

the

BOOK the Spanihl arms have not penetrated. So
'.-. -. numerous. are the ecclefiatics of all those va-

rious orders,, and such the profuse liberality
with which many of them are endpwed, that the
rev:enues of the church in Amnerica are immense.
The superstition of-Rome appears with itsutmolt
pomp in the New World. Churches and con-
vents there are magnificent, and richly adorned;
and on high festivals, the display of gold and
silver, and precious stones, is such as exceeds
the conception of an European P. An eccle-
fiaftical eftablilhment so splendid and expen-
five, is unfavourable, as has been formerly
observed, to the progress of rising colonies;
but in countries where riches abound, and the
people are so delighted with parade, that reli-
gion must assume it, in order to attra& their
veneration, this propensity to ofrentation has
been indulged, and becomes less pernicious.

Prn;c;cc THE early inititution of monasteries in the
mniti- Spanish colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in
f5iuoins multiplying them, have been attended with

consequences more fatal. In every new fettle-
ment, the first object is to encourage popula-
tion, and to incite every citizen to contribute
towards augmenting the strength and number

P Voy. de Ulloa, i. 4;0.

01

of the community. 'During the youth and Bov-.
vigour of society, while there is ro6orr to '--y
spread, and sustenance is procured with'faci-
liry, mankind intreafe with amazing rapidity.
But the Spaniards had hardly-taken poffeflion
of America, when, with a most preposterous
policy, they began to erect convents, where
persons of both sexes were shut up, under a'
vow to defeat the purpose of nature, and to
counteract the first of her laws. Influenced by
a misguided piety, which ascribes transcendent
Inerit to a state of celibacy, or allured by the
profpe't of that listless ease, which, in sultry
climates, is deemed supreme felicity, numbers
crowd into those mansions of foth and luper-
flition, and are loft to society. As rnone but
persons of Spanish extrat are admitted into the
monasteries of the New World, the evil is
more sensibly felt, and every monk or nun
may be confidered as an active person with-
drawn from civil life. The impropriety of
such foundations in any situation where the
extent of territory requires additional hands to
improve it, is so obvious, that some catholic
Ptates have expressly prohibited any person in
their colonies from taking the monastic vows q.
Even the Spanifl monarchs, on some occasions,

q Voy. de Ulloa, ii. 124.

5 seem

BOOK; seem to have been alarmed with the spreading

viii.
t-.--- of a spirit so adverse to the increase and pro-

fperity of their colonies, that they have en-
deavoured to check itr. But the Spaniards in
America, more thoroughly under the influ-
ence of superstition than their countrymen in
Europe, and directed by ecclesiastics more
biootted and illiterate, have conceived such an
high opinion of monastic fanclity, that no re-
gulations can restrain their zeal; and, by the
excess of their ill-judged bounty, religious
houses have multiplied to a degree no less
amazing than pernicious to society '.

ch2--,.e.of Ix viewing the slate of colonies, where not
ccccfia:: e
in slia only the number but influence of ecclesiastics
Aricg i is so great, the charactr of this powerful body

is an objecd that merits particular attention. A
considerable part of the secular clergy in Mex-
ico and Peru are natives of Spain. As persons
accustomed by their education to the retire-
rent and indolence of academic life, are more
incapz:ble of active enrerprize, and less disposed
to strike :.no newv paths, than any order of
men, the ecclefiafrical adventurers by whom

Her-er- , dc. v. lhb. i. c. i, 2. Recop. lib. i.
t:. ii. i. :1 , :. T.:. i\' . c. . . S 1irz. li. iii. c. 23.

* See N O T E LVI.

the

the American -chtreh- is 'recruited?.are,-C rm- B,,o.'c.
monly fihch: s, frommeritor rank in:life, have. --
little prospect of success in their own country;,
Accordingly, the secular priests in the New. ofthe ecu.
World are still' iefs diPtinguilhed than their '
brethren in Spain, for literary accompliihments
of any species; and though, by theample.pro-i
vision which has been made for the American:
church, many of its members enjoy the ease.
and independence which are favourable to the.
cultivation of science, the body of secular,
clergy has hardly, during two centuries and a
half, produced one atthor whose works convey
Iuch useful information, or possess such a de-
gree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attract the attention of enlightened na-
tions. But the greatet part of the ecclesiastics bFothcgu-
in the Spanish settlements are regulars. On g"lr.
the discovery of America, a new field opened
to the pious zeal of the monastic orders; arid,
with a becoming alacrity, they immediately
lent forth missionaries to labour in it. The
first attempt to inftruc and convert the Ame-
ricans, was made by monks; and, as loon as
the conquest of any province was completed,
and its ecclesiastical eftabliflment began to
assume rome form, the popes permitted the
miflionaries of the four mendicant orders, as
a reward for their services, to accept of paro-

Vo.. III. Z chial

BOOK chial charges in America, to perform all fpiri-
'--; --* tual funcions, and to receive the tythes, and

other emoluments of the benefice, without de-
pending on the jurisdiction of the bishop of
the diocese, or being subject to his censures.
In consequence of this, a new career of useful-
ness, as well as new objects of ambition pre-
sented themselves. Whenever a call is made
for a fresh supply of nifiionaries, men of the
most ardent and aspiring minds, impatient un-
der the restraint of a cloister, weary of its in-
sipid unifonnity, and fatigued with the irksome
repetition of its frivolous functions, offer their
service with eagerness, and repair to the New
World in quest of liberty and diftintion. Nor
do they pursue distinction without success.
The highest ecclesiastical honours, as well as
the most lucrative preferments in Mexico
and Peru, are often in the hands of regulars;
and it is chiefly to the monaffic orders that
the Americans are indebted for any portion
of science which is cultivated among them.
They are almost the only Spanish ecclesiastics,
from v.holm we have received any accounts
either of the civil or natural history of the va-
rious provinces in America. Some of them,
though deeply tinged with the indelible super-
flition of their proefiion, have published books
which give a favourable idea of their abili-

ties.

ties. The natural and moral history of the BEoo0c
New World, by the Jesuit Acofta, contains
more accurate observations, perhaps, and more
bound science, than are to be found in any de-
scription of remote countries published in the
sixteenth century.

BUT the fame disgust with monastic life, to D;ifltjte

manner* of

which America is indebted for some instructors ,,me of
of worth and abilities, filled it with others of a them
very different character. The giddy, the pro-
fligate, the avaricious, to whom the poverty
and rigid discipline of a convent are intolerable,
conrider a million to America as a release from
mortification and bondage. There they soon
obtain some parochial charge, and far removed,
by their situation, from the infpestion of their
monastic superiors, and exempt, by their cha-
raSter, from' the jurisdiction of their diocesan °,
they are hardly subjeR to any controul. Ac-
cording to the teffimony of the most zealous
catholics, many of the regular clergy in the
Spanish settlements are not only destitute of
the virtues becoming their profession, but re-
gardlefs of that external decorum and refpec&
for the opinion of mankind, which preserve a
fcmblance of worth, where the reality is want-

A -;cndano Thef. Indic. ii. 253.

Z ^ ing.

BOOK ing. Secure of impunity, some regulars, in
L--v-- contempt of their vow of poverty, engage

openly in commerce; and are so rapaciously
eager in amaffng wealth, that they become
the most grievous oppressors of the Indians,
whom it was their duty to have proteted.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their
vow of chastity, indulge with little disguise in
the most dissolute licentiopfnefs'.

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for re-

dressing enormities so manifest and offensive.
Several persons no less eminent for piety than
discernment, have contended, that the regulars,
in conformity to the canons of the church,
ought to be confined within the walls of their
cloisters, and mhould no longer be permitted to
encroach on the functions of the secular clergy.
Some public-fpirited m agifirates, fromcon-
vision of its being necessary to deprive the re-
gulars of a privilege, bestowed at first with
good intention, but of which time and expe-
rience had discovered the pernicious effects,
openly countenanced the lecular clergy in their
1tiS. attempts to assert their own rights. The prince

D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Phi-
1Ip III. took meafrces ib decisive and eftec-

See NOTE I. VIII.

t:,,l

tual for circumscribing the regulars within their B o K
proper sphere, as itruck them with general con- -
iternation Y. They had recourse to their usual
arts. They alarmed the superstitious, by re-
presenting the proceedings of the viceroy as
innovations fatal to religion. They employed
all the refinements of intrigue, in order to gain
persons in power; and seconded by the power-
ful influence of the Jesuits, who claimed and
enjoyed all the privileges which belonged to the
Mendicant orders in America, they made a
deep impreflion on a bigotted prince, and a
weak ministry. The ancient practice was to-
lerated. The abuses which it occasioned conti-
nued to increase, and the corruption of monks,
exempt from the restraints of discipline, and
the infpetion of any superior, became a dif-
grace to religion. At last, as the veneration
of the Spaniards for the monastic orders began
to abate, and the power of the Jesuits was on
the decline, Ferdinand VI. ventured to apply J"une23
the only effectual remedy, by issuing an edict,
prohibiting Regulars of every denomination
from taking the charge of any parish with the
cure of fouls; and declaring, that on the de-
mile of the present incumbents, none but fe-
iular priests, fubjeEt to the jurifdistion of their

' See NOTE L1X.

Z 3 diocesans,

BOOK diocesans, shall be presented to vacant bene-

rices . If this regulation is carried into exe-
cution with iteadinefs in any degree proportional
to the wisdom with which it is framed, a very
considerable reformation may take place in the
ecciefiaftical slate of Spanifi America, and the
iccular clergy may gradually become a refpet-
able body of men. The deportment of many
eccltiaftics, even at present, seems to be de-
cent and exemplary, otherwise we can hardly
ibppole that they would be held in such high
eilimation, and possess such a wonderful ascend-
ant over the minds of their countrymen through-
out all the Spanish settlements.

S=z'; .r.- BE'T whatever merit the Spanish eccefiaftics
-...
: . in America may possess, the success of their
ch:^.:a endeavours in communicating the knowledge

of true religion to the Indians, has been more
imperfect than might have been expected, either
from the degree of their zeal, or from the do-
minion which they had acquired over that
people. For this various rea'bns may be al-
signed. The firif miionaries, in their ardour
to make profelvees, admitted the people of
America into the christian church, without
p'evious instruction in the doctrines of reli-

2 P !a Cecdu'; .S. cr.; me.

gLon,

gion, and even before they themrelves had ac- iv0- K
quired such knowledge of the Indian language, -
as to be able to explain to the natives the myf-
teries of faith, or the precepts of duty. Relt-
ing upon a subtle diftinftion in scholastic
theology, between that degree of assent which
is founded on a complete knowledge and con-
viclion of duty, and that which may:be yielded
when both these are imperfect, they adopted
this strange practice, no less inconsistent with
the spirit of a religion which addresses itfeif to
the understanding of men, than repugnant to
the dictates of reason. As soon as. any body of
people, overawed by dread of the Spanish
power, moved by the example of.itheir own
chiefs, incited by levity, or vieldingfrom mere
ignorance, expressed the slightest desire of eml
bracing the religion of their.conquerors, they
were instantly baptized. While this rage of
conversion continued, a tingle clergyman bap-
tized in one day above five thousand Mexicans,
and did not desist until he was so exhausted by
fatigue, that he was unable to lift his hands .
In the course of a few years, after the reduc-
tion of the Mexican empire, the sacrament of
baptifrn was adminiftcrcd to more than four
= P. Torribio, MS. Torqucm. Mond. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6.

Z 4 millions.

B 010 K millions . Proselytes adopted with such in-
-v-' considerate haste, and who were neither in-

Itructed in the nature of the tenets to which
it was supposed they had given assent, nor
taught the abfurdiry of those which they were
required to relinquish, retained their veneration
for their ancient superstitions in full force, or
mingled an attachment to its docrines and
rites with that slender knowledge of Chrilti-
anity which they acquired. These sentiments
the new converts transmitted to their posterity,
into whole minds they have funk so deep, that
the Spanish ecclesiastics, with all their industry,
have not been able to eradicate them. The re-
ligious inRitutions of their ancestors are still
remembered, and held in honour by the In-
dians, both in Mexico and Peru; and when-
ever they think themselves out of reach of in-
ipeEtion by the Spaniards, they assemble and
celebrate their idolatrous rites '

B-T this is not the most unsurmountable ob-

flacle to the progress of Christianity among the
Indians. The powers of their uncultivated un-
derfiandings are so limited, their observations

b P. Torribio. MS. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. S.
c Voy. de Ulloa, i. 341. Torquem. ib. xv. c. ;3.
iib. x-i, c. :S. Gage. 171.

an(!

and reflections reach so little beyond the mere BvOOK
objects of sense, that they seem hardly to have t--v-
the capacity of forming abftrat ideas, and pof-
fess not language to express them. To such
men, the sublime and spiritual doctrines of
Chriflianity must be incomprehensible. The
numerous and splendid ceremonies of the popish
worfiip catch the eye, please and interest them
but when their inftru&ors attempt to explain
the articles of faith, with which those external
oblervances are connected, though the Indians
may lilfen with patience, they so little conceive
the meaning of what they hear, that their ac-
quiescence does not merit the name of belief.
Their indifference is still greater than their in-
capacity. Attentive only to the present mo-
ment, and ingroffed by the objects before them,
the Indians lo seldom reflect upon what is past,
or take thought for what is to come, that nei-
ther the promises, nor threats of religion, make
much impression upon them; and while their
foresight rarely extends so far as the next day,
it is almost impossible to inspire them with so-
licitude about the concerns of a future world.
Astonished equally at their slowness of com-
prehcnfion, and at their insensibility, some of
the early missionaries pronounced them a race
of men so brutish, as to be incapable of under-
ilanling the first principles of religion. A

council

B o i K council held at Lima decreed, that, on account

Vill.
i _y- of this incapacity, they ought to be excluded

from the sacrament of the Eucharilt'. And
though Paul III. by his famous bull, issued in
the year 1537, declared them to be rational
creatures, entitled to ail the privileges of Chrifti-
ans; yer, after the lapse of two centuries,
during which they have been members of the
church, so imperfect are their attainments in
knowledge, that very few poficfs such a por-
tion of Ipiritual discernment, as to be deemed
worthy of being admitted to the holy com-
munion '. From this idea of their incapacity
and imperfect knowledge of religion, when the
zeal of Philip II. eftablilhed the inquisition in
America in the year 157o, the Indians were
exempted from the juridition of that levere
tribunal ;, and ftiil continue under the infpec-
tion of their diocesans. Even after the most
perfect instruction, their faith is held to be
feeble and dubious; and though obme of them
have been taught the learned languages, and
have gone through the ordinary course of aca-
demic education vith applause, their frailty is
still so much fulfpcced, that no Indian is e::her

d Torquem. Iib. xv' . c. :o.
· Torquem. !ib. :.i. c. ;. Garcia or-gin. l I.
r Vov. de Ulioa, i. 343.
s Recop. lib. '.i. ::. i. !.3 .

ordaincd

ordained a priest, or received into any religious B 0 K
order

FROM this brief survey, some idea may be

formed of the interior state of the Spanish co-
lonies. The various productions with which Produaio.

of the Spa-

they `upply and enrich the mother country, nih colo.
and the system of commercial intercourse be- "
tween them, come next in order to be ex-
plained. If the dominions of Spain in the
New World had been of such moderate extent,
as bore a due proportion to the parent state,
the progrecs of her colonizing might have been
attended with the fame benefit as that of other
nat:ons. But when, in less than half a cen-
tury, her inconsiderate rapacity had seized on
coun:ries larger than all Europe, her inability
to fi!l flch vast regions with a number of in-
habitants sufficient for the cultivation of them,
wa, so obvious, as to give a wrong direction
to all the efforts of the colonists. They did
not form compact settlements, where industry,
circumscribed within proper limits, both in its
views and operations, is conduted with that
fober persevering spirit, which gradually con-
verts whatever is in its possession to a proper
use, and derives thence the greatelt advantage.

b Torqucm. lib. xvii. c. 13. See NOTE LX.

Instead

Bu OK Inflead of this, the Spaniards, reduced by the
a__-- boundless prospect which opened to them, di-

vided their poffeflions in America into govern-
ments of vast extent. As their number was
too small to attempt the regular culture of the
immense provinces, which they occupied ra-
ther than peopled, they bent their attention to
a few objects, that allured them with hopes
of sudden and exorbitant gain, and turned
away with contempt from the humbler paths of
indutlrv, which lead more slowly, but with
greater certainty, to wealth and increase of na-
tional frength.

F-_.: OF all the methods by which riches may be
ra'ce acquired, that of learching for the precious

metals is one of the most inviting to men, who
are ei:. - unaccustomed to the regular assiduity
with which the culture of the earth and the
operations of commerce must be carried on, or
so enterp:i.Sg and rapacious as not to be satis-
sied with ti:e gradual returns of profit which
they yield. Accordingly, as soon as the fe-
veral cour.trirs in America were fubjeited to
the don.inion- of Spain, this was almost the
only mnethod of acquiring wealth which oc-
curred to :he adventurers, by whom they were
conquered. Such provinces of the continent
as did not allure them to fettle, by the prospect

of

of their affording gold and silver, were totally BOo K

viiL

neglected. Those in which they met with a -. -
disappointment of the sanguine expectations
they had formed, were abandoned. Even the
value of the ifands, the first-fruits of their dif-
covcries, and the first object of their attention,
funk so much in their estimation, when the
mines which had been opened in them were ex-
haufted, that they were deserted by many of
the planters, and left to be occupied by more
industrious possessors. All crowded to Mexico
and Peru, where the vast quantities of gold and
silver found among the natives, who searched
for them with little industry and less skill, pro-
mifed an unexhaufted store, as the recompence
of more intelligent and persevering efforts.

DURING several years, the ardour of their DiroerOyof

.

11 1oe of Po-

re'e.rches was kept up by hope, rather than tofianJi-
fuccels. At length, the rich silver mines of Cotc4.
Potofi, in Peru, were accidentally discovered
in the year 1545 , by an Indian, as he was
clamhering up the mountain, in purfiit of a
Llama which had strayed fiom his flock. Soon
after the mines of Sacotecas, in New Spain,
little inferior to the other in value, were
opened. From that time, successive disco-

Fcrnandcz, p. i. lib. xi. c. 1l.

verie;

0Bo ' veries have been made in both colonies, and

5 !lver mines are now so numerous, that the
working of them, and of some few mines of
gold in the provinces of Tierra Firme, and
the new kingdom of Granada, has become the
cir:ral occupation of the Spaniards, and is re-
dcuced into a system no less complicated than
in.rerefing. To describe the nature of the va-
riuus ores, the mode of extrasing them from
the bowels of the earth, and to explain the
.everal processes b;- which the metals are fepa-
rated from the substances with which they are
mingled, either by the action of fire, or the at-
tractive powers of mercury, is the province of
the natural philosopher or chymift, rather than
of the historian.

R;,ns, THE exuberant profusion with which the
ic" :h" mountains of the New World poured forth their

treasures, aifonithed mankind, accustomed hi-
therto to receive a penurious supply of the pre-
cious metals, from the more scanty stores con-
ta-ied in the mines of the ancient hemisphere.
According to principles of computation,
vwhch appear to be extremely moderate, the
quantity of gold and silver that has been regu-
l]i-l entered in the ports of Spain, is equal in
-vale to four millions sterling annually, reckon-
ing from the year i492, in which America was

.3 discovered,

discovered, to the present time. This, in two BOOKll
hundred and eighty-three years, amounts to A_
eleven hundred and thirty-two millions. Im-
menel as this fum is, the Spanish writers con-
tend, that as much more ought to be added to
it, in consideration of the treasure which has
been extracted from the mines, without paying
duty to the king. By this account, Spain has
drawn from the New World a supply of wealth,
amounting at leaPt to two thousand millions of
pounds sterling k.

THE mines, which have yielded this amaz- Spirit to

which this

ing quantity of treasure, are not worked at the g;es rifc.
expence of the crown, or of the public. In
order to encourage private adventurers, the
person who discovers a new vein, is entitled to
the property of it. .Upon laying his claim be-
fore the governor of the province, a certain
extent of land is measured off, and a certain
number of Indians allotted him, under the
obligation of his opening the mine within a
limited time, and of his paying the customary
duty to the king, for what it shall produce.
Invited by the facility with which such grants
are oitained, and encouraged by some striking

k Ul-ariz Thcor. y Prata. de Commercia, c. 3. IHer-
-cra, dec. viii. lib. xi. c. i . See NOTELXI.

examples

B OO examples of success in this line of adventure

VIII.
'.--- not only the sanguine and the bold, but the

timid and diffident enter upon it with astonish-
ing ardour. With vast obje&s always in view;
fed continually with hope, and expe&cing every
moment that fortune will unveil her secret
iLores, and give them up to their withes, they
deem every other occupation insipid and unin-
teresting. The charms of this pursuit, like the
rage for deep play, are so bewitching, and take
iuch full possession of the mind, as even to give
a new bent to the natural temper. Under its
influence, the cautious become enterprising,
and the covetous prolufe. Powerful as this
charin naturally is, its force is augmented by
the arts of an order of men known in Peru by
the cant name of searchers. These are com-
monly persons of desperate fortunes, who,
availing themselves of some Ikill in mineralogy,
accompanied with the insinuating manner, and
confident pretensions peculiar to projectors,
address the wealthy and the credulous. By
plausible de'criptions of the appearances which
they have discovered of rich veins hitherto un-
explored; by producing when requisite, fpe-
cimens of promising ore; by affirming, with
an impoling assurance, that success is certain,
and that the expence must be trifling; they
fcldoTi fail to periuade. An afrociation is

I formed;

sor-ned; a finall fum is advanced by each co- B OOK
partner; the mine is opened; the fearcber is--
entrufied with the sole direction of every ope-
ration ; unforeften difficulties occur; new de-
mands of money are made; but arnidft a fuc-
ceflion of disappointments and delays, hope is
never extinguifned, and the ardour of expe-ca-
tion hardly abates. For it is observed, that if
any person once enter this seducing path, it is
almost impossible to return; his ideas alter, he
fcems to be possessed with another spirit, visions
of imaginary wealth are continually before his
eyes, and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams
of nothing else.

SucHi is the spirit that must be formed, Fatal eTcfl

wherever the active exertions of any society are
chiefly employed in working mines of gold
and lilver. No fpirir is more adverse to such
improvement in agriculture and commerce, as
render a nation really opulent. If the fyitem
of administration in the Spanish colonies had
been founded upon principles of found policy,
the power and ingenuity of the legislature
would have been exerted with as much ardour,
in restraining its fubjeats from such pernicious
induitry, as is now employed in alluring them
towards i:. " Projecs of mining (fays a good

Ulloa Entrcten. p. 223.
VOL. III. A a " judeld

Src "t judge of the political conducT of nations)

" instead of replacing the capital employed in

them, together with the ordinary profit of

" foc-;, co;mmonly absorb both capital and
" front. They are the projects, therelore, to
* v,'ichi, of all others, a prudent lawgiver,
": ho desired to increale tie capital of lis na-
: t:o, would lealt chu;e to give any extraor-

" dinarv encouragencn;:, or to turn towards
" thei a greater lhare of that capital than
" would go to them of its own accord. Such,

in reality, is the abiurd confidence which all

" men have in their own good fortune, that
" herever thcrc is ::e least probability of
" success, too great li-lre of it is apt to go to
"them of its own accord ."' But in the Spa-
ri;h colonies, gov rnment is lnudious to cherilh
a ! icit whlich it i'ould ln\ve laboured to de-
press, and by the inai;on of its approbation
a.ugments that inconfiderare credulity, which
i;as turned the active indui'rv of Mexico and
Periu :nto Ilch an improper channel. To this
may be imputed the fiender progress which
Spaniih America has made during two cen-
turies and a half, either in useful inanufactures,
or in thufe lucrative branches of cultivation,
which furnifll t;e colonies of other nations with
their staple commodities. In comparilbn with

Dr. Smiti'. Inquir.-, &c. ii. 1iS.

the

the precious metals, every bounty of nature is BsO K
so much despised, that this extravagant idea of -
their value has mingled with the idiom of lan-
guage in America, and the Spaniards fettled
there denominate a country, rich, not from the
fertility of its foil, the abundance of its crops,
or the exuberance of its paflures, but on ac-
count of the minerals which its mountains
contain. In quest of these, they abandon the
delightful plains of Peru and Mexico, and
retort to barren and uncomfortable regions,
where they have built some of the largest towns
which they possess in the New World. As the
acdivity and enterprise of the Spaniards ori-
ginally took this diretion, it is now so difficult
to bend them a different way, that although,
from various causes, the gain of working mines
is much decreased; the fascination continues,
and almost every person, who takes any ative
part in the commerce of New Spain or Peru,
is flill engaged in some adventure of this
kind .

BUT though mines are the chief obje& of Oh. corm.

0D J modltc~s of

the Spaniards, and the precious metals which the SrIian
these yield, form the principal article in their
commerce with America; the fertile countries

n See NOTE LXUI

A a X which

B 0o 0 which they poTlefs there, abound with other

_-- -- commoidtics of fuich value or fcarcitv, as to

attract a considerable degree of attention. Co-
chineal is a produ&ion almost peculiar to New
Sp-in, of such demand in commerce, that the
sale is always certain, and it yields fuch-profir,
as anmpl-Tre'-ards the labour and care employed
in rearing the curious infects of which this
valuablc drur:g is composed, and preparihg it
for the market. Quinquina, or Jeilits Bark,
the most salutary simple, pcrhaps, and ofmoft
refrora:ivc virtue, that Providence, in compaf-
fi:i f r human infirmitv, has made known
un:,o ;ma, is found only in Peru, to which it
a,'r-ds . lucrative branch of commerce. The
indigo of Guatimala is superior in quality to
that c6f any province in America, and culti-
vated to a considerable cxtcnt. Cacoa, thouglt
nor peculiar to the Spaniil colonies, attains to
i:s hi-htn.e: fr:- of pericr.:.;:. threre, and from
rtie re-: confump :.-,n oft .:-colate in Europe,

- x.,1 as in Amr.-c;., {s

. ; vAlu:ale commo-

.i:.v. ilcL ti',).a-c , r Cub:., of more exqui-
irc . xvo':r t .n a.T , ; from the N'c'
\Veld; the mI.-T r ;- in that island, in
l-iip3:-:la, a-,.; ,n N v.: o'.:

- together with

(':.r:!' o-' v r.j'.; . ::i.., :-;,:. be mentioned
;:_ r' r--..l F.. :''...:' ns of America,
; :.:..:. :ri the Sp:.n;f ;i c .-.nMcrce. Totl;cfe

nu ft

muff be added, an article of no inconsiderable B 90OK
account, the exportation of hides; for which, l--,
as well as for many of those which I have enu-
merated, the Spaniards are more indebted to
the wonderisl fertility of the country than to
ticir own foresight and induitry. The domes-
tic animals of Europe, particularly horned
cattic, have multiplied in the New World
Vwith a rapidity which almost exceeds belief.
A few years after the Spaniards fettled there,
the hr]ids of tame cattle became so numerous,
that their proprietors reckoned them by thou-
sands '. Less attention being paid to them, as
they continued to increase, they were suffered
to run wild, and spreading over a country of
boundlels extent, under a mild climate, and
covered with rich pasture, their number be-
came immense. They range over the vaif
plains which extend from Buenos Ayres, to-
wards the Andes, in herds of thirty or forty
thouland; and the unlucky traveller who once
falis in among them, may proceed several days
before he can disentangle himself from among
the crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
Icemns to have no end. They are hardly less
numerous in New Spain, and in several other

o orcJo ap. Ramus. iii. loi, B. Hacklut, iii.
. , ,. 5 j 1.

A a 3 pro-

B o0. K provinces: these are killed merely for the fake of
* --- their hides; and the flauchter at certain seasons

is so oreat, that the stench of the carcases, which
are left in the field, would infect the air, if
large packs of wild dogs, and vast flocks of
g^!:nazrs, or American vultures, the most vo-
racious of all the feathered kind, did not in-
ftantly devour them. The number of those
hides exported in evern fleet to Europe is
prodigious, and is a lucrative branch of com-
merce r.

AL.MosT all these may be confidered as staple

commoditics peculiar to America, and diffe-
rent, if we except that lall mentioned, from the
productions of the mother-country.

A-3-,:-S W\TiHEN the importation into Spain of those
eif^- ... various articles from her colonies, first became
k:rco1n;a. ative and ccnfiderable, her interior industry

and manufactures were in a slate so prosperous,
that with the produ^t of these she was able
both to purchase the commodities of the New
\Vorld, and to :nfwer its growing demands.
Undcer -he reigns of Ferdinand and Itabella,

r A\cc . lib. ii. c. 33. Ovai'. !:1:. of Chiil. Church.
Co'';. iii. 4-. fep. Ib: p. . p 6 . 692 Lettres

5 :-. .:ii. 235. Feui!:, i. :',.

anr;

and Charles V. Spain was one of the moRs B ,oK
indultrious countries in Europe. Her manu- .
fatures in wool, and flax, and silk, were so
extcnfive, as not only to furnish what was sus-
ficient for her own consumption, but to afford
a surplus for exportation. When a market for
them, formerly unknown, and to which she
alone had access, opened in America, flie had
recourse to her domestic store, and found there
an abundant fupplyq. This new employment
muit naturally have added vivacity to the spirit
of induftrv. Nourished and invigorated by it,
the manufacures, the population, and wealth
of Spain might have gone on increasing in the
fame proportion with the growth of her colo-
nies. Nor was the state of the Spanish marine
at this period less flouriflhing than that of its
manufactures. In the beginning of the fix-
teenth century, Spain is said to have possessed
above a thousand merchant flhipsr, a number
probably far superior to that of any nation in
E'urope. By the aid which foreign trade and
domeltic industry give reciprocally to each
other in their progress, the augmentation of
both must have been rapid and extensive, and

plnain might have received the lame accefflon
.,f ,pulcnce and vigour from her acquisitions

* '.. NOTE LXII1. r Campomanes, ii. 140.

a 4 in

B o0 0 in the New World, that other powers have de-

rived from their colonies there.

w- r,, BUT various caufts prevented this. The
n- ^. fame thing happens to nations as to indivi-

' ' duals. \Ve.i wich filows in gradually, and

vi;-h moderate increase, feeds and nourishes
that a;ti:vlr v.hi;h is friendly to commerce,
and c'.ls i- i'rIh into vigorous and well-con-
tciujcd exer:ons ; bui when opulence pours in
iliden!ll-, a- .d- .:;<h too full a ifream, it over-
turu. ail lo ber i'.'ns of indufin, and brings
aICl:'i \\i:h i:- i '.'i: for w!lha is wild and ex-
trav'_-an:, an;' i:.ir!ng in bufineiS or in action.
Suc;h was :he ,-£ : and iudden augmentation
o" power anti revenue, that the possession of
Amir;lca brou-iht! itno Spain, and some fymp-
tomi o; :its - rnimic:us influence upon the poli-
zicai cpIraz.ons cf thiat monarchy soon began
ro ape;ar. For a considerable time, however,
.1ec luyni.' or trcaalire from the New World
v.'- :c-y an.d precarious, and the genius of
C;;r':e; \. conuSi.cd public measures with
'ucCi pi-uicnc,., =imia the efrects of this inrfuence
werc !e i: pc:ci;cd. But when Philip II.
.qiecndcu :he Si-anr.il throne, with talents far
inie'rior to ti:.oe cos his father, and remittances
:;'c.n the colonies became a regular and vast
branch of revenue, the fatal operation of this

rapid

rapid change in. the state of the-kingdom, both BOOK
oi the monarch and his people, was at once -.--
contsicuous. Philip, poffelfing that spirit of
unceiling assiduity, which often characerizes
the ambition of men of moderate talents, en-
tertained fich an high opinion of his own
rcoiurces, that he thought nothing too arduous
fur him to undertake. Shut up himself in the
ifitludc of the Escurial, he troubled and annoy-
ed all the nations around him. He waged open
war with the Dutch and English; he encou-
raged and aided a rebellious faction in France;
lie conquered Portugal, and maintained armies
and garrisons in Italy, Afiica, and both the
1 n:ies. By fuich a multiplicity of great and
complicated operations, pursued with ardour
during the course of a long reign, Spain was
drained both of men and money. Under the
weak adminiliration of his fuccoffor, Philip III.
the Vigour of the nation continued to decrease,
and iunk into the lowest decline, when the A.D.,16,.
inconliderate bigotry of that monarch expelled
at once near a million of his most industrious
iubhccts, at the very tine when the exhausted
slate of the kingdom required some extraor-
dinary exertion of political wisdom to augment
its numbers, and to revive its strength. Early
in the leventeenthl century, Spain felt such a
dimi:nution in the number of her people, that

from

B OK- from inability to recruit her armies, fle was
r -' 'obliged to contract her operations. Her flou-

rifhing manufacaures were fallen into decay.
Her fleets, which had been the terror of all
Europe, were ruined. Her extensive foreign
commerce was loft. The trade between diffe-
rent parts of her own dominions was inter-
rupted, and the snips which attempted to carry
it on, were taken and plundered by enemies
whom f.e once despised. Even agriculture,
the primary ob;ect of industry in every pro-
fPerous fta:e, was ne2lected, and one of the
moir fertile countries in Europe hardly railed
what was iluticienr for the support of its own
inhabitants,

-.--. I.- proportion as the population and manu-,
,'....' 'factures of the parent state declined, the de-

mands of her colonies continued to increaje.
The Spaniards, like their monarchs, inroxi-
cared with the wealth which poured in annually
upon them, deferred the paths of industry, to
which the; had been accullomed, and repaired
w-.irh eazcrn-f- tio thole regions from which
th.s o:-!uncet- ilTed. Bv this rage of emigra-
tion, another drain was opened, and the
iteren:-, of the colonics augmented bv exhaust-
ir. th;at of the mother-country. All those
c:rig2r.nts, as well as the adventurers who had

ar

at firrf fettled in America, depended absolutely P OK
upon Spain for almofl every article of necef- - I
fary consumption. Engaged in more alluring
and lucrative pursuits, or prevented by re-
ftraints which' government imposed, they
could not turn their own attention towards
eftablithing the manufatures requisite for
comfortable subsistence. They received (as I
have observed in another place) their clothing,
their furniture, whatever ministers to the ease
or luxury of life, and even their instruments
of labour, from Europe. Spain thinned of
people, and void of induJtry, was unable to
supply their increasing demands. She had re-
course to her neighbours. The manufadtures
of the Low Countries, of England, of France,
and of Italy, which her wants called into ex-
iflence, or animated with new vivacity, fur-
nifhed in abundance whatever ihe required.
In vain did the fundamental law, concerning
the exclusion of foreigners from trade with
America, oppose this innovation. Necessity,
more powerful than any statute, defeated its
operations, and constrained the Spaniards
themselves to concur in eluding it. The
English, the French, and Dutch, relying on
the fidelity and honour of Spanish merchants,
who lend their names to cover the deceit, fend
out their manufactures to America, and receive

the

BO.OK the exorbitant price for whici they are fold
-~.- _ there, cither in Ipecie, or in the rich conmmo-

diies of the New World. Neither the dread of
danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever in-
duced a Spanish factor EO betray pr defraud the
per!bn who confided in him ; and that probity,
Mwich is the pride and dibtincion of the nation,
contributes to its ruin. In a flort time, not
above a twentiith part of the coinmodities
exported to America was of Spanish growth or
fabric . All the relt was the property of
forein mr s,

tg n h entered in the name

of Sp.aniar's. T: ; treaifre of the New World
mav be c.i ':enc;r'.. :- no, to have belongyed
ro Sp ;a:. c c;.~ I: i'a-rhecd Europe, it was

.. ;;'; reI a. t:ie nrice of poods purchased
,j;' i.orc;ners. 1 ha: wealth which, by an

:..- .. C I .:, v,:,..:i hlave flread tlrough

*ich !\'.in '.f i: :'.

. ..!-.:, 3.'d have conveyed life

::::. aci;i\,i; to c(.c r brancih of maniiaccure,
.,j',cd o:;. i ; th'e I..; '.'i: witi such a rapid
ca ric, .:; :;,.i.nr ci:r.:ci.l nor animated it.
On the o.th<: L:',., the artilkns of rival na-
t;ons, encc,.ra -ci by this quick sale of their
-;· ; ''.mCdi;:'c, improved fIo nlitch in skill and
.:t:ciitry, as to be able to a: ord them at a rate

~-..:-9~i.-. .r
. ~:. i

so low, thlat 'eie: anufacure's f'Spain, ivhici B'o.;O K
*coYItl ot vie : ihrt'leirs, 'either ih $qtialit-y oit- -.
chietine ' 6 o'f ,w-k, 'were ifill farther 'dcprefld.
This deitrufiive commeirce drained off the
riches of the nation faster and more completely,
than even the extravagant schemes of ambi-
tion carried on by its monarchs. Spain was
so much astonished and diftrcffed, at behold-
ing her American trealures vanifli almost as
soon as they were imnported, that Philip III.
unable to supply what was requisite in circu-
lation, issued an edit, by which he endeavour-
ed to raiit copper money to a value in cur-
rency nearly equal to that of silver ; and the
lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was
reduced to a wretched expedient, which is the
lalt resource of petty impoverished itates.

TFiUS the poflfefrons of Spain in America

have not proved a source of population and of
wealth to her, in the fame manner as those of
other nations. In the countries of Europe,
where the spirit of indufl-ry subsists in full vi-
gour, every person fettled in such colonies
as are similar in their situation to thole of
Spain, is supposed to give employment to
three or four at home in supplying his wants .
- 'ztariz, c. 104. Child on trade and colonies.

5 But

B e0 K But wherever the mother-country cannot at

-- ford this supply, every emigrant may be con-

fidered as a citizen loft to the community,
and firangers must reap all the benefit of an-
fwering his demands.

.-;T.-r;. SL-CH has been the internal state of Spain
ti:,. from the close of the sixteenth century, and
"..... such her inability to iupply the growing wants

A-: of her colonies. The fatal effects of this dif-

proportion between their demands and her
capacity of answering them, have been much
increascd by the mode in which Spain has
endeavoured to regulate the intercourse be-
tween the mother-country and the colonies.
It is from her idea of monopolizing the trade
with America, and debarring her subje&s
there from any communication with foreigners,
that all her jealous and f)ftematic arrangements
have arisen. These are so singular in their na-
ture and consequences, as to merit a particular
explanation. In order to secure the monopoly
at which she aimed, Spain did not vest the
trade with her colonies in an exclusive com-
epanv, a plan which had been adopted by na-
tions more commercial, and at a period when
mercantile policy was an object of grca:er at-
tention, and ough: to have been better under-
itood. The Dutch gave up the whole trade

with

with their colonies, both in the East and Weft B OK
Indies, toexcluive companies. The English, - .
the French, the Danes, have imitated their
example with refpe& to the East Indian corm-
merce; and the two former have laid a similar
restraint upon some branches of their trade
with the New World. The wit of man can-
not, perhaps, devise a method for checking
the progress of industry and population in a
new colony more effe&ual than this. The in-
terest of the colony, and of the exclusive com-
pany, mufft in every point be diametrically
opposite; and as the latter possesses such ad-
vantages in this unequal contest, that it can
prescribe at pleasure the terms of intercourse,
the former muff not only buy dear and fell
cheap, but must susser the mortification of
having the increase of its surplus frock dif-
couraged by those very persons to whom alone
it can dispose of its productions .

SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from This ron-

falling into this error in policy, by the high f,.to°'
ideas which lie early formed concerning the Sp"ain
riches of the New World. Gold and silver
were commodities of too high value to vest a
monopoly of them in private hands. The

Y Smith's Inquiry, ii. 17i.

7;r~~~ ~crown

B 0 OK crown wished to retain the direction of a corn-

m

, erce so inviting; and in order to secure that,

ordained the cargo of every ship fitted out for
America, to be infpe&ed by the officers of
the Casa de Contra;acion in Seville, before it
could receive a licence to make the voyage;
and that on its return, a report of the coml-
modities w.hich it brought should be made to
the fame board, before it could be permitted
to land ther.. In consequence of this regu-
lation, all the trade of Spain with the New
World centred in the port of Seville, and
was gradually- brought into a form, in which
it has been conducted, with little variation,
from the middle of the lixteenth century
almost to our own tirmes. For the greater
fecuritv of the valuable cargoes sent to Ame-
rica, as well as for the more easy prevention
of fraud, the commerce of Spain with its
colonies is carried on by fleets, which fail un-
der llrong convovs. These fleets confitling
of two squadrons, one distinguished by the
name of Galecns, the other by that of the Flota,
are equipped annually. Formerly they took
their departure frc:m Sr-ille; but as the
port of Cadiz has been ,ound more commo-
dious, they have Iaiied from i: since the year
172.Ti

ITi0

THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra iBoo
Firme, and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, '- -

Carried on

with almost every article of luxury, or necef- by ihe Ga-
fary consumption, that an opulent people can eon"'
demand, touch first at Carthagena, and then
at Porto-bello;. To the former, the mer-
chants of Santa Martha, Caraccas, the New
Kingdom of Granada, and several other pro-
vinces resort. The latter is the great mart
for the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At
the flafon when the Galeons are expected, the
product of all the mines in there two king-
doms, together with their other valuable com-
modities, is transported by sea to Pan::ma.
From thence, as soon as the appearance of the
fleet from Europe is announced, they are con-
veyed across the isthmus, partly on mulesj
and 1prtly down the river Chagre to Porto-
bello. This paltry village, whose climate,
from the pernicious union of exceftive hear,
continual moiflrure, and the putrid exhalations
arifin from a rank Ibil, is more fatal to life
than any perhaps in the known world, is im-
medialtely filled with people. From being
the rciidcnce of a few negroes and mulattoes,
and of a miserable garriobn relieved every
three months, its streets are crowded with
opulcnt merchants from every corner of Peru,
anJ the adjacent provinces. A fair is opened,

VOL. III. B b the

BOOK the wealth of America is exchanged for the

.-- '- manufactures of Europe, and during its pre-

fcribed term of forty days, the richelt traffic
on the face of the earth is begun and finished,
with that funplicity of tranfaacion and un-
bounded confidence, which accompany exten-
2S!.i. five cornmerce'. The Flota holds its course

to Vera Cruz. The treasures and commo-
dities of New Spain, and the depending pro-
vinces, which were deposited at Puebla de los
Angeles in expectation of its arrival, are car-
ried thither, and the commercial operations
of Vera Cruz, conducted in the fame manner
w.':h those of Porto-bello, are inferior to them
only in importance and value. Both fleets,
as soon as they have completed their cargoes
irom America, rendezvous at the Havanna,
and retur in company to Europe.

,i (,-'- THi trade of Spain with her colonies, while

/

-
.'... :'nus feitered, and reftri:ted, came neccffarilv

to bc cc!nd '

:vcd wt!h the fImc Ipirit, and upon

the iln'.e pri.c:ples, as that of an exclusive
con ..-nv. E Bcrn- con,..acd to a F;;ele port,
i; -va ors ci-!' rhrcrwn into a few hands, and
ani.(;: . he ' .

\ '. c

, :' i: '; -. - r.' _I.- iu-.lly engrolfer
kb a '.;il rnu'-.aer ' . ;.-.:.:. ... , for erly

:- s' N u'S : '.!V.

in

in Seville, and now in Cadiz. There by corn- B yOK
binations, which they can easily 'form, may --.-
altogether prevent that competition which
preserves commodities at their natural price;
and by acting in concert, to which they are
prompted by their mutual interest, they may
raile or lower the value of them at pleasure.
In conlequence of this, the price of European
gulods in America is always high, and often
exorbitant. A hundred, two hundred, and
even three hundred per cent. are profits not
uncommon in the commerce of Spain with
her colonies'. From the fame ingroffing fpi-
rit it frequently happens, that traders of the
second order, wlhoe warehouses do not con-
tain a complete assortment of commodities
for the American market, cannot purchase
from the more opulent merchants, such goods
as they want, at a lower price than that for
vwhich they are fold in the colonies. With
the fame vigilant jealousy that an exclusive
company guards against the intrusion of the
free trader, those overgrown monopolifls en-
deavour to check the progress of every one
whose encroachments they dread'. This re-
i'raint of the American commerce to one port,

1 B. Ulloa Retabliff. part ii. p. 191.
' Smnithr's Inuiry, i. 171. Camlpomanes, Educ. Po-
r1:.. i. .i:.

B b 2 not

BOOK not only affests its domeitic state, but limits

c-- --' its foreign operations. A monopolist may

acquire more, and certainly will hazard less,
by a confined trade which yields exorbitant
prost, than by an extensive commerce in
which he receives only a moderate return of
gain. It is often his interest not to enlarge,
but to circumscribe the iphere of his acivity;
and ini:ead of calling forth more vigorous
exer:ions of co:nmercial industry, it may be
the object of his attention to check and set
bounds to them. By some Ilch maxim, the
nmeicantii policy of Spain seems to have re-
gulated i:s inrercourfe with America. Instead
of si'. !rnning the colonies with European
goods in ,ich quantity as might render both
the price and the profit moderate; the mer-
chants of Seville and Cadiz seem to have sup-
plicd them v.::h a tparing hand, that the ea-
gernefs of co::;'.itio!i armongif customers ob-
liged to purch-fe in a scanty market, might
enable their if-:-ors to dipof of their cargoes
witn exorbi.:a:t gan. About the middle of
the la cen ,

hehe hlae cxclufive trade to

America from Seviile was in its most flou-
rifning ii' -e, the burden of the two united
squa'drons of :e Galco;s and i-iota, did not ex-
ceed twrntv-icven tl:ouflnd .ve hundred tons'.

Campnomor.e. Educ. Pcu!. . ;.
P -. . ii. 10o.

The

The supply which such a fleet could carry, must Bl 0o
have been very inadequate to the demands of - --
those populous and extensive colonies, which
depended upon it for all the luxuries, and
many of the neceflaries of life.

SPAIN early became sensible of her declen- R'medi;e

proposed.

lion from her former prosperity, and many re-
fpectable and virtuous citizens employed their
thoughts in devising methods for reviving the
decaying industry and commerce of their coun-
try. From the violence of the remedies pro-
poled, we may judge how desperate and fatal
the malady appeared. Some, confounding a
violation of police with criminality against the
state, contended, that in order to check illicit
commerce, every person convicted of carrying
it on, fiould be punished with death, and con-
fifcation of all his effets d. Others, forgetting
the diftinftion between civil offences and acts of
impiety, insisted, that contraband trade fliould
be ranked among the crimes reserved for the
cognizance of the Inquisition; that such as
were guilty of it might he tried aid'punifhed,
according to the fecrer and furnmary form in
which that dreadful tribunal exercises itsjurif-

M. de Santa Cruz Commercia' 'i>Ito, p. 14z.

1B ).3 tiitiOn.

EBOOK° diction '. Others, uninftru&ed by obierving
.-,,--' the pernicious effects of monopolies in every

country where they have been eftablified, have
proposed to verf the trade with America in ex-
clufive companies, which interest would render
the nioft vigilant guardians of the Spanish conm-
merce against the incroachment of the inter-
lopers '.

BESIDE these wild projects, many schemes,

be:ter digested and more beneficial, were fug-
Sefted. But under the feeble monarchs, with
whom the reign of the Austrian line in Spain
ciosed, incapacity and indecision are confpicu-
ous in every department of government. In-
flead of taking for their model the active ad-
minifiration of Charles V. they affelted to imi-
tate the cautious procrailinating wildom of
Philip II. and destitute of his talents, they de-
liberated perpetually, but determined nothing.
No remedy was applied to the evils under which
the national commerce, domeffic as well as
foreign, languished. These evils continued to
increase, and Spain, with dominions more ex-
tensive and more opulent than any European

' Morcada Reflauracion politica de Efpagna, p. 41.
f Zavala y Augnon Reprefer:acicn, &c. p. 9go.

state,

slate, possessed neither vigour, nor money h, B O K
nor industry. At length, the violence of a _
great national convulsion rouzed the slumber-
ing genius of Spain. The efforts of the two
contending parties in the civil war, kindled by
the dispute concerning the succession of the
crown at the beginning of this century, called
forth, in tome degree, the ancient spirit and
vigour of the nation. While men were thus
forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than those which had influenced the
councils of the monarchy during the course of
a century, Spain derived from an unexpected
source the means of availing itself of their ta-
lents. The various powers who favoured the
pretensions either of the Austrian or Bourbon
candidate for the Spanish throne, sent formi-
dable fleets and armies to their support; France,
England, and Holland remitted immense fums
to Spain. These were spent in the provinces
which became the theatre of war. Part of the
American treasure, of which foreigners had
drained the kingdom, flowed back thither.
From this asra, one of the most intelligent Spa-
nith- authors dates the revival of the monarchy;
and, however humiliating the truth may be,
he acknowledges, that it is to her enemies his

c See NOTE LXV.

B b 4 country

B lOOrK country is indebted for the acquifiticn of a fund

c ,-- _of circulating specie, in fume measure adequate

to the exigencies of the public :.

s.- ....di A As loon as the Bourbons obtained quiet pof-
im.:.r. X -

t

n.nr . :ie scion of the throne, they discerned this change
uo;:, in the ipirit of the people, and in the state of

the nation, and took advantage of it for al-
though that family has not given monarchs to
Spain, remarkable for fuperioritv of genius,
they have all been beneicent princes, attentive
to the happiness of their subjects, and solicitous
to promote it. It was, accordingly, the first
object of Philip V. to suppress an innovation
which had crept in during the course of the

lr.irg ewavr, and had overturned the whole system of
f,,':"* the Spanish commerce with America. The

.;.: ,i English and Dutch, bv their superiority in

naval power, having acquired such command
of the ira, as to cut off all inrercourfe between
Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to fur-
nifh her subjects in America thole necessaries
of life, without which they could not exist,
and as the only means of receiving from thence
an" part of thtir treasure, departed so far from
the uiual rigour or its max.ms, as to open the
trace with Peru to her allies the French. The

! Cnmpormaes, i. z4:.

merchants

merchants of St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. B0QOK
granted the privilege of this lucrative corn- -,
merce, engaged in it with vigour, aid car-
ried it on upon principles very different from
t!',ole of the Spaniards. They supplied Peru
with European commodities at a moderate
price, and not in stinted quantity. The goods
which they imported were conveyed to every
province of Spanifl America, in such abun-
dance as had never been known in any former
-pcriod. If this intercourse had been continued,
the exportation of European commodities from
Spain nmufl have ceased, and the dependence of
the colonies on the mother-country have been
at an end. The most peremptory injunfcions 1713.
were therefore issued, prohibiting the admifflion
of f:Ircign vessels into any port of Peru or
Chili k, and a Spanish squadron was employed
to clear the South Sea of intruders, whose aid
was no longer necessary.

BUT though, on the cessation of the war, bychecking

contraband

which was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht, trade,
Spain obtained relief from one encroachment
on her commercial system, she was exposed t6
another, which Ihe deemed hardly lets perni-

k Frezier Voy. 256. B. Ulloa Retab. ii. 104, &c.
'iccdo y llerrcra. Avifo, &c. 236.

cious.

BOOK cioUS. As an inducement-that might prevail

with Queen Anne to conclude a peace, which
France and Spain desired with equal ardour,
Philip V. not only conveyed to Great Britain

-C-: the AjerlI, or contract for supplying the Spa-

is Afn..of nifh colonies with negroes, which had formerly
"'rPy, been enjoyed by France, but granted it the

more extraodinary privilege of fending annually
to the fair of Porto-bello a lhip of five hundred
tons, laden with European commodities. In
consequence of this, British factories v.ere efta-
blissed at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz,
Buenos Ayres, and other Spanilh settlements.
The veil with which Spain had hitherto covered
the fiate and transactions of her colonies was
removed. The agents of a rival nation, re-
fiding in the towns of most extensive trade,
and of chief retort, had the befl opportunities
of becoming acquainted with the interior con-
dition of the American provinces, of observing
their stated and occasional wants, and of know-
ing what commodities might be imported into
them with the greatest advantage. In confe-
querce of information so authentic and expe-
ditious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other
English colonies who traded to the Spanish
main, were enabled to assort and proportion
their cargoes so exactly to the demands of the
mar'-ke, that the contraband commerce was

carried

carried on with a facility, and to an extent un- B 00K
known in any former period. This, however, -~
was not the most fatal consequence of the As-
fiento to the trade of Spain. The agents of
the British South Sea Company, under cover of
the importation which they were authorised to
make by the ship sent annually to Porto-bello,
poured in their commodities on the Spanilh
continent, without limitation or restraint. In-
stead of a ship of five hundred tons, as ftipu-
lated in the treaty, they usually employed one
which exceeded nine hundred tons in burden.
She was accompanied by two or three smaller
vefills, which mooring in tome neighbouring
creek, lUpplied her clandestinely with fresh
bales of goods, to replace such as were fold.
The inspectors of the fair, and officers of the
revenue, gained by exorbitant presents, con-
nived at the fraud'. Thus, partly by the ope-
rations of the company, and partly by the ac-
tivity of private interlopers, almost the whole
trade of Spanish America was ingroffed by so-
reigners. The immense commerce of the Ga-
leons, formerly the pride of Spain, and the
envy of other nations, funk to nothing, and 737.
tie squadron itself reduced from fifteen thou-

See NOTE -I XVI.

sand

B 0 0 K sand to two thousand tons °, served hardly any

VIII.
-,-- ' purpose but to fetch home the royal revenue

arising from the fifth on silver.

C--da Crf- 'WTHILE Spain observed those encroachments,
f*r. .-;.r- and felt so sensibly their pernicious effects, it

P was irpoffible not to make some effort to re-

frrain them. Her first expedient was to station
ihips of force, under the appellation of Guardd
Cclfas, upon the coafis of thole provinces, to
which interlopers most frequcenly resorted. As
private interest concurred v.izh the duty which
they owed to the public, in renderig the of-
ficers who commanded those vessels vigilant
and aFtive, some check was given to the pro-
grefs of the contraband trade, though in do-
minions so extensive, and lo accessible by sea,
no number of cruisers was iufficint to guard
aoainf its inroads in every quarter. This in-
terrurtion of an intercourse, which'had been
carried on with so much facility, that the mer-
chants in the Britilf colonies were accustomed
to conf.der it almost as an allowed branch of
commerce, excited murmurs and complaints.
These authoriled, in some measure, and ren-
dered more interesting, by `everal unjustifiable

Alcedo y Herrera, p. 359. Campomanes, i. 436.

ads

ars of violence committed by Fhecaptains.of B1o'6K
the Spanilh Guarda Collas, precipitated Great
Bri.tin into a war with Spain; in conlequence 1739.
of v.'hich the latter obtained a final eleafe from
the AiTlento, and was left at liberty to regulate
the commerce of her colonies, without being
r trained by any engagement with a foreign
power.

As the formidable encroachments of the The ufof

register Ihips

Lnglill on their American trade, had disco- i7rroduced.
vered to the Spaniards the vast consumption of
European goods in their colonies, and taught
them the advantage of accommodating their
importations to the occasional demand of the
various provinces, they perceived the necessity
of deviling tome method of uipplying their co-
lonies, different fiom their ancient one, of
iending thither periodical fleets. That mode.
of communication had been found not only to
be uncertain, as the departure of the Galeons
and Flota was sometimes retarded by various
accidents, and often prevented by the wars
which raged in Europe, but to be ill adapted
to afford America a regular and timely supply
of what it wanted. The Icarcity of European
goods in the Spanish settlements frequently be-
came excelive ; their price rose to an enormous

height;

B oI K height; the vigilant eve of mercantile attention
t- --r- did not fail to observe this favourable oppor-

tunity, an ample lupply was poured in by in-
terlopers from the English, the French, and
Dutch ifiands; and when the Galeons at length
arrived, they found the markets bo glutted by
this illicit commerce, that there was no de-
mand for the commodities with which they
were loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain
permitted a considerable part of her commerce
with America, to be carried on by regijifrjhips.
These are fitted out, during the intervals be-
tween the flared seasons when the Galeons and
Flota fail, by merchants in Seville or Cadiz,
upon obtaining a licence from the council of
the Indies, for which thev pay a very high pre-
mium, and are destined for those ports where
any extraordinarn demand is foreseen or ex-
pected. By this expedient, such a regular sup-
ply of fresh commodities is conveyed to the
American market, that the interloper is no
longer allured by the fame profpe of cxceffive
gain, or the people in the colonies urged by
the fame necefity, to engage in the hazardous
adventures of contraband trade.
ThC .ic:-i \. proportion as experience manifested the

advantages of carrying on trade in this mode,
the number c: re : ricr hips ir.reafed; and at

X~~~~~I ~length,

length, in the year 1743, the Galeons, after BO3 0.
having been employed upwards of two cen- .
turics, were finally laid aside. From that pe-
riod there has been no intercourse with Chili
and Peru but by single ships, dispatched from
time to time as occasion requires, and when
the merchants expea a market will open. These
lail round Cape Horn, and convey dire&ly to
the ports in the South Sea the productions and
manufactures of Europe, for which the people
fIttled in those countries were formerly obliged
to repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These
towns, as has been formerly observed, must
gradually decline, when deprived of that com-
merce to which they owed their existence. This
disadvantage however is more than compen-
fated, for the whole continent of South Ame-
rica receives supplies of European commodities,
with so much regularity, and in such abund-
ance, as mufr contribute greatly to the hap-
pins;i and prosperity of all the colonies fettled
there. But as all the register ships destined for
the South Seas, mufl frill take their departure
from Cadiz, and are obliged to return thither",
this branch of the American commerce, even
in its new and improved form, continues sub-
icj to the reRraints of a Ipecies of monopoly,

n Camponane;, j. 434. 440,

and

B OK 0 and feels those pernicious effefts of it, which
- -. - I have already described.
Serrmn for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined

..... to regulating the trade with its more flourishing

colonies, it has extended likewise to the re-
viving commerce in those settlements where it
was neglected, or had decayed. Among the
new taftes which the people of Europe have
acquired, in consequence of their intercourse
with the natives of those countries which they
conquered in America; that for chocolate is one
of the most universal. The use of this liquor
made with a paste, formed of the nut, or al-
mond of the cacao-tree, compounded with va-
rious ingredients, the Spaniards first learned
from the Mexicans; and it has appeared to
them, and to the other European nations, so
palatable, lb nourishing, and so wholesome,
that it has become a commercial article of con-
fiderable importance. The cacao-tree grows
fpontaneoulyv in several parts of the torrid
zone; but the nuts of the befi quality, next to
those of Guatimala, on the South Sea, arc pro-
duced in the rich plains of Caraccas, a pro-
vince of Tierra Firme. In consequence of this
acknowledged luperiority in the quality of ca-
cao in that province, and its communication
with the Atlantic, vhich facilitates the con-

vevance

veance to Europe, the culture of the cacao Bo 0 K
there is more extensive than in any diftri& of i-
America. But the Dutch, by the vicinity of
their settlements in the finall islands of Curazoa
and Buen-Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas, gra-
dually ingroffed the greatest part of the cacao
trade. The traffic with the mother-country
for this valuable commodity ceased almost en-
tirely; and such was the supine negligence of
the Spaniards, or the defeas of their com-
mercial arrangements, that they were obliged
to receive from the hands of foreigners this
production of their own colonies, at an exorbi-
tant price. In order to remedy an evil no less by etablii.

ing thecom-

disgraceful, than pernicious to his subjects, panyofCa-
Philip V. in the year 1728, granted to a body "'"''
of merchants, an exclusive right to the com-
merce withCaraccas and Cumana, on condi-
tion of their employing, at their own expence,
a sufficient number of armed vessels to clear the
coast of interlopers. This society, diftin-
guiihed sometimes by the name of the Com-
pany of Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain
in which it is eftablilhed, and sometimes by
that of the Company of Caraccas, from the
diftrift of America to which it trades, has car-
ried on its operations with such vigour and fuc-
cess, that Spain has recovered an important
branch of commerce, which the had suffered

VOL. III. C c to

BO 0 to be wrested from her, and is plentifully sup-
-.-»-.' plied with an article of extensive consumption

at a moderate price. Not only the parent
state, but the colony of Caraccas, has derived
great advantages from this inlsitution; for al-
though, at the first aspect, it may appear to be
one of those monopolies, whose tendency is to
check the spirit of industry, instead of calling
it forth to new exertions, it has been prevented
from operating in this manner, by several fa-
lutary regulations, framed upon foresight of
such bad effcEts, and of purpose to obviate
them. The planters in the Caraccas are not
left to depend entirely on the company, either
for the importation of European commodities,
or the sale of their own productions. The in-
habitants of the Canary islands have the privi-
ege of fending thither annually a register ship
of considerable burden; and from Vera Cruz
in New Spain, a free trade is permitted in
every port comprehended in the charter of the
company. In consequence of this, there is
such a competition, that both with respect to
what the colonies purchase, and what they fell,
the price seems to be fixed at its natural and
equitable rate. The company has not the
power of raising the former, or degrading the
latter at pleasure; and accordingly, since it
was effablilhed, the increase of culture, of po-

pulation,

ula.tion, and of live stock, in the province of BO o v;
Caraccas, has been very considerable o.

BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish Enirgr-

any yftem which time has rendered venerable, m,.orcia,
or that commerce can be diverted from the sdpah
channel in which it has long been accustomed
to flow; Philip V. in his new regulations con-
cerning the American trade, paid such de-
ference to the ancient maxim of Spain, con-
cerning the limitation of all importation from
the New World to one harbour, as to oblige
both the register ships which returned from
Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan Company
from Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes in the
port of Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments
more liberal and enlarged begin to spread in
Spain. The spirit of philosophical inquiry,
which it is the glory of the present age to have
turned from frivolous or abstruse speculations,
to the business and affairs of men, has extended
its influence beyond the Pyrenees. In the re-
searches of ingenious authors, concerning the
police or commerce of nations, the errors and
defects of the Spanifl system with refpec to
both met every eye, and have not only been
exposed with severity, but are held up as a
warning to other states. The Spaniards, stung

o See NOTE LXVII.

C c 2 with

B o0OK with the reproaches of these authors, or con-

Viii.

, _
--. vinced by their arguments, and admonished by

several enlightened writers of their own coun-
try, seem at length to have discovered the de-
ftruaive tendency of those narrow maxims,
which, -by cramping commerce in all its opera-
tions, have so long retarded its progress. It is
to the monarch now on the throne, that Spain
is indebted for the first public regulation formed
in consequence of such enlarged ideas.

TA.^;:;A- WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her an-
m-nit or rc- -
r..: pac't cient maxims concerning her commerce with

America, ihe was so much afraid of opening
any channel, by which an illicit trade might
find admission into the colonics, that she alroft
shut herself out from any intercourse with them,
but that which was carried on by her annual
fleets. There was no eflabliflment for a re-
gular communication of either public or pri-
vate intelligence, between the mother-country
and its American settlements. From the want
of this neceffarv institution, the operations of
the Rfate, as well as the business of individuals,
were retarded or conducted unfkilfully, and
Spain often received from foreigners her first
information with respect to very interesting
events in her own colonies. But though this
defect in police was sensibly felt, and the re-

medy

medy for it was obvious, that jealous spirit B o K
with which the Spanish monarchs guarded the .----
exchlfive trade, retfrained'therh from apply-
ing it. At length Charles III. surmounted
those confideratioris which had deterred his pre-
decefliors, and .ri the year 1'764 ap.pointed
packet-boa ts'.to-;:ediai'fpat~chieion t-he, ' sift, d'ay
of each month, from'C"brugna totheWivan.
na or Porto-Rico. From thence letters. ag--
conveyed in smaller vessels to Vera Cruz and
Porco-bello, and transmitted by post through
the kingdoms of Tierra Firme, Granada, Peru,
and New Spain. With no less regularity
packet-boats fail once in two months to Rio de
la Plata, for the accommodation of the pro-
vinces to the east of the Andes. Thus provi-.
sion is made for a speedy and certain circulation
of intelligence throughout the va domipions
of Spain, 'from 'tfh. 'equal advrtageresr uft
redou n'd'tolthe- political and nmerfai.le;:.treg
of the kingdom P..' With this pnew'arrange-
ment, a scheme of extending aon-merce';has
been more immediately conneted.' Each of
the packet-boats, which are vessels of some
considerable burden, is allowed to take in half
a loading of such commodities as are the pro-
duct of Spain, and moll in demand in the

r onz Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. i5.

C c 3 ports
,-rr"'

BOO ports whither they are bound. In return for
_--- there they may bring home to Corugna an

equal quantity of American productions ,
This may be confidered as the first relaxations
of those rigid laws, which confined the trade
with the New World to a single part, and the
sift attempt to admit the reft of the kingdom
to some hare in it.

Fr.tiAd- IT was soon followed by one more decisive.
p*rml:td to
Scrsiir- In the year 1765, Charles III. laid open the

trade to the windward islands, Cuba, Hifpa-
niola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad,
to his fubje^ts in every province of Spain. He
permitted them to fail from certain ports in
each of these, specified in the edi&, at any
season, and with whatever cargo they deemed
most proper, without any other warrant than a
simple clearance from the custom-house of the
place whence they took their departure. He
released them from the numerous and op-
pretTive duties imposed on goods exported to
Am.erica, and in place of the whole substituted
a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the
commodities sent from Spain. He allowed
them to return either to the fame port, or to
any other where they might hope for a more

A Append. L. a la Educ. Pop. p. 31.

advantageous

advantageous market, and there to enter the B 00.
homeward cargo, on payment of the usual '-
duties. This ample privilege, which at once
broke through all the fences which the jealous
policy of Spain had been labouring for two
centuries and a half to throw round its com-
mercial intercourse with the New World, was
soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the
provinces of Yucatan and Campeachyr.

THE propriety of this innovation, which Beneficial

may be confidered as the most liberal effort of
Spanish legislation, has appeared from its es-
sets. Prior to the edic in favour of the free
trade, Spain derived hardly any benefit from
its negleted colonies in Hispaniola, Porto-
Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad. Its com-
merce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and that
of Yucatan and Campeachy was engrossed al-
most intirely by interlopers. But as soon as a
general liberty of trade was permitted, the in-
tercourfe with those provinces revived, and has
gone on with a rapidity ofprogreffion, of which
there are few examples in the history of nations.
In less than ten years, the trade of Cuba has
been more than tripled. Even in those fettle-
ments where, from the languishing state of

rAppend. ii. a la Educ. Pop. 37, 54. 91.

C c 4 induRfry,

BOOK indutry, greater efforts were requisite to re-
I, -_I store its activity, their commerce has been

doubled. It is computed, that such a number
of ships is already employed in the free trade,
tha: the tonnage of them far exceeds that of the
Galeons and Flota, at the moit flourifliing
era of their commerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a few mer-
chants, established in a favourite port. They
are diffused through every province of the
kingdom; and by opening a new market for
their various productions and manufa&ures,
must encourage and add vivacity to the in-
duftry of the farmer and artificer. Nor does
the kingdom profit only by what it exports, it
derives advantage likewise from what it re-
ceives in return, and has the prospect of being
soon able to supply itself with several commo-
dities of extensive confumpion, for which it
formerly depended on foreigners. The con-
fumption of sugar in Spain is perhaps as great
in proportion to the number of its inhabitants,
as thti of any European kingdom. But though
possessed of countries in the New World, whose
foil and climate are ir.of proper for rearing the
ifug..r-cane; tho gh the domestic culture of
that valuabie plant in the kingldom of Gra-
nada w-as once considerable ; fuich has been
tie fatal tendency of iii-iudged institutions in

America,

America, and such the pressure of improper BVOK
taxes in Europe, that Spain has loft almost .
entirely this branch of industry, which has
enriched other nations. This commodity,
which has now become an article of primary
necessity in Europe, the Spaniards were obliged
to purchase of foreigners, and had the morti-
fication to fee their country drained annually
of an immense fum on that accounts. But if
that spirit, which the permiflion of free trade
has put in motion, ihall persevere in its efforts
with the fame vigour, the cultivation of sugar
in Cuba and Porto-Rico may increase so much,
that in a few years their growth may be equal
to the demand of the kingdom.

SPAIN has been induced by her experience Free trade

of the beneficial consequences resulting from bPtween the
having relaxed somewhat of the rigour of her coloni."
ancient laws with refpeft to the commerce of
the mother-country with the colonies, to per-
mit a more liberal intercourse of one colony
w'ith another. By one of the jealous maxims
of the old system, all the provinces situated on
the South Seas were prohibited, under the
molt revere penalties, from holding any com-
munication with one another. Though each

U Lztariz, C. 94.

of

Bo0 OK of theie yield peculiar productions, the reci-
-e- .. procal exchange of which might have added

to the happiness of their refpe&ive inhabitants,
or have facilitated their progress in industry,
so solicitous was the Council of the Indies, to
prevent their receiving any supply of their
wants, but by the periodical fleets from Eu-
rope, that in order to guard againif this, it
cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in New
Spain, in Guatimala, and the New Kingdom
of Granada, from such a correlpondence with
their fellow-fubjeE;s, as tended manifefftly to
their mutual prosperity. Of all the numerous
restrictions devised by Spain for securing the
exclusive trade with her American fettle-
ments, none perhaps was more illiberal, none
teems to have been more lenfibly felt, or to
have produced more hurtful effects. This
grievance, coeval with the settlements of Spain
in the New World, is at last redressed. In the
year I74, Charles III. published an edi&,
ra-nting to the fcur vail provinces which I
ha;e mentioned, the privilege of a free trade
wl:h each other'. WVhat may be the effects
of opening this communication between coun-
tries def.ined by their situation for reciprocal

1 Rea! CcdIa pc -. P... -... -, e

ec Efpagna, vi.
Prologo. ?. N C E LX\'iI.

intercourse,

intercourse, cannot yet be determined by ex- B o P
perience. They can hardly fail of being bene-
ficial and estenfive. The motives for granting
this permission are manifestly no less laudable,
than the principle pn which it is founded is
liberal; and both difcqver the progress of g
spirit in Spain, far elevated above the narrow
prejudices and maxims on which her system
for regulating the trade, and conducing the
government of her colonies, was originally
founded.

AT the fame time that Spain has been in- New reg-

lations Con-

tent on introducing regulations, suggested by cerningthe
more enlarged views of policy, into her system of the...
of American commerce, she has not been in- i'"e
attentive to the interior government of her
colonies. Here too there was much room for
reformation and improvement, and Don Joseph
Galvez, who has now the direcion of the de-
partment for Indian affairs in Spain, has en-
joyed the best opportunities, not only of
observing the defects and corruption in the
political frame of the colonies, but of disco-
vering the sources of those evils. After being
employed seven years in the New World on an
extraordinary million, and with very extensive
powers, as infpeEor-general of New Spain;
after visiting in perfoi the remote provinces

of

0 0 K of Cinaloa, Sonora, and California, and
VIII.
( -- making several important alterations in the

slate of their police and revenue; he beganj4is

Rfonr.2- ministry with a general reformation of thei,-
tion of tih . .
conr of bunals of juffice in America. In conseque.nce
j"5ic". of the progress of population and wealth in the

colonies, the business of the Courts of Audi-
ence has increased so much,. tiat'the number
of judges of whicdr- -hey were diigirially com-
posed, has bee~f inadequate to the grow-
ing labours and duties of the office, and the
salaries iertted upoatAhen inferior to the dig-
nity of the ftatiohn, -.A::aremedy for both, he
obtained a' r6t}"e;diiticatiia -ing an addi-
tional- number of judges in each court of Audi-
ence, -wih higher titles, and more ample
appoiritm~eits-u,

~N ;qR:-. To the fame intelligent minister- Sparin
^go ° sindebted for-aTYew Wdibution 6f geAMr
".n.. in it s Amerrcan ra3 sl,, .iEven since the

eizabiifnment of a Eird vicess ty in the New
Kingdom of Graria 'so great tis the extent
of the Spanish dom fs in the New World,
that several places ifjec to the jurifdi tion
of each viceroy, were at such an enormous
difance from the capitals in which the re

u Gizeta de Madrid, igth March, 177.

fided,

fided, that neither their attention, nor their BOOK

VIII.

authority, could reach so far. Some provinces G.v
subordinate to the viceroy of New Spain, lay
above two thousand miles from Mexico. There
were countries fubjeEt to the viceroy of Peru
till farther from Lima. The people in those
remote diftriEts could hardly be said to enjoy
the benefit of civil government. The oppref-
lion and insolence of its inferior ministers they
often feel, and rather submit to there in silence,
than involve themselves in the expence and
trouble of resorting to the distant capitals,
where alone they can find redress. As a re- New vce.

royalty,

medy for this, a fourth vice-royalty has been Aug. 1776,
erected, to the jurisdiction of which are sub- Plata
jecEed the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Bue-
nos-Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta
Cruz de la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of
Mendoza and St. Juan. By this well-judged
arrangement, two advantages are gain'ed. All
the inconveniences occasioned by the remote
situation of those provinces, which had been
long felt, and long complained of, are re-
moved. The countries most distant from
Lima are separated from the viceroyalty of
Peru, and united under a superior, whose feat
of government at Buenos-Ayres will be com-
modious and accessible. The contraband trade
with the Portuguese, which was become so

extensive,

BOO

0 extensive, as muti have put a final ftdp to the
*- - * exportation 6fcomrmdities ffbm Spaini to her

southern colonies, may be checked riore tho-
roughly, and with greater facility, when the
fupreine magifrate, by his vicinity to the
places in which it is carried on, can view its
progress and effects with his own eyes. Don
Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised to this
new dignity, with appointments equal to
those of the other viceroys, is well acquainted
both with the ifate arid the interest of the
countries over which he is to preside, having
served in them long, and with distinction. By
this dismemberment, succeeding that which
took place at the erection of the viceroyalty of
the New Kingdom of Granada, almost two-
third parts of the territories originally subje&c
to the vicerovy of Peru are now lopped off
from their jurifdicion.

Ne-- :- THE limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain
p...r ..'.i- have likewise been considerably circumscribed,
soao, & and w inh no lcs propriety and discernment.

Four of its nofn remote provinces, Sonora,
Cinalo3, Californ::, and New Navarre, have
been ftr;m.cd i:.o a iepara-c government. The
Chevalier de Croix, who is intrusted with
this command, is not dignified with the title
of viceroy, nor does he enjoy the appointments

s belonging

belonging to that rank, but his jurifdiltion is B 0 OK

VIII.

altogether independent on the viceroyalty of
New Spain. The erection of this last govern-
ment ifems to have been suggested, not only
by the consideration of the remote situation of
thole provinces from Mexico; but by atten-
tion to the late discoveries made there, which
I have mentioned' Countries containirig fch
riches, and which probably may rife into such
importance, required the immrediate inspection
of a governor, to whom they were specially
committed. As every consideration of duty,
of interest, and of vanity, must concur in
prompting those new governors to encourage
such exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and
prosperity through the provinces committed
to their charge, the beneficial effects of this
arrangement may be considerable. Many
diftriEts in America, long depressed by the
languor and feebleness natural to provinces
which compose the extremities of an overgrown
empire, may be animated with vigour and
activity when brought so near the feat of
power, as to feel its invigorating influence.

SuCH, since the accession of the Bour- Attempt to

reform do-
bons to the throne of Spain, has been the medic po-

licy.
1 Book vii. p. 262.

progress

BOOK progress of their regulations, and the gradual

, u expansion of their views with refpe& to the

commerce and government of their American
colonies. Nor has their attention been so
entirely engrofed by what related to the more
remote parts of their dominions, as to render
them neglectful of what was still more im-
portant, the reformation of domestic errors
and defeEts in policy. Fully sensible of the
causes to which the declension of Spain, from
her former prosperity, ought to be imputed;
they have made it a great objeEt of their policy,
to revive a spirit of industry among their sub-
jects, and to give such extent and perfection to
their manufatures, that they may be able to
supply the demands of America from their
own stock, and to exclude foreigners from a
branch of commerce which has been so fatal
to the kingdom. This they have endeavoured
to accomplish, by a variety of edicts issued
since the peace of Utrecht. They have
granted bounties for the encouragement of
some branches of induftrv; they have lowered
the taxes on others; they have prohibited, or
have loaded with additional duties, such
foreign manufatures as come in competition
with their own; they have instituted societies
for the improvement of trade and agriculture;
they have planted colonies of husbandmen in

7 some

some uncultivated districts of Spain, and di- BOOK
vided among them the waste fields; they have il
had recourse to every expedient, devised by
commercial wisdom, or commercial jealousy,
for reviving their own industry, and difcoun-
tenancing that of other nations. These, how-
ever, it is not my province to explain, or to
inquire into their propriety and effets. There
is no effort of legislation more arduous, no
experiment in policy more uncertain, than an
attempt to revive the spirit of indutry where
it has declined, or to introduce it where it is
unknown. Nations already possessed of exten-
five commerce, enter into competition with
Iiclh advantages, derived from the large capi-
tals of their merchants, the dexterity of their
manufaCaurers, the alertness acquired by habit
in every department of business, that the state
which aims at rivalling, or supplanting them,
must expect to struggle with many difficulties,
and be content to advance slowly. If the
quantity of productive industry now in Spain,
be compared with that of the kingdom under
the last listless monarchs of the Aufirian line,
its progress must appear considerable, and is
sufficient to alarm the jealousy, and to call
forth the most vigorous efforts of the nations
now in poffefion of the lucrative trade which
the Spaniards aim at wresting from them.

VOL. III. D d One

OOK0 One circumstance may render those exertions
_'--»-- of Spain an object of more serious attention

to the other European powers. They are not
to be ascribed wholly to the influence of the
crown and its ministers. The sentiments and
ipirit of the people seem to second the pro-
vident care of their monarchs, and to give it
greater effect. The nation has adopted more
liberal ideas, not only with refpec to com-
merce, but domneric policy. In all the later
Spanilh writers, defects in the arrangements
of their country concerning both are acknow-
ledged, and remedies proposed, which igno-
rance rendered their ancestors incapable of dif-
cerning, and pride would not have allowed
them to confess x. But after all that the Spa-
niards have done, much remains to do. Many
pernicious inf'itiuions and abuses, deeply in-
corporated with the system of internal policy
and taxation, which has been long established
in Spain, mutf be abolilhed before industry
and manufactures can recover an extensive ac-
tivity.

Caneaisd STILL, however, the commercial regula-
': .' tions of Spa.n with re!peSt to her colonies,

are too rigid and i\llem-^tical to be carried

S
S NOTE LXIX.

into

into complete execution. The legislature that B 0O0 K
loads trade with impositions too heavy, or set- -'
ters it by restrictions too severe; defeats its
own intention; and, in truth, is only multi-
plying the inducements to violate its statutes,
and proposing an high premium to encourage
illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in Europe
and America, circumscribed in their mutual
intercourse by the jealousy, or oppressed by
the exactions of the crown, have their in-
vention continually on the stretch how to
elude its edits. The vigilance and ingenuity
of private interest discover means of effecting
this, which public wifdoin cannot foresee,
nor public authority prevent. This iPirit,
counteracting that of the laws, pervades the
commerce of Spain with America in all its
branches; and from the highest departments
in government, descends to the lowest. The
very officers appointed to check contraband
trade, are often employed as instruments in
carrying it on; and the boards instituted to
restrain and punish it, are the channels through
which it flows. The king is supposed to be
defrauded by various artifices, of more than
one half of the revenue which he ought to
receive from Americay; and as long as it is

. Solorz. delnd. jure, ii. lib. v.

D d 2 the

Bcl 0 0 the interest of so many persons to screen those
_-¢ --> artifices from detection, the knowledge of

them will never reach the throne. " How
" many ordinances, fays Corita, how many
" instructions, how many letters from our so-
" vereign, are sent in order to correct abuses,
' and how little are they observed, and what

f: rmall advantage is derived from them ! To

" me the old oblervation appears just, that
"where there are many physicians, and many
' medicines, there is a want of health; where
" there are many laws, and many judges,
cC there is want of justice. We have viceroys,

presidents, governors, oydors, corrigidors,

" alcaldes, and thousands of alguazils abound
: every where; but notwithstanding all these,
"public abuses continue to multiply '." Time
has increased the evils which he lamented as
early as the reign of Philip II. A spirit of
corruption has infected all the colonies of
Srain in America. Men far removed from
tL'e set of government; impatient to acquire
wealth, that they may return speedily from
what they are apt to confider as a state of exile
in a rermote unhealthful country ; allured by
opportunities too tempting to be refited, and
ieduced by the example of those around them;

- M.. penes me.

find

find their sentiments of honour and of duty Bv lK
gradually relax. In private life, they give a
themselves up to a dissolute luxury, while in
their public conduct they become unmindful
of what they owe to their sovereign and to
their country.

BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish Trade be-

ntade in America, there remains one detached, s'painnd'
but important branch of it, to be mentioned. the Philip.
Soon after his accession to the throne, Philip II.
formed a scheme of planting a colony in the
Philippine islands, which had been negleaed
since the time of their discovery; and he ac-
complifhed it by means of an armament fitted 1564.
out from New Spainb. Manila, in the inand
of Luconia, was the station chosen for the ca-
pital of this new establishment. From it an
active commercial intercourse began with the
Chinese, and a considerable number of that
indutrious people, allured by the profpea of
gain, fettled in the Philippines under the Spa-
nifh protection. They supplied the colony so
amply with all the valuable produacions and
manufactures of the East, as enabled it to
open a trade with America, by a course of
navigation, the longest from land to land on

b Torquem. i. lib. v. c. 14.

D d 3 our

ooK our globe. In the infancy of this trade, it
VIIl.

was carried on with Callao, on the coast of
Peru; but experience having discovered the
impropriety of fixing upon that as the port of
communication with Manila, the staple of the
commerce between the east and well was re-
moved from Callao to Acapulco, on the coast
of New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been

brought into a regular form. One or two
ships depart annually from Acapulco, which
may carry out silver to the amount of five hun-
dred thousand pelus', but have hardly any
thing elle of value on board; in return for
which, they bring back spices, drugs, china,
and japan wares, calicoes, chintz, muffins,
silks, and every precious article, with which
the benignity of the climate, or the ingenuity
of its people, has cni.'bld the East to supply
the reft of the worid. Fur some time the
mrerchants of Peru. were admitted to partici-
pate in thil traffic, and might fend annually
a flip to Aaapulco, to wait the arrival of the
-efFels from Manila, and receive a propor-
tional liare of the commodities which they
imported. At length, the Peruvians were

Recop. lib. ix. c. 45. 1. 6.

excluded

excluded by moif rigorous edias, and- all the B 00 ^K

VIII.

commodities from the East reserved solely for t --~
the consumption of New Spain.

IN consequence of this indulgence, the in'ha.

bitants of that country enjoy advantages un-
known in the other Spanish colonies. 'The
manufactures of the East are not only more
suited to a warm climate, and more fihwy
than those of Europe, but can be fold at a
lower price; while, at the fame time, 'the
profits upon them are so considerable, as to
enrich all those who are employed, either in
bringing them from Manila, or vending them
in New Spain. As the interest both of the
buyer and feller concurred in favouring this
branch of commerce, it has continued to ex-
tend in spite of regulations, concerted with
the most anxious jealousy to circumscribe it.
Under cover of what the laws permit to be
imported, vast quantities of India goods are
poured into the markets of New Spain d, and
when the flota arrives at Vera Cruz, it often
finds the wants of the people already supplied
by cheaper and more acceptable commodi-
ties.

See NOTE LXX.

D d 4 TigER

BOO .K THERE is not, in the commercial arrange-
>__-- ments of Spain, any circumstance more inex-

plicable than the permission of this trade be-
tween New Spain and the Philippines, or
more repugnant to its fundamental maxim of
holding the colonies in perpetual dependance
on the mother-country, by prohibiting any
commercial intercourse that might suggest to
them the idea of receiving a supply of their
wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion muff appear itill more extraordinary, from
confidering that Spain herself carries on no
direct trade with her settlements in the Phi-
lippines, and grants a privilege to one of her
American colonies, which The denies to her
fubjecds in Europe. It is probable, that the
colonists who originally took possession of the
Philippines, having been sent out from New
Spain, begun this intercourse with a country
which they confidered, in some measure, as
their parent state, before the court of Madrid
was aware of its consequences, or could efta-
blifh regulations in order to prevent it. Many
remonstrances have been presented against this
trade, as detrimental to Spain, by diverting
into another channel, a large portion of that
treasure which ought to flow into the kingdom,
as tending to give rile to a spirit of inde-

pendence

pendence in the colonies; and to encourage in- BOOK
numerable-frauds, against which it. is impof- tr-v
fible to guard; in tranfasions so far removed
from the inspection of government. But as
it requires no flight effort of political :wisdom
and vigour to'abolilh any pracice, which num-
bers are interefted'in supporting, and to which
time has added the sanction of its authority,
the commerce between New Spain and Manila
feelms to be as considerable as ever, and may
be confidered as one chief cause of the elegance
and splendor conspicuous in this part of the
Spanish dominions.

BuT, notwithitanding this general corruption Phblic re.v

in the colonies, and all the defalcations of the nu °o
public revenue, by the illicit importation of
foreign commodities, or by the fraudulent arts
of their own subjects, the Spaniflh monarchs re-
ceive a very considerable fum from their Ame-
rican dominions. This arises from taxes of va-
rious kinds, which may be divided into three
capital branches. The first contains what is
paid to the king, as sovereign, or superior lord
of the New World: to this class belongs the
duty on the gold and silver raised from the
mines, and the tribute exacted from the Indi-
ans; the former is termed by the Spaniards the

right

oo IK right of fignio', the latter is the daly of vaef-
, J fialage. The second branch comprehends the

numerous duties upon commerce, which ac-
company and oppress it in every ftep of its pro-
grefs, from the greatest tranfa&ions of the
wholesale merchant, to the petty traffic of the
vender by retail. The third includes what ac-
crues to the king, as head of the church, and
administrator of ecclesiastical funds in the New
World. In consequence of this he receives the
first-fruits, annats, spoils, and other fpi;itual
revenues, levied by the apoftoiic chamber in
Europe; and is entitled, likewise, to the pro-
fit arising from the sale of the bull of Cruzado.
This bull, which is published every two years,
contains, an absolution from past offences by
the pope, and, among other immunities, a
permission to eat several kinds of prohibited
food, during Lent, and on meagre days; The
monks employed in dispersing those bulls, ex-
tol their virtues with all the fervour of inte-
refted eloquence; the people, ignorant and cre-
dulous, liften with implicit assent; and every
person in the Spanish colonies, of European,
Creolian, or mixed race, purchases a bull, which
is deemed essential to his salvation, at the rate
set upon it by government c.

See NOTE LXXI.

V HAT

WHAT may be the amount of those various BOOK
funds, it is almost impossible to determine with - --'

Its amount.

precilion. The extent of the Spanish domi-
nions in America, the jealousy of government,
which renders, them inacceflible to foreigners,
the mysterious silence which the Spaniards are
accustomed to observe with refpec to the in-
terior state of their colonies, combine in co-
vering this subjet with a veil which it is not
eaiy to remove. But an account, apparently
no lets accurate than it is curious, has lately
been published of the royal revenue in New
Spain, from which we may form some idea with
ref'pet 'to what is collected in the other pro-
vinces. According to that account, the crown
does not receive from all the departments of
taxation in New Spain, above a million'bf our
money, from which one half muff be deducted
as the expence of the provincial eftablifhrnent'.
Peru, it is probable, yields a fum not inferior
to this, and if we suppose that all the other re-
Zions of America, including the islands, ftr-
nifl a third share of equal value; we {hall not
perh:ps be far wide from the truth, if we con-
clude, that the net public revenue of Spain,
raised in America, does not exceed a million
and a half iterling. This falls far short of the

'See NOTE LXXII.

immense

BVin nK immense fums, to which suppositions, founded

upon conjecture, have railed the Spanish re-
venue in America F. It is remarkable, how-
ever, upon one account. Spain and Portugal
are the only European powers, who derive a
direct revenue from their colonies, as their
quota towards defraying the general expence of
government. All the advantage that accrues
to other nations, from their American domi-
nions, arises from the exclusive enjoyment of
their trade; but beside this, Spain has brought
her colonies to contribute towards increasing
the power of the state; and in return for pro-
tection, to bear a proportional share of the
common burden.

ACCORDINGLY, what I have computed as

the amount of the Span ifh revenue from Ame-
rica, comprehends only the taxes colleced
there, and is far from being the whole of what
accrues to the king from his dominions in
the New World. The heavy duties imposed
on the con-modities exported from Spain to
America ', as well as what is paid by thole
wvhich foe fends home in return ; the tax upon
the negroe-fiaves, with which Africa supplies
the New World, together with lfeveral smaller

Sec NOTE L XXIII. Sc N 0 T E LXXIV.

branches

branches of finance, bring large fums into the BV. K
treafurv, the precise extent of which I cannot _
pretend to ascertain.

BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from E.Denceof

America be great, the expence of adminiftra- a"ininfla.
tio n i her colonies bears proportion to it. In
every department, even of her domestic police
and finances, Spain has adopted a system more
complex, and more encumbered with a variety
of tribunals, and a multitude of officers, than
that of any European nation, in which the ib-
vereign possesses such extensive power. From
the jealous spirit with which Spain watches over
her American settlements, and her endeavours
to guard against fraud in provinces so remote
from infpetion; boards and officers have been
multiplied there with still more anxious at-
tention. In a country where the expence of
living is great, the salaries allotted to every
perlbn in public office must be high, and must
load the revenue with an immense burden.
The parade of government greatly augments
the weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico,
Peru, and the New Kingdom of Granada, as
representatives of the king's person, among
people fond of ostentation, maintain all the
ihate and dignity of royalty. Their courts are
frnned upon the model of that at Madrid, with

5 horse

B 00K horse and foot guards, a household regularly
VIII.

established, numerous attendants, and ensigns
of power, displaying such pomp, as hardly re-
tains the appearance of a delegated authority.
Ail the expence incurred by supporting the ex-
ternal and permanent order of government is
cefrayed by the crown. The viceroys have
besides peculiar appointments suited to their
exalted station. The salaries fixed by law are
indeed extremely moderate, that of the viceroy
of Peru is only thirty thousand ducats; and
that of the viceroy of Mexico, twenty thou-
sand ducats . Of late, they have been raised
to forrv thousand.

THESE salaries, however, constitute but a

fnrall part of the viceroy's revenue. The
exercise of an absolute authority extending to
every department of government, and the
power of disposing of many lucrative offices,
afford them innumerable opportunities of ac-
cumulating wealth. To these, which may be
confidered as legal and allowed emoluments,
vast fums are often added by exacutions, which
:n countries so far removed from the ieat of
government, it is not easy to dilcover, and
irpofible to reflrain. By monopolizing some

Recop. lib. i. iit. iii. c. 7-.

2 branches

branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern BOOK
in others, by conniving at the frauds of mer- -
chants, a viceroy may raise such an annual
revenue, as no subject of any European mo-
narch enjoys k. From the tingle article of
prelents made to him on the anniversary of his
NAame-day (which is always observed as an
high festival), I am informed that a viceroy
has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanish faying, the
legal revenues of a viceroy are known, his
real profits depend upon his opportunities and
his conscience. Sensible of this, the kings of
Spain, as I have formerly observed, grant a
commission to their viceroys only for a few
vears. This circumstance, however, renders
them often more rapacious, and adds to the
ingenuity and ardour wherewith they labour
to improve every moment of power which
they know is hastening fast to a period; and
fliort as its duration is, it usually affords fuffl-
cient time for repairing a shattered fortune, or
for creating a new one. But even inkfituations
so trying to human frailty, there are inflances
of virtue that remains unfeduced. In the year
177', the Marquis de Croix finified the term

k See NOTE LXXV.

of

B 0 K of his viceroyalry in New Spain with unfuf-
--, -- pec'ed integrity; and instead of bringing home

exorbitant wealth, returned with the admira-
tion and applause of a grateful people, whom
his government had rendered happy.

NOTES

N O T E S

AND

ILLUS TRA TIONS.
VOL. III. E e

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T ES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 2.

N tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New
Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our most

certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain
a minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own
exploits. Our information with respect to them, and
other transactions in Peru, is derived however from
contemporary and refpetable authors.

THrE most early account of Pizarro's tranfadions

in Peru, was published by Francisco de Xerez, his
secretary. It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried
down no farther than the death of Atahualpa, in 1533;
for the author returned to Spain in 1534, and soon
after he landed, printed at Seville his short History of
the Conquest of Peru, addeffled to the emperor.

DON Pedro Sancho, an officer who served under

Pizarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which
v.I' translated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted in

E e 2 his

his valuable colleedion, but has never been publifled
in its original languaze. Sancho returned to Spain at
the fame time with Xerez. Great credit is due to
what both those authors relate concerning the progress
and operations of Pizarro; but the residence of the
Spaniards in Peru had been lo short, at the time when
t.ev left it, and their in:crcourfe with the natives so
slender, tiat their knowledge of the Peruvian manners
and custo.s is very imperfe1.

TH~ next ccnte.-norary hiltorian is Pedro Cieza

de Leon, who publi.hed his Cronica del Peru, at
Seville in 1553. If he had finifled all that he proposes
in the -en.era! division of his work, it would have been
the r.oit comnpete hil/ory which had been published of
anr re-i.-n in the New W\orld. He was well qualified
to cxeccue i:, h.i.'l erCed tdC'ring frventcen years in
America, and viif: j in person mro: of the provinces
cs-.cern:r.z which he had occaiion to write. But only
the firlr p2-t of h:s Chronicle has been printjd. It
cuntrins a d-icr!iptitn of Peru, and leveral of the ad-
iacent prov;..C2-, with an account of the institutions
a._ cu::o-:s o:tne na:ives, and is written wi;h so little
art, an:U fuh an apparen; re.a:d for tru:h, that one

.:::- r2..: :inc ' o.0£

£ t2:: o :

'.-a': o.£ :ix ;'r.u

Tli;:s !-. ; i, a-:'- f:-?.:. r Don Au;iinine
5:i.:-:, "'.' p~..,:'!''.,. i. 1 55-- his H'iti ria del

l-;:'c:5,.. ':e:-.o v C. nq.:e'a e Id iProvineic dci Peru.
Z. -.- \ - . ., r.::< ::c tru'.;i.o:;, and n'pioycd
FH . '. '.: ..: i...-...: :' '.'. -: ..._ :;. i:s n..;:;.r or (o:n-

i U~~~~~~~~~~~~~pL::u:

p:,ition, is a book of considerable merit; as he had
opportunity to be well informed, and seems to have
been inquilitive with refpel to the manners and tranf-
actions of the Peruvians, great credit is due to his
t.ftimnon)'.

Do>; Diego Fernandez published his HiRforia del

Peru in 1571. His sole object is to relate the dissensions
and civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he
fcrvcd in a public station in Peru, and was well ac-
quainted both with the country, and with the principal
actors in those singular scenes which he describes, as
he poflfled found underfianding, and great impar-
tiaiit), his work may be ranked among those of the
historians most diftinguilhed for their indufiry in re-
fLarch, or their capacity in judging with refpec to the
events which they relate.

THE last author who can be reckoned among the

contemporary historians of the conquest of Peru,
is Garcilaffo de la Vega, Inca. For though the first
part of his work, intitled, Commentarios Reales del Ori-
gen de Is. Incas Reies del Peru, was not published sooner
than the year 1609, feventy-fix years after the death
of Atahualpa the last emperor, yet as he was born in
Peru, and was the Ton of an officer of distinction
aronlg the Spanifl conquerors, by a Coya, or lady of
the royal race, on account of which he always took
the name of Inca, as he was mafler of the language
spoken by the Incas, and acquainted with the traditions
of his countrymen, his authority is rated very high,
and often placed above that of all the other hiflorians.
His work, however, is little more than a commentary

E e 3 upon

upon the Spanish writers of the Peruvian story, and
composed of quotations taken from the authors whom
I have mentioned. This is the idea which he himself
gives of it, Lib. i. c. jo. Nor is it in the account of
sacs only that he follows them servilely. Even in ex-
piaininr the inltitutions and rites of his ancestors,
his information seems not to be more perfec than
theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is almofi the
fame with that of Acolta. He produces no .fpcimen
of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one which he
borrows from Bias Valcra, an early milffonarv, whole
memoirs have never been publilhed. Lib. ii. c. 15.
As for compoSition, arrangement, or a capacity of dif-
tinguifling between what is fabulous, what is probable,
and what is true, one searches for them in vain in the
commentaries of the Inca. His work, however, not-
withitanding its great defects, is not altogether defti-
tute of use. Some traditions which he received from
his countrymen are Freferved in it. His knowledge
of the Peruvian language has enabled him to correct
some errors of the Spanish writers, and he has inferred
in it fume curiius fais taken from authors whose
works were never published, and are now loft.

N TOTE II. p. 8.
o N E rrm: :-.:m an idea both of the hardships which

they endured, and of the sickliness of the regions

which they vifnted, from the extraordinary mortality
that prevaiied among them. Pizarro carried out 112
men, A;magro ;c. In lets than nine months 130 of
these died. Few fcl by the sword; mult of them were
cut of by di;ea.r. .XeSz, p. ;8c.

6 NOTE

NOTE III. p. 13.
T H I S island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncom-

sortable by the unwholefomenefs of its climate,

its impenetrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the
multitude of infeRs and reptiles, that it is seldom
any softer epithet than that of infernal is employed
in describing it. The fun is almost never seen
there, and throughout the year it hardly ever ceases to
rain. Dec. iii. lib. x. c. 3. Dampier touched at this
island in the year 1685; and his account of the climate
is not more favourable. Vol. i. p. 172. He, during
his cruize on the coast, visited most of the places where
Pizarro landed, and his decfription of them throws
light on the narrations of the early Spanish historians.

NOTE IV. p. 34.

Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the
Spanish settlements on the continent. When

Cortes began his expedition in the year 1518, though
his armament was more considerable than that of
Pizarro, and composed of persons superior in rank to
rhoie who invaded Pcru, he could procure no more
than sixteen horses.

NOTE V. p. 36.

N tile year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George
Juan, travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the

farm route which Pizarro took. From the description
of their journey, one may form an idea of the difficulty
ot ihis march. The sandy plains between St. Michael

E c4 de

de Pieura and Motupe extend go miles, without waters
without a tree, z plant, or any green thing, on a
dreary firetch of burning sand. Voyage, tom, i.
p. 399, &c.

NOTE VI. p.42.
THIS extravagant and unfeafunable discourse of

Valverde has been censured by all historians, and

with justice. But though be seems to have been an
illiterate and bigotted monk, nowise resembling the
good Olmedo, who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity
of his address to Atahualpa must not be charged wholly
upon him. His harangue is evidently a translation,
or paraphrase of that form, concerted by a junto of
Spaniih divines and lawyers in the year i5o0, for ex-
plaining the right of their king to the sovereignty of
the New World, and for direting the officers em-
ploeed in America how they {hould take poffeilion of
any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The
sentiments contained in Valverde's harangue muff not
then be imputed to the bigotted imbecility of a par-
ticular man, but to that of the age. Gomara and
Ber.z3ni relate one circumfiance concerning Valverde,
which, if authentic, renders him an object not of con-
tempt only, but of horror. They afiert, that during
the whole aclion, Valverde continued to excite the
soldiers to slaughter, calling to them tofirike the enemy
not with the edge, but with the points of their swords.
Gom. Cron. c. 113. Benz. Hiftor. Nov. Orbis,
lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour was very different from
that of the Roman Catholic clergy in other parts of

America,

America, where they uniformly exerted. their influence
to protec the Indians, and to moderate the ferocity of
their countrymen.

NOTE VII. p.44.
T W o different fyfiems have been formed concern-

ing the conduct of Atahualpa. The Spanish

writers, in order to justify the violence of their country-
men, contend, that all the Inca's professions of friend-
ship were feigned; and that his intention in agreeing
to an interview with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to
cut off him and his followers at one blow; that for
this purpose he advanced with such a numerous body
of attendants, who had arms concealed under their
garments to execute this scheme. This is the account
given by Xerez and Zarate, and adopted by Herrera.
But if it had been the plan of the Inca to destroy the
Spaniards, one can hardly imagine that he would have
permitted them to march unmolested through the desert
of Motupe, or have negle&ted to defend the pases in
the mountains, where they might have been attacked
with so much advantage. If the Peruvians marched to
C:axamalca with an intention to fall upon the Spa-
niards, it is inconceivable, that of lo great a body of
men, prepared for acion, not one should attempt to
make refintance, but all tamely susser the.nfcives to be
butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to
attack. Atahualpa's mode of advancing to the inter-
view, has the aspec of a peaceable proceflion, not of
a military enterprize. He himself and his followers
were, in their habits of ceremony, preceded, as on
days of solemnity, by unarmed harbingers. Though

rude

rude nations are frequently cunning and falie, yet, if
a scheme of deception and treachery mufi be imputed
either to a monarch, that had no great reason to be
alarmed at a visit from firangers who solicited admif-
sion into his presence as friends, or to an adventurer so
daring, and so little scrupulous as Pizarro, one cannot
hesitate in determining where to fix the presumption of
guilt. Even amidst the endeavours of the Spanish
writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro, one
plainly perceives, that it was his intention, as well as
his interest, to frize the Inca, and that he had taken
measures for that purpose previous to any suspicion
of that monarch's designs.

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to

vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the
crime of having concerted the defirucion of Pizarro
and his followers, and no less afraid to charge the
Spaniards with improper conduc towards the Inca,
has framed another system. He relates, that a man of
majestic form with a long beard, and garments reach-
ing to the ground, having appeared in vision to Vira-
cocha, the eighth Inca, and declared, that he was a
child of the Sun, that monarch built a temple in ho-
nour of this person, and ere&ted an image of him, re-
fembling as nearly as possible the singular form in which
be had exhibited himself to his view. In this temile,
divine honours were paid to him, by the name of Vira-
cocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. 2X. lib. v. c. 22. When the
Spaniards first appeared in Peru, the lkngth of their
beards, and the dress they wore, firuck evely perfen to
much with their likeness to the im:.e cf Vi.acocha,

*-lut

that they supposed them to be children of the Sin,
who had de(f:nded from heaven to earth. All con-
cluded, that the fatal period of the Peruvian empire
was now approaching, and that the throne would be
occupied by new possessors. Atahualpa himself, con-
fidering the Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was
b1 far from entertaining any thoughts of refilling them,
that he determined to yield implicit obedience to their
commands. From those sentiments flowed his profef-
sions of love and refpe&. To those were owing the
cordial reception of Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his
camp, and the submissive reverence with which he
himlclf advanced to visit the Spanilh general in his
quarters; but from the gross ignorance of Philipillo,
the interpreter, the declaration of the Spaniards and
his anifer to it, were so ill explained, that by their
mutual inability to comprehend each other's intentions,
the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all its dread-
ful consequences, was occasioned.

Ir is remarkable, that no traces.of this fuperfRitious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to
be found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, pre-
vious to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the two
former served under Pizarro at that time, and the latter
visited Peru loon after the conquest. If either the
Inca himself, or his mefTengers, had addrefled the
Spaniards in the words which Garcilaffo puts in their
mouths, they must have been struck with such sub-
mnifive declarations; and they would certainly have
availed themselves of them to accomplish their own
dfigns with greater facility. Garcilaffo himself,

though

though his narrative of the intercourse between the
Inca and Spaniards preceding the rencounter at Caxa-
malca is founded on the supposition of his believing
them to be Viracochas, or divine beings, p. ii. lib. i.
c. 17, &c. yet with his usual inattention and inaccu-
racy he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians
did not recolle: the resemblance between them and
the god Viracocha, until the fatal disasters subsequent
to the defeat at Caxamalca, and then only began to
call them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is
confirmed by Herrera, dec. v. ib. ii. c. 12. In many
different parts of America, if we may believe the Spa-
nifh writers, their countrymen were confidered as di-
vine bcings who had descended from Heaven. But in
this instance, as in many which occur in the inter-
course between nations whose progress in refinement
is very unequal, the ideas of those who used the expref-
sion were different from the ideas of those who heard it.
For such is the idiom of the Indian languages, or such is
the fimp!icity of thcfe who speak them, that when they
fee any thing with which they were formerly unac-
quainted, and of which they do not know the origin;
they fay, that it came down from Heaven. Nugnez.
Ram. iii. 327, C.

THE account which I have given of the sentiments

and proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more
natural and consistent than either of the two preceding,
and is better supported by the facts related by the con-
temporary hifiorians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 2co, two thousand Pe-
ruvians were killed. Sancho makes the number of the

slain

slain fix or seven thousand. Ram.'iii. 274, D. By
Garcilaffo's aEedxint, 'five thbtfand 'were nraffacred.
P. ii. lib. i.. c.5.' The number which"I have merr-
tioned, being the medium between'the extremes, may
probably be nearest the truth.

NOTE VIII. p. 46.

O T H I N G can be a more itriking proof of this,
than that three Spaniards travelled from Caxa-

malca to Cuzco. The distance between them is fix
hundred miles. In every place throughout this vast
extent of country, they were treated with all the ho-
nours which the Peruvians paid to their sovereigns,
and even to their divinities. Under pretext of amass-
ing what was wanting for the ransom of the Inca,
they demanded the plates of gold with which the walls
of the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco were adorned.;
and though the priests were unwilling to alienate those
sacred ornaments, and the people refuied to violate the
shrine of their God, the three Spaniards with their own
hands robbed the Temple of part of this valuable trea-
sure; and such was the reverence of the natives for
their persons, that though they beheld this act of fa-
crilege with astonishment, they did not attempt to
prevent or disturb the commiflion of it. Zarate, lib.
ii. c. 6. Sancho ap. Ramus. iii. 375, D.

NOTE IX. p. 62.
AC CO RD IN G to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco,

after setting apart the king's fifth, was divided
among 480 persons. Each received 4000 pesos.

This

This amounts to 1,92o,ooo pesos. Dec. v. lib. 6.
c. 3. But as the general, and other officers, were en-
titled to a part far greater than that of the private men,
the fim total must have risen much beyond what I
have mentioned. Gomara, c. 123. and Zarate, lib.
ii. c. 8. satisfy themselves with asserting in general,
that the plunder of Cuzco was of greater value than
the ranfor of Atahualpa.

NOTE X. p. 6.
N O expedition in the New World was conducted

with more persevering courage than that of Alva-

rado, and in none were greater hardships endured.
Many of the persons engaged in it were, like their
leader, veterans who had served under Cortes, inured
to all the rigour of American war. Such of my read-
ers as have not an opportunity of perusing the firiking
description of their sufferings by Zarate or Herrera,
may form some idea of the nature of their, march from
the sea-coast to Quito, bv consulting the account
which D. Ant. Ulloa gives of his own journey in 1736,
nearly in the fame route. Voy. tom. . i. 78. , &c.
or that of M. Bouguer, who proceeded from Puerto
Viejo, to Quito, by the fame road which Alvarado
took. He compares his own journey with that of the
Spanish leader, and bv the comparison, gives a most
ir kling idea of the holdnefs and patience of A!varado,
in forci.g his way through so many obftacies. Voyage
du Perou, p. xxviii. &c.

NOTE

NOTE XI. p; '66.
A C C RD IN G to Herrera, there was entered on

account of the king, in gold, 155,300 pesos, and

5400 marks (each 8 ounces) of silver, besides several
veflels and ornaments, some of gold, and others of fil-
ver; on account of private persons, in gold 499,000oo
pesos, and 54,000 marks of silver. Dec. v. lib. vi.
c. 13.

NOTE XII. p. 76.
T H E Peruvians had recourse to other military arts

than those of the Spaniards. As the cavalry were

the chief objec of their terror, they endeavoured to
render them incapable of aEting, by means of a long
thong with a fione fastened to each end. This, when
thrown by a skilful hand, twitled about the horse and
its rider, and entangled them so as to obftrua their
motions. Herrera mentions this as an invention of
their own. Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have ob-
served, vol. ii. p. 184, this weapon is common among
several barbarous tribes towards the extremity of
South America; and it is more probable, that the
Peruvians had observed the dexterity with which
they used it in hunting, and on this occasion adopted
it themselves. The Spaniards were considerably an-
noyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another intlance of the
ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention. By turn-
ing a river out of its channel, they overflowed a valley,
in which a body of the enemy was posted, so suddenly,
that it was with the utmost difficulty the Spaniards
made their escape. Herrera, dec. v. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE

NO T E ~XImI: p. loo.
H ERR ER A's account of Orellana's voyage is

the most minute, and apparently the most accu-

rate. It was probably taken from the journal of
Orellana himielf. But the dates are not diftin6tly
marked. His navigation down the Coca, or Napoo,
begun early in February I54I ; and he arrived at-the
mouth of the river on the 26th of Auguff, having spent
near (even months in the voyage. M. de la Conda-
mine, in the year 1743, failed from Cuenca to Para, a
settlement of the Portuguese at the mouth of the river,
a navigation much longer than that of Orellana, in
less than four months. Voyage, p. 179. But the
two adventurers were very differently provided for the
voyaCe. This hazardous undertaking, to which am-
bition prompted Orellana, and to which the love of
science led M. de la Condamine, was undertaken in
the year 1769, by Madame Godin des Odonais, from
conjugal affecion. The narrative of the hardfihips
which hfe suffered, of the dangers to which (he was
exposed, and of the disasters which besel her, is one of
the most singular and affecting stories in any language,
exhit.iintg in her conduE a irriking picture of the for-
titude .which diftinguifies the one sex, mingled with the
sensibility and tenderness peculiar to the other. Lettre
de M. Godin, a M. de la Condamine.

NOTE XIV. p. to5.
H E R R E R A gives a striking picture of their in-

digence. Twelve gentlemen, who had been of-
icers of diftinrion under Almagro, lodged in the fame

house,

house, and having but one cloak among them, it was
worn alternately by.himrwho had occarion to appear in
public, while the ref, from the want of a decent dress,
were obliged to keep within doors. Their former
friends and companions were so much afraid of giving
offence to Pizarro, that they durt not entertain or
even converse with them. One may conceive what
was the condition, and what the indignation of men
once accustomed to power and opulence, when ihe
felt themselves poor and despised, without a roofurider
which to shelter their heads, while they beheld others
whose merit and services were not equal to theirs, liv-
ing with (plendor in sumptuous edifices. Dec. vi. lib.
viii. c. 6.

NOTE XV. p. 120.

E R R E R A, whoe .accuracy entitles him tqgreat
credit, asserts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poftefsed

domains in the neighbourhood of Chuqsuefaca de.la
Plata, which yielded him an annual revenue greater
than that of the archbilhop of Toledo, the best en-
dowed fee inrEurope. Dec. vii. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XVI. p.138.
ALL the Spanish writers describe his march, and

the diflreffes of both parties very minutely. Za-

rate observes, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in
hiitory, either with refpet to the length of the retreat
or the ardnur of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to
his computation, followed the viceroy upwards of
three thousand miles. Lib. v. c. I6. 26.

VOL. III. Fs NOTE

NOTE XVII. p. 156.
IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the best in-

formed historian of that period, to one million four
hundred thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XVIII. p.,i58.
CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been in

advocate for an accommodation with Gafca. Find-

ing Pizarro incapable of holding that bold course
which he originally fuggefled, he recommended to
him a timely fubmiflion to his sovereign as the safest
measure. WThen the president's offers were first com-
municated to Carvajal, " By our Lady (said he, in
that firain of buffoonery which was familiar to him)
the priest issues gracious bulls. He gives them both
good and cheap, let us not only accept them, but
wear them as reliques about our necks." Fernandez,
lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XIX. p. 66.
D U RING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, seven

hundred men were killed in battle, and three

hundred and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Her-
rera, dec. viii. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of
these were cut off by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c.
g9. Zarate makes the number of those put to a vio-
lent death five hundred. Lib. vii. c. I.

NOTE

NOTE XX. p. 175;
IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy

of the Mexicans, I'have 'eceived much'in'formatiort

from a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one
of the judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In
the year 1553, Philip It. in order that he might dif-
cover the mode of levying tribute from his Indian sub-
jeRs, that would be most beneficial to the crown, and
least oppressive to them, addressed a mandate to all the
Courts of Audience in America, enjoining them to
answer certain queries which he proppfed to them,
concerning the ancient form of goveriment eftablified
among the various nations of Indians, and the mode
in which they paid taxes to their kings or chiefs. In
obedience to this mandate, Corita, who had resided
nineteen years in America, fourteen of which he passed
in New Spain, composed the work of which .I have a
copy. He acquaints his sovereign, that he had made
it an objet during his residence in America, and in all
its provinces which he had visited, to inquire diligently
into the manners and customs of the natives, that he
had conversed for this purpose with many aged and' in-
telligent Indians, and consulted several of the Spanish
ecclefaftics, who underftpoo the Indian languages most
perfeftly, particularly some of those who landed in
New Spain soon after the conquest. Corita appears to
be a man of fomne learnipg, and to have carried on his
inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to which he
pretends. Greater credit is due to his testimony from
one circumstance. His work was not composed with
a view to publication, or in support of any particular

F f 2 theory,

theory, but contains simple, though full answers td
queries proposed to him officially. Though Herrera
does not mention him among the authors whom he
had followed as guides in his history, I should fuppobe,
from several fa&s of which he takes notice, as well as
from several expressions which he uses, that this me-
morial of Corita was not unknown to him.

NO T E XXI. p. 188.
T H E early Spanish writers were so hasty and inac-

curate in eiimnating the numbers of people in the

provinces and towns of America, that; it is impossible
to ascertain that of Mexico itself with any degree of
prec sion. Cortes decrlbes the extent and populous-
ness ,f Mexico in general terms, which imply that it
was not inferior to the greatest cities in Europe. Go-
mara is more exticit, and affirms, that there were
60.000 houses, or families in Mexico. Cron. c. 78.
Herrera adopts his opinion. Dec. ii. lib. v:i. c. 13;
and the genera!i:y of writers follow then implicitly
without inquiry or scruple. According to this account,
the inhabitants of Mexico must have been about
3co,cco. Torquemada, with his usual propensity to
the marvellous, asserts, that there were a hundred and
twenty thousand houses or families in Mexico, and
consequently ab-ut fix hundred thousand inhabitants.
Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious account of
the Mexican empire, by one of Cortes's officers, the
population is fixed at 6f,coo people. Ramufio, iii.
3o9, A. Even by this account, which probably is
much nearer the truth than any of the foregoing, Mex-
ico was a great city.

NOTE

NOTE XXII . p. 19.
IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I amn in-

debted for this curious observation. Palafox, bishop

of Ciudad de la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and' il-
luffrates it more fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the
only language in which a termination indicating re-
fpe&, filavas reverentiales y de cortefia, may be affixef to
every word. By adding the final syllable zinz, or azin
to any word, it becomes a proper expression of venera-
tion in the mouth of an inferior. If, in speaking to
an equal, the word Father is to be used, it is Tatl, but
an inferior fays Tatzin. One priest speaking to ano-
ther, calls him 7Teopixque; a person of inferior rank
calls him Teopixcatzin. The name of the emperor who
reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico, was Moniezuma,
but his vassals, from reverence, pronounced it Monte-
zumazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Virtudes del Indio,
p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential nouns,
but reverential verbs. The manner in which these are
formed from the verbs in common use, is explained by
D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Cuevara in his Mexican
Giarlmar, No. 188.

NOTE XXIII. p. 199.
F RO comparing several passages in Corita and

Herrera, we may collec with some degree of ac.

curacy, the various modes in which the Mexicans
contributed towards the support of government. Some
persons of the first order seem to have been exempted
from the payment of any tribute, and as their only duty

Fs 3 to

to the public, were bound to personal service in war,
and to follow the banser 'of the sovereign with their
vafials. 2. The immediate vassals of the crown were
bound not only to personal military service, but paida
certain proportion of the produce of their lands in
kind. 3. Those who held offices of hodiour or trust,
paid a certain share of what they received in confe-
quence of holding these. 4. Each Capulor, or aso-
ciation, cultivated some part of the common fiela al-
lotted to it, for the behoof of the crown, and deposited
the produce in the royal granaries. 5. Some part of
whatever was brought to the public rrarkets, whether
fruits of the earth, or the various productions' f their
artists and manufacturers, was demanded for the public
use, and the merchants who paid this were exerimpted
from every other tax. 6. The Mayeques, or adfcripti
glehe, were bound to cultivate certain dlltrlcts in every
province, which may be confidered as crown lands, and
brought the increase into public storehouses. Thus
the sovereign received fame part of whatever was use-
ful or valuable in the country, whether it was the na-
tural prodution of the foil, or acquired by the industry
of the people. What each contributed towards the
support of government, seems to have been inconfider-
able. Corita, in answer to one of the queries put to
the Audience of Mexico by Philip 1I. endeavours to
estimate in money the value of what each citizen
might be supposed to pay, and does not reckon it at
more than three or four reals, about eighteen pence or
two shillings a head.

NOTE

NOTE XXIV. p. 200.
CORT E S, who seems to have been as much afto-

nifhed with this, as with any instance of Mexican

ingenuity, gives a particular description of it. Along
one of the causeways, fays he, by which they enter the
city, are conducted two conduits, compored of clay
tempered with mortar, about two paces in breadth,
and railed about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed
a iream of excellent water, as large as the body of a
man, into the centre of the city, and it supplies all the
inhabitants plentifully. The other is empty, that
when it is necessary to clean, or repair the former, the
fiream of water may be turned into it. As this con-
duit pases along two of the bridges, where there are
breaches in the causeway, through which the salt-
water of the lake flows, it is conveyed over them in
pipes as large as the body of an ox, then carried from the
conduit to the remote quarters of the city in canoes,
and fold to the inhabitants. Relat. ap. Ramus. 241, A.

NOTE XXV. p. 202.
IN the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are shewn

suits of armour, which are called Montezuma's.

They are composed of thin lacquered copper-plates.
In the opinion of very intelligent judges they are evi-
dently eastern. The forms of the silver ornaments
upon them, representing dragons, &c. may be confi-
dered as a confirmation of this. They are infinitely
superior in point of workmanship to any effort of Ame-
rican art. The Spaniards probably received them

F f 4 from

from the Philippine islands. The only unqueftionabe
specimen of Mexican art that I know of in Great Bri-
tain, is a cup of very fine gold, which is said to have
belonged to Montezuma. It weighs 5 oz. I2 dwt.
Three drawings of it were exhibited to the Society of
Antiquaries, June ie, 1765. A man's head-is repre-
sented on this cup. On one fide the full face, on the
other the profile, on the third the back parts of the
head. The relievo is said to have been produced by
punching the inside of the cup, so as to make the re-
presentation of a face on the outside. The features
are rude, but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for
Spanish workmanlhip. This cup was purchased by
Edward earl of Orford, while he lay in the harbour of
Cadiz with the fleet under his command, and is now
in the poffefon of his grandson, Lord Archer. I am
indebted for this information to my refpedable and
ingenious friend Mr. Barrington.

NOTE XXVI. p. 208.
T HE learned reader will perceive how much I have

been indebted, in this part of my work, to the

gu.'a:ice cf the bifhnp of Gloucester, who has traced
the fucceflive steps, by which the human mind ad-
vanced in this line of its progress, with much erudi-
tion, and greater ingenuity. He is the first, as far as
I know, who formed a rational and confiRent theory
conce:n:ng the 'arious modes of writing pra&ised by
nations, according to the various degrees of their im-
provenent. Div. Legation of Motes, iii. 69, &c.
Sone impdrttnt observations have been added by the

6 learned

learned and intelligent author.of the,Traite6 del.a Eor
mation Mechanique des L.anguPes,.torr li. 295, &c. .,

As the Mexican paintingsiare the mbft curious mon

numents extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will
not be improper to give some account of the means by
which they were preserved from the general.wreokof
every work of. art in America, and communicatedito
the Public. For the most early and complete collec-
tion of these publifled by Purchas, we are indebted to
the attention of that curious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don
Antonio Mendoza, viceroy of New:Spain, having
deemed those paintings a proper present for CharJes V.
the fiip in which they were sent to Spain, was takeri
bv a Fiench cruizer, and they came into'the pbfeffeion
of Thevet, the king's geographer, who'having tra-
velled himself into the New World, and described one
of its provinces, was a curious observer of whatever
tended to illustrate the manners of the Americans. On
his death, they were purchased by Hakluyt, at that
tinie chaplain of the English ambassador to the French
cout ; and, being left by him to Purchas, were Rubr
lifhcd at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry
bpeinian. Purchas, iii. 1065.

TIHE fcrcnnd specimen of Mexican piaure-writing,

wa, ii :,!i!(hed by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two
colp;-. r- lates. The first is a map, or representation of
the prnr rels of the ancient Mexicans on their first ar-
riv.i! in the country, and of the various fiations in
whli;' they fettled, before they founded the capital of
the'r empire in the lake of Mexico. The second is a

Chrono-

Chronoogtical VWheel, or Circle, representing the
manner in which they computed and marked their
cycle of fifty-two years. The former was given to
himn by Dr. Chriftoval de Goadalajora, in the city of
Puebla de loa Angeles the latter he received from
Don Carlos de Siguesza y Gongorra. But as it seems
now to be a received opinion (founded I know tlot on
what evidence) that Carreri was never out of 'Italy,
and that his famous Giro del MnNdo is an account of
a fdiitiious voyage, I have not mentioned these paint-
ings in the test. They have, however, manifestly the
appearance of being Mexican producions, and are al-
lowed to be so by Boturini, who was well qualified to
determine whether they were genuine or fuppofititiods.
The style of painting in the former is considerably
more perseS, than any other specimen of Mexican de-
sign; but as the original is said to have been much
defaced by time, I fufpea that it has been improved
by some touches from the hand of an European artist.
Carreri, Churchill, iv. p. 487. The chronological
wheel is a j-Jf delineation of the Mexican mode of
computing time, as described by Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2.
It seems to resemble one which that learned Jesuit had
seen; and if it be admitted as a genuine monument, it
proves that the Mexicans had artificial, or arbitrary
chbaraers, which represented several things besides
numbers. Each month is there represented by a sym-
bc! expressive of fcme work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was dif-

covered by another Italian. In 1-36, Lorenzo Bo-
turini Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led

by

by several in'idtefts to study the language of the Mexi-
cans, and to colled the remains 'of their -hifttotical no-
numents. He persisted nine years ih hii s researches,
with the enthusiasm of a'projecor, and the patienee
of an antiquary. In 1746, he publfhiea at M'ifl'd,
Idea de una Nueto HiftoYia General de 'la Ainerica .&p-
tentrional, containing a'n account bs the refatlt T :his
inquiries; and :he added to it a catal6'le 'of h's Alii%-
rican Hiftoricil Mufeetin, ati'nge'd- 'nder thtirty;ftx
different heads. His idea of h NeW TIi'iftrs apeatss
to me the work o'f a whimfitcl 'cretul'ubs 'mah. DBit
his catalogue of :MLxicln thaps, paintings, tributie-
rolls, calendars, &c. is amazing. Uhfoitulitaely la
ship, in which 'he had Tent a confiderabre part of :thden
to Europe, was 'taken by an Englth 'priva;ter -in the
war before last; ahd it is probable hthA they perihled
by falling fnto tfe:hand5s of ignorant Captors. Boturini
himrelf incurred the displeasure of.the Spanish court,
and died in an hospital at Miadrid. The history, ,of
which 'the Idea, &c. was bnly a profpeaus, was never
published. The remainder of his Museum seems to
have been dispersed. Some part of it came into the
possession of the present archbishop of Toledo, when
he was primate of New Spain, and he published from
it that curious tribute-roll which I have mentioned.

THE only other colletion of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vi-
enna. By order of their Imperial Majesties, I have
obtained such a fpecimenof these as I desired, in eight
paintings, made with so much fidelity, that I am in-
formed the copies could hardly be distinguished from

the

the originals. According to a note in this Codex Mexica-
nus, it appears to have been a present from Emmanuel
King of Portugal to Pope Clement VII. who died
A. D. 1533. After pasing through.the bands of fe-
deral illustrious proprietors, it fell into those of the
cardinal of Saxe-Eifenach, who presented it to the em-
peror Leopold. Tbefe paintings are manifestly M.exi-
can, but they are in a fiyle very different from any of
the former. An engraving has been made of one of
them, in order to gratify such of my readers, as may
deem this an object worthy of their attention. Were
it an objec of sufficient importance, itpmight, perhaps,
be possible, by recourse to the plates of Purchas, and
the-archbilhop of Toledo, as a key, to form plausible
conjecures concerning the meaning of this picture.
Many of the figures are manifestly similar. A. A. are
targets and darts, almost in the fame form with those
published by Purchas, p. 1070, 1071, &c. B. B. are
figures of temples, nearly resembling those in Purchas,
p. ilog and 1113, and in Lorenzana, PlateII. C. is
a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the figure of which
occurs in almost every plate of Purchas and Lorenzana.
E. E. E. seem to be Mexican captains in their war
dress, the fantastic ornaments of which resemble the
figures in Purchas, p. irie, itl . 2113. I flould
suppose this picture to be a tribute-roll, as their mode
or noting numbers occurs frequently. D. D. D. &c.
According to Boturini, the mode of computation by
the number of knots, was known to the Mexicans as
well as to the Peruvians, p. 85, and the manner in
which the number of units is represented in the Mexi-
can paintings in my pole:ffion, seems to confirm this

opinion.

opinion. They plainly resemble a string of knots on
a cord or slender rope. . .

SINCE I published the former.Edition,.Mr..Waddi-

love, who is flill pleated to continue his friendly at-
tention to procure-me information, has discovered, in
the Library of the Eecurial, a volume in folio, con-
sifting of forty sheets of a kind of.pafteboard, each the
size of a common Theet of writing paper, with great
variety of uncouth and whimsical figures of Mexican
painting, in very fresh colours, and with an explana-
tion in Spanish to most of them. The,,firif. twenty-
two sheets are the signs of the months, days, &c.
About the middle of each sheet are two or more large
figures for the month, surrounded by the signs of
the days. The last eighteen sheets are not so filled
with figures; They seem to be signs of Deities,
and inages of various objects. According to this Ca-
lendar in the Escurial, the Mexican year.contained 286
days, divided into 22 months of 13 days. Each day
is rcprelfnted by a different sign, taken from some
natural obje&, a serpent, a dog, a lizard, a reed, a
house, &c. The signs of days in the Calendar of the
Escurial are precisely the fame with those mentioned
by Boturini, Idea, &c. p. 45. But, if we may give
credit to that Author, the Mexican year contained 360
days, divided into 18 months of 20 days. The order
of days in every month was computed, according to
him, first by what he calls a tridecennary progression of
days from one to thirteen, in the fame manner as in
the Calendar of the Escurial, and then by afeptenary
progression of days from one to seven, making in all

twenty.

twenty, In this Calendar, not only the signs which
distinguish each day, but the qualities supposed to.b
peculiar to each month, are marked. There are ce-
tain weaknesses which seem to accompany. the human
mind through eyery stage of its progress in obfervatiqn
and science. Slender as was the knowledge of the
Mexicans in Aflrqpomy, it appears to be lready con-
neaed with Judicial Afirology. The fortune and
characer of persons born in each month are fuppoid
to he decided by some superior influence predominant
at the time of nativity. Hence it is foretold in the
Calendar, that all who are born in one month will be
rich, in another warlike, in a third luxurious, &:.
The pasteboard, or whatever substance it may be, on
which the Calendar in the Escurial is painted, seems,
by Mr. Waddilove's description of it, to resemble near-
ly that in the Imperial Library at Vienna. In fevgrl
particulars, the figures bear some likeness to thqfe in
the plate which I have publified. The figures marked
D. which induced me to conjecure, that this paint-
ing might be a tribute-roll similar to these published
by Purchas and the Archbishop of Toledo, Mr. Wad-
dilove supposes to be signs of days; and I haye such
confidence in the accuracy of his observations, as to
conclude his opinion to be well founded. It appears
from the characters in which the explanations of the
figures are written, that this curious monument of
Mexic-n art has been obtained, soon after the con-
quest of the Empire. It is singular that it should
never have been mentioned by any Spaniff Author.

TOTE

NOTE XXVII. p.210.
T HE firfl was called, the Prince of the deathful

Lance; the second, the Divider of men; the

third, the Shedder of Blood; the fourth, the Lord
of the Dark-Houfe. AcoRfa, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 2i9.

HE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more
holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the

moRt considerable. But it was nothing more than a
mount of solid earth. According to Torquemada, it
was above a quarter of a league in circuit at the base,
and rose to the height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind.
Lib. iii. c. 19.

FROM infpeaing various figures of temples in the

paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems to be Come
reason for suspecting that all their temples were con-
RruEted in the fame manner. See vol. iii. p. 0o9,
IIO,0 1113.

NOTE XXIX. p. 220.
N 0 T only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but evei

in Mexico itself, the houses of the people were

mere huts built with turf, or mud, or the branches of
trees. They were extremely low, and flight, and with-
out any furniture but a few earthen veflels. Like the
rudest Indians, several families resided under the fame
roof, without having any separate apartments. Her-
rera, Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. 13. Jib. x. c. 22. Dec. iii.
lib. iv. c. 17. Torquem. lib. iii. c, 23.

NOTE

NOTE XXX. p. 221.

AM informed by a person who resided long ir
New Spain, and visited almost every province of it,

that there is not in all the extent of that vast empire,
any monument, or vestige of any building more ancient
than the conquest, nor of any bridge, or highway,
except some remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe
to that gate of Mexico by which Cortes entered the
city. MS. penes me. The author of another account
in manuscript observes, " That at this day there does
not remain even the fmallefl vestige of the existence of
any ancient Indian building, public or private, either
in Mexico or in any province of New Spain. I have
travelled, fays he, through all the countries adjacent
to them, viz. New Galicia, New Biscay, New Mex-
ico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New Kingdom of Leon,
and New Santandero, without having observed any
monument worth notice, except the ruins near an an-
cient village in the valley de Casas Grandes, in lat. N.
30o. 46'. longit. 258°. 24'. from the Island of Tene-
riffe, or 460 leagues N. N. WX. from Mexico. He
describes this minutely, and it appears to have been a
paltry building of turf and stone, plaiflered over with
white earth or lime. A mifionary informed that gen-
tleman, that he had discovered the ruins of another set-
tlement similar to the former, about an hundred leagues
towards N. W. on the banks of the river St. Pedro.
MS. penes nu.

THOSE testimonies derive great credit from one cir-
cumftance, that they were not given in support of any

particular

particular fyfiem or theory, but as simple answers to
queries which I had proposed. It is probable, how-
ever, that when these gentlemen aftert, that no ruins
or monuments of any)ancient work whatever are now-
to be discovered in the Mexican Empire, they meant
that there were no such ruins or monuments as con-
veyed any idea of grardeur or magnificence, in the
works of its ancient inhabitants. Nor it appears frot
the tetimriony of several Spanith authors, that in Otum-.
ba, Tlafcala, Cholula, &c. some vestiges of ancient
buildings are still visible. Villa Segnor Theatro Amer.
p. 143. 308. 353. D. Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, former-
ly archbishop of Mexico, and now of Toledo, in his
introdution to that edition of the Cartas de Relacion of
Cortes, which he published at Mexico, mentions some
ruins which are till visible in several of the t6wns
through which Cortes passed in his way to the capital,
p. 4. &c. But neither of there authors give any defcrip-
tion of them, and they seem to be so very inconsiderable,
as to show only that some buildings had once been
there. The large mount of earth at Cholula, which
the Spaniards dignified with the name of temple, till
remains, but without any steps by which to afcend,'or
any facing of fione. It appears now like a natural
mount, covered with grass and shrubs, and possibly it
was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 19.
I have received a minute description of the remains of
a temple near Cuernavaca, on the road from Mexico to
Acapulco. It is composed of large stones, fitted to
each other as nicely as those in the buildings of the
Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the
foundation it forms a square of 25 yards; but as it
. VOL. III. G g rifes

rifes in height,, it dinminifiies in extent, not gradually,
but by being qntraaed fudd4enry at.regular diknges,
so tha it rmua have refe.nbl . e9 figure B in the plate;
It teruaoated, it is said, in. A eiirc,

N 0 TE XXXI.. . 227.'

HE- exaggeration of the Spanish Hiflorians, wvith
refpeO to the number of human victims facnficed

in Mexico, appears to be very great. AccordWing to
Gomara, there was no year in which twenty tbhouiand
human vitir.s were not offered to the Mexcad Da'n -
nities, and ih some years they amounted to'firy i8ou-
sand. Cron. c. 229. The skulls of those unihappy
persons were ranged in order in a building erected for
that purpose, and two of Cortes's officers who had
counted them, informed Gomara that their number
was a hundred and thirty-fix thousand. Ibid.C. 82.
Herrera's account is ffill more incredible, that'the num-
ber of vicims was so great, that five thousand have
been sacrificed in one day, nay, on some occasions, no
lets than twenty thousand. Dec. iii. lib. ii. c. li.
Torquemada goes beyond both in extravagance;,for he
aferts, that twenty thousand children, exclusive of
other victims, were slaughtered annually. ibon.Ind.
lib. vii. c. 2t. The most refpecable authority in fa-
vour of such high numbers is that of Zumurraga, the
first bishop of Mexico, who, in a letter to the chap-
ter general of his order, A. D. 1631, asserts that the
Mexicans facrificed-annually twenty thousand victims.
Davila. Teatro Eccles. 126. In opposition to all these
accoonts, B. de las Casas observes, that if there had
been sith an armual waste of the human species, the

country

country could never have arrived at that degree of po-
puloufnefs, for which it was remarkable when the
Spaniards firfl landed there; and he positively asserts,
that the Mexicans never sacrificed more than fifty or a
hundred persons in a year. See his dispute with Se-
pulveda, subjoined to hisBtteviffiina Relacion, p. o15.
Cortes does not specify what number of viaims was
sacrificed annually, but B. Diaz del Caftello relates,
that an enquiry having been made, with refpec to this,
by the Franciscan Monks, who were sent into New
Spain immediately after the conquest, it was found that
about two thousand five hundred were sacrificed every
year in Mexico. C. 207.

NOTE XXXII. p. 228.
i T is hardly necessary to observe, that the Peruvian

Chronology is not only obscure, but' repugnant to

conclusions deduced from the most accurate and exten-
five observations, concerning the time that elapses
during each reign, in any given fuccelion of princes.
The medium has been found not to exceed twenty
years. According to Acofia and Garcilaffo de la Vega,
Huana Capac, who died about the year 1527, was the
twelfth Inca. The duration of the Peruvian monar-
chy ought not to have been reckoned above two hun-
dred and forty years; but they affirm that it had sub-
fifled four hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega,
lib. i. c. 9q By this account each reign is'extended
at a medium to thirty-three years, inflead of twenty,
the number ascertained by Sir Isaac Newton's obferva-
tions; but Co imperfeca were the Peruvian traditions,

G g z that

that though the total is boldly marked, the number of
years in each reign is unknown.

NO T E XXXIII. p. 238.
M A 2ANY of the early Spanish writers aflert, that

the Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xeres,

p. 19o. Zarate, lib. i. c. I. Acofta, lib. v. c. 19.
But Garcilaffo de la Vega contends, that though this
barbarous praAice prevailed among their uncivilized
ancestors, it was totally abolished by the Incas, and
that no human viAim was ever offered in any temple
of the Sun. This affer:ion, and the plausible reasons
with which he confirms it, are sufficient to refute the
Spaniff writers, whose accounts seem to be founded
entirely upon report, not upon what they themselves
had observed. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their
festivals, the Peruvians offered cakes of bread moisten-
ed with blood drawn from the arms, the eye-brows,
and notes of their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This
rite appears to have been derived from their ancient
pracice of sacrificing human victims.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 244.
TH E Spaniards have adopted both those customs

of the ancient Peruvians. They have preserved

lome of the aqueduas or canals, made in the days of
the Incas, and have made new ones, by which they
water every field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage,
tom. i. 422. 477. They likewise continue to use
rua7;n, or the dung of sea-fowls, as manure. Ulloa

gives

gives a description of the almost incredible quantity of
it in the small ifiands near the coast. Ibid: 48r.

NOTE XXXV. p, 247.
THE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca

at Callo in the plain: of Lacatunga, and that of

Atun-Cannar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i.. 286,
&c. who infpe6ed them with great care. M. de
Condamine publilsed a curious memoir concerning the
ruins of Atun-Cannar. Mem. de l'Academie de
Berlin, A. D, 1746, p. 435. Acofta describes the
ruins of Cuzco, which he had examined.. Lib. vi.
c. 14. Garcilaffo, in his usual flile, gives pompous
and confused dcfcriptions of several temples, and other
public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. 21. lib. vi. c. 4. Don

i-- Zapata, in a large treatise concerning. Peru,
which has not hitherto been published, communicates
some information with refpe& to several monuments of
the ancient Peruvians, which have not been mentioned
by other authors. MS. penes me, Articulo xx.;->:llioa,
describes some of the antient Peruvian fortifications,
which were likewise works of great extent and solidity.
Tom. i. 391. Three circumstances struck all those
observers: the vatl size of the flones which the Peru-
vians employed in some of their buildings. Acofta
measured one, which was thirty feet long, eighteen
broad, and fix in thickness; and yert he adds, that in
the fortress at Cuzco, there were stones considerably
larger. It is difficult to conceive how the Peruvians
could move these, and rai(e them to the height even of
twelve feet. The second circumstance is, the imper-
section of the Peruvian art, whe: applied to working

Gg 3 in

in timber. By the patience and perseverance natural
to Americans, stones may be formed into any shape,
merely by rubbing one against another, or by the use
of hatchets or other instruments made of stone; but
with such rude tools, little progress can be made in
carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two
beams together, or give any degree of union, or fta-
bility to any work composed of timber. As they
could not form a centre, they were totally unac-
quainted with the ufc of arches in building, nor can
the Spanish authors conceive how they were able to
frame a roof for those ample ftrnatures which they
raised.

THE third circumstance is a flriking proof, which

all the monuments of the Peruvians furnish, of their
want of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with
patience no less astonishing. None of the stones em-
ployed in those works were formed into any particular
or uniform shape, which could render them fit for
building. The Indians took them as they fell from
the mountains, or were raised out of the quarries.
Some were square, some triangular, some convex,
some concave. Their art and industry were employed
in joining them tcgether, by forming such hollows in
the one, as perfeCliy corresponded to the projecAions
or risings in the other. This tedious operation, which
nmiht have been so easily abridged, by adapting the
surface of the sones to each other, either by rubbing,
or by their hatchets of copper, would be deemed in-
credible, if it were not put beyond doubt by infpeaing
the remains of those buildings. It gives them a very

singular

singular appearance to an European eye. There is no
regular layer or ftralum of building, aind no.one stone
resembles another..in dimensions or form. At the fame
time, by. the persevering, but ill-directed induary of
the Indians, all are jqined with that pinute nicety
which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this observation
concerning the form of the siones in the fortress of
Atun-Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pinetogives a similar
description of the fortress of Cuzco, the molfperfec of
all the Peruvian works. Zapata MS. penes me. Ac-
cording to M. de Condaminr, there were regular strata
of building in some parts of Atun-Cannar, which he"
remarks as singular, and as a proof of some progress
in improvement.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 251.
T H E appearance of those bridges, which bend with

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are

considerably agitated by the motion of every person
who pafnes along them, is very frightful at firfl. But
the Spaniards have found them to be the'eafieft mode
of palling the torrents iii'Peru, over which it' would; be
difficult to throw more solid ftru&ares eitiHer of stone
or timber. They form those hanging bridges so strong
and broad, that loaded mules pass alon'gf' them. All
the trade of Cuzco is carried on by means of such a
bridge over the river Apurimac. UlHol ton. i. 358.
A more simple contrivance was employed in pafling
smaller streams: a basket, in which the traveller was
placed, being suspended from a strong rope firetched
across the stream, it was pufled or drawn from one fide
to the other. Ibid.

Ggq NOTE

NOTE XXXVII. p. 264.
/ Y information with refpea to those events is

taken from Noticia breve de la expedicion militar

de Sonora y Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eftado,
en que por confecuencia de ello, fe han puefto ambas
provincias, published at Mexico, June I7th, 1771,
in order to satisfy the curiosity of the merchants, who
had furnished the viceroy with money for defraying the
expence of the armament. The copies of this Noticia
are very rare in Madrid; but I have obtained one
which has enabled me to communicate these curious
sacs to the Public. According to this account, there
was found in the mine Yecorato in Cinaloa, a grain of
gold of twenty-two carats, which weighed sixteen
marks four ounces four ochavas i this was sent to
Spain as a present fit for the king, and is now deposited
in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 265.
T HE uncertainty of geographers with refpea to

this point is remarkable, for Cortes seems to have

surveyed its coats with great accuracy. The arch-
biihop of Toledo has published, from the original, in
the pofiffion of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant
of Cortes, a map drawn in 1541, by the pilot Do-
mingo Castillo, in which California is laid down as a
peninsula, stretching out nearly in the fame direction
which is now given to it in the best maps, and the
point where Rio Colorado enters the gulf is marked
with precision. Hilt. de Nueva Efpagna, 327.

NOTE

NOTE XXXIX. p. 268.

A M indebted for this fa&t to M. L'Abbe Raynal,
tom. iii. 103. and upon confilting an intelligent

person, who having been long fettled on the Mosquito
lhore, has been engaged in; the logwood trade, I find
that ingenious author has been well informed. The
logwood cut near the town of St. Fraricis of Cam-
peachy, is of much better quality than that oh the other
fide of Yucatan, and the Englifl trade in the Bay of
Honduras is almost at an end.

NOTE XL. p.275.
p Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enru-

merated ten causes of the rapid depopulation of

Mexico, to which he gives the name of the ten plagues.
Many of these are not peculiar to that province.
I. The introducion of the small-pox. This disease
was first brought into New Spain in the year 152o, by
a negro slave, who attended Naryaez. Torribio
affirms, that one half of the people, in the provinces
visited with this distemper, died. To this mor-
tality occasioned by the small-pox, Torquemada adds
the deftrutive effecs of two contagious dilfempers
which raged in the years i545 and 1576. In the
former Soo,ooo; in the latter, above two millions
perilhed, according to an exa& account taken by order
of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642. The small-pox
was not introduced into Peru for several years after
the invasion of the Spaniards, but proved very fatal to
the natives. Garcia Origen, p. 88. 2. The numbers
who were killed, or died of famine in their war with

7 the

the Spaniards, particularly during the siege of Mexico.
3. The great famine that followed after the reduftion
of Mexico, as all the people engaged, either on-one
fide or other, had neglected the cultivation of thei'
lands. Something similar to this happened -in all the
other countries conquered by the Spaniards. 4. The
grievous tafrs imposed by the Spaniards upon the peo-
ple belonging to their Repartimientos. 5. The op-
preffive burden of taxes which they were unable to pay,
and from which they could hope for no exemption.
6. The numbers employed in collecing the gold,
carried down by the torrents from the mountains,
who were forced from their own habitations, without
any provision made for their subsistence, and fubje&ed
to all the rigour of cold in those elevated regions.
7. The immense labour of rebuilding Mexico, which
Cortes urged on with such precipitate ardotr, as
detroyed an incredible number of people. 8. The
number of people condemned to fervitnde, under vari-
ous pretexts, and employed in working the silver mines.
These, marked by each proprietor with a hot iron,
like his cattle, were driven in herds to the mountains.
The nature of the labour to which they were filbieeed
there, the noxious vapours of the mines, the coldness
of the climate, and scarcity of food, were so fatal,
that Torribio affirms, the country round several of
those mines, particularly near Guaxago, was covered
with dead bodies, the air corrupted with their ierich,
and so many vultures, and other voracious birds, hover-
ed about for their prey, that the fun was darkened
with their flight. Io. The Spaniards, in the differ-
ent expeditions which they undertook, and by

the

the civil wars which they carried on, destroyed many
of the natives, whom they compelled. to serve them as
Tamnemes, or carriers ps burdens. This last mode of
oppreflion was particularly ruinous to the Peruvians.
From the number of Indians who perifed in Gonzalo
Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the east of
the Andes, one may form some idea of what they
suffered in similar services, and how fast they were
wafted by them. Torribio, MS. Coritain his Breve
y Summaria Relacion, illufirates and confirms several
of Torribio's observations, to which he refers. MS.
penes me.

NOTE XLI. p. 276.

V EN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii.
c. I8. But the passion of that great man for

system, sometimes rendered him inattentive to research;
and from his capacity to refine, he was apt, in some
instances, to overlook obvious arid just causes.

NOTE XLII p. 276.
A STRONG proof of this occurs in the testament

of Isabella, where ihe discovers the most tender

concern for the humane and mild usage of the Indians.
Those laudable sentiments of the queen have been
adopted into the public law of Spain, and serve as the
introducion to the regulations contained under the
title of the good treatment of the Indians. Recopil. lib.
vi, tit. x.

NOTE

NOTE XLIII. p. 279.
IN the seventh Titke of the firfi book of the Recopi.

lacion, which contains the Taws concerning the

powers and funaions of archbiflops and bishops, al-
most a third part of them relates to what is incumbent
upon them, as guardians of the Indians, and points
out the various methods in which it is their duty to
interpose, in order to defend them from oppression,
either with refpec& to their persons or property. Not
only do the laws commit to them this honourable and
humane office, but they actually exercile it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced

from Spanish authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as
he was not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popish
clergy, to which they were not fully entitled. Survey,
p. 142. 192, &c. Henry Hawks, an Engliff merchant,
who resided five years in New Spain, previous to the
year 15-2, gives the fame favourable account of the
popish clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466. By a law of
Charles V. not only biflops, but other ecclesiastics,
are impowered to inform and admonish the civil ma-
giftrates, if any Indian is deprived of his just liberty
and rights. Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley. 14; and
thus were constituted legal protectors of the Indians.
Some of the Spanish ecclesiastics refused to grant abfo-
lution to such of their countrymen as poffefled Enco-
mitendas, and confidered the Indians as slaves, or em-
p oyed them in working their mines. Gonz. Davil.
Teatro Eccles. i. 157.

NOTE

NOT E XLIV. p. 280.
A CCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains

4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of
the largest Indian towns in America, p. 104.

NOTE XLV. p. 280.
l T is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of

the state of population in those kingdoms of Europe

where the police is most perfect, and.where science has
made the greatefl progress. In Spaniih America, where
knowledge is flill in its infancy, and few men have
leisure to engage in researches merely speculative, little
attention has been paid to this curious inquiry. But
in the year 1741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys and
governors of the several provinces in America, to make
an actual survey of the people under their jurifdition,
and to transmit a report concerning their number and
occupations. In consequence of this order, the Conde
de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New Spain, appointed D.
Jos. Antonio de Villa Segnor y Sanchez, to execute
that commiflion in New Spain. From the reports of
the magifirates in the several diftrits, as well as from
his own observations, and long acquaintance with most
of the provinces, Villa Segnor published the result of
his inquiries in his Teatro Americano. His report,
however, is imperfect. Of the ninediocefes, into which
the Mexican empire has been divided, he has publish-
ed an account of five only, viz. the archbishopric of
Mexico, the bishoprics of Puebla de los Angeles, Me-
choacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The bishoprics
of Yucutan, Vcrapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are

entirely

entirely omitted, though the two latter comprehend
countries, in which the Indian race is more numerous
than in any part of New Spain. In. his survey of the
extensive diecefe of Nova Galiciae the. situation of the
different Indian. villages is described, but be specifies
the number of people only in a small part of it. The
Indians of that vast province, in which the Spanish
dominion is imperfectly efiablithed, are not regifared
with the fame accuracy as in other parts of New Spain.
According to Villa Segnor, the aaual flate-of pcpula-
tion in the five dioceses above mentioned is of Spani-
a.-ds, negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, in the..4io,
cefes of

Families.

Mexico - - - 10522
Los Angeles - - - 30,600
Mechoacan - - - 30,
Oaxaca - - - 796

Nova Galicia 6,-
- - 1 o.

190,708

At the rate of five to a family,the total number is953, 40

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico l.rl9,xt
Los Angeles - - - 8V24o
Mechoacan - - - 36,96

Oaxaca - - - 44,222
Nova Galicia - - - 6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number is

I,47 ,955. We may rely with greater certainty oh this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken

3 from

from the MatrtilSi, or register, according-to which the
tributei paid rb .thema;isriolleAed:. Asifour diocefas'of
nine are totallyriomitted ,aid 'in fhat of-Nova Galicia
the numbers air iniperfeetlyreccrdedWtwe mjiiacottchd,-
that-thb nuniber of iIhl'nifs in theMexicfilt.'empirie ix-
ceeds two millionsii. '; ; - '

TfE accoantbif thetnumber oF Spaniards, c&e. Teems

not to be ecqiually cbipltete. Of- iaaiyTp1aces; Villa
Segnor observes in 'geieral teri is, th;it;.feveral 'Spasi-.
ards,. negroesy and' people of a mixedriace, reside there,
without specifying, their numberi - If, therefore, We
make allowance for these, and for all who reside in:the
four dioceses omitted, the number of Spaniards, and.pf
thole of a mixed race, may probably amount toa mil-
lion and a half. In Come places, Villa Segnor diftin-
gifnies between Spaniards and the three inferior races
of negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, and marks their
number separately. But he generally blends them toge-
gether. But from the proportion observable in thole
places, where the number of each is marked, as well
as from the account of the state of population in New'
Spain by. otheryauthors, it-is manifest thatthe number
of negroes and persons of a mixed-race far exceeds that
of Spaniards. Perhaps -the latter ought not-to.be: rec-
koned above soo,ooo to a million of the former. '

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the num-
ber of people in -eru,.as,,might enable me to. form any
conjeture equally fatjsfying. with refpe& to the degree
of its population. I have been informed, that in the

year

year I761, the protecor of the Indians in the vice -
royalty of Peru computed that 612,780 paid tribute to
the king. As all females, and persons under age, are
exempted from this tax in Peru, the total number of
Indians ought, by that accounts to be 2,449jI20;
MS. penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess concerning the slate
of population in New Spain and Peru. According to
an account which I have reason to confider as accurate,
the number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported
to Peru on each new publication, is 1,171,953; to
New Spain 2,649,326. I am informed, that but few In-
dians purchase bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the
Spanish inhabitants, and those of mixed race, so that the
number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will
amount by this mode of computation to at least three
millions.

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns

in Spaniih America, may give us some idea of the
extent of population, and corre& the inaccurate, but
popular notion entertained in Great Britain, concern-
ing the weak and desolate state of their colonies. The
city of Mexico contains at leaf 15o,ooo people. Pu-
ebba de los Angelcs contains above 60,coo Spaniards,
and people of a mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247.
Guadaiaxara contains above 30,oco, exclusive of In-
dians. Id. ii. 206. Lima contains 54,coo. D. Cos-
me Bueno Defcr. de Peru, 1764. Carthagena con-
tains 25,cpc. Potofi contains 25,000, Bueno, 1767.

Popayan

Popayan contains above 20,000. Ulloa, i. 287.
Towns of a fccond class are itill more numerous. The
cities in the most thriving settlements of other Euro-
pean nations in America cannot be compared with
these.

Suci are the detached accounts of the number of

people in several towns, which I found scattered in
authors whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have
obtained an enumeration of the inhabitants of the
towns in the province of Quito, on the accuracy of
which I can rely; and I communicate it to the Public,
both to gratify curiosity, and to rectify the mistaken
notion which I have mentioned. St. Francisco de
Quito contains between 50 and 6o,ooo people of all
the ldffecrent races. Besides the city, there are in the
Corrt-ein:iento 29 curas or parilhes eflablifled in the
principal villages, each of which has smaller hamlets
depending upon it. The inhabitants of these are moflly
Indians and Mestizos. St. Juan de Pasto has between
6 and 80co inhabitants, besides 27 dependent villages.
St. Miguel de Ibarra 7c00 citizens, arid ten villages.
The district of Havala between 18 and 20,000 people.
The diftri& of Tacunna between o and I2,0oc. The
diftri&t of Ambato between 8 and lo,oco, besides r6
depending villages. The city of Riobamba between
16 and 20,030 inhabitants, and 9 depending villages.
The diftria of Chimbo between 6 and 8000. The
city of Guyaquil from 16 to 20,oco inhabitants, and
14 depending viiiages. The diftria of Atuafi between
5 and 60oo, and 4 depending villages. The city of
Cuenza between 25 and 30,000 inhabitants, and 9

VOL, Ill. H h populous

populous depending villages. The town of Laxa
from 8 to 1o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending vil-
lages. This degree of population, though slender, if
we confider the vast extent of the country, is far be-
yond what is commonly supposed. I have omitted to
mention, in its proper place, that Quito is the only
province in Spanish America that can be denominated
a manufaauring country; hats, cotton fluffs, and coarse
woollen cloths, aare made there in such quantities, as
to be sufficient not only for the consumption of the pro-
vince, but to furnish a considerable article for exporta-
tion into other parts of Spanish America. I know not
whether the uncommon industry of this province should
be confidered as the cause or the effet of its populous-
ness. But among the ostentatious inhabitants of the
New World, the passion for every thing that comes
from Europe is so violent, that I am informed the ma-
nufactures of Quito are so much undervalued, as to
be on the decline.

NOTE XLVI. p. 287.
TH E S E are established at the following places. St.

Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in

New Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firme,
Santiago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New Galicia,
Santa Fd in the New Kingdom of Granada, La
Plata in the country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de
Quito, St. Jago de Chili, Buenos Avres. To each
of these are fubjeaed several large provinces, and some
so far removed from the cities where the courts
are fixed, that they can derive little benefit from their

jurif-

jurifdiifion. The. Spanifl writers commonly reckon
up twelve courts of Audience, but they include that of
Manila in the Philippine Iilands.

NOTE XLVII. p. 31r.
ON account of the distance of Peru and Chili

from Spain, and the difficulty of carrying

commodities of such bulk as wine and oil across
the iflhmus of Panama, the Spaniards in those pro-
vinces have been permitted to plant vines and olives.
But they are strictly prohibited from exporting wine or
oil to Panama, Guatimala, or any province in such
a situation as to receive it from Spain. Recop. lib.
tit. xviii. 1. i5-18.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 3T3.
T H I S computation was made by Benzoni, A. D.

155o, fifty-eight years after the discovery of Ame-

rica. Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21. But as Ben-
zoni wrote with the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to
detrat from the Spaniards in every particular, it is
probable that his calculation is too low.

NOTE XLIX. p. 315.

" Y information with. refpec to the division and

tranfmiflion of property in the Spanish colonies

is imperfe&. The Spanish authors do not explain this
fully, and have not perhaps attended sufficiently to the
effecs of their own institutions and laws. Solorzano
de jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. ii. ]. 16. explains in some
measure the introduaion of the tenure of Alayorafgo,

H b 2 and

and mentions tome of its effeels. Villa Segnor takes
notice of a singular consequence of it. He observes,
that in some of the best situations in the city of Mexico,
a good deal of ground is unoccupied, or covered only
with the ruins of the houses once ereaed upon it;
and adds, that as this ground is held by right of Mayo-
r-,;, and cannot be alienated, that desolation and
thole ruins become perpetual. Theatr. Amer. vol. i.
P. 34-

NOTE L. p. 317.
THERE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices

either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary,

there are many Cedulas which recommend the confer-
ring places of trust ind;fcriminatclv on the natives of
S?.in and America. Betancurt y F:gueroa Derecho,
fce. p. 5, 6. But notwithstanding such repeated re-
ccr-menrdation., preferment in almolt every different
line is conferred on native Spaniards. A remarkable
pro: f of thi; is produced by the author last quoted.
From the ciflcovery of America to the year 1637, three
hundred and fix:y.nine bishops, or archbishops, have
bcen appointed to the different diorefes in that country,
:d s' a21; that number only vtwelve were Creoles,
p T-'rni' s predilecton for Europeans seems still to
c..:iC:.,. By a royal mandiate, ifled in 1776, the
*.-:- '. of tl;! c_.ther;- o; MIex;co is direicd to nomi-

i a !.:-;:: : ccci:.:-:;lcs of known merit and abi-
'.t -, th: ::-c K;i. r.-.y .?'pcit thrm to supply vacant

i ..:iC-. S. :'ii, .NOT

NOTE

NOTE LI. p.324.
tj.ODERATE as this tribute may appear, such is

the extreme poverty of the Indians in many pro-

vinces of America, that the exacting of it is into-
lerably oppreflive. Pegna Itincr. par Parochos de In-
dios, p. 192.

NOTE LII. p. 325.

TN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit
and services of the first conquerors, as well as the

small revenue arising from the country previous to the
discovery of the mines of Sacatecas, the enccmitndas
were granted for three, and Sometimes for four lives.
Rccopil. lib, vi, tit. ii. c. 14, &c,

NOTE LIII. p. 326.
D Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in mines is

not noxious, and as a proof of this informs us,

that many Mestizos and Indians, who do not belong
to any Rcpartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as
miners; and several of the Indians, when the legal
term of their service expires, continue to work in the
mines of choice. Entrctcn. p. 265. But his opinion
concerning the wholesomeness of this occupation is
contrary to the experience of all ages; and wherever
men are allured by high wages, they will eniage in
any species of labour, however fatiguing or pernicious
it mav be. D. Hern. Carillo Altemirano relates a cu-
rious fa&d incompatible with this opinion. Wherever

P h 3 mines

mines are wrought, fays he, the number of Indians
decreases; but in the province of Campeachy, where
there are nomines, the number of Indians has increased
more than a third since the conquest of America,
though neither the foil nor climate be so favourable as
in Peru or Mexico. Colb.rt Collec. In another
merrorial presented to Philip III. in the year 16c9,
Captain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo asserts, that in
every diftrit of Peru, where the Indians are compelled
to labour in the mines, their numbers were reduced to
the half, and in some places to the third, of what it
was under the viceroyalty of Don. Fran. Toledo in
1581. Colb. Collect.

NOTE LIV. p. 327.
AS labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with

legal accuracy, the talks seem to be in a great mea-

sure arbitrary, and like the services exaced by feudal
superiors, in -vinea, prati aut mfie, from their vassals,
are extremely burdenrome, and often wantonly oppref-
five. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios.

NOTE LV. p. 327.
T HE turn of frvice known in Peru by the name of

Aifta, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it

continues no longer than a week at a time. No per-
son is called to serve at a greater distance from his ha-
bitation than 24 miles. This arrangement is less op-
preffve to the Indians than that eftabliLhed in Peru.
Memorial of Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert
Collea.

NOTE

NOTE LVI. p.330.
TH E flrongeft proof of this may be deduced from

the laws themselves. By the multitude and variety

of regulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea
of their number. Though the laws have, wifely,
provided that no Indian shall be obliged to serve in any
mine at a greater distance from his place of residence
than thirty miles; we are informed in a memorial of
D. Hernan Carillo Altamirano presented to the king,
that the Indians of Peru are often compelled to serve
in mines at the distance of a hundred, a hundred
and fifty, and even two hundred leagues from their
habitation. Colbert Collect. Many mines are situ-
ated in parts of the country, so barren, and so distant
from the ordinary habitations of the Indians, that the
necessity of procuring labourers to work there, has
obliged the Spanish monarchs to dispense with their
own regulations in several instances, and to permit
the viceroys to compel the people of more remote pro-
vinces to resort to those mines. Efcalona Gazophyl.
Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But in justice to them it (hould
be observed, that they have been studious to alleviate
this oppression as much as possible, by enjoining the
viceroys to employ every method, in order to induce
the Indians to fettle in some part of the country adja-
cent to the mines. Id. ibid.

Hh4 NOTE

NOTE LVII. p. 336.
TORQUEMADA, after a long enumeration,

which has the appearance of accuracy, concludes

the number of monasteries in New Spain to be four
hundred. Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number
of monaftcries in the city of Mexico alone was, in the
year 1745, fifty-five. Villa.Segnor. Theat. Amer. i.
34. Ulloa reckons up forty convents in Lima; and
mentioning those for nuns, he fays, that a small town
might be peopled out of them, the number of persons
shut up there is so great. Voy. i. 429. Philip III.
in a letter to the viceroy of Peru, A. D. 1620, ob-
serves, that the number of convents in Lima was so
great, that they covered more ground than all the reft
of the city. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii.
c. 16. Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3. The first monastery
in New Spain was founded A. D. 1525, four years
only after the conquest. Torq. lib. xv. c. 16.

AccoRDINsG to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the com-

p:ete establishment of the American church in all the
Spanish fittlements was, in the year 1649, I patriarch,
6 archbishops, 32 bishops, 346 prebends, 2 abbots, 5
royal chaplains, S4o convents. Teatro Ecclefiaflico
de las Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of
Jesuits was expelled from all the Spanish dominions,
the colleges, prcfjed houses, and refidencies, which it
poiffeied in the province of New Spain, were thirty, in
Quito sixteen, in the New Kingdom of Granada thir-
teen, in Peru seventeen, in Chili eighteen, in Para-
guay eighteen ; in all a hundred and twelve. Collec-

cion

cion General de Providencias haita acqui tomadas fobre
eltranamento, &c. de la Compagnia, part i. p. 19.
The number of jesuits, priests and novices in all these,
amounted to 2245. MS. penes me.

Ir' the year 1644, the city of Mexico presented a

petition to the king, praying that no new monastery
might be founded, and that the revenues of those al-
ready eltablifhed might be circumscribed, otherwise
the religious houses would soon acquire the property qs
the whole country. They request likewise, that the
bishops might be laid under reftri&ions in conferring
holy orders, as there were at that time in New Spain
above fix thousand clergymen without any living. Id.
p. i6. These abuses must have been enormous indeed,
when the superstition of American Spaniards was
flocked, and induced to remonitrate againlt them.

NOTE LVIII. p. 340.
THIS description of the manners of the Spaniil

clergy, I should not have ventured to give, upon

the testimony of protestant authors alone, as they may
be fufpeaed of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in
particular, who had a better opportunity than any pro-
teflant, to view the interior ftatc of Spanish America,
describes the corruption of the church which he had
forfakcn, with so much of the acrimony of a new con-
vert, that I should have distrusted his evidence, though
it communicates some very curious and itriking faas.
But Benzoni mentions the profligacy of ecclesiastics in
America at a very early period after their settlement

there,

there. Hi:s. lib. ii . c 19, 20. M. Frezier, an in-
telligent observer, and zealous for his own religion,
paints the dissolute manners of the Spanifi ecclesiastics
in Peru, particularly the regulars, in itronger colours
than I have employed. Voy. p. 51. 215, &c. M.
Gen:il confirms this account, Voy. i. 34. Correal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circum-
stances. Voy. i. 6i. I55. 161. I have good reason to
believe, that the manners of the regular clergy, parti-
cularly in Peru, are still extremely indecent. Acofta
himself acknowledges that great corruption of manners
had been the confeqlence of permitting monks to for-
fake the retirement and discipline of the cloister, and
to mingle again with the world, by undertaking the
charge of the Indian parishes. De procur. Ind. Sa-
lu:e, lib. iv. c. 13, &c. He mentions particularly
those vices, of which I have taken notice, and confi-
ders the temptations to them as so formidable, that he
leans to the opinion of those who hold that the regular
clery- fhaulid not be emplo)ed as parish priests. Lib.
v. c. 2C. Even the advocates for the regulars admit,
that many and great enormities abounded among the
monks of different orders, when set free from the te-
firaint of monafic d.;cioline; and from the tone of
their defence, one may conclude that the charge brought
a-.iinft them was no: destitute of truth. In the French
colonits, the state cf the regular clergy is nearly the
fame as in the Spanish settlements, and the fame con-
sequences have folcowed. M. Biet, superior of the
fecu:ar prietls in Cavenne, inquires with no less ap-
pearance of piety than of candour, into the causes of
this corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemp-

tion

tion of regulars from the jurifdilion and cenfurcs of
their diocesans ; to the temptations to which they are
exposed; and to their engaging in commerce. Voy.
p. 320. It is remarkable that all the authors, who
censure the licentiousness of the Spanish regulars with
the greatest severity, concur in vindicating the condu&
of the Jcfuits. Formed under a discipline more per-
set than that of the other monalfic orders, or ani-
mated by that concern for the honour of the society,
which takes such full possession of every member, the
Jesuits, both in Mexico and Peru, it is allowed,
maintained a most irreproachable decency of manners.
Frezier, 223. Gentil, i. 34. The fame praise is like-
wife due to the bishops and most of the dignified
clergy. Frez. ibid.

A VOiLUME of the Gazeta de Mexico for the years

1728, 1729, 1730, having been communicated to me,
I find there a itriking confirmation of what I have ad-
vanced concerning the spirit of low illiberal fuperltition
prevalent in Spanish America. From the newspapers
of any nation, one may learn what are the objets
which chiefly engross its attention, and appear to it
most intcrefting. The Gazette of Mexico is filled al-
most entirely with accounts of religious funcions, with
delcriptions of processions, consecrations of churches,
beatifications of faints, festivals, autos de fe', &c.
Civil cr commercial affairs, and even the tranfations
of Europe, occupy but a small corner in this maga-
zine of monthly intelligence. From the titles of new
books, which are regularly inserted, it appears that
two-thirds of them are treatises of scholastic theology,
or of monkish devotion.

~5 ~NOTE

NOTE LIX. p. 341.
SOLORZANO, after mentioning the corrupt

morals of some of the regular clergy, with that

cautious reserve, which became a Spanilh layman, in
touching on a subjec so delicate; gives his opinion
very explicitly, and with much firmness against com-
mit'ing parochial charges to monks. He produces the
testimony of several refpefable authors of his country,
both divines and lawyers, in confirmation of his opi-
nion. De Jure Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A firiking
proof of the alarm excited by the attempt of the Prince
d'Efquilache to exclude the regulars from parochial
cures, is contained in the Colbert collecion of papers.
Sever!a memorials were presented to the king by the
procura:ors for the monastic orders, and replies were
made to there in name of the secular clergy. An eager,
and even rancorous, spirit is manifest on both fides, irl
the conduct of this dispute.

NOTE LX. p. 347.
N 0 OT only the native Indians, but the Ml'iizss, or

children of a Spaniard and Indian, were ori-

ginally excluded from the priefihood, and refused ad-
mission into any religious order. But by a law issued
Sept. 28th, I5S8, Philip II. required the prelates of
America to ordain such mestizos born in lawful wed-
lock, as they should find to be properly qualified, and
to permit them to take the vows in any monastery
where they had gone through a regular noviciate.
Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7. Some regard teems to
have been paid to this law in New Spain ; but none in

Peru,

Peru. Upon a representation of this to Charles II. in
the year 1697, ie issued a new edit enforcing the ob-
servation of it, and professing his desire to have all his
fubjecs, Indians and mestizos as well as Spaniards,
admitted to the enjoyment of the fame privileges.
Such, however, was the aversion of the Spaniards in
America to the Indians, and their race, that this seems
to have produced little effe&; for, in the year 1725,
Philip V. was obliged to renew the injunction in a
more peremptory tone. But so unsurmountable are
the hatred and contempt of the Indians among the Pe-
ruvian Spaniards, that the present king has been con-
firained to enforce the former edics anew by a law,
publiflhed September I , 1774. Real Cedula, MS.
pencs ,n.

NOTE LXI. p. 351.
U Z T A RI Z, an accurate and cautious calculator,

seems to admit, that the quantity of silver which

does not pay duty may be tfated thus high. Accord-
ing to Herrera, there was not above a third of what
was extracted from Potofi that paid the king's fifth.
Dec. viii. lib. ii. c. 15. Solorzano asserts likewise,
that the quantity of silver which is fraudulently circu-
lated, i; far greater than that which is regularly
fiamped, after paying the fifth. De Ind. jure, vol. ii.
lib. v, p. 846.

NOTE LXII. p. 355.
W H E N the mines of Potofi were discovered in the

year 1545, the veins were so near the surface,
that the ore was easily extracted, and so rich that it

I was

was refined with little trouble, and at froall expence,
merely by the action of fire. This fimp!e mode of re-
finin by fusion alone continued until the year 1574,
when the use of mercury in refining silver, as well as
gold, was discovered. Those mines having been
wrou-h: wi:hout interruption for two centuries, the
veinz are now funk so deep, that the expence of ex-
tracti-:; the cre is greatly increased. Besides this, the
richness of tre ore, contrary to what happens in most
other mines, has become less, as the vein continued
to dpa, and; ha; diminifcd to such a degree, that one is
a -nzej that the Spaniards fliould persis in working it.
Other rich mines have been successively discovered, but
in :c;r.:l the value of the ores has decreased so much,
whi:e the expr.:e of extracting them has augmented,
that the court of Spain, in the year 1736, reduced the
duty paya'ie to the king frcm a fifth to a tenth. All
the quicksilver uscd in Peru, is extracted from the fa-
rmoLs mine of Guancabelica, discovered in the year
1563. The crown has reserved the property of this
mine to itself; and the persons who purchascd the
cuickfi;ver, paid not only the price of it, but likewise a
sis'-, as a duty to the king. But, in the year 176r,
this duty on quicksilver was abolished, on account of
the in::esas of expence in working mines. Uiloa,
Ei.tretenimiento;, .ii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. 505. 523.
In c:r.-.;;-ncc cf tn.s abolition of the fish, and some
fb.lq .; ,; il': :cn:i i;rs of price, which became necessary
c-n accsj;. or the increasing expence of working
mines. q jickfihscr, hich was formerly fold at eighty
;efos the quintal, is nuw dclivered by the king at the
rate of fix:y pe'os. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii.

132,

132, Note. The duty on gold is reduced to a twentieth,
or five per cent. Any of my readers who are desirous of
being acquainted with the mode in which the Spaniards
condu't the working of their mines, and the refine-
ment of the ore, will find an accurate description of
the ancient method by Acofta. Lib. iv. c. I--3.
And of their more recent improvements in the metal-
lurgic art, by Gamboa Coment. a las ordenanz. de
minas, c. 22.

NOTE LXIII. p. 359.
M A N Y remarkable proofs occur of the advanced

fiate of industry in Spain, at the beginning of

the fixtcenth century. The number of cities in Spain
was considerable, and they were peopled far beyond the
proportion that was common in other parts of Europe.
The caules of this I have explained, Hist. of Cha, V.
i. 158. Wherever cities are populous, that species of
industry which is peculiar to them incrcafes, artificers
and manufactlrers abound. The effect of the American
trade in giving a4tivity to these is manifest, from a fin-
gular sac. In the year 1545, while Spain continued
to depend on its own industry, for the supply of its
colonies, so much work was bespoke from the ma-
nufacaurers, that it was supposed they could hardly
finish it in less than fix years. Campom. i. 406. Such
a demand must have put much industry in motion, and
have excited extraordinary efforts. Accordingly, we
are informed, that in the beginning of Philip II.'s
reign, the city of Seville alone, where the trade with
America centered, gave employment to no fewer than

16,ooo

16,ooo looms in silk or woollen work, and that above
130,000 persons had occupation in carrying on there
manufaAures. Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and
pernicious was the operation of the causes which I shall
enumerate, that before Philip III. ended his reign,
the looms in Seville were reduced to 400. Uztariz,

C. 7.

SINCE the publication of the first edition, I have

the fatisfacaion to find my ideas concerning the early
commercial intercourse between Spain and her colo-
nies confirmed and illustrated by D. Bernardo Ward,
of the Junta de Comercio at Madrid, in his Proyec7o
Ecsncmrns, Part ii. c. i. " Under the reigns of
Charles V. and Philip II. fays he, the manufactures
of Spain and of the Low Countries subject to her do-
minion were in a most flourishing slate. Those of
France and England were in their infancy. The re-
public of the United Provinces did not then exist. No
European power but Spain had co'onies of any value
in the New World. Spain could supply her settlements
there with the productions of her own foil, the fabrics
wrought by the hands of her own artisans, and all she
received in return for these belonged to herself alone.
Then the exclusion of foreign manufactures was pro-
per, because it might be rendered effcaual. Then
Spain might lay heavy duties upon goods exported to
America, or imported from it, and might impose what
restraints the deemed proper upon a commerce entirely
in her own hands. But when time and fucceflive re-
volutions had occafoned an alteration in all those cir-
cumifan.ces, when the manufactures of Spain began

to

to decline, and the demands of America were supplied
by foreign fabrics, the original maxims and regulations
of Spain should have been accommodated to the change
in her situation. The policy that was wife at one pe-
riod, became absurd in the other."

NOTE LXIV. p. 370.
N O bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of trea;

sure is examined. Both are received on the credit

of the persons to whom they belong; and only one
instance of fraud is recorded, during the long period in
which trade was carried on with this liberal confidence.
All the coined silver which was brought from Peru to
Porto-bello in the year 1654, was found to be adulte-
rated, and to be mingled with a fifth part of bale metal.
The Spanifl merchants with their usual integrity sus-
tained the whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners,
by whom they were employed. The fraud was de-
teaEed, and the treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the
author of its was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif.
de Manus. &c. liv. ii. p. o02.

NOTE LXV. p. 375.
MN ANY striking proofs occur of the scarcity of

money in Spain. Of all the immense fums which

have been imported from America, the amount of which
I shall afterwards have occasion to mention, Mon-
cada asserts that there did not remain in Spain, in 1619,
above two hundred millions of pejos, one half in coined
money, the other in plate and jewels. Reftaur. de
Efpagna, Disc. iii. c. I. Uztariz, who published his
valuable work in 1724, contends, that in money,

VOL. III. I i plate,

plate, and jewels, there did not remain a hundred
million. Theor. &c. c. 3. Campomanes, on the
authority of a remonstrance from the community of
merchants in Toledo to Philip III. relates, as a certain
proof how scarce cafl had become, that persons who
lent money, received a third part of the fum which
they advanced, as interest and premium. Educ.
popul. i. 417.

NOTE LXVI. p.379.
T HE account of the mode in which the factors of

the South Sea Company conducted the trade in

the fair of Porto-bello, which was opened to them by
the Affienro, I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo
y Herrera, president of the court of Audience in
Quito, and governor of that province. Don Dionyfio
was a person of such a respectable character for probity
and discernment, that his testimony, in any point,
would be of much weight, but greater credit is due to
it in this cafe, as he was an eye-witncfs of the tranf-
acions which he relates, and was often employed in
detecting and authenticating the frauds which he de-
scribes. It is probable, however, that his reprefenta-
tion being composed at the commencement of the war
which broke out between Great Britain and Spain, in
the year 1739, may, in some instances, discover a
portion of the ac:imonious spirit, natural at that junc-
ture. His detail of fats is curious; and even English
authors confirm it in some degree, by admitting both
that various frauds were practised in the tranfations of
the annual ship, and that the contraband trade from
Jamaica, and other Britilh colonies, was become

enormously
6

enormously great. But for the credit of the English na-
tion it may be observed, that those fraudulent opera-
tions are not to be confidered as deeds of the company,
but as the dishonourable arts of their facors and
agents. The company itself fufiained a considerable
loss by the Affiento trade. Many of its servants ac-
quired immense fortunes. Anderson Chronol. de-
duct. ii. 388.

NOTE LXVII. p. 387.
SEVERAL faeds with refpe°t to the institution,

the prgrefs, and the effets, of this company,

are curious, and but little known to English readers.
Though the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, ex-
tends four hundred miles along the coast, and is one
of the most fertile in America; it was so much ne-
gleced by the Spaniards, that during the twenty years
prior to the establishment of the company, only five
ships failed from Spain to that province; and during
sixteen years, from 1706 to 1722, not a single Ihip ar-
rived from the Caraccas in Spain. Noticias de Real
Compania de Caraccas, p. 28. During this period
Spain mufl have been supplied almost entirely with
the large quantity of cacao, which it consumes, by
foreigners. Before the erection of the company,
neither tobacco nor hides were imported from Ca-
raccas into Spain. Id. p. 17. But since the com-
mercial operations of the company began in the year
1731, the importation of cacao into Spain has in-
creased am.izingly. During thirty years subsequent to
1701, the number of Fanegas of cacao (each a hun-
dred and ten pounds) imported from Caraccas, was

I i 2 643,215.

643,215. During eighteen years subsequent to 173r,
the number of Fanegas imported was 869,247; and if
we suppose the importation to be continued in the fame
proportion during the remainder of thirty years, it will
amount to 1,448,746 Faregas, which is an increase of
805,531 Fanegas. Id. p. 148. During eight years
fublequent to 1756, there has been imported into
Spain by the Company, 88,482 arrobas (ea:h twenty-
iive pounds) of tobacco; and hides to the number of
177,354. Id. ibI. Since the publication of the No-
ticias de Compania, in 1765, itS trade seems to be on
the increase. During five years subsequent to 1769,
it his imported 179, 156 Fanegas of cacao in:o Spain,
n6,2c8 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and 221,432
pFfos in specie. Campomanes, ii. I62. The laPt ar-
ticle is a proof of the growing wealth of the colony.
It receives cash from Mexico in return for the cacao,
w::i) which it supplies that province, and this it re-
rr,ts to Spain, or lays out in purchasing European
goods. But, besides this, the most explicit evidence is
produced, that the quantity of cacao raised in the pro-
i ince is double to what it yielded in I731; the num-

er of i:s live-stock is more than treble, and its inha-
b::r.:s much augmented. The revenue of the biflop,
wlch arises wholly from tythes, has increased from
cizht to twenty thousand pesos. Notic. p. 69. In
ci:f.quence of the augmentation of the quantity of
creso in-ported into _pa::, its price has decreased
frcm cihty pcfos for the fanega to forty. Id. 6r.
Since the publication of the rft ed;ion, I have learn-
cd :hat Guyana, including all the cx:enfive provinces
:i:ua:ed on the banks of the Orinoco, the islands of

Trinidad

Trinidad and Margarita are added to the countries
with which the company of Caraccas had liberty of
trade by their former charters. Real Cedula, Nov.
19, i: 76. But I have likewise been informed that the
institution of this company has not been attended with
all the beneficial effects which I have ascribed to it.
In many of its operations the illiberal and oppreflive
spirit of monopoly is conspicuous. But in order to
explain this, it would be necessary to enter into mi-
nute details, which are not suited to the nature of
this work.

NOTE LXVIII. p.394.
T HI S first experiment made by Spain of opening a

free trade with any of her colonies, has produced

effclcts so remarkable, as to merit some farther illus-
tration. The towns to which this liberty has been
granted, are Cadiz and Seville, for the province of
Andalusia; Alicant and Carthagena, for Valencia and
IMurcia; Barcelona, for Catalonia and Arragon;
Santander, for Castile; Corugna, for Ga'icia; and
Gijon, for Asturias. Append. ii. a la educ. popu!. p. 41.
These are either the ports of chief trade in their re-
fpeRivc dilrrits, or those most conveniently situated
fi.r the exportation of their refpcaive productions.
The following facts give a view of the increase of trade
in the settlements to which the new regulations ex-
tend. Prior to the allowance of free trade, the duties
collected in the cufRom-houfe at the Havannah, were
computed to be 104,208 pesos annually. During the
five years preceding 1774, they rose at a medium to
3c8,coo pesos a year. In Yucatan, the duties have

I i 3 risen

risen from 8,cco to I5,ooo. In Hispaniola, from
2,500 to 5,60o. In Porto-Rico, from 1,200 to 7,oco.
The total value of goods imported from Cuba into
Spain, was reckoned, in 1774, to be 1,500,000 pesos,
Educ. Pupul. i. 450, &c.

NOTE LXIX. p. 402.
T H E two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Cam-

pamanes, Fijfaldel real cor.fie y Supremo (an office in

rank and power nearly similar to that of Attorney Ge-
neral in England), and Direaor of the Royal Academy
of History, the one intitled Difcurfo fobre el Fomento
de la Induftria Popular; the other, Difcurfo fobre la
Educacion Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the
former publiihed in 1774, and the latter in 1775, as-
so:d a striking proof of this. Almost every point of
importance with respect to interior police, taxation,
a,;r;-.i:re, manufadures, and trade, domeflic as well
as forYCn, is examined in the course of there works;
zr. tincr. are not many authors, eien in the nations
r. :t er. rrnt for commercial knowledge, who have
cirried on their inquiries with a more thorough know-
lJc': o: tl o e various fusi.' t-, and a more perfect free-
d-.n fr nm ulgrar and national prcjudices, or who
ha;e u:'.:: d mrr.re happily the calm researches of phi-
I n:.'pi' , with the ardent zeal of a public-fpiritcd
ci:,z.rl. These books are in high estimation among
tn!: pa::iaJ , and it is a decisive evidence of the pro-
grete of their own ideas, that thce are capable .of re-
l;fhlng an author whose fetiiiments are To liberal.

NOTE

NOTE LXX. p.407.

H E galeon employed in that trade, instead of
the fix hundred tons, to which it is limited by law,

Recop lib. xlv. 1. i5. is commonly from twelve hun-
dred to two thousand tons burden. The (hip from
Acapulco, taken by Lord Anson, instead of the 500,000
pesos pcrmit-rd by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos,
betides uncoi.ed silver equal in value to 43,611 pesos
more. Anson's Voyage, 384.

NOTE LXXI. p. 410.
T EH E price paid for the bull varies according to the

rank of different persons. Those in the lowest

order, who arc servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate,
or one fihilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and
those in public oflice, or who hold encomiendas, fix-
teen reals. Solorz. dejure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25.
According to Chilton, an English merchant who re-
fided long in the Spanish settlements, the bull of Cru-
zado bore an higher price in the year 1570, being
then fold for four reals at the lowest Hakluyt, iii.
46i. The price seems to have varied at different
periods. That exacted for the bulls issued in the last
Prc:lic;aionl, will appear from the ensuing table, which
will give tome idea of the proportional numbers of the
different classes of citizens in New Spain and Peru.

I i 4 There

There were issued for New Spain,
Bulls at rc pesos each - - - 4

at 2 pesos each - - 22,601
at I peso each - - 164,220
at 2 reals each - - 2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

at 16 pesos 4 . reals each 3
at 3 pesos, 3 reals each - 14,202
at I peso, 5 ½ reals - 78,822
at 4 reals 410,325
at 3 reals - - 668,60o

1,I71,953

NOTE LXXII. p. 411.
AS Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this

information, vw3 accomp:tant-eiieral in one of

the molt confiderabie departmen-s of the royal revenue,
and bv that means had acccfs to proper information,
his tcfiimr'-. with rfCpect to this point merits great
credit. No such accur3te detail of tic Spaniflh revenues
in an-. part of Ar-c:i., has h:rhtrto been published
in the En -!;f lan uaze, and the particulars of it may
appear cur:ous ard i:iicfting to fume of my readers.

FReo.: th- bull of Cruzada, publishcd every two
years, there arics an ~nnual revenuc in pesos i5s,ooo

From the duty cn fii7er 70o,oco

Carried forward 85o,cco

From
7

Brought forward 850,000

From the duty on gold - 60,000
From tax on cards 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Indians - - - x16,ooo

From tax bn fRamped paper - 41,000
From ditto on ice - - 15,522
From ditto on leather - - 2,500
From ditto on gunpowder - 71,550
From ditto on salt - - 32,000
From ditto on copper of Mechocan - ,00oo
From ditto on alum - - 6,500
From ditto on Juego de los gallos - 21,100
From the half of ecclesiastical annats 49,000
From royal ninth of bifhopricks, &c. 68,800
From the tribute of Indians - 65o,ooo
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods 721,875
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house 373,333
From the mint - 357,500

3,552,680

THIS fum amounts to 819,I611. Sterling; and if

we add to it the profit accruing from the sale of 5000
quintals of quicksilver, imported from the mines of
Almaden, in Spain, on the king's account, and what
accrues from the Averia, and some other taxes which
Villa Segnor does not estimate, the public revenue in
New Spain may well be reckoned above a million
pounds sterling money. Theat. Mex. vol. i. p. 38,
&c. According to Villa Segnor, the total produce of
the Mexican mines, amounts at a medium to eight
millions of pesos in silver annually, and to 5912

marks

marks of gold. lb. p. 44. Several branches of the
revenue have been explained in the course of the his-
rory; some, which there was no occasion of mention-
ing, require a particular illustration. The right to
the :,ji.cs in the New W5'orld, is vested in the crown of
Spain, by a bu'i of Alexander VI. Charles V. ap-
pointed them to be applied in the following manner.
One fourth is aliotted ta the bishop of the diocese,
another fourth to the dean and chapter, and other of-
ficers of the cathedral. The remaining half is divided
into nine cquai parts. Two of thele, under the deno-
mination of l;; dss \'ovefns r,-.'s, are paid to the crown,
and cor.ftitjte a branch of the royal revenue. The
other sei en parts are applied to the maintenance of the
parochial clerav, the building and support of churches,
and other pious ufjs. Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23,
&c. Avendno Tnefaur. Indic. vol. i. p. 184.

THE .':a.'al.* is a dury levied by an excise on the

s;i- of g)ods. In S-ain, it amounts to ten per cent.
In Ar.eric-, to fa'r par cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
:b vi. c. 8. Avenia;eo, vol. i. 186.

T::r ..'.'..1'.-': -:, -or custom paid in America on

2go-. ::::;::Ji an.i exported, m;y amount on an ave-
ri-e t. .':nl per cen-. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv.

L iv. .
i Avendno, vol. i. iS8.

T' -. A.-:s, or jtx p-iJ on account of convoys to

g'lr.'d ie thi:s 1- i.n : to and trom America, was first
i: :-.]: whrie Sir Fraric,. Dir.ie nlled the New World
w;:n terror by h,: exputtion to the South Sea. It

amounts

amounts to two per cent. on the value of goods.
Avendano, vol. i. p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix.
Ley. 43, 44.

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the Isveral branches of revenue in Peru, later than
the year 1614. From a curious manuscript, contain-
ing a Pf:.t of that vice-royalty in all its departments,
picfcnted to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran.
Lo;lcz Caravantes, accomptant-general in the tribunal
of linm., it appears, that the public revenue, as nearly
as I can compute the value of the money in which
Caravantes states his accounts, that the revenue col-
lcEtcd, amounted in ducats, at 4s. I Id,, to 2,372,768

Expences of government - 1,242,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in sterling money - L. 583,303
Expcnces of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this

computation, such as the duty on itamped paper,
lei:ther, ccclcfiaftical annats, &c. so that the revenue
of Peru may be well supposed equal to that of
1 exico.

IN

IN computing the expence of government in New

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a standard. There
the annual eftablifiment for defraying the charge of
adminiflration, exceeds one half of the revenue col-
leacd, and there is no reason for supposing it to be less
in New Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount

of the public revenue of Spain from America and the
Philippines, which, as the reader will perceive from
the two laif articks, is more recent than any of the
furmer.

A!a2va!as (Excite) and Aduanas (Cuf-

torms), &c. in pesos fuertes - 2,500,000

D-t:es on gold and silver - 3,00,000
Bull of Cruzada - 1,000,000
Tribute of the Indians 2,CCO,CCO
By sale of quicksilver 300,0ec
Prar c.ported on the king's account,

an.d fold in the royal warehouses oc30,co
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other small

du:ies - ,coo,coo

Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one

rcai de ia Piata for each rrark 300,0oo

From the trade of Acapulco, and the

coasting trade from province to province 500,0oo

A.iento of ne:roes - - 200,0oo
From the trade of .iat:ik, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized by
the Jesuits - - - 5c,oo

Carry forward 1,6oo,ooo

From

Brought forward I1,600oo000
From other revenues formerly belong-

ing to that order - - 400,000

Total I2,ooo,ooo

Total in sterling money £. 2,700,000
DeduEt half, as the expence of ad-

minifiration, and there remains net
free revenue - £. 1,350,000

NOTE LXXIII. p. 42.
AN author, long conversant in commercial fpecula-

tion, has computed that from the mines of New

Spain alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth,
the fum of two millions of our money. Harris Colle:.
of Voy. ii. p. 164. According to this calculation,
the total produce of the mines must be ten millions
tferling; a fum so exorbitant, and so little correspond-
ing with all accounts of the annual importation from
America, that the information on which it is founded
must evidently be erroneous. According to Campo-
manes, the total produc of the American mines may be
computed at thirty millions of pesos, which, at four
flillings and fix pence a peso, amounts to 7,425,000 1.
sterling, the king's fifth of which (if that were re-
gularly paid) would be ,485,000ool. But from this
fum the expence of administration is to be deducted,
which is very considerable, as appears from the pre-
ceding note. Educ. Popular, vol. ii. p. 131. note.

NOTE

NOTE LXXIV. p. 412.
ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign

goods exported from SPdin to America pay duties

of various kinds, amounting in all to more than 25
per cent. As most of the goods with which Spain
supplies her colonies are foreign; such a tax upon a
trade so extensive muff yield a considerable revenue.
Retablif. de Manus. & du Commerce d'Efp. p. 150.
He computes the value of goods exported annually
from Spain to America, to be about two millions and
a half sterling, p. 97.

NOTE LXXV. p. 415.
TrHE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by

a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in

the Manila trade as well as in that to Spain, gained
annually a million of ducats. In one year he remitted
a million of ducats to Spain, in order to purchase from
the Conde Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation
of his government, p. 61. He was successful in his
suit, and continued in office from 1624 to 1635, double
the usual time.

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xii, xiii.

SHORT ACCOUNT

O F
Wbhat is contained in the LETTER sent

to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface,
p. xii, xlii.
T HIS letter is dated July 6th, 15I9.

Cortes in his second dispatch takes notice
that it was sent off on the i6th of July.

THE great object of the persons who wrote

this letter, is to justify their own conduc in
eltablifling a colony independent on the jurif-
dicaion of Velasquez. With this view they
endeavoured to detra& from his merit, in
fitting out the two former armaments under
Cordova and Grijalva, representing these as
equipped by the adventurers who engaged in
the expedition, not by the governor. They
labour likewise to depreciate the services of
Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exalt the
merit of their own exploits.

THEY

THEY contend, that the sole object of Velaf-

quez was to trade or barter with the nativesj
not to attempt the conquest of New Spain, or
the establishment of a colony there. This is
frequently mentioned by B. Diaz del Castillo,
c. 19. 41, 42, &c. But if Velasquez had not
conquest and settlement in view, there seems
to have been no reason for equipping such a
considerable armament.

THEY assert, that Cortes defrayed the greatest

part of the expence of fitting out the arma-
ment. But this does not agree with the ac-
count of his Render fortune given by Gomara,
Cron. c. . and B. Diaz, c. o2. or what I have
mentioned Note lxxi. vol. ii.

THEY take notice, that though considerable

numbers were wounded in their different en-
counters with the people of Tabasco, not one
of them died, and all recovered in a short
time. This seems to confirm what I have ob-
served vol. ii. p. 302, concerning the imperfec-
tion of the offeniive weapons of the Ame-
ricans.

THEY give some account of the manners and

institutions of the Mexicans. It is very short,
and as they had resided but a short time in the

country,

country, and had but little intercourse with
the natives, it is both defective and inaccurate.
They describe minutely, and with great horror,
the human sacrifices offered by the Mexicans
to their deities, and affirm that some of their
number were eye-witnesses of those barbarous
rites.

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue and

description of the presents sent to the em-
peror. That published by Gomara, Cron.
c. 29. seems to have been copied from it, and
Pet. Martyr describes many of the articles in
his treatise De Infulis nuper inventis, p. 354,
&c,
VoL. III. K k

# INDEX.

IN D E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Vo-

lume, and the Figures to the Page.

A

B BYSS1NI/, an embalfy sent to that country
by John 11. King of Portugal, i. 80.
Acapu!ca, the nature of the trade carried on from

thence to Manila, iii. 406. Amount of the trea-
sure on hoard the ship taken by Lord Anson, 487.
Arofa, his method of accounting for the different de-

grees of heat, in the old and new continents, ii.
459.
Adair, his account of the revengeful temper of the

native Americans, ii. 477.
jldanfn, his justification of Hanno's account of the

African seas, i. 353.
.frica, the western coast of, first explored by order of

Tchn I. King of Portugal, i. 58. Is discovered
from Cape Non, to Bojador, 60 Cape Bojador
doubled, 66. The countries southward of the
River Senegal dircovered, 74. Cape of Goed Hope
seen by Bartholomew Diaz, 79. Causes of the ex-
treme heat of the climate there, ii. i . Ignorance
of the ancient astronomers concerning, i. 354.
Ag;riullur,-, the srate of, among the native Americans,

11. ii7. Two principal causes of the defcas of,

12!.
.$ua.io is sent to Hl(fpniola, as a commiffloner to in-

ipct the conduct of Columbus, i. 187.
.4ul;.r, Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity

among the Indians at Cozumel, by Fernando Cor-
tes, ii. 260.

K k 2 AlbztiurqI'e,

Albuqutrque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the

Indians of Hispaniola, i. 304.
A..-cva.a, in the Spanish cultoms, the term explained,

iii. 490.
Alexander the Great, his political charaAer, i. 20. His

motive in founding the city of Alexandria, 21. His
discoveries in India, 22, 23.
.Aixand.r VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Isabella

of Caflile, the right of all their western discoveries,
i 12. Sends miflionaries with Columbus on his
second voyage, r63.
A:lms-rc, Diego de, his birth and character, iii. 3.

Associates with Pizarro and de Luque, in a voyage
of discovery, 5. His unsuccessful attempts, 6. Is
neglected by Pizarro in his Spanish negociation, I8.
Is reconciled to him, 20. Brings reinforcements
to Pizarro at Peru, 46. Beginning of dissensions
between him and Pizarro, 67. Invades Chili, 7r.
Is created governor of Chili, and marches to Cuzco,
77, 78. Seizes Cuzco, out of the hands of Pizarro,
80. Defeats Alvarado, and takes him prisoner, 8r.
Is deceived by the artful negociations of Francis
Pizarro, 83. Is defeated by the Pizarros, 87. Is
taken puifoner, 89. Is tried and condemned, 91.
Is put to death, 92.
Aimagro the son, affords refuge to his father's follow-

ers at Lima, iii. c4. His character, ibid. Heads
a conspiracy against Francis Pizarro, Io5. Pizarro
aiaffinated, ic6. Is acknowledged as his successor,
l-8. His precarious situation, iog. Is defeated
by Vaca de Castro, x12. Is betrayed and executed,
113. Ak.f!ajrifafj, in the Spanifl American customs, the

amcunt of, iii. 490.
A.varad:, Alonzo, is sent from Lima, by Francis Pi-

zarro, with a body of Spaniards to reiieve his bro-
thers at Cuzco, iii. So. Is taken prisoner by Al-
magro, 8I. His escape, 84.
A.4zartad Pedro de, is left by Cortes to command at

Mexico,

Mexico, while he marched against Narvaez, ii. 357.
He is besieged by the Mexicans, 366. His impru-
dent condut, 367. His expedition to Quito in
Peru, iii. 63.
Amazons, a community of, said to exist in South Ame-

rica, by Francis Orellana, iii. o11.
America, the continent of, discovered by Christopher

Columbus, i. 198. How it obtained this name,
214. Ferdinand of Castile nominates two govern-
ments in, 272. The propositions offered to the na-
tives, 273. 111 reception of Ojeda and Nicueffa
among them, 274. The South Sea discovered by
Balboa, 290. Rio de Plata discovered, 302. The
natives of, injuriously treated by the Spaniards, 33r.
The vast extent of, ii. 2. The grand objeAs it
presented to view, 3. The circumstances of, fa-
vourable for commerce and civilization, 5. The
climates of, 7, 8. Various causes of the peculiarity
of its climates, 1o. Its rude and uncultivated
ltate when first discovered, 15. Its animals, 18.
Its infeas and reptiles, 20. Birds, 22. General
account of its foil, 23. Inquiry into the firfR po-
pulation of, 25. Could not be peopled by civil-
ized nations, 33. The northern extremity of,
contiguous to Asia, 38. Probably peopled by
Asiatics, 47. Condition and character of the na-
tive inhabitants inquired into, 49. Were more
rude than the natives of any other known parts of
the earth, 51. The Peruvians and Mexicans ex-
cepted, 52. The first discoverers incapable of a
judicious speculative examination, 54. The vari-
ous f)ftems of philosophers refpecling the natives,
56. Method observed in the present review of their
bodily constitution and circumstances, 59. The
venereal disease derived from this part of the world,
87. Why so thinly inhabited, 129. The coun-
try depopulated by continual wars, 172. Cause of
the extreme coldness toward the southern extremity
of, 465. The natural uncultivated fiate of the

K k 3 country

country described, 467. Bones of large extinct
species of animals discovered under g:ound near the
banks of the Ohio, 469. Why European animals
degenera'e there, 470. Su;pofed to have undergone
a convulfie fep2ratlo. from Asia, 475. Causes of
the depopulation of, traced, iii. 288. This depo-
pulation not the result of any intentional system of
poiicv, 275. Nor the result of religion, 278.
Number of Indian natives fill remaining in Mexi-
co and Peru, 280. All the Spanish dominions
there, fujieclcJ to two viceroys, 284. Its third
viceroya:ty lately ellablifhed, 285. See Mexicc,
Peru, C rtes, Pizarro, &Sc.

A,-irecairs, native, in Spanish America, their bodily

conflitution and complexion, ii. 60. Their firength
and abilities, 62. Their insensibility with regard
to their women, 64. No deformities in their
frame, 71. This circumitance accounted for, 72.
Uniformiry of their colour, 74. A peculiar race
of, described, 77. The Efquimaux, 80. Pata-
conians, 81. The e\iftence of Patagonian giants
vet remaining to be decided, 83. Their diseases,
84. The venereal direafe, peculiarly theirs, 86.
The powers and qu2li:ies of their minds, 88. Are
only solicitous to luppiy immediate wants, 90. The
art of compu:ation, scarcely known to them, 9r.
Have no abstract ideas, 93. The North Americans
much more intelligent than those of the South, 95.
Their averfiin to la'i,ur, 97. Their social slate,

-:. Domes.ic union, ioi. The women, I03.
'I heir women not pro;ific, ic6. Their parental
affecToon 2nd fia.l du:), c8S. Their modes of
f:bfidencc, I1. F:fhing. 112. Hunting, 114.
Agriculture, 1;,. The various objecs Ls their
cu ture, i. ii Two principal causes of the defects
of their 2:iCLlture, 122. Their want of tame
animals, :iLd. Their want of ufcful metals, i25.
Their poltical inlitutions, 128. Were divided
into inall independcr; communities, ibid. Unac-

quainted

quainted with the idea of property, r30. Their
high sense of equality and independence, 12.
'Their ideas of subordination imperfea, 133 To
what tribes these descriptions apply, 136. Some
exceptions, 138. Florida, 139. The Natchez,
ibid. The islands, r41. In Bogota, ibid. In-
quiry into the causes of these irregularities, 143.
Their art of war, 147. Their motives to hostility,
148. Causes of their ferocity, 149. Perpetuity of
their animofities, I52. Their modes of conduAcing
war, 153. Are not destitute of courage and forti-
tude, 156. Incapable of military discipline, I58.
Their treatment of prisoners, 159. Their forti-
tude under torture, I61. Never eat human flesh
but to gratify revenge, 165. How the South Ame-
ricans treated their prisoners, 166. Their military
education, 168. Strange method of chufing a cap-
tain, among the Indians on the banks of the Ori-
noco, ibid. Their numbers wafted by continual
wars, 172. Their tribes now recruit their numbers
by adopting prisoners, 173. Are never formidable
in war, to more polished nations, 175. Their
arts, dress, and ornaments, 176. Their habita-
tions, 180. Their arms, 184. Their domestic
utensils, 185. Conftrution of their canoes, 186.
The liftleflnefs with which they apply to labour,
187. Their religion, igo. Some tribes altogether
destitute of any, 193. Remarkable diversity in their
religious notions, 198. Their ideas of the immor-
tality of the foul, 202. Their modes of burial,
203. Why their physicians pretend to he conjurors,
206. Their love of dincing, 2Io. Their immo-
derate palTion for gaming, 214. Are extremely
addicled to drunkenncrf, 2:6. Put their aged and
incurable to death, 221. General estimate of their
character, 222. Their intellectual powers, 223.-
Their political talents, 274. Powers cf afic'tion,
227. H.irdnefs of heart, 228. Their iniflnfibility,
22q. Taciturnity, 273. Their cunning, 232.

K k 4 Their

Their virtues, 234. Their foirit of independence,
ibid. Fortitude, 235. Attachment to thdr com-
munity, 236. Their fatisfaaion with their own
condition, 237. General caution with reiper to
this inquiry, 241. Two diftinguifiabie clafles of,
243. Exceptions as to their charaaer, 245.
Their characeriflic features described, 476. In-
stances of their persevering speed, 477. An an-
tipathy iidufirioufly encouraged between them and
the negroes in America, by the Spaniards, iii. 321.
Their present condition, 323. How taxed, 324.
Stated fernices demanded from them, 325. Mode
of exaiain;: there services, 326. How governed,
327. Protector of the Indians, his funclion, 328.
Reasons why so small a progrels is made in their
conversion, 343.
Arniriga Vespucci, publishes the firfl written account

of th.e New World; and hence gave name to America,
i. 213. His claim as a difcovercr examined, 330.
Aracana, a female cazique of Hlipaniola, her base

and cruel u!ae cv the Spaniards, i. 255.
Andes, fiupendous heizht and extent of that range of

mountains, ii. 4. Their height compared with
other mountains, 457. Gonzalo Pizarro's re-
markable expedition over, iii. 97.
Aiiralh, large, very few found in America at its first

discovery, ii. 18.
Anticts, cauie of the imperfeion of the art of navi-

gation among thzm, i. o. Tncir geographical
kn.wieJde e:trcmely c nfiinel, 352, 353, 354,
355, 356, 357.
,fraiaor:s pul::.";y attached to the fludy of geogra-

phy, i. 30.
Ar-:nr:'s, the expe.'ition of, why so famous among

the Cireik, i. I6, 17.
Ari/,rr:i:., cr comnpltation, the art of, hardly known

to the n.::ve Arcricans. i. 9.

ZfLCr,'li, father, i:i: cxtraor:::asr mission to the prince
ot the Tart,.s, i. -.

: !;.

A4siatic discoveries made by the Ruffians, ii. 38.
lffinto trade, the nature of, explained, iii. 378. The

frauds in, and how put an end to, 379, 380.
Atahualpa, is left by his father Huafcar his fucccfrir in

the kingdom of Quito, iii. 30. Defeats his brother
Hualcar, and usurps the empire of Peru, 31. Sends
presents to Pizarro, 34. Visits Pizarro, 39. Is
perfidiously seized by him, 43. Agrees with Pizarro
on a ransom, 45. Is refused his liberty, 50. His
behaviour during his confinement, 54. A form of
trial I.eftowed on him, 55. Is put to death, 57.
Comparison of authorities relating to his tranfac-
tionm with, and treatment by, Pizarro, 425.
Audience of New Spain, board of, eftabliihed by the

Emperor Charles V. ii. 452. 'Courts of, their
jurifdicaion, iii. 286.
Averia, a Spanish tax for convoy to and from Ame-

rica, when first imposed, iii. 490o. Its rate, 49r.

Azores, those ifiands discovered by the Portuguese,
i. 72.

B.
Ea'boa, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a colony at Santa

Maria, in the gulph of Darien, i. 276. Receives
intelligence of the rich country of Peru, 284. His
character, 287. Marches across the isthmus, 288.
I)ifcovers the Southern Ocean, 290. Returns,
291. Is superseded in his command hy mlie ap-
pointinent of Pedrarias Davila, 294. Is fined by
Pedrarias for former transactions, 295. Is ap-
pointed lieutenant-governor of the countries on the
South Sea, and marries Pedrarias's daughter, 298.
Is arri ted and put to death by Pedrarias, 300.

Bark, J Filtits, a produ&ion peculiar to Peru, iii. 356.
Earrre, his defcrip:ion of the conltriiClion of Indian

houtlcs, i, 506.
:chuim:, M\artin, the honour of having discovered

America falsely ascribed to him by f me German

authors,

2auth'rs, i. 371. Account of him and his family9
372.
B./hirz anj Tf hirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought

to haie di'covered the rno:t.)-weit extemit, of
A.i et:ca from the eafiward, ii. 41. Uncertainty
,if ihi.r a counts, 474.
E,:'r-..-zr. governor of St. M.chael, reduces the

ki. d. m

r Q.! o, iii. 62. Is deprived of his com-

ma.nd orv Pizai:c, s.7
Ft ;l" tn r.e J. w ot TuJela, his extraordinary travels,

i 45
B,'r.aidr., inilmnce of the bravery of the Catibbees

r eiiii.ii'd o. him, ii. 5 3.
B ti.-o jt, John de, a No;man baron, conquers and

p liclte the Cana'v Iflnds, i z,
i.- s, n a:cuount [ t[ o e nurai to America, ii. 22.

i'nt : ht of, of!en flretch to an immense difiance
S-o ,: ,a.t. i. 364.

L- -t: I:l - nerica, some acccunt of the inhabitants

o:. i. 141. Causes of their ta;mn- ubmiilion to the
Sa;-.. .:

- 145.

' Thcir rcli;.ous doCtrines and

ii:'.-, 2CI.

r :':, p, cape, ;he n :il c:y'.er of, i. 60. Is

dou-!c :'v the Por:'uuiie d:fcoveries, 66.
I;:'. i.i.; 2ccoun:t o. thc A.in;er;c.rn war-fong, ii. 500.

..,. i;.'..i. I'ranci dc. is tent to Hiifplaniola to inquire
i:lit hi" tiuci oi LC-':r.u.,

t . 220. Sends Co-

!u'- ' ;c nme iio.-, 222. Is degraded, 225.
2 n.
B.E-. :;.,, h:; dcrince of the Periplus of Hanno,

35R2.

.'' -;:.-. M?,. ci. chracicr of the native Peruvians,
'. ':.. ;. . c 'a. oi, dif:ovcre: by Alvarez Cabral,

i. :_i". i; . .- ..;; the 'l:n i:of, ii. 463.
i.. : .i, -.. ':.~.',I A'.-.';...c, io:ne account of

th.i: pro ;irtc , i:i. 2-5.

BuEls,

Luils, papal, of no force in Spanish America, before

examined and approved by the royal council of the
Indies, iii. 333. See Cruzado.
Buial! of the dead, American mode of, ii. 203.

C
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander, difcovera

the coalt of Brasil, i. 216.
Catoa, the best in quality, produced in the Spanifi

American colonies, iii. 356. The preparation of
chocolate from, derived from the Mexicans, 384.
Cadiz, the galeons and flota, removed thither from

Seville, iii. 368.
Cali/ornia, the peninsula of, discovered by Fernando

Curtes, ii. 453. The true frate of this country
long unknown, iii. 265. Vv hy depreciated by the
Jesuits, ibid. Favourable account of, given by
Don Joseph Galvez, 266.

Ca'ifrnians, the charasler of, by P. Venegas, ii. 486.
Cai:peachrb, discovered by Coraova, who is repulsed

by the natives, i. 340.
Camemarnes, Don Pedro Rodriguez, character of his

political and commercial writings, iii. 483. His
account of the produce of the Spanish American
mines, 484.
Canarv ilands erecaed into a kingdom by pope Cle-

ment VI. i. 54. Are conquered by John de Bc-
thencourt, ibid.
Canw:bals, no people ever found to eat human flrfli for

lubliltence, though often for revenge, ii. ib5. 5or.
Canoss, American, the conitruction of, delcribed,

ii. S86.
Caraccus, eflablifhment of the company trading to

that coast, iii. 385. Growth of the trade, 479.
Caribbee flands, discovered by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 164.
Caribbcs, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 245. Their

character by M. de Chanvalon, 485. Prohable

cc:rjcture

conjecure as to the difin&ion in characer between
them and the natives of the larger ifands, 514.
Carini, his extraordinary mission to the prince of the

Tartars, i. 46.
Carths:ena, the harbour of, the fafelf and best fortified

cf any in all the Spanish American dominions,
iii. 279.
Cia-IbrinriaS, slate of commerce and navigation

am.on;, i. xI. The famous voyages of Hanno
ana Hi.nilco, 13.
Car-jsi!, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Cafro's

vicqirv over young Al nagro, iii. 1I3. Encourages
Go.nzalo Pizarro to aliumre the governmenr of Peru,
173 Ad uii.es Pizarro to aliume the sovereignty of
the country, 141. Is leized by Gafca and executed,
Coa/lis, Bernal Di:z ,'.1, character of his Hifforia

Verdadero de ia Lonquifta de la Nueva Efp.gna,
i7. 5i7.

Ctn:er.:, L)ie2o, revokrs Frorn Gonzalo Pizarro to the

viceroy o- .'ru, ii. 137. Is defeated by Carvajal,
and sec.e:e, h.milf mn a cave, 140. Sallies out
and leizes C zco, 155. Is reduced by Pizarro,
i56. Is employed by Gafca to make dilcoveries in
thr. re ions aoout the river Plata, 16S.
C'-cn-.a..:;:. M. de, his ch.ragter of the native Carib-

bees, ii. S45.
C:?.f.;..s, in the Spanish American colonies, who

t-.;ii c:i 'ngu:fhed. iii. IrS.
C,.'ti III. kin; or- Spain, establishes packet-boats

b-:;ween Sa.n and the colonies, iii. 388. Allows
free trade to the windward ifiands, 390. Grants
'rh: co:' n;i a ro. tradihe wich each other, 393.
CGr.... V. emrtror, fends Roderigo de Figueroa to

Hi - n!:ki;,. as chief jude, to re2ulate the treat-
rrent of the Indians, i. 319. Causes this subjec
to he cebha:;i ,tforh him, 327. Equips a squadron
sr t-e io: c :- on of Ferdinand Mlagellan, ii. 431.
R..i :ns ;n: J.:m on the iMoluccas to the Portu-

guefe,

guefe, 437. Appoints Cortes governor of New
Spain, 441. Rewards him on coming home, 45r.
EtRabliihes a board called the Audience of New
Spain, 452. His consultations on American affairs,
iii. 114. Efiablifies new regulations, 12r.
Chili, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 7 i. How subjected

by the Spaniards, 269. Excellence of its climate
and foil, 270. Cause of its being neglected, 271.
Profpea of its improvement, 273.
Chigui;os, political state of that people, from Fernandez,

ii. 497.
Chocolate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans,

iii. 384.
C);lula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there,. with

some account of the town, ii. 312. A conlpiracy
against Cortes discovered, and the inhabitants de-
stroyed, 314,

Cicero, inflance of his ignorance in geography, i. 358.
Cinalca, political fiate of the people there, ii. 497.

Their mode of living, 505. Are deflitute of all
religion, 5g9. Extraordinary large grain of gold
found there, iii. 456.
Cinguiiha, in the province of Sonora, late discoveries

of rich mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 264.
Probable effects of these difco.eries, ibid.
Clement VI. pope, ereas the Canary islands into a

kingdom, i. 54.
C'inmatfs, influenced by a variety of causes, ii. 8.

Their operation on mankind, 24r. Inquiry into
the cause of the different degrees of heat in, 459.
Cochineal, an important producion, almost peculidr to

New Spain, iii. 356.
C/ld, extraordinary predominance of, in the climates

of America, ii. 8. Causes of this peculiarity, o0.
Ccs,:ies, Spanifi American, view of the pnlicv and

trade of, iii. 287. Depopulation the firlt ce.t": of
them, 288. Causes of this depopulation, ibil. The
small-pox very fatal to, 275. General idea of the
Spanifl policy in, 281. Early interposition of the

7 regal

rezal authority in, 282. An exclusive trade the
first object in, 308. Compared with those of an-
cien: Greece and Rome, 309. T'he great restric-
tions thev are subject t., 311. Slow prozrefs of
their pcpuiaticn from Europ-, 312. Are difcou-
raged by the ilate of property there; 313. And
by the nature of their ecclesiastical policy, 315.
The various classes of people in, 316. Ecclefi-
aftica; conflltuti'n of, 33i. Form and endowments
of the church there, 333. Pernicious efEccs of
monafic inltitutiors tnere, 334. Charactr of the
ecclefiaft:cs there, 336. Produciors of, 347.
The mires, 248. Tn fe of Potofi and Sacotecas,
349. The !pirit a it'. which they are w-rked, 35t.
Fatal effe3qs of t is ardour, 353. Other com-
modities that compose the commerce of, 356.
Amazing increase of horned cattle there, 357.
Ad.antages 'ahich Spain formerly deiived from
them, 358. \, h' the fame advantages are not still
rece:rcc, 360. Guarda coilas employe.! to check
the contraband trade in, 380. The use of regifler
flips introduced, 3S . And galeons laid aside,
-382. Company of the Caraccas instituted, 38;.
Eftabiifhment of regular pjcket-boats to, 388.
Free trade permitted between them, 393. New
regulations in the government of, 395. Reforma-
tion of the courts of juflice, 396. New diftribu-
tion us governments, ii:d. A fourth siceroyalty
e:sb'ilhed, 397. A.tempts to re'orm domcftic
policy, 399. Their trade with the Philippine
iland, -05. R: e.nue derived from, by Spain,
409. E pence of admi:'iriation there, 413. State
of rop'atior in, 462. The number cfmcniaceries
there, 472. S-e Alfi.:, Peru, &c.
Cdlr.bu , i3-rtholomTvw, is sint by his brother

Chr;ilophtr !o nezociate with Henry VII. king of
En-lanr , i. ico. The misfrrt,.nes of his voyage,
c5 Fo!ows his brother to Hifpanicl.l, 176. Is
v. it:d rtith the admin;fraticn of affairs there Dy

2 his

his brother on his return to Spain, 188. Founds
the town of St. Domingo, 200.
Coium'us, Christopher, birth and education of, i. 85.

His e.rly vuyages, 86. Marries and fettles at
Lisbon, 88. His geographical reflections, 91.
Conccives the idea of making difcoveiies to the
wela tard, 93. Offers his services to the Genoese
senate, 97. Cause of his overtures being rejected
in lPortugal, 99. Applies to the courts of Castile
and Em,. land. too. His pr 'pofal, how treated
by the Spanish geographers, 102. Is patronised by
Juan Perez, ic6. H:s proposals again rejected,
So8. Is invited by Isabella, and engaged in the
Spanifih ervice, 113. Preparations si r his voyage,
115. The amount of his equipment, 116. Sails
from Spain, 118. His vigilant attention to all cir-
cumftances during his voyage, 121. Apprehen-
sinns of his crew, 122. His address in quieting
their cabals, 126. Indications of their approach-
ing land, 128. An island discovered, 129. He
lands, 131. His interview with the natives, 132.
Names the island San Salvadore, I34. Prosecutes
his discoveries southward, 135. Discovers, and
lands on, the island of Cuba, 136. Discovers
Hilpaniola, 138. Suffers shipwreck, but is saved
by the Indians, 139. Builds a fort, 146. Re-
turns to Europe, 15o. His expedient to preserve
the memory of his discoveries during a form, 152.
Arrives at the Azores, 153. Arrives at Lisbon,
154. His reception in Spain, 155. His audience
with Ferdinand and Irabella, 157. His equipment
for a second voyage, 16o. Discovers the Caribbce
islands, i64. Finds his colony on Hispaniola de,
stroyed, b16, 166. Builds a city, which he calls
Ifahella, 1b8. Visits the interior parts of the
country, 17o. His men discontented and factious,
172, 173. Discovers the island of Jamaica, 175.
Meets his brother Bartholomew at Itabella, 176.
Th- natives ill used by his men, and begin to be

alarmed,

alarmed, 177, 178. He defeats the Indians, 182.
Exacs tribute from them, 183. Returns to Spain
to juftfy his conduc, 188. Is furnished with a
more regular plan for colonization, 19i. His
third voyage, i95. Discovers the island of Trini-
dad, 197. Discovers the continent of America,
198. State of Hispaniola on his arrival, 200, Com-
poses the mutiny of Roldan and his adbeernts, 203.
Is difireffed by the factious behaviourof his men, 27.
Complaints carried to Spain against him, 218, 219.
Is sent home in irons, 222. Clears his conduct,
but is nat restored to his authority, 225. His soli-
citations negleced, 231. Forms new schemes of
di;0coverv, 232. Engages in a fourth voyage, 234.
His treatment at Hispaniola, 235. Searches after a
paiEcOe to the Indian ocean, 237. Is shipwrecked
on the coast of Jamaica, 239. His artifice to secure
the friendship of the Indians, 243. Is delivered,
and arrives at Hispaniola, 247. Returns to Spain,
248. His death, 250. His right to the original
cicovery of America defended, 369.
Cciu'mnus, Don Diegn, sues out his claims to his fa-

ther's privileges, i. 267. Marries and goes over to
Hispaniola, 268. Establishes a pearl fishery at Cu-
bagua, 270. Projeas the conquest of Cuba, 279.
His measures thwarted by Ferdinand, 303. Returns
to Spain, 304.
C:m'rn',r, the ara from which its commencement is

to ce ited, i. 3. Motives to an intercourse among
dcifiti: nations, 5. Still flourifled in the eastern
empire after the subversion of the western, 37. Re-
vival of, in Europe, 4^.

Cr.>l/s, mariner's, navigation extended more by the

in intion of, than by all the efforts of preceding
ages, i. 5r. By whom invented, 62.
C.n.cmin, .MI. his account of the country at the foot

of the Andes, in South America, ii. 467. His re-
rrarks on the characacr of the native Americans,

Cangc,

Cong, the kingdom of, discovered by the Portuguese,

i. 75.
CoiSarn::,lopt, the consequence of removing the feat

of the Roman empire to, i. 35. Continued a com-
mercial city after the extinacion of the western em-
pire, 37. Became the chief mart of Italy, 40.
Csrdova, Francisco Hernandez, discovers Yucatan,

i. 339. Is repulsed at Campeachy, and returns to
Cuba, 34t.
CSrita, Alonzo, his observations on the contraband

trade of the Spanifi colonies, iii. 403. Characer
of his American memoirs, 435.
Csrtes, Fernando, his birth, education, and charaler,

ii. 249. Is by Velasquez appointed commander of
the armament fitted out by him againlf New Spain,
251. Velasquez becomes jealous of him, 254.
Velasquez fends orders to deprive him of his com-
mission, and lay him under an arrest, 255. Is
protected by his troops, 257. The amount of his
forces, 258. Reduces the Indians at Tahafco, 260.
Arrives at St.Juan de Ulua, 261. His interview with
two Mexican commanders, 264. Sends presents
to Montezuma, 267. Receives others in return,
268. His schemes, 275. Establishes a form of
civil government, 280. Resigns his commiflion
under Velasquez, and assumes the command in the
king's name, 283. His friendship courted by the
Zempoallans, 285. Builds a fort, 288. Concludes
a formal alliance with (everal caziques, ibid. Dif-
covers a conspiracy among his men, and destroys
his ships, 292, 293. Advances into the country,
296. Is oppoled by the Tlafcalans, 298. Con-
cludes a peace with them, 306. His rash zeal, 3c9.
Proceeds to Cholula, 312. Discovers a conspiracy
against him here, and destroys the inhabitants, 314.
Approaches infightof thecapital cityof Mexico. 316.
His first interview with Montezuma, 318. His anxiety
at his situation in the city of Mexico, 326. Seizes
Montezuma, 331. Ordeis him to be fettered, 334.
VOL. 11t. L 1 ReIon

Reafonsofhis conduct, 335. Prevails on Montezuma
to own hi!mftlf a vassal to the Spanish crown, 340.
Amount and division of his treasure, 342. Enrages the
.lexicans by his imprudent zeal, 346. An arma-
mentr ent by Velasquez to supersede him, 35I. His
Jciebcr;tions on this event, 354. Advances to meet
Nariaez, 359. Defeats Narvaez, and takes him
prisoner, 36A.. Gains over tie Spaniff soldiers to
his interelt, ibid. Returns to Mexico, 368. His
imprper c..nduac on his arriva', 369. Is resolutely
attacked by the Mexicans, 30o. Attacks them in
turn wvithujt success, 3-2. L;c-th of Montezuma,
3-5. H.s extraordinary efccpe from death, 376.
Abanions the city of IMexico, 3-. Is attacked by
the Mexicans, 379. His g reat iloiss in the encoun-
ter, 380. Diiculties of h s retreat, 382. Battle
of Cttunba, 385. Defeats the Mexicans, 386.
Mutinous spirit of his truop:, 30o. Reduces the
Tepacans, 392. Is f:£en;tberd by several rein-
f.irci.ent-, 3,5. Returns .o :icxico, 396. Etla-
bli:l.s his head-quar:ers -: T'czeuco, 399. Reduces
Oi coniitis t.e iuruurdiir r countr.y, 4Co. Ca-
b:!. a.mcnr hi, iroi',, 4:2. His prudence in sip-
p.e r..g ;hem, 4c5. Bui;Js and launches a fleet
cf ,r;;a:r;.e on me lake, ,c3. Beieges Mexico,
_!. Mla..es a gran; a:i..ult to take the city by
s1oar.., but i repu' :, 415. E'adJs the AMexican
FrC;.ihec 49. laS cs (jua-troz'n prisoner, 423.
G;1..S DofTelllon of the civt, 424. And of the whole
en.-pr, 428. De:';its ano:hrr attemptto supersede
hi!m in hs commani, 439. Is appointed governor
o' New Spain. 441. His f<hemiies and arrange-
m-::;s, b:a. C:-. i t.catiner.t of the natives, 443.
H:i cnc'dui t :.i;-;!d to inquiry, 44'S. Returns to
'uail to IL-;;,y .hl.ief, 449. Is rewarded by the
cr.'.'-e:r C:n;r;- \. 451. Goes back to Mlexico

,;:n limited p ,wetr, :52. Dif-overs California,
453. Returns to Spain, and dies, 454. Inquiry
1,:J ihe nature of hi icters to the emperor Charles

V. 515,

V. 5 [ . Authors who wrote of his conquaR of
New Spain, 516.

C'uncil of the Indies, its power, iii. 306.
Creols, in the Spanish American colonies, charaaer

of, iii. 318.
Crol/an, colonel George, his account of the discovery

of the bones of large extinc species of animals in
North America, ii. 4691
Crujad s to the Holy Land, the great political advan-

tages derived from, by the European nations,
i. 42, 43.

Cruzado, bulls of, published regularly every two years

in the Spanifl colonies, iii. 410. Prices of, and
amount of the sale at the last publication, 487.
Cub.I, the island of, discovered by Christopher Colum-

bus, i. 136. Is failed round by Ocampo, 267:
The conquest of, undertaken by Diego Velasquez,
278. Cruel treatment of the cazique Hatuey, and
his repartee to a friar, 279. Culumbus's enthufi-
aflic description of a harbour in, 365. The to-
bacco produced there, the finest in all America,
iii. 356.

Cuibnua, a pearl filhery established there, i. 270.
Cumann, the natives of, revenge their ill-treatment by

the Spaniards, i. 332. The country desolated by
Diego Ocampo, 355.
Cuzcs, the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded by

Manco Capac, iii. 26. Is seized by Pizarro, 61.
Is besieged by the Peruvians, 75. Is surprised by
Almagro, 80. Is recovered and pillaged by the
Pizarros, 89. Was the only city in all Peru, 255.

D
Dancing, the love of, a favourite pafion among the

Americins, ii. 2o0.
Darien, the iflhmus of, described, i. 286. The in-

crease of settlement there, obftruaed by the noxi-
oufnefs of the climate, iii. 277.

L12 Di

De Sdlis, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata,

i. 3c2.
De Sdois, Antonio, charaaer of his Hifioria de la Con-

quilsa de Mexico, ii. 5t8.
D'Efqui!arbe, prince, viceroy of Peru, his vigorous

neafures for restraining the excefles of the regular
clergy there, iii. 340. Rendered ineffeaual, 341.
Diaz, Bartbolor.ew, discovers the Cape of Good

Hope, i. 79.
Difcov, ies, the difference between those made by land,

and those by sea, fated, i. 357.
Dudwi.el, his obje&ions to the Periplus of Hanno ex-

ploded, i. 351.
Dsrings, St. on the island of Hispaniola, founded by

Bartholomew Columbus, i. 200.
Domin'cans, those in Hispaniola publicly remonstrate

against the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 305.
See Las Casas.
Drunnenefs, firong propensity of the Americans to

inculge in, i. 215.
EartI', the globe of, how divided into zones by the

ancients, i. 32.
Ey.:.iani, ancient, fate of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 6.
El Dorcdo, wonderful reports of a country so called,

made by Francis Orellana, iii. 101.

E.'/piant, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 470.
L'curial, curious calendar discovered in the Library

there bv Mr. WVaddiiove, iii. 445. Description of
that valuable monument of Mexican arr, 446.
Ejiu.rrax Incians, resemblances between them and

their neighbours the Greenlanders, ii. 45. Some
account ci, 166. 507.

L;i,-ne IV. pope, grants to the Portuzuefe an exclu-

l:e ripht to a'i the countries they fbould discover,
f: m Cape Non to the ccntinent of India, i. 70.

Europe,

Europe, how affec&ed by the dismemberment of the

Roman Empire by the barbarous nations, i. 36.
Revival of commerce and navigation in, 40.. Poli-
tical advantages derived from the crusades, 43.

F
Ferdinand king of Castile. See Columbui and Ifabelia.

Turns his attention at length to the regulation of
American affairs, i. 261. Don Diego de Colum-
bus sues out his father's claims against him, 267.
Erefs two governments on the continent of Ame-
rica, 272. Sends a fleet to Darien, and supersedes
Balboa, 293. Appoints Balboa lieutenant-gover-
nor of the countries on the South Sea, 298. Sends
Dias de Solis to discover a western paflage to the
Moluccas, 302. Thwarts the measures of Diego
Columbus, 303. His decree concerning the treat-
ment of the Indians, 307.

Fernandez, Don Diego, character of his Hifioria del

Peru, iii. 421.
Firnandez, P. his description of the political ltate of

the Chiquitos, ii. 497.
liguer'a, Roderigo de, is appointed chief judge of

Hispaniola, with a commiflion to examine into the
treatment of the Indian natives, i. 319. Makes an
experiment to determine the capacity of the Indians,
333.
.hlrrda, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 280.
'he chiefs there hereditary, 135. Account of,
from Alvar Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, ii. 490.

Flota, Spanish, some account of, iii. 368.
Fsn/fca, bishop of Badajos, minister for Indian affairs,

obftruels the plans of colonization and discovery
formed by Columbus, i. 184. 195. Patronizes the
expedition of Alonzo de Ojcda, 212.

L 13 Gaolnm,

G
Galeons, Spanish, the nature and purpoCe of these vef-

fces. i:i. 368. Arrangement of their voyage, 369.
Gatlve, Don Joseph, sent to discover the true state of

California, iii. 266.

Ganra, Vaico de, his voyage for discovery, i. 206.

Doubles the Cape of Good Hope, 208. Anchors
beifre the city Melinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut
in Malabar, 2c9.
GaNr.mg, strange propenfi:y of the Americans to,

ii. 214.
G&aigts, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the pofi-

tion of that river, i. 356.
Ga,; a, Pedro ce Ia, sent to Peru as prcfident of the

court of Audience in Li-na, iii. 146. His cha-
rater and moderation, ibid. The powers he was
veit-d uith, 148. Arrives at Panama, 149. Ac-
quires pofiefiion of Panama w.th the fleet and forces
there, 153. Advancts towards Cuzco, 15S. Pi-
zarro's roops defeit to him, ibo. His moderate
uwe o the viriorv, 161. levi:es employment for
his folciers, l07. His dii.ioni of the country
amonz his followers, I6S. Rcflcrrs order and go-
vernment, 17:. His re;ep;;on at his return to
Spain, 17i.
Go :s'ns, instance of his iaor:arce in geoeraphy, i.

35S.
Gt:rTC!'i, the knc.wv-dge of, extremely confined

cmonj the ancients. i. 31. Became a fvourite
flu ') arnon trh eArs i;;n. 39.

Giaii:, the accounts rr, in our early travellers, un-

confi mec b; recent dilcovcries. i. 5. ii. 48o.
G:r:a, Flavio, the invritor of the mariner's compass,

i. ;2.

G.Ol/, its d, iflon in'o zones by the ancients, i. 32.
G:... won 'he fi;fr nri:ti wi:h which man was ac-

c-uinr:ei, iii. I:5. xt:'aor.:inary large grain
c:, feund in rh: ni:r.c at Cin.aoa, 456.

Gsmara,

Gomrara, character of his Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna,

ii. 510.
Gcod Hspc, cape of, discovered by Bartholomew Diaz,

i. 79.
G:iazer,!cet, no visible form of, among the native

Americans, ii. 134. Exceptions, 138.
Gran Chaco, account of the method of making war

among the natives of, from Lozano, ii. 498.
Grana:a, new kingdom of, in America, by whom re-

duceJ to the Spanifil dominion, iii. 282. Its cli-
mate and produce, 283. A viceroy lately efta-
blifhed there, 285.

Greets, ancient, progress of navigation and discovery

among them, i. 16. Their commercial intercourse
with other nations very limited, iS, 19.

Green/.and, its vicinity to North America, ii. 45.
Grijalva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of

dilcovery, i. 342. Discovers and gibes name to
New Spain, 343. His reasons for not planting a
colony in his newly discovered lands, 346.
Guarda Costas, employed by Spain to check illicit

trade in the American colonies, iii. 380.
Guatimala, the indigo there superior to any in Ame-

rica, iii. 356.
Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma,

fuccccds Quetlavaca in the kingdom of Mexico,
ii. 398. Repulses the attacks of the Spaniards, in
forming the city of Mexico, 415. I taken pri-
foncer by Cortes, 423. Is tortured to discover his
treafurc, 427. Is hanged, 444.
Gian,., Dutch, cause of the excessive fertility of the

boil there, ii. 473.

H
]iann, his Periplus defended, with an account of his

voyage, i. 351.
Ij]atuev. a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treatment, and

memorable repartee to a Franciscan friar, i. 279.

L 1 4 Hawkefrwortb'

H-auos[fisrtb's voyages, account of New Holland,

and the inhabitants from, ii. 492.
eiat, the dircrent degrees of, in the old and new
conti-ntis, accounted for, ii. 459. Effimated, 472.
Fiw,-y, Prince of Portugal, his characer and fludies,

i. 6b. Expeditions formed by his order, 63. Ap-
n..es for a papal grant of his new dilcoveries, 69.
His death, 72.
}i, rada, Juan de, afaffinates Francis Pizarro, iii.

i26. Dies 112.
Hrrtra, the bell historian of the conquest of New

Spain, ii. 519. His account of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 432
H:,;an:i.a, the illand of, discovered by Christopher

Co:umbus, i. 138. His tranfaaions with the na-
tries, 139. A colony left there by Columbus,
148. The colony destroyed, 166. Columbus
builds a city called Isabella, x68. The natives ill-
used, and begin to be alarmed, 177. Are defeated
by the Spaniards, 182. Tribute exacaed from
them, 183. They scheme to starve the Spaniards,
iS5. St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Co-
lumbus, 200. Columbus sent home in irons by
Bovadidla, 222. Nicholas de Orandoappointed go-
vernor, 2zb. Summary view of the conduc of the
Spaniards towards the natives of, 254. Unhappy
fate of Anacoana, 255. Great produce from the
mines here, 259. The inhabitants diminish, 262.
The Spaniards recruit the i by trepanning the na-
tises of the Lucayos, ,ó4. Arrival of Don Diego
de Columbus, 26-. The natives of, almost extir-
pared by fla- r;, Z-8. 304. Controversy concern-
i;' the trea: rt of them, .o:. Columbus's ac-
c-.nt of the humane treatment he received from
the na:iise of, 366. Curious inflance of fuperfti-
tion in the Spar:th planters there, ii. 471.
_7i;./;:ir, Pcdcr r As'arez, erecqs the royal standard

in Pc:u, in oppofi:ion to the )uunger Almagro,
iii. 112. Vaca de Cf..ro arr.ves and assumes the
ccr-mmn d, ;:Dj.

.rHcr,

Homer, his account of the navigation of the ancient

Greeks, i. 17.
Honduras, the value of that country, owing to its

production of the logwood tree, iii. 267.
Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in Spanish

America, iii. 357.
Horses, aflonifhment and mistakes of the Mexicans at

the first fight of them, ii. 525. Expedient of the
Peruvians to render them incapable of a&ion, iii.
43'1
Hinana Capac, Inca of Peru, his characer and fa-

mily, iii. 29.
Huaojar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his brother

Atahualpa's succession to Quito, iii. 30. Is de-
feated and taken prisoner by Atahualpa, 3r. So-
licits the assistance of Pizarro against his brother,
33. Is put to death by order of Atahualpa, 47.

I

.amaica discovered by ChriftopherColumbus, i. 175.
Jerome, St. three monks of that order sent by cardinal

Ximenes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of
the Indians, i. 3r2. Their condu& under this
commission, 316. Are recalled, 319.
7efuits, acquire an absolute dominion over California,

iii. 265. Their motives for depreciating the coun-
try, ibid.
7eus, ancient, slate of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 1o.
Jncas of Peru, received origin of their empire, iii. 27.

231. Their empire founded both in religion and
policy, 233. See Peru.
India, the motives of Alexander the Great, in his ex-

pedition to, i. 21. The commerce with, how
carried on in ancient times, 27, 28. And when
arts began to revive in Europe, 40. The first voy-
age made round the Cape of Good Hope, 207.
l-;diars in Spanish America. See /mericans.

Indies,

Ind;es, Weft, why Columbus's discoveries were so

named, i. 16c.
nnocent IV. pope, his extraordinary million to the

prince of the Tartars, i. 45, 46.
Inqusiti7s, court of, when and by whom first intro-

duced into Portugal, i. 361.
Ilf.ti and repti!es,' why so numerous and noxious in

America, ;i. 2C.
: ,n 1. king of Portugal, the first who sent ships to
explore the western coasts of Africa, i. 58. His
frn Frince Henry engages in these attempts, 61.
Jhn II. k;ng of Portugal, patronises all attempts to-

wardc dii'cover:ct, i. 75. Sends an embassy to
Abt.flnia, 8'. His ungenerous treatment of Co-
lumh!as, ?'.
Jr., the rea'on -:hy faagec nations were unacquainted

with thi mc2al, ii. 125, 126.

]lj./i,") cSctn of Cast:!e, is applied to by Juan Perez

in behali of Chriflopher Columbus, i. o05. Is
az?;n 2ap'lid to by Q.intanilla and Santangel, lIc.
ls :zval!ed on to equip him, I12. Dies, 248.
Hrr real motives fcr encouraging discoveries in
Amnerica, iii. 2-6.
J' .ia, the cir' o;, in Hispaniola, built by Chrifto-

i "er Cc'unmbus, i. 168.

ihr':. the firlt country in Europe, where civilization

and arts reiiedj after the overthrow of the Roman
JIncire, i. 40. The commercial spirit of, aflive
;.J c..:e:p:ih['g, 42.

L

L "-; fl-anas, discovered by Ferdinand M\agellan,

L.;rs.. amnazin- f;ze of those in North America, ii. 4.
L,-s C/':s, Ba-rholomew, returns from Hispaniola to

*' '.-:t :he ca-:e of the enfaived Indians at the court
o' S.'an, i. 311. Is sent back with powers by car-
c::;.'! X:.mces, 313. Returns dissatisfied, 314.

7 318.

318. Procures a new commilfion to be sent over
on this fubjetSt, 319. Recommends the fchemeof
suppl) ing the colonies with negroes, 322. Under-
takes a new colony, 323. His conference with the
bishop of Darien before the emperor Charles V. 328.
Gte' to Ame, ica to carry his schemes into execu-
tion, 330. Circumitances unfavourable to him,
333. His final milcarriage, 33f. Revives his re-
prefcntations in favour of the Indians, at the desire
of the emperor, iii. ut8. Composes a treatise on
the deflluc.ion of America, !r9.
Leon, Pedro Cieza de, character of his Chronica del

Peru, iii. 420.
Lery, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

Toupinambos, ii. 502.

Lima, the city of, in Peru, founded by Pizarro, iii.

70.
Logwood, the commodity that eives importance to the

provinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 267. Po-
licy of the Spaniards to defeat the English trade in,
268.
Louis, St. king of France, his embalfy to the chan of

the Tartars, i. 47.
Lozano, his account of the method of making war

among the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 498.

Luque, Hernando de, a priest, associates with Pizarro
in his Peruvian expedition, iii. 5.

M

1,adeira, the island of, firit discovered, i. 64.
Mlad:c, prince of North Wales, flory of his voyage

and dilcovery of North America examined, i. 373.
.Aagellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic lize

of the Patagonians, ii. 8r. The existence of this
gigantic race yet to be decided, 83. 480. His
introduclion to the court of Castile, 429. Is
equipped with a squadron for a voyage of discovery,

431.

431. Sails through the famous flrait that bears his
name, 432. Discovers the Ladrone and Philippine
islands, 434. Is killed, ibid.
,agi.~- :os property of attracting iron known to the

a;.n: .s, b.: r.o' its polar inclination, i. 6. Ex-
tri:;a:nz:. ac'u ::-tages resulting from this discovery,

:I.., 2t. a-o:.:'- oi its commerce with Spanish Ame-
rica, :i1. 3
.il'r.l CSpa%. fcunder of the Peruvian empire, account

of, it. 2-. 23t1.
Alandevtiiie, S.r Jchn, his eastern travels, with a cha-

ra2er of hiz w.rlin., i. 50.
Mari:a, the colorv of, eftablified by Philip II. of

Spain, Iii. 4c5. Trade between, and South-Ame-
rica, 406b

Ata.kind, their d rpcfition and manners formed by their

situation, ii. 29. Hence resemblances to be traced
in iery distant places without communication, 30.
Have uniformly attained the greatest perfetion of
their nature in temperate regions, 24t.
Alaric Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in

the Eail, i. 48.
AMarrl, Gabriel, his account of the country between

the Illinois and Machilimakinac, ii. 493.

Marina, Donna, a Mexican slave, her history. ii. 263.
Alarinus, Tyrius, his erroneous polition of China,

i. 363.
lMartyr, Peter, his sentiments on the sirs discovery of

America, i. 377.
:A1yizas, in the Spanish American colonies, difRinc-

tion between them and Mulattoes, iii. 319.
Afrtals, useful, the original natives of America totally

unacquainted with, ii. 125.
Mzxicins, their account of their own origin, com-

pared with later discoveries, ii. 47. Descriptions of
their hiflorical piAures, iii. 441. Various exagee-
rated accounts of the number of human viaims fa-
crificed by them, 450. Their language furnished

r~~~~~~I ~with

with refpe&ful terminations for all its words, 437.
How they contributed to the support of government,
438.
lMexio, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coast of, ii.
261. His interview with two Mexican officers,
264. Information sent to Montezuma,. with some
Spanish presents, 267. Montezuma fends presents
to Cortes, with orders not to approach his capital,
263. State of the empire at that time, 27o. The
Zempoallans court the friendship of Cortes, 285.
Several caziques enter into alliance with Cortes, 288.
Charater of the natives of TlaCcala, 297. The
'Flalfalans reduced to Cue for peace, 305 Arrival
of Cortes at the capital city, 318. The city de-
fcribed, 320. Montezuma acknowledges himself a
vafial to the Spanish crown, 340. Amount of
the treasure colleced by Cortes, 342. Reasons
of gold being found in such small quantities, 343.
The Mexicafis enraged by the imprudent zeal- of
Cortes, 346. Attack Alvarado during the absence
of Cortes, 366. Their resolute attack on Cortes
when he returned, 370. Death of Montezuma,
:75. The city abandoned by Cortes, 377. Battle
of Otumba, 385. The Tepeacans reduced, 392.
Preparations of the Mexicans againit the return of
Cortes, 396. Cortes besieges the city with a fleet
on the lake, 411. The Spaniards repulsed in florm-
ing the city, 415. Guatimozin taken prisoner, 423.
Cortes appointed governor, 44I. His schemes and
arrangements, ibid. Inhuman treatment of the na-
tives, 443. Reception of the new regulations
there, iii. 124. A retrofpe& into the form of go-
vernment, policy, and arts in, 175. Our informa-
tion concerning, very imperfet, 179. Origin of
the monarchy, 181. Number and greatness of
the cities, 186. Mechanical profefions there di-
flinguifhed from each other, 188. Ditindtion of
ranks, 189. Political institutions, 192. Power
and splendor of their monarchs, 197. Order of

government,

government, 197. Provifon for the support of ;tg
198. Police of, I99. Their arts, 200. Their
paintings. 2:3. Their method of computing time,
208. Their wars continual and ferocious, 209.
Their funeral rites, 2rt. Imperfection of their
agriculture. ibid. Doubts concerning the extent
of the empire, 212. Little intercourse among its
several provinces, 214. Ignorance of money, 215.
State of their citIes, 217. Tempies and other pub-
lic buildings, 218, 29r Religion of, 225. Causes
of the depopulation of this country, 288. The
small-pox very fatal there, 275. Number of Indian
natives remaining there, 280. Lift and characer
of those authors who wrote accounts of the conquest
of, ii. 516. Description of the aqueduca for the sup-
ply of the capital city, ili. 439. See Co;onies.

Afichael, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea, disco-

vered and named by Balboa, i. 290. The colony
of, established by Pizarro, iii. 24.

Ali;ra.rins of mankind, wny first made by land, i. r.
Mind, human, the efforts of it proportioned to the

wants of the body, ii. 96.
Mines of South America, the great inducement to

population, iii. 262. Some account of, 348. Their
produce, 350. The spirit with which they are
worked, 35t. Fatal erfects of this ardor, 353.
Evidence of the pernicious effects of labouring in
them, 469. Of Mexico, total produce of, to
the Spanith revenue, 491, 492, 493, 494.
.Ao,'uca Ifar.ds, the Spanish claims on, fold by the

Emperor Charles V. to the Portuguese, ii. 437.
Afsnaolic institutions, the pernicious effecs of, in the

Spanish American colonies, iii. 334. Number of
convents there, 472.
Aflsnj.crs, the periodical course of, when discovered

by navigators, i. 27.
A.M:,/.-n:, a Dominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub-

lick!y remonftrares against the cruel treatment of
the Indians, i. 3z5.

Mionttzuma,

Mo]entezuma, the first intelligence received by the Spa-

niards of this prince, i. 345. Receives intelligence
of the arrival of Fernando Cortes in his dominions,
ii. 266. His presents to Cortes, 268. Forbids him
to approach his capital, 269. State of his empire
at this time, 270. His chara&er, 271. His per-
plexity at the arrival of the Spaniards, 272. His
timid negociations with Cortes, 273. His scheme
for destroying Cortes at Cholula discovered, 313.
His irresolute condua, 317. His firt interview with
Cortes, 318. Is seized by Cortes, and confined to
the Spanish quarters, 331. Is fettered, 334. Ac-
knowledges himfelfa vassal to the Spanish crown,
340. Remains inflexible with regard to religion,
345. Circumstances of his death, 375. Account
of a gold cup of his, in England, iii. 440.
IMulattoes, in the Spanish American colonies, expla-

nation of this difiinaion, iii. 319.

N
Narvaez, Pamphilo, is sent by Velasquez with an

armament to Mexico, to supersede Cortes, ii. 352.
Takes possession of Zempoalla, 359. Is defeated
and taken prisoner by Cortes, 363. How he car-
ried on his correspondence with Montezuma, 531.
Natcrez, an American nation, their political infti-

tutions, ii. 139, 140. Causes of their tame sub-
miflion to the Spaniards, 145. Their religious
doctrines, 200.
Nav gation, the arts of, very slowly improved by man-

kind, i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commer-
cial intercourse, 3. Imperfecions of, among the
ancients, 6. More improved by the invention of
the mariner's compaf, than by all the efforts of
preceding ages, 51. The firit naval discoveries un-
dertaken by Portugal, 55.

AM'grocs,

rNegrees, their peculiar situation under the Spanish do.

minion in America, iii. 321.

Newfourdland, its situation described, ii. 458.
New Holland, some account of the country and inha-

bitants, ii. 492.

Nw Spain, discovered and named by Juan de Gri-

jalva, i. 343. See AMexicz.

Nigno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i. 214.
WNorwegians might in ancient times have migrated to,

and colonized America, ii. 46.
Nugnez Vela, Blasco, appointed viceroy of Peru, to

enforce the new regulations, iii. 123. His charaaer,
128. Commits Vaca de Cafiro to prison, 130.
Dissensions between him and the court of audience,
132. Is confined, 133. Recovers his liberty, 135.
Resumes his command, 136. Is pursued by Gon-
zalo Pizarro, 138. Is defeated and killed by Pi-
carro, 139.

0
Ocanipo, Diego, sent with a squadron from Hispaniola

to desolate the country of Cumana, i. 332. 335.
Ocampo, Sebastian de, first fails round Cuba, and dif-

covers it to be an island, i. 267.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the intercourse be-

tween distant countries, continued long a formidable
barrier, i. 2. See Compass and Navigation.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to the Weft

Indies, i. 212. His second voyage, 227. Obtains
a government on the continent, 272.
Olmned, Father Bartholomew de, checks the rash zeal

of Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico, ii. 3o1. Is sent
by Cortes to negociate with Narvaez, 356.
Orf.'ana, Francis, is appointed to the command of a

baxk built by Gonzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, iii.

99.

99. Sails down the Maragnon, zoo. Returns to
Spain with a report of wonderful discoveries, o11.
Herrera's account of his voyage, 432.
Orgognez commands Almagro's party against the Pi.

zarros, and is defeated and killed by them, iii. 88.
Orinoco, the great river of, discovered by ChriftRpher

Columbus, i. 197. The amazing plenty of fifliihg,
ii. 489. Strange method of chufing a captain among
the Indian tribes on the banks of, 168.
Otaheite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of

boiling water, ii. 508.
Otumba, battle of) between Cortes and the Mexicans,

ii 385.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to Hispaniola,

i. 228. His prudent regulations, 230. Refuses
admiflion to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 235.
His ungenerous behaviour to Columbus on his ship-
wreck, 241. 244. Receives him atlength and fends
him home, 247. Engages in a war with the In-
dians, 2;3. His cruel treatment of them, 254.
Encourages cultivation and manufactures, 260. His
method of trepanning the natives of the Lucayos,
264. Is recalled, 268.

P

Pacific ocean, why, and by whom so named, ii. 433.
Packet boats, first eftablihment of, between Spain and

her American colonies, iii. 488.

Panama is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 30r.
Parmcnid:s, the first who divided the earth by zones,

i. 360.
Patag noan, some account of, ii. 8S. The reality of

their gigantic fizeyet to be decided, 83. 40o.
Pcdrarias Davila is sent with a fleet to fiuperfede

Balboa in his government of Santa Maria on the
isthmus of Darien, i. 294. Treats Balboa ill, 2q5.
Rapa.ious conduct of his men, 29'. Is reconciled

VOL. III. M m to

to Balboa, and gives him his daughter, 299. Put*
Balboa to death, 300. Removes his settlement from
Santa Maria to Panama, 301.
Pnzu;n, the name of that bird not derived from the

Welch language, i. 374.
Pcrcz, Juan, patroniles Columbus at the court of Caf-

tile, i. 16. His solemn invocation for the success
of Columbus's voyage, 118.
Pri'pius of Hanno, the authenticity of that work jus-

tifid, i. 374-
Prru, the first intelligence concerning this country,

received by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 285. 291.
The coast of, first discovered by Pizarro, iii. 13.
Pizarro's second arrival, 2a. His hostile proceed-
ings against the natives, 22. The colony of St.
Michael established, 24. State of the empire at the
time of this invasion, 25. The kingdom divided
between Huafcar and Atahualpa, 30. Atahualpa
usurps the government, 32. Huafcar solicits aflift-
ance from Pizarro, 33. Atahualpa visits Pizarro,
;g. Is seized by Pizarro, 43. Agreement for his
ransom, 45. Is refused his liberty, 50. Is cruelly
put to death. 57. Confusion of the empire on this
event, 59. Quito reduced by Benalcazar, 62. The
citv of Lima founded by Pizarro, 7c. Chili invaded
by Almagro, 71. Insurrection of the Peruvians, 73.
A!mraro put to death by Pizarro, 92. Pizarro di-
vides the country among his followers, 95. Pro-
zrci; of the SpaniLh arms there, 96. Francis Pi-
zarro affaflinated, 1c6. Reception of the new re-
gulatiuns there, 125. The viceroy confined by the
court of audience, 133. The viceroy defeated and
killed by Gonzalo Pizarro, I39. Arrival of Pedro
de la Gafca, 149. Reducion and death of Gon-
zalo P!zarro, I5r. The civil wais there not carried
on with mercenary ioldiers, 162. But nevertheless
grat:fifd with immense rewards, 16.. Their pro-
tufion and luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their contefs,
165. Their want of faith, 166. Lilances, 167.

Dlvlfion

Division of, by Gafca among, his followers, 168.
A retrofpeft into the original government, arts, and
manners of the natives, 175. The high antiquity
they pretend to, 228. Their records, 229. Ori-
gin of their civil policy, 231. This founded in
religion, 233. The authority of the Incas absolute
and unlimited, ibid. All crimes were punished ca-
pitally, 235. Mild genius of their religion, 236.
Its influence on their civil policy, 238. And on
their military system, 239. Peculiar itate of pro-
perty there, 240. Diftin&ion of ranks, 24i. State
of arts, ibid. Improved state of agriculture, 243.
Their buildings, 245. Their public roads, 248.
Their bridges, 250. Their mode of refining silver
ore, 252. Works of elegance, 253. Their civi-
lization, nevertheless, but imperfec6, 255. Cuzco
the only place that had the appearance of a city,
ibid. No perfet separation of professions, 255.
Little commercial intercourse, 256. Their unwar-
like spirit, 257. Eat their flesh and sis raw, 259.
]lrief accbunt of other provinces under the viceroy
of New Spain, 260. Causes of the depopulation of
this country, 273. The small-pox very fatal there,
275. Writers who gave accounts of the conquelt
of, 419. Their method of building, 453. Stateof
the revenue derived from, by the crown of Spain,
489. See Colonies.
Peter 1. czar of Russia, his extensive views in prose-

curing Afiating discoveries, ii. 38.
Phen,'cianj, ancient, Itare of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 8. Their trade, how conduaed,
35rt
PWl/ip II. of Spain, his turbulent disposition aided by

his American treasures, iii. 361. Eflabliflies the
colonv of Manila, 40o5
f;lilip Ill. exhaufis his country by inconsiderate bi-

gntry, iii. 361.
Pli.'it)pine islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan,

mm 2 ii.

ii. 434. A colony eftabl;fhed there by Philip II. of
Spain, iii. 405. Trade between and America, 406.
Pbyfic, the art of, in America, why connected with

divination, ii. 2z7.
Pinto, Chevalier, hi'. Itcription of the charaaeriltic

features of the native Americans, ii. 476.
Pirzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a veflel under

Columbus in his first voyage of discovery, i. 117.
Sails to America on a private adventure with four
ships, 1I7. Discovers Yucatan, 266.
Pizarro, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuzco by the Peru-

vians, iii. 76. Is surprised there by Almagro, 81.
Escapes with Al arado, 84. Defends his brother at
the court of Spain, 03. Is committed to prison, 95.
Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in his settlement

on the ifihmus of Darien, i. 276. Marches under
him across the isthmus, where they discover the
South Sea, 289. His birth, education, and cha-
raaer, iii. 3. Associates with Almagro and De
Luque, in a voyage of discovery, 5. His ill fuc-
cees, 7. Is recalled, and deserted by most of his
followers, ii. Remains on the island of Gorgona
for supplies, 12. Discovers the coast of Peru, 13.
Returns to Panama, 14. Goes to Spain to solicit
reinforcements, 17. Procures the supreme com-
mand for himself, IS. Is affifled with money by
Cortes, 19. Lands again in Peru, 21. His hof-
tile proceedings against the natives, 23. Efta-
blifhes the colony of St. Michael, 24. State of
the Peruvian empire at this time, 25. Cause of his
easy penetration into the country, 32. Is applied
to by Huafcar for assistance against his vicorious
brother Atahualpa, 33. State of his forces, 34.
Arrives at Caxamalca, 36. Is visited by the Inca,
39. His perfidious seizure of him, 43. Agrees to
Atahualpa's ofer for his ransom, 45. Division
of their plunder, 48. Refutes Arahualpa his li-
be:t;, 53. His ignorance exposed to Atahualpa,
54. Brflows a form of trial on tle Inca, 55. Puts

2 him

him todeath, 57; Advances to Cuzco, 6o. Flo-
nours conferred on him by the Spanish court, 66.
Beginning of dissentions between him and Alma-
gro, 67. His civil regulations, 68. Founds the
city of Lima, 70. Infurrefion of the Peruvians,
73. Cuzco seized by Almagro, 80. Deludes Al-
magro by negotiations, 83. Defeats Almagro,
and takes him prisoner, 88. Puts Almagro to
death, 92. Divides the country among his fol-
lowers, 95. The impolitic partiality of his allot-
ments, ibid. Makes his brother Gonzalo governor
of Quito, 97. Is aflaffinated by Juan de Herrada,
107.
Pizarro, Gonzalo, is made governor of Quito, by

his brother Francis, iii. 97. His expedition over
the Andes, 98. Is deserted by Orellana, -99. His
diltrefs on this event, 102. His disastrous return
to Quito, 103 Is encouraged by the people to
oppose Nugnez Vela, the new viceroy, 130. As-
fumes the government of Peru, 134. Marches
against the viceroy, 137. Defeats and kills him,
139. Is advised by Carvajal to assume the fove-
reignty of the country, I41. Chufes to negociate
with the court of Spain, 143. Consultations of
the court on his condut, ibid. His violent refo-
lurions on the arrival of Pedro de la Gafca, 151.
Resolves to oppose him by violence, 153. Marches
to reduceCenteno at Cuzco, 155. Defeats him,
x56. Is deserted by his troops on the approach of
Gafca, 160. Surrenders and is executed, 16I.
His adherents, men of no principle, ;66.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Solis, i. 302.

Its amazing width, ii. 458.
Pliny, the naturalist, inftanie of his ignorance in ge-

ography, i. 359.
Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. 280, Ro-

mantic motive of his voyage, 281.
Population of the earth, flow progress of, i. I,

M m 3 Porto

Ports Bello, discovered and named by Chriflopher

Columbus, i. 238-
Porto Rico, is fettled and frbjected by Juan Ponce de

Leun, i. 265.

Porto Santo, the si fti iifcovery of, i. 63.
Pcrtugal, when and by wbom the court of inquisition

was first introduced into, i. 361.
PFrl:g.e/e, a view of the circumstances that induced

them to undertake the difcovcry of unknown coun-
tries, i. 56. 5o. First African dircoveries of, 6c.
Madeira oiicovered, 64, 65. They double Cape
Bojador, 66. Obtain a papal grant of all the
cou.;i es they fhouid dicfover, 7c. Cape Verd
Ifluni.s, :nd tne Azores discovered, 72. Voyage
to the ELAt Indies by Vasco deGama, 207.
Pctrl, the ricr silver mines there, how discovered,

iii. 349. The mines of, greatly exhausted and
scarce. worth working, 478.
Prijuners of war, how treated by the native Ameri-

cans. ii. 159
Prtr.T, the ioea of, unknown to the nativeAme-

rn.a'.. ,1. i .c. Notions of the Brafilians con-
cerr.,ng, 494.
Prrte. cr of the Indians, in Spanifli America, his

funcilon, iii. 328.
Pt;lzrm.- the .hdiofpher, his teographical descriptions

more aniple and exas than thore of his predecessors,
i. 35. His Geography translated by the Arabians,
39. His erroneous poftion of the Ganges, 356.

Q.
.:el1zvacra, brother of Montezuma, furceeds him as

1: Mexico, i. 3c6. Conducts in person the
f. ; ':- which obliged Curtes to abandon his
ca: < . DieC of the small-pox, 398.

j.~v',.:, 'i z: .,
-i ,- his conference with Las

CasaS

Casas on the treatmentof the Indians, in the pre.
fence of the Emperor Charles V. i. 327; :

Z'ickfi.'ver, the property of the famous mines of, at

Gu.inacabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain,
iii. 4-8 The price of, why reduced, ibid.
uinqu/ina, or Jesuits bark, a production peculiar to
Peru, iii. 356.
uipIs, or historic cords of the Peruvians, some ac-
count o', iii. 229.
.Quito, the kingdom of, conquered by Iluana Capac,

Inca of Peru, iii. 29. Is left to his son Atahualpa,
30. Arahualpa's general revolts after his death,
60. Is reduced by the Spaniards under Benal-
cazar, 62. Benalcazar deprived, and Gonzalo
Pizarro made governor, 97.

R

Ramufio, his defence of Hanno's account of the coast

of Africa, i. 353.
Reg/ier ships, for what purpose introduced in the trade

between Spain and her colonies, iii. 381. Super-
fede the use of the galeons, 382.

Religion of the native Americans, an inquiry into,

ii. 190.
Ribas, his account of the political slate of the people

of Cinaloa, ii. 505· Of their want of religion, 509.
Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account of those pro-

vinces, iii. 273.

Rivers, the amazing size of those in America, ii. 4.
Robifon, professor, his remarks on the temperature of

various climates, ii. 459.
Roldan, Francis, is left chiefjuftice in Hispaniola, by

Christopher Columbus, i. 188. Becomes ringleader
of a mutiny, 200. Submits, 204.
Romans, their progress in navigation and discovery,

i. 25. Their military spirit averse to mechanical
arts and commerce, 26. Navigation and trade fa-

voured

voured in the provinces under their government, 27.
Their extensive discoveries by land, 29. Their
empire and the sciences, destroyed together, 36.
Rubruyquis, father, his embassy from France to the

Cnan of the Tartars, L 47.
Ruiffanr, Asiatic discoveries made by them, ii. 38.

Uncertainty of, 474.

S
Sacste:as, the rich silver mines there, when discovered,

iii. 349.
San Sa.vadoar, discovered and named by Christopher

Columbus, i. 134.
San;bo, Don Pedro, account of his History of the

conquest of Peru, iii. 420.
Sandoval, the shocking barbarities executed by, in

Mexico, ii. 443.
Sandwval, Francisco Tello de, is sent by the emperor

Charles V. to Mexico, as vifitador of America,
idi. 123. His moderation and prudence, 124..

Savage life, a general estimate of, ii. 223.
Scalps, motive of the native Americans for taking them

from their enemies, ii. 500.
Snrrclo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains during

his viceroyalty in America, iii. 494.
Setii', extraordinary increase of its manufa&ures by

the American trade, iii. 479. Its trade greatly
reduced, 480. The American trade removed to
Cadiz, 368.
Sihia r ore, method of refining it praftifed by the na-

tive Peruvians, iii. 252.
Ssnpra, late discoveries of rich mines made there by

the Spaniards, iii. 264.

S:i', American ideas of the immortality of, ii. 202.
Ssa:,: Sea, sirs discovered by Vasco Nugnez de Bal-

boa, i. 29o.
Spain, geneal idea of the policy of, with regard to

the

the American colonies, iii. 28r. Early interpo-
fition of the regal authority in the colonies, 282.
All the American dominions of, fubjeied to two
viceroys, 284. A third viceroyalty latelyeftablifh.
ed, 285. The colonies of, compared with those of
Greece and Rome, 309. Advantagesihe derived from
her colonies, 358. Why the does not. fill derive
the fame, 360. Rapid declineof trade, 362. This
decline increased by the mode of regulating the
intercourse with America, 366. Employs guarda
costas to check illicit trade, 380. The use of re-
gifter ships introduced, 381. Efiablifhment of the
company of Caraccas, 385. Enlargement of com-
mercial ideas there, 387. Free trade permitted to
several provinces, 390. Revenue derived from
America, 409. Specification, 489.
Spaniards, their curious form of taking pofeffion of

new discovered countries, i. 382.
Strabo, a citation from, proving the great geqgraphi-

cal ignorance of the ancients, i. 355. His own
want of geographical knowledge, 360.
Super/lition always connected with a desire of pene-

trating into the secrets of futurity, ii. 205.

T
Tapia, Chriftoval de, is sent from Spain to Mexico,

to supersede Cortes in his command, but fails in the
attempt, ii. 438.
Tartars, the poflibility of their migrating to America,

ii. 43.
TIafcala, in Mexico, characer of the natives of, ii.

297. Oppose the passage of the Spaniards, 298.
Are reduced to sue for peace, 305.
7obacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of any in all

America, iii. 356.
Tcupinambas, account of their ferocious courage from

Lery, ii. 502.

Trade,

Trade, free, opened between Spain and her colonies,

iii. 390. Increase of the Spanish customs from this
mealfre, 485.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, when disco-

vered by navigators, i. 27.

Travellers, ancient, character of their writings, i. 50.
Tr-ini^d, the ifiand of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbus on his third voyage, i. 197.
Tucnrran, and Rio de !a Plata, account of those pro-

vinces, iii. 273.
Tyre, the commerce of that city, how conducted,

i. 351.
Tytbes of Spanish America, how applied by the court

of Spain, iii. 490.

V
,aca de Ca/frc, Chriloval, is sent from Spain to re-

gulate the government of Peru, iii. 94. Arrives
at Quito, i e. Afiumes the supreme authority,
ibid. Defeats young Almagro, i12. The feve-
rity of his proceedings, 113. Prevents an infur-
reffion concerted to oppose the new regulations,
128. Is imprisoned by the new viceroy, 130.
Valverde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to

Atahualpa, Inca of Peru, iii. 40. Gives his fanc-
tion to the trial and condemnation of Atahualpa,
56.
IT'ea, Garcilaffo de la, character of his commentary

on the Spanish writers concerning Peru, iii. 421.
J'.grtab!es, their natural tendency to fertilize the foil

where the- grow, ii. 24, 25.
I ,'a/erz, Diego de, conquers the island of Cuba,

i. 278. 337. His preparations for invading New
Spain, ii. 247. His difficulty in chufing a com-
mar.der f r the expedition, 248. Appoints Ser-
n-ndo Cortes, 249. His motives to this choice,
251. Becomes suspicious of Cortes, 252. Orders
Cortes to be deprived of his commiflon, and ar-

3 rifted,

refled, 254, 255. Sends an armament to Mexico
after Cortes, 348.
Venegas, P. his character of the native Californians,

ii. 486.
Vene-eal direafe, originally brought from America,

i. 87. Appears to be wearing out, ibid. Its first
rapid progress, ii. 481. -.

Ienezuela, history of that settlement, iii. 280.
Venice, its origin as a maritime ltate, i. 43.. Travels

of Marco Polo, 48.

Verd, islands discovered by the Portuguese, is 72.
,Viceros, all the Spanish dominions in America sub-

jeaed to two, iii.. 284. A third lately established,
285. Their powers, ibid. A fourth eftablifehd,
397.
Villa Segnor, his account of the state of population

in New Spain, iii. 462. His detail of the Spanish
American revenue, 489.

lVilefagna, Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foments

a mutiny among his troops, ii. 403. Is disco-
vered by Cortes, and banged, 404.
Wiloa, Don Antonio de, his description of the cha-

raaeriflic features of the native Americans, ii. 476,
477. His reason for the Americans not being so
sensible of pain as the reft of mankind, 502. His
account of the goods exported from Spain to Ame-
rica, with the duty on them, iii. 489.
VoLanos, remarkable number of, in the northern parts

of the globe discovered by the Ruffians, ii. 475.

W
l'aser, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of di-

minutive Americans, ii. 77. Compared with fimi-
lar producions in Africa, 78.
iYar-fong of the native Americans, the sentiments

and terms of, ii. Sco.

Tiommn,

Wisrt, the.condition of, among the native Ameti-

cans, ii. 102. Are not prolific, o16. . Are not
permittd ;t .join in fiieir drunken feaftsi 220.
Nor to wear ornaments, 504.

X
XeTrr.'Eraifco. Ae, secretary to Pizarro, the earliest

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 419.

UXimmsl Cardinal., his regulations for the treatment

of the India=s inthe Spanish colonies i. 312. Pa-
tronifie the attcmpt ot'Ferdinand Magellan,. ii. 430.

Y
Yucatan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and

Dias de Soils, i. 266. Described, 386. Fiom
whence that province derives its value, iii. 267.
Policy of the court of Spain with refpea to, z68.

Z
Zcratr, Don Auguffine, charaaer of his Hiflory of

the conquest of Peru, iii. 420.
Zmus, the earth how divided into, by the geography

of the anciernts i. 3z. By whom first so divided,
36o.
Zummarraga, Juan de, first bishop of Mexico, the

dettroyer of all the ancint records of the Mexican
empire, iii. 180.

END OF T% IRD VOLUME.
